H1722 [ocm]12392792 197735
THE HISTORIE OF EPISCOPACIE. By Theophilus Churchman. HEBR. 13.17. Obey them that have rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your soules, as they that must give account, that they may doe it with joy, and not with griefe: for that is unprofi∣table for you. CYPRIAN. Epist. LXIX. Inde Schismata & Haereses obortae sunt & oriuntur, dum EPISCO∣PVS qui unus est, & Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam prae∣sumptione contemnitur; & homo dignatione Dei honoratus, in∣dignus hominibus judicatur. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the blacke spread Eagle neere the Inner Temple gate in Fleet-street. 1642.
TO THE MOST REVEREND AND RIGHT REVEREND FA∣THERS IN GOD, THE L L. ARCHBI∣SHOPS and BISHOPS, and to the Re∣verend and Right Worshipfull the Deanes, Archdeacons, and others of the Clergie of the truly Catholike and Aposto∣like Church of England, as∣sembled in their severall Convocations, THEOPHILVS CHVRCHMAN, The meanest of the sons of that Blessed Mother, Dedicates and submits these his poore and unwor∣thy labours: humbly beseeching that by their Approbation and Authoritie they may be recommended to the pub∣like view.
A PREFACE TO The Christian Reader, shewing the oc∣casion of writing this ensuing Historie, and the manner of the Authors proceeding in it. 1. IT is a saying of the wi∣sest man that ever was,Eccles. 12 12. faciendi plures libros nullus est finis, that there is no end of making many books. And he that said it was a writer also, the grea∣test Writer of his time; and so had some experience in that kind himselfe. For besides those bookes of his n holy Scripture, which make up no small part of the Hagiographa,1 Kings 4.33. he spake of trees from the Cedar tree which is in Libanon, even unto the Hyssop which springeth out of the wall: he spake al∣so of beasts, and of fowle, and of creeping things, and of fishes. And if the multiplying of books was growne so endlesse in those early dayes, before Philosophie was full of subtilites, nd Divinitie became perplext with Contro∣versies; What censure thinke we had he pas∣sed
on these restlesse times, (if either he had lived till now, or forseene them then:) Wherein, as unda undam pellit, one wave thrusts another forwards, so doth one Booke beget another, and that a fruitful progenie of Answers▪ and Replies, even ad infinitum? For proofe whereof, were there no other in∣stances to be found besides, as there are too many, the very question of Church-govern∣ment so often moved, so learnedly resolved, and yet continually revived and agitated, would serve sufficiently. A question first rai∣sed in this Church of England (for what have I to doe with those without) by Cartwright, Travers, and their followers, who like Dio∣trephes in S. Johns Epistle,3. Iohn 10. loving to have prehe∣usinence in the Church of God, prated against the Bishops with malicious words: perhaps be∣cause they were the Successours of those Apo∣stles, whom Diotrephes baited and reviled in the last Surviver. But their Disciples not con∣tent herewith, neither themselves receive them with such honour as they ought to doe, but forbid them that would; and for as much as in them is, cast them out of the Church, as an intol∣lerable burden not imposed by CHRIST, and therefore not consistent with our Christian libertie. 2. This as it then did put the Church to a necessitie of vindicating and asserting that forme of government, which had beene re∣commended
to her with the Faith it selfe: so that necessitie continuing stil, or rather being againe obtruded on her by unquiet spirits, she is inforced to pursue her former courses, in labouring to give satisfaction to a kinde of men, who are resolved, I feare, not to be sa∣tisfied. A labour which might well be spa∣red at this present time, if they who bring no new supply of Arguments to make good their cause, would rest content with such Old an∣swers, as have beene given already to their Predecessours. For did men looke into this businesse with a diligent and carefull eye, it might bee easily discerned, that there hath beene no new objection made in those late dis∣courses which have beene writ upon this Subject, but what are either Answered or pre∣vented in the learned workes of B. Bilson, B. Downham, and other worthies of this Church, now in blisse with God. But being it is the disposition of some men, not to let any thing remaine in peace, though never so well grounded, so securely settled, as long as by new furbushing their rusty Armour, they can pretend some new abilities, and therewithall new hopes to effect their purpose: it cannot but concerne the Church, and the friends thereof, to have recourse unto her publike Magazines, and thence to borrow such provision both of Armes and weapons, as are therein laid up and treasured, for her just
defence. Vt jugulent homines, is a friendly watch word, a preserving Caveat, and as fit∣ly placed in the title of a booke, writ by that worthy Baronet, Sir Tho. Aston. 'Tis true indeed, as long as the assault was onely made by scurrillous and unlearned li∣bels, or emptie and unworthy Pamplets, there was no better Answer to bee given then con∣tempt and silence; as being neither considerable for the Authors, nor formidable for the dan∣gers which might thence ensue. Nay, they occasioned by that course, as the cause was handled, no small advantage to the Church: a learned and religious Gentleman collecting out of all their scattered Papers, a full survey of the inconveniences of the Presbyterian Dis∣cipline, and the inconsistencie thereof with the Con∣stitution of this state: adding therto, to the de∣tection of their shame, and his owne great honour, out of Authenticall and true re∣cords, the originall institution, succession, and jurisdiction of the antient and venerable Order of Bishops. This the best course that could bee taken possibly to detect their follies. They which went other wayes to worke, and undertooke to answer them upon equall termes, parted for ought I can see on the same termes also, complying with them in some points of no small importance, out of a silly hope to obtaine the rest: and thereby letting them perceive how much was to bee got by
confident and continuall clamour. For whe∣ther out of a conceit, that to bestow a dash upon the Prelacie, would make the businesse tast the better; or that they held it an high point of Policie not to goe so farre, but that they might retire with safetie in the change of times: some of these Answerers have laid as deepe a Calumnie upon the Clergie, forModest Ad∣vertis. p. 19. hunting after secular employments, for having greater care of rites and ceremonies, as of piety and godlinesse, and ordering matters of the Church, not by rule and Canon, but in an ar∣bitrary way, as any of the Pamphleters either old or new. As if there were no better way to justifie the government of Bishops, then by traducing of their persons, nor any safer meanes to bee devised for vindicating the Church, then by calumniating the Clergie. 3. But these were onely Tentamenta bello∣rum civilium, certaine preparatorie skirmi∣shes and velitations, to keepe men awake. The maine Batallio was not yet drawne up. And when it was drawne up and ready, it was conducted with great artifice, by men of wit and understanding, in a learned way: Who as they had it in designe to cut downSmectym. An∣swer to the humble Re∣monst. Litur∣gie and Episcopacie at one blow together; so as it seemes they made no question of bea∣ring downVindic. of the Answ. Sect 13. Cathedrals also, and making them a gratefull oblation unto spoyle and ruine. Never was learning so employed, to cry
down the incouragement and reward of lear∣ning. And now or never was the time for those that had a care of the Churches safetie to put themselves into a posture for defence, and be provided for the Battaill. In which if few appeared at first on the Churches side, it was not that they durst not give the onset, but that they were reserved for Succours. For whilest the humbly Reverend Remonstrant was pleased to vindicate aswell his owne as the Churches honour, there was small cause, or rather none, that other men should interpose themselves at all, or robbe him of the glory of a sole encounter. Par{que} novum fortuna vi∣det concurrere, bellum, at{que} virum. But when that Reverend Pen grew wearied not with the strength or number of his Adversaries, but their importunitie, who were resolved to have the last words,Answ. to the Vindic. p. 102. as himselfe observeth; and that he hath beene pleased to give way to o∣thers, to shew their duty and affection in so just a cause: I then conceived it might not be unfit to bethinke my selfe what further course might be pursued for the Churches peace. And though I knew full well that a good cause is never more easily betrayed, then by a weake and slight defence: yet when I saw that none of thoseId. Ibid more able de¦fendants to whom he seemed to recommend the cause had appeared therein, I was the more encouraged in my resolution of offering
my poore endeavours to the publike service. And so thou hast at last, good Christian Rea∣der, the very reason, why one of my obscuri∣tie and meane condition, hath undertooke a busi∣nesse of such waight and moment; as also why it was so late before I durst adventure on the undertaking. 4. For my proceeding in this matter, that must next be knowne. And that I have dis∣posed of in another Method, then what hath formerly beene followed. Not in the way of Argument, or of Polemicall discourse, much lesse in answer unto those with whom the Reverend Remonstrant had to doe; (I found no likelihood of any end in such disputations) but in the way of an historicall narration, as in point of fact; in which the Affirmative being made good by sufficient evidence, it will bee very difficult, if not impossible, to prove the negative. And for the better making good of the Affirmative, I have called in the An∣tient writers, the holy Fathers of the Church, to testifie unto the truth of what here is said, either as writing on those texts of Scripture, in which the institution and authoritie of Bi∣shops is most cleerely evidenced; or speaking of the condition of the Church in their severall times, in the administration and government whereof they had most of them some espe∣ciall interesse. Their testimonies and autho∣rities I have fully pondered, and alledged as
fully; not misreporting any of them in their words or meaning, according to the best of my understanding: as knowing well, and ha∣ving seene experience of it, that such false shifts, are like hot waters, which howsoever they may serve for a present pang, doe in the end destroy the stomack. And for these ho∣ly and renowned Authors thus by mee pro∣duced, I desire no more, but that we yeeld as much authoritie unto them in expounding Scripture, as we would doe to any of the mo∣derne Writers on the like occasion: and that we would not give lesse credit to their Affir∣mations, speaking of things that hapned in their owne times, and were within the com∣passe of their observation, then wee would doe to any honest Countrey Yeoman, speaking his knowledge at the Barre, between man & man. And finally that in relating such occur∣rences of holy Church, as hapned in the times before them, we thinke them worthy of as much beliefe, as we would give to Livie, Taci∣tus, or Suetonius, reporting the affaires of the State of Rome, from the traditions and dis∣courses of the former times. This is the least wee can afford them. And if I can obtain but this, I doubt not but it will appeare most evi∣dently to an indifferent and impartial Reader, first that our Lord & Saviour JESUS CHRIST, laid the foundation of his Church in an impari∣tie of Ministers, & that according unto his Ex∣ample
the holy Apostles did the like, ordaining the three severall orders and degrees, of Bi∣shops, Presbyters, and Deacons, in the holy Mi∣nistrie: Next that the government of Bishops being founded thus, was propagated over all the world, with the faith it selfe, there be∣ing no Nation which received the one with∣out the other: and finally that in matter of authoritie and jurisdiction, the Bishops of the Primitive and purest times had rather more then lesse, then what now they have. 5. This is the summe of my designe, and this I hope will be made good in all particulars. In prosecution of the which my purpose was to have pursued this storie until the later times of S. Austins life, when as the Church was at her height for peace & puritie. But finding that the times from Constantine til then, were quick and active, and likely to administer more store of matter then could be ordered and concocted in so short a time, as I had limited unto my selfe for dispatch hereof: I rather chose to publish what I had already finished, (in hope it might conduce to the publike good) then to detaine it from the Presse, till I had fully perfected the whole according to my first intention. Hereafter, if I find my la∣bours in this Peece accepted, and that I am thereby encouraged to performe the rest, I shall not be deficient in it, either unto the Church or my owne discharge. This that is done, as I have done it with all faith and
candour, and layed it with like dutie and af∣fection at the Churches feete: so with respe∣ctive care and Reverence doe I submit it to the judgement of the Christian Reader, for whose instruction in the point it was chiefly studied. And I shall heartily beseech all those who shall please to reade it, that if they meet with any thing therein, which either is lesse fitly spoken, or not cleerely evidenced, they would give me notice of it in such a charitable and a Christian way, as I may bee the better for it, and they not the worse. Which favour if they please to doe me, they shall bee wel∣come to me, as an Angel of God, sent to con∣duct me from the lanes of errour into the open wayes of truth. And doing these Christi∣an Offices unto one another, wee shall by Gods good leave and blessing, not onely hold the bond of externall peace, but also in due time be made partakers of the Spirit of unitie. Which blessing that the Lord would graciously bestow on his afflicted and distra∣cted Church, is no small part of our devotions in the publike Liturgie: where we are taught to pray unto Almighty God, that hee would please continually to inspire his universall Church with the spirit of truth, unitie and concord, and grant that all they which doe confesse his holy Name, may agree also in the truth of his holy Word, and live in unitie and godly love. Un∣to which prayer, hee hath but little of a Christian which doth not heartily say, Amen.
THE CONTENTS. PART I. CHAP. I. The Christian Church first founded by our Lord and Saviour, in an im∣parity of Ministers. 1 THe severall offices of Christ our Saviour in the administration of his Church. 2 The aggregating of Disciples to him. 3 The calling of the Apostles out of them, and why twelve in number. 4 Of the name and office of an Apostle. 5 What things were specially required unto the making of an Apostle. 6 All the Apostles equall in authority amongst them∣selves. 7 The calling and appointing of the 70 Disciples. 8 A reconciliation of some different opinions about the number. 9 The twelve Apostles superiour to the Seventy by our Saviours Ordinance.
10 What kind of superioritie it was, that Christ inter∣dicted his Apostles. 11 The severall powers, faculties, and preheminences given to the Apostles by our Saviour Christ. 12 That the Apostles were Bishops, averred by the ancient Fathers. 13 And by the text of holy Scripture. CHAP. II. The foundation of the Church of Hie∣rusalem under the government of S. Iames the Apostle, and Simeon one of the Disciples, the two first Bishops of the same. 1 MAtthias chosen in the place of Judas. 2 The comming of the Holy Ghost, and on whom it fell. 3 The greatest measure of the spirit fell on the Apo∣stles, and therewithall the greatest power. 4 The severall ministrations in the Church then gi∣ven; and that in ranking of the same, the Bishops are intended in the name of Pastors. 5 The suddain growth of the Church of Hierusalem, and making Saint James the first Bishop there. 6 The former point deduced from Scripture. 7 And proved by the generall consent of Fathers. 8 Of the Episcopall Chaire, or throne of James, and his Successors in Hierusalem. 9 Simeon elected by the Apostles to succeed Saint James.
10 The meaning of the word Episcopus, and from whence borrowed by the Church. 11 The institution of the Presbyters. 12 What interest they had in the common businesse of the Chuch whilst Saint James was Bishop. 13 The Council of Jerusalem, and what the Presby∣ters hd to do therein. 14 The institution of the Seven, and to what office they were called. 15 The nmes of Ecclesisticall Functions promiscu∣ously used in holy Scripture. CHAP. III. The Churches planted by St. Peter, and his Disciples, originally founded in Episcopacie. 1 THe founding of the Church of Antioch, and that Saint Peer was the first Bishop there. 2 A reconciliation of the difference about his next Successors in the same. 3 A List of Bishops planted by him in the Churches of the Circumcision. 4 Proofe thereof from Saint Peters generall Epistle to the Jews dispersed, according to the exposition of the Ancient Writers. 5 And from Saint Pauls unto the Hebrews. 6 Saint Pauls Praepositus, no other then a Bishop in the opinion of the Fath rs. 7 Saint Pete the first Bihop of the Church of Rome. 8 The difference about his next Successors there, re∣conciled also.
9 An answer unto such objections as have beene made against Saint Peters being Bishop there. 10 Saint Marke the first Bishop of Alexandria, and of his Successors. 11 Notes on the observations of Epiphanius and Saint Hierom, about the Church of Alexandria. 12 An observation of Saint Ambrose applyed unto the former businesse. 13 Of Churches founded by Saint Peter and his Di∣sciples in Italy, France, Spaine, Germany, and the Isle of Britain, and of the Bishops in them insti∣tuted. CHAP. IV. The Bishoping of Timothy and Titus, and other of Saint Pauls Disciples. 1 THe Conversion of Saint Paul, and his orday∣ning to the place of an Apostl. 2 The Presbyters created by Saint Paul, Acts 14. of what sort they were. 3 Whether the Presbyters or Presbytery did lay on hands with Paul, in any of his ordinations. 4 The people had no voice in the election of those Pres∣byters by Saint Paul ordained. 5 Bishops not founded by Saint Paul at first, in the par∣ticular Churches by him planted; and upon what reasons. 6 The short time that the Churches of Saint Pauls Plantation, continued without Bishops over them. 7 Timothy made Bishop of Ephesus by Saint Paul, according to the generall consent of Fathers.
8 The time when Timothy was made Bishop, according to the holy Scripture. 9 Titus made Bishop of the Cretans; and the truth verified herein by the ancient Writers. 10 An answer unto some objections against the sub∣scription of the Epistle unto Titus. 11 The Bishoping of Dionysius the Areopagite, Ari∣starchus, Gaius, Epaphroditus, Epaphras, and Archippus. 12 As also of Silas, Sosthenes, Sosipater, Crescens, and Aristobulus. 13 The office of a Bishop not incompetible with that of an Evangelist. CHAP. V. Of the authority and jurisdiction given unto Timothy and Titus; and in them to all other Bishops by the Word of God. 1 THe authority committed unto Timothy and Ti∣tus was to be perpetuall and not personall onely. 2 The power of Ordination intrusted onely unto Bi∣shops by the Word of God, according to the exposition of the Fathers. 3 Bishops alone both might and did ordain without their Presbyters. 4 That Presbyters might not ordain withou a Bishop proved by the memorable case of Colluthus and Ischyras. 5 As by those also of Maximus, and a Spanish Bi∣shop.
6 In what respects the joynt assistance of the Presby∣ters was required herein. 7 The case of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, objected, and declared. 8 The care of ordering Gods Divine Service, a worke peculiar to the Bishop. 9 To whom the ministration of the Sacraments also doth in chief belong. 10 Bishops to have a care that Gods Word be preached, and to incourage those that take pains therein 11 Bishops to silence and reprove such Presbyters as preach other doctrines. 12 As also to correct and reject the Heretick. 13 The censure and correction of inferiour Presbyters in point of life and conversation, doth belong also to Bishops. 14 And of Lay people, if they walke unworthy of their Christian calling. 15 Conjecturall proofs that the description of a Bishop in the first to Timothy, is of a Bishop strictly and properly called. CHAP. VI. Of the estate of holy Church, particu∣larly of the Asian Churches, toward the later dayes of Saint Iohn the A∣postle. 1. THe time of Saint Johns comming into Asia. 2 All the seven Churches except Ephesus, of his Plantation. 3 That the Angels of those Churches were the Bi∣shops of them, in the opinion of the Fathers.
4 And of some Protestant Divines of name and emi∣nency. 5 Conclusive Reasons for the same. 6 Who is most like to the Angell of the Church of E∣phesus. 7 That Polycarpus was the Angell of the Church of Smyrna. 8 Touching the Angell of the Church of Pergamus, and of Thiatyra. 9 As also of the Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea. 10 What Successors these severall Angels had in their severall Churches. 11 Of other Churches founded in Episcopacy by Saint John the Apostle. 12 Saint John deceasing lest the Government of the Church to Bishops, as to the Successours of the A∣postles. 13 The ordinary Pastors of the Church. 14 And the Vicars of Christ. 15 A brief Chronologie of the estate of holy Church, in this first Century. THE CONTENTS. PART II. CHAP. I. What doth occurre concerning Bishops, and the government of the Church by them, during the first half of the second Century. 1 OF the condition of th Church of Corinth, when C emens wrote unto them his Epistle.
2 What that Epistle doth contain in reference to this point in hand. 3 That by Episcopi, hee meaneth Bishops truly and properly so called, proved by the scope of the Epistle. 4 And by a text of Scripture therein cited. 5 Of the Episcopall Succession in the Church of Co∣rinth. 6 The Canons of the Apostles ascribed to Clemens, what they say of Bishops. 7 A Bishop not to be ordained under three or two at least of the same order. 8 Bishops not barred by these Canons from any Se∣cular affaires, as concern their Families. 9 How far by them restrained from the employments of the Common-wealth. 10 The jurisdiction over Presbyters, given to the Bi∣shops by those Canons. 11 Rome divided into Parishes, or tituli, by Pope Euaristus. 12 The reasons why Presbyteries or Colledges of Pres∣byters, were planted first in Cities. 13 Touching the superiority over all the flock given to the Bishop by gnatius. 14 As also of the Iurisdiction by him, allowed them. 15 The same exemplifid in the works of Justin Mar∣tyr. CHAP. II. The setling of Episcopacy together with the Gospel, in the Isle of Britain, by Pope Eleu∣therius. 1. VVHat Bishops Egesippus met with in his Peregrination; and what hee testifieth of them. 2 Of Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, and of the Bi∣shops by him mentioned.
3 How Bishops came to be ordained, where none were left by the Apostles. 4 The setling of the Gospel in the Isle of Britaine by Pope Eleutherius. 5 Of the condition of the Church of Britaine from the first preaching of the Gospel there, till the time of Lucius. 6 That Lucius was a King in those parts of Britaine which we now call England. 7 Of the Episcopall Sees here founded by King Lu∣cius at that time. 8 Touching the Flamines and Arch-flamines, which those Stories speak of. 9 What is most like to be the reason of the number of the Archbishopricks and Bishopricks here, of old established. 10 Of the Successors, which the Bishops of this Or∣dination are found to have on true record. 11 Which of the British Metropolitans was anciently the Primate of that Nation. CHAP. III. The Testimony given unto Episcopall autho∣rity, in the last part of this second Century. 1 THe difference betwixt Pope Victor and the A∣sian Bishops, about the Feast of Easter. 2 The interpleading of Polycrates and Irenaeus, two renowned Prelates, in the aforesaid cause. 3 Severall Councels called about it, by the Bishops of the Church then being; with observations on the same. 4 Of the Episcopall Succession in the four prime Sees, for this second Century. 5 An answer to some objections made against the same.
6 The great authority and esteeme of the said foure Sees, in those early days. 7 The use made of this Episcopal Succession by Saint Irenaeus. 8 As lso by Tertullian, and some other Ancients. 9 Of the authority enjoyed by Bishops in Tertullians time, in the administration of the Sacraments. 10 As also in enjoyning Fasts, and the disposing of the Churches treasury. 11 And in the dispensation of the Keys. 12 Tertullian misalleaged in mayntenance of the Lay Presbytery. 13 The great extent of Christianity and Episcopaey, in Tertullians time, concludes this Century. CHAP. IV. Of the authority in the government of the Church of Carthage, enjoyed and exerci∣sed by Saint Cyprian and other Bishops of the same. 1 OF the foundation and preheminence of the Church of Carthage. 2 Of Agrippinus and Donatus, two of Saint Cy∣prian's Predecessors. 3 The troublesome condition of that Church, at Cy∣prian's first being Bishop there. 4 Necessitated him to permit some things to the discre∣tion of his Presbyters, and consent of the Pole. 5 Of the authority ascribed by Cyprian to the people, in the Election of their Bishop, 6 What power the people had de facto, in the said Elections. 7 How far the testimony of the people was required in the Ordination of their Presbyters. 8 The power of Excommunication reserved by Saint Cyprian, to the Bishop only.
9 No Reconciliation of a Penitent allowed by Cy∣prian without the Bishops leave and licence. 10 The Bishop's power as well in the encouragement, as in the punishment and censure of his Clergy. 11 The memorable case of Geminius Faustinus, one of the Presbyters of Carthage. 12 The Bishop's power in regulating and declaring Martyrs. 13 The Divine Right, and eminent authority of Bi∣shops fully asserted by Saint Cyprian. CHAP. V. Of the condition & affairs of the two Patri∣archal Churches of Alexandria, & Antiochia. 1 OF the foundation and first Professours of the Divinity Schoole in Alexandria. 2 What is affirmed by Clemens, one of those Profes∣sors concerning Bishops. 3 Origen the Divinity Reader there, permitted to ex∣pound the Scriptures, in the presence of the Bishop of Caesarea. 4 Contrary to the custome of the Alexandrian and We∣stern Churches. 5 Origen ordained Presbyter by the Bishops of Hie∣rusalem and Caesarea, and excommunicated by the Bishop of Alexandria. 6 What doth occur touching the superiority and power of Bishops in the Works of Origen. 7 The custome of the Church of Alexandria, altere in the election of their Bishops. 8 Of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, and his great care and travails for the Churches peace. 9 The government of the Church in the former times, by Letters of intercourse and correspondence amongst the Bishops of the same. 10 The same continued also in the present Century.
11 The speedy course took by the Prelats of the Church, for the suppressing of the Heresies of Samosatenus. 12 The Civil Jurisdiction, traine, and thrones of Bi∣shops, things not unusuall in this Age. 13 The Bishops of Italy and Rome, made Judges in a point of title and possession, by the Ro. Emperour. 14 The Bishops of Italy and Rome, why reckoned as distinct in that Delegation. CHAP. VI. Of the estate wherin Episcopacy stood in the Westerne Churches, during the whole third Century. 1 OF Zepherinus Pope of Rome, and the Decrees ascribed unto him concerning Bishops. 2 Of the condition of that Church, when Cornelius was chosen Bishop thereof. 3 The Schisme raised in Rome by Novatianus; with the proceedings of the Church therein. 4 Considerable observations on the former story. 5 Parishes set forth in Coūtry Villages, by P. Diony∣sius. 6 What the words  and  doe signifie most properly in ancient Writers. 7 The great authority which did accrue unto the Pres∣byters, by the setting forth of Parishes. 8 The rite of Confirmation, reserved by Bishops to themselves, as their own Prerogative. 9 Touching the ancient Chorepiscopi, and the autho∣rity to them entrusted. 10 The rising of the Manichean Heresie, with the great care taken by the Bishops, for the crushing of it. 11 The lapse of Marcellinus Pope of Rome; with the proceedings of the Church in his condemnation. 12 The Councel of Eliberis in Spaine, what it decreed in honour of Episcopacie. 13 Constantine comes unto the Empire; with a briefe prospect of the great honours done to Bishops in the following Age. (14) A briefe Chronology of the estate of holy Church, in these two last Centuries.
THE HISTORIE OF EPISCOPACIE. THE FIRST PART. FROM THE FIRST INSTJTVTJON OF It by our Lord and Saviour IESVS CHRIST, untill the death of St. JOHN the Apostle. By Theophilus Churchman. CYPRIAN. Epist. LXV. Apostolos, id est, EPISCOPOS & Praepositos Dominus clegit; Diaconos autem post Ascensum Domini in coelos Apostoli sibi constituerunt, EPISCOPATVS sui & Ecclesiae Mini∣stros. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the blacke spread Eagle neere the Inner Temple gate in Fleet-street. 1642.
THE HISTORIE OF EPISCOPACIE. PART I. CHAP. I. The Christian Church first founded by our Lord and Saviour, in an Jmparity of Ministers. I. The severall Offices of Christ our Savi∣our in the administration of his Church. II. The aggregation of Disciples to him. III. The calling of the Apostles, and why twelve in number. IV. Of the Name and Office of an Apostle. V. What things were specially required unto the making of an Apostle.
VI. All the Apostles equall amongst them∣selves. VII. The calling and appointing of the Se∣venty Disciples. VIII. A reconciliation of some different opinions about the number. IX. The twelve Apostles superiour to the seventy by our Saviours ordinance. X. What kind of superiority it was that Christ prohibited his Apostles. XI. The severall powers and preheminen∣ces, given to the Apostles by our Saviour Christ. XII. That the Apostles were made Bishops by our Lord and Saviour, averred by the anci∣ent Fathers. XIII. And by the Text of holy Scripture. OF all the Types in holy Scripture, I find not any that did so fully re∣present the nature of our Saviours King∣dome, as those of Da∣vid, Moses, and Mel∣chizedech.Psal. 78.71, 72. David a Shepheard, and a King Moses a Legislator, and a Prince;Gen. 14.18. Melchizedech both King of Salem, and a Priest also of the living God, as that Text hath stiled him. Each of these was a type of our Saviour Christ, accor∣ding
to his Regall office; hee being like Melchisedech,Heb. 7.2. a King of Peace and Righteous∣nesse; leading his people, as did Moses, out of the darknesse and Idolatries of Egypt,Exod. to the land of Canaan: and conquering like David2 Sam. all those enemies which before held them in subjection. This office, as it is supreme, so it is perpetuall. That God who tels us inPsal. 2. the Psalmes, that he had set his King on Zion, on his holy mountaine: hath also told us by his Angell,Luk. 1.33. that he should reigne over the housc of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdome there should be no end. But if wee looke upon him in his Sacerdo∣tall and Pastorall offices: if we behold him as a Lawgiver to his Church and people: we find him not fore-signified in any one of these, but in all together.Heb. 5.6, 10. A Priest he was after the order of Melchisedech;Heb. 3.2. faith∣full to him that did appoint him, as also Moses was faithfull in all his house; ordering, and disposing of the same, according to his will and pleasure. And as for the discharge of his Pastorall or Propheticall office, God like∣neth him to David, by his holy Prophet saying,Eze. 34.23. I will set up one Shepheard over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepheard. Which offices, although subor∣dinate to the Regall power, are perpetuall also. He was not made a Priest for a time
or season, but for ever. Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum:Heb. 5.6. Thou art a Priest for ever, said the Lord unto him. A Priest, who as he onceHeb. 9.26. appeared to put away sinne by the sacrifice of himselfe; so by thatHeb. 10.14. one of∣fering hath he perfected for ever all them that are sanctified; and sitting downe at the right hand of God, heHeb. 7.25. ever liveth, and maketh intercession for them. Of the same perpetuity also are those other offices of Christ our Saviour, before remembred. Hee had not beene fidelis sicut Moses, faithfull as Moses was in all his house:Estius in Heb. 3. v. 2. i. e. as Estius well ex∣pounds it, in administratione populi sibi cre∣dita, in the well ordering of the charge committed to him, had he not constituted a set forme of government, and given the same unto his Church, as a rule for ever. Nor had he faithfully discharged the part of David, had he looked onely to his flock, whiles himselfe was present; and tooke no care for the continuall feeding of the same, after he was returned to his heavenly glo∣ries. And therefore,Eph. 4.8, 11, 12, 13. when he ascended up on high he gave gifts to men, and gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Tea∣chers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the worke of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the sta∣ture of the fulnesse of Christ. He gave them then indeed, after his Ascension, when he ascended up on high, be∣cause he then did furnish them with those gifts and graces, wherewith they were en∣dued by the Holy Ghost, and thereby fit∣ted for the execution of the trust commit∣ted to them by their Lord. For otherwise many of them had beene given already; not onely in the way of choyce, and de∣signation, but of commission and employ∣ment.Mat. 28.19. Ite, & docete omnes Gentes, had beene said before. It was not long after our Saviours baptisme by John in Jordan, that some Disciples came unto him. That testimony which came downe from God the Father, when the Heavens were opened,Mat. 3.16. and the Spirit of God descended on him like a Dove, was of it selfe sufficient to pro∣cure many followers. The evidence which was given by John the Baptist, added nought to this. And yet that evidence pre∣vailed so farre, that two of his Disciples, when they heard him speake,Joh. 1.37. forsooke their old Master, and went after Jesus. Nor did it satisfie them, that they had found the Christ, and had talked with him, but they impart the same unto others also. Thus An∣drew brings in his owne BrotherJoh. 1.42, 46. Simon; Philip invites his friend Nathaneel. One tels
another the glad tidings, that they had found him of whomJoh. 1.5. Moses in the Law, and all the Prophets did write: and all of them desire to be his Disciples. Afterward as his fame increased, so his followers multiply∣ed; and every miracle that he wrought to confirme his doctrine, did adde unto the number of his Proselytes. So great his fame was, and so great the confluxe of all sorts of people, that Johns Disciples pre∣sently complained, I know not whe∣ther with more truth or envie,Joh. 3.26. Om∣nes ad eum veniunt, that all men came unto him, both to heare his preaching, and receive his baptisme. And certainly it was no wonder that it should be so; that all men should resort to him, who was the way; or seeke for him, who was the truth; or follow after him, who was the life. Lord, saith Saint Peter,Joh. 6.86. to whom shall wee goe? thou hast the words of life eter∣nall. The number of his followers being thus increased, he sends them not immediately to preach his Gospell. Two yeares he tray∣ned them up in the schoole of piety, where he himselfe was both the Teacher and the lesson, before he ventured them abroad upon that employment; And when hee ventured them abroad, he neither sent them all together, nor with like authority.
Luk. 6.13. Twelve he selected from the rest, whom he named Apostles. And he ordained themMark. 3.14. saith Saint Marke, that they should be with him, and that hee might send them forth to preach: first to be with him, as the con∣stant witnesses of his words and workes, and afterwards to preach and publish what they saw and heard. In which regard, Ter∣tullian cals them not unfitly,De Prae∣script. advers. haeret. Legatos à latere, sent from Christ to teach the nations. Ex quibus (out of his Disciples) duodecem praecipuos lateri suo adlegerat, destinatos natio∣nibus Magistros: as his owne words are. The same Tertullian gives a reason, why Christ made choyse of twelve Apostles, neither more nor lesse: viz.Cntra Mar∣cian. l. 4. because there were twelve fountaines in Elim; twelve gemmes or pretious stones in the brest-plate of Aaron; and 12. stones taken out of Jordan by the hand of Joshua, and by him put into the Arke of the Testament. And then he addes, totidem enim Apostoli praetendebantur, that the like number of A∣postles was prefigured. Other conceits there are of the Ancient Fathers about this number:In Joh. 6. Bede, andSedulius. Sedulius, resemble them to the 12. signes of the Zodiack:Dialog. um Tryphne. Justin Martyr to the 12. bels in the high Priests garment: Tertullian before named,Loco supra citato. to the twelve oxen that did uphold the molten sea in the Temple of Solomon.
Others have other fancies to the same effect; but whether Christ related unto any of them in this designation, as it is no where to be found, so is it not materiall to the present purpose. More neere unto the point in my opinion, is that of Calvin, who thinkes our Saviour in the choise of his twelve Disciples related to the twelve Pa∣triarchs of the Tribes of Israel: to shew that as the Patriarchs were the roote and semi∣narie of the Tribes of Israel, so the Apo∣stlesCalvin in Harm. Evang. were to be the Parents, or if you will, the Patriarchs of the Church of Christ, Non ergo frustra Dominus duodecem veluti Patriarchas constituens, Ecclesiae renun∣ciationem testatus est. Which guesse of his, though it come neerer to the matter than the other did; yet it falls short also of the true intention of our Lord and Saviour. For Christ, who was best able to assigne the reason of his mind herein, hath told us, that he fitted his Apostles according to the number of the Tribes of Israel; that his Apostles in due time might become their Judges. For so himselfe declares it in his holy Gospell;Mat. 19.28. Verily (saith he) I say unto you, that yee which have followed mee in the regeneration, when the Sunne of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, yee also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel:Hieron. in locum. i. e. as Hierome doth expound
it, Quia credentibus vobis, illi credere noluerunt; by reason of their obstinacie and unbeliefe, not giving credit to that Gospell the Apo∣stles preached. Twelve then our Saviour pleased to choose, whom he named Apostles, and they themselves conceived this num∣ber not to want its weight: and therefore made it their first care to fill up their num∣ber, and surrogate some other in the place of Judas. Saint Peter very well declared the necessity of it, when he came in with his Oportet;Act. 1 21, 22. Oportet ergo ex his viris, &c. Wherefore of these men that have companied with us all the time, that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, must one be ordained to be a witnesse with us of his resurrection. So ex∣cellently true is that of Austin,August. in Psal. 103. Adeo nu∣merus ille sacratus est, ut in locum unius qui exciderat, non posset nisi alter nominari. As for the name, quos & Apostolos nomi∣navit, as SaintLuk 6.13. Luke informes us: Baro∣nius thinkes it was not of our Saviours owne divising, but by him borrowed of the high Priests of the Jewish nation, who had a spe∣ciall kind of Ministers, whom they called Apostles,Quos etiam ipse legare con∣sueverat ad com∣ponendos opti∣mos Sacerdotum mores, ipsas Sy∣nogogas inspici∣endas, pravos mores corrigen∣dos, &c. Annal. A. 32. ss. 5. imployed by them for the in∣struction of the Priests, the visiting of the severall Synagogues, the rectifying of ill manners, and the reforming of those pub∣like Ministers, who did not live according to the prescript of the Law. Whether that
it were so or not, or that the Cardinall be not mistaken in the meaning of the Author whom he citeth; I will not meddle for the present: though I conceive by looking on the place inEpiphan. hares: 30. n. 5. Epiphanius, that the succee∣ding Patriarchs of the Jewish nation, did rather take this name from Christs Apostles, than he from theirs. But for the word as now we use it, it is meerly Greeke, signify∣ing in its naturall and originall sense aQuos haec ap∣pellatio misss interpretatur. Tert. de prae∣script. Messenger, a Legate, an Embassadour; from whom, to whomsoever sent: after appropriated and applyed by the Evange∣lists to signifie those twelve, whom our Sa∣viour chose, and called his Apostles, as by way of excellence: yet so that many of those men who saw our Saviour in the flesh, and did preach the Gospell, are sometimes honoured with that name.In Epist. ad Gal. c. 2. Quod autem exceptis duodecem quidam vocantur Apostoli, illud in causa est, omnes qui Dominum vide∣runt, & eum postea praedicarunt, fuisse Apo∣stolos nominatos: as Saint Hierome notes it. By which wee see, that those two things did principally concurre unto the making of an Apostle, viz. to have beene conversant with our Saviour Christ, and to preach his word: which being most exactly verified in those twelve Disciples, whom he selected for that purpose; it was most fit that they should chiefly have the honour of so high
a title. But these, although they were two speciall markes of an Apostle; yet they were not all. Others had seene our Saviour in the flesh, and preached his Gospell, which notwithstanding never durst assume that title:Ignat. Epist ad Smymens. Ignatius, who affirms it of him∣selfe, that he had seene the Lord JESUS, doth yet disclaime the power and privi∣ledge of an Apostle. , saith he in his Epistle to the Romans. So that besides their seeing of our Saviour in the flesh, and preaching of those things which themselves had seene; the Twelve had a preheminence above the rest of the Disci∣ples, in those three particulars: first, in their neernesse of accesse unto him when he was alive: Secondly, in the latitude of their commission, when he was to leave them: And thirdly, in the height of their autho∣rity after his departure. For first, the twelve Apostles, and no o∣thers were the continuall, constant, and domesticall Auditors of all his Sermons; the diligent beholders and observers of all his miracles. With them did he discourse familiarly, propounding questions, answe∣ring their demands, and satisfying all their scruples. The Twelve, and none but they, were present with him, when he did insti∣tute his holy Supper: and they alone partici∣pated of those prayers and promises which
he made to them from himselfe, or for them to his heavenly Father. Many there were of his retinue, of his Court not few: the Twelve were onely of his Counsell; and of those too, some more especially ad∣mitted to his privacies, and of his ca∣binet counsell, (as it were) then others; whereof see Mat. 17.1. Mark. 14.33. Luk. 8.51. And on this ground dothClemens A∣lex. ap. Euseb. l. 2. c. 1. Clemens tell us, that Christ imparted many things unto these three, after his ascension, which they communicated , un∣to the rest of the Apostles: the rest of the Apostles to the 70. As they were neerer in accesse, so were they furnished with a more liberall Commission, when he was to leave them.Mark. 16. Ite in universum mundum. He said unto them, Goe into all the world, and preach the Gospell to every creature. No such com∣mission granted to any others, who had their severall precincts and bounds, a limited commission when it was at best. To the eleven (for unto them alone did hee give that charge) the whole world went but for a Diocesse. For this causeChrys. Tom. 8. p. 110. edit. Savill. Chrysostome doth honour them with the stile of Princes, and Princes of a great command over all the universe. . The Apostles were ordained Princes by the hand of God: Princes which have not onely under them some
Townes, and Nations, , but such unto whose care the whole world was trusted. So farre that Father. And if wee doubt that their authority fell short in any thing of their commission: the same good Father in the same place, will informe us otherwise. For making a comparison betweene Spirituall and Civill dignities, hee calleth the office of an ApostleChrys. ibid. , a spiritu∣all Consulship, , the most spirituall of all powers or governments; and finally, : the head, the roote, nay the foundation of all spirituall dignities of what sort soever. Doubtlesse the Father had good reason for so high an Eulogie. When Christ affirmed, Sicut misit me Pater,Joh. 20.21. that as his Father sent him, so sent hee them: He said enough to intimate that supreme au∣thority which he had given them in the Church whether it were in preaching of the Gospell, in founding Churches, Con∣stituting, and ordaining Pastors, or whatsoe∣ver else was necessary for the advancement of his Kingdome. For by these words, as Cyrill hath right well observed,Cyril. in Ioh. Evang. l. 12. , he did ordaine them for to be guides, and tea∣chers unto all the world, & the dispensers of his holy mysteries, commanding them not
onely to enlighten the land of Jewrie, but all the people of the universe: as also gi∣ving them to understand that it was their duty, , to call the sinners to repentance, to heale all those that were afflicted, either in body or in soule, in the dispensing of Gods blessings; not to follow their owne will, but his that sent them: and in a word, as much as in them was, , to save the world by wholsome doctrines, for to that purpose was he sent by his Heavenly Father. And so we are to understand Saint Chrysostome, when he tels us this, that Christ invested his Apostles with the like autho∣rity as he received from his Father.. Hom. in Joh. c. 20.21.Calv. in Ioh. Cal∣vin affirmes as much or more upon those words of our Redeemer. Quare non abs re Christus cum Apostolis suis communicat, quam à Patre autoritatem acceperat, &c. But this au∣thority of theirs will be seen more cleerly, when we behold it in the practice, and exe∣cution. Five things then of necessity were to concurre in the making or constituting of an Apostle, truly and properly so called: first an immediate call from Christ him∣selfe: secondly, an Autopsie, or eye-wit∣nessing of those things which they were af∣terwards to preach or publish of him: third∣ly, their neernesse of accesse: fourthly, the
latitude of their Commission: fifthly, and finally, the eminence of their authority. Of these the first were common with them unto the rest of the Disciples; save that the calling of the Apostles to that charge, and function doth seeme to be more solemne, and immediate. But in the rest, which are indeed the speciall or specificall differen∣ces, they had no co-partners. This made them every way superiour unto the rest of the Disciples, although all equall in them∣selves. Though in the calling of those bles∣sed spirits to that great imployment, there was a prius and posterius; yet in regard of power & authority, there was neither Sum∣mum, nor Subalternum: And howsoever Pe∣ter be first named in that sacred Catalogue; yet this entitleth him to no more authority, above the rest of the Apostles, then Stephen might challenge in that regard above the residue of the Seaven. Saint Cyprian did re∣solve this cause many hundreds since; as∣signing unto all the 12. a parity of power and honour.Cyprian lib. de unitate Ec∣cles. Hoc erant utique & cae∣teri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consorto praediti, & honoris & potestatis; sed exordium ab unitate proficiscitur. Where cleerly there is nothing given to Peter, but a priority of order; a primacie if you will, but no supre∣macie. Neither doth Barlaam give him more, though he inscribe his booke, de Papae Prin∣cipatu.
Barlaam de Papae principa∣tu. , &c. The Apostles, all of them saith hee, in matters which concerned the Church, were of equall honour. If Pe∣ter had preheminence in any thing, it was that in their sacred meetings he first brake the businesse, , and peradventure also had the upper place in the assemblies of that goodly fellowship. But what need Cyprian, or Barlaam come in for evidence, when as wee find this parity so cleerly evidenced in holy Scripture? In the immediatenesse of their calling, and their accesse unto our Lord and Saviour, they were all alike. Hee that called Peter from his nets, called also Matthew from the re∣ceit of custome. If onely Peter, and the sonnes of Zebedee were taken with him to mount TaborMat. 17.1. there to behold the glory of his Transfiguration; or chosen from a∣mongst the rest to attend his personMark. 14.33. when he went out into the Garden of Geth∣semane: this makes as much for the suprema∣cie of the sonnes of Zebedee, as the sonne of Jona. Their mission, and commission were alike to all. He that said Ite & docete, Goe into all the world and preach the Gospell to every creature, spake it indefinitely to every one; not unto Peter only, as the supreme Pastor; from whom the rest were to receive a delegated and confined autoritie. Neither
had hee so often beene molested with that needlesse question, which of them should be greatest in their Masters Kingdome: had he before determined of it, and setled the su∣premacie in Saint Peters person. And as for those prerogatives, of Tibi dabo claves, Pasce oves meas: which being spoken unto Peter, may seeme peculiarly to belong to him: the Fathers say, that nothing did hereby accrew to Peter, but what was common to the rest.August. lib. de Agon. Christian. c. 30. Ecclesiae enim claves regni coelorum datae sunt. Et cum ei dicitur, ad omnes dicitur, Amas me? Pasce oves meas: as Saint Austin states it. But what need more be said to affirme this point, then that of our most blessed Saviour, when he en∣couraged them to perseverance with this heavenly cordeall, that they should sit uponMat. 19.28. twelve Thrones, judgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel? In which most gracious words of his, as the sitting of the Apostles shewes authority; their sitting upon thrones, an eminence of power; their sitting to judge, a power and exercise of jurisdiction; and their sitting thus to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, the universality and extent of their jurisdiction: so doth their sitting on twelve thrones, singuli in sua sede,Iansen. harm. Evang. in locum. as Jan∣senius hath it, intimate an equality of ju∣risdiction, a parity in point of power. But to proceed. Our Saviour finding
that the harvest was great, and the labou∣rers as yet but few, and that his houre was now at hand,Luk. 10.1. appointed other seventy al∣so, and sent them two, and two before his face, into every City and place,Vers. 9. whither he himselfe would come. To them he gave authority to proclaime, and publish to the people, that the Kingdome of God was come nigh unto them:Vers. 17. giving them also power to heale the sicke, and to cast out Devils, as hee had for∣merly to his Apostles. So that there is no question to be made, but that they were in∣trusted with a part of this sacred Ministery, but whether in an equall ranke we shall see anon. In the meane time if any question should be asked who these Seventy were, and by what names called; we answer, non∣dum constat, that we cannot tell.Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 12. α. Euse∣bius as great a searcher into the monuments of antiquity, as the Church ever bred, professeth plainly, , that he could never meete with any list or catalogue of them. Some he had ta∣ken up on heare-say, as Barnabas, Sosthenes, Cephas, Matthias, after chose into the place of Judas, and Thaddeus.Ap. Euseb. hist. l. 1. c. 33. . Papias menti∣oneth Aristion, as another of that number also. And EpiphaniusIn Panar. l. 1. haeres. 20. n. 4. addes to these, Stephen, and the residue of the Seven, Marke and Luke, two of the Evangelists, Justus, who stood in competition with Matthias,
together with Apelles, Rufus, and Niger, whose names accurre in holy Scripture. These are the most that there is any ground for, in antiquity. As for the Cata∣logue of their names and actions fathered on Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre: there is not any thing more false & fabulous: that Rhapsodist thrusting into that Catalogue, many who were converted by the Apostles, after Christs ascension. Insomuch asEstius in Rom. c. 16. Estius worthily complaineth, eos fere omnes qui à Paulo in hoc capite nominantur, aut salutantes, aut salutandi, that all the men whose names occurre in the 16. chapter to the Romans, are by him thrust into the Catalogue of the Seventy Disciples: not to say any thing of those many other absurdities, which hee hath noted in that Bedroll. As for the number of Seventy, why our Redeemer pitched on that, there is not much dispute amongst the learned.Tertul. contr. Marcion. l. 4. Tertullian, who had fitted (as before wee saw) the number of the Apostles, to the twelve foun∣taines in Elim; doth also proportion the number of these Disciples, ad arbusta Palma∣rum, unto the number of the Palm-trees, that grew thereby. But this being onely in the way of Allegorie, we shall passe it over: one∣ly reserving the Application made by Hie∣rome for a little longer. That which com∣meth neerest the matter, and is agreed
upon almost by all sorts of writers, is that our Saviour in this choyse, related to the Seventy Elders interessed in the government of the tribes of Israel: mention of whom is made, Num. 11.16. Ezek. 8 11.Calv. in har∣mon. Evan. Calvin amongst the rest gives this reason of it, In numero septuaginta videtur eum ordinem secu∣tus esse, cui jam olim assueverat populus: and addes withall another note, which may well serve to reconcile the difference about this number, which is betweene the Greeke, & the Latine copies. For the Greeke copies have it generally, , that hee appointed other seventy also, as our English reads it. The Latine no lesse gene∣rally: Designavit & alios septuaginta duos, that he sent out other seventy two: which reading doth occurre inHieron. in canone Lucae. Hierome,In Evan. l. 2. cap. 14. Au∣stin, and some others. I know indeed,Beza in An∣not. in Luc. 10. Beza doth put an handsome slurre on the Latine Copies, and thinkes that some poore ignorant scribes (Librarii indocti, as he cals them) abbreviating the word di∣scipulos into dlos: others as ignorant as they, out of dlos read duos, and so found seventy two Disciples instead of seventy. But sure∣ly those renowned Fathers Hierome, and Austine, were no such Babies: not to say any thing of Beda, and the rest that followed. And therefore since it is agreed on, that these Disciples were proportioned to the number
of the Elders of the Tribes of Israel: wee must first find what was the number of those Elders, before wee can agree upon the other. Now for the number of those Elders, the Scripture saith expressely, they were seventy two, as may appeare by com∣paring the 25. verse of the 11. of Numbers, with the 26. in which wee find that there were seventy Elders gathered about the Taber∣nacle, besides Eldad, and Medad in the Camp. For making up this number, as afterwards in the translation of the Bible, there were sixe chosen out of every Tribe, , asIoseph. Ant Iudaic. l. 12. Josephus hath it, which commeth to seventy two in all. But both the seventy two Elders, are generally called the Seventy; as the Translators of the Bible are called the Septuagint; both of them ad rotundationem numeri: even as the Magistrates in Rome were called Centumviri, though being three for every tribe, they came unto an hun∣dred and five in all. And this is that whichCalvin. in harm. Evang. ut spra. Calvin hath observed in the present businesse: viz. that the Consistorie of the Jewish Judges, to which the number of the Disciples is by him proportioned, consisted of no lesse than 72. though for the most part, ut fieri solet in talibus numerus, they are called the 70. So then to reconcile the Latin with the Greek Originall, there were in all 72. Di∣sciples, according to the truth of the calcula∣tion:
and yet but seventy in account, ac∣cording to the estimation which was then in use. And therefore possible the Church of England, the better to comply with both computations; though it have seventy in the new Translations, yet still retaines the number of seventy two, in the Gospell ap∣pointed for Saint Lukes day in the booke of Common-Prayer confirmed by Parlia∣ment. This being the number of the Disciples, it will then fall out, that as there were six Elders, for every Tribe; so here will be sixe Presbyters or Elders, for every one of the Apostles. For those which have compared the Church of Christ which was first plan∣ted by the Apostles, with that which was first founded by the Lord himself: resemble the Bishops in the Church to the twelve A∣postles; the Presbyters, or Priests, unto the Seventy. Which parallell how well it hol∣deth, and whether it will hold or not, we shall see hereafter. Meane while it cannot be denyed, but that the Apostles were supe∣riour to these Seventy, both in place and power. The Fathers have so generally af∣firmed the same, that he must needs runne crosse unto all antiquity that makes question of it. The Councell of Neocaesa∣rea, which was convened some yeares before that of Nice, declareth that the
Chorepiscopi, which were butLeo Ep. 88. Presby∣ters in fact, (though in title Bishops) , were instituted ac∣cording to the patterne of the Seventy.Concil. Neo∣caesar. 1. Can. 13. Saint Hierome, in his tractate ad Fabiolam, speaking of the twelve fountaines of Elim, and the seventy Palmes that grew thereby, doth resolve it thus, Nec dubium quin de duode∣cem Apostolis sermo sit, &c. It is not to be doubted, but that the Scripture speaketh here of the twelve Apostles, the waters issuing from whose fountaines have moistned the barren drinesse of the whole world; and that the seventy Palmes that grew thereby, are the teachers of the se∣cond ranke or order: Luca testante duo∣decem fuisse Apostolos, & septuaginta Disci∣pulos minoris gradus: Saint Luke affirming that there were twelve Apostles, and se∣venty Disciples of a lower order, whom the Lord sent two and two before him. In this conceit, Saint Ambrose led the way before him, likening unto those Palmes the Seventy, qui Secundo ab Apostolis gra∣du, who in a second ranke from the Apo∣stles, were by the Lord sent forth for the salvation of mankind. Serm. 24.Epist. 5. Da∣masus their co-temporarie doth affirme as much, viz: non amplius quam duos ordines, that there were but two orders amongst the Disciples of Christ, viz. that of the twelve
Apostles, and the Seventy.Theoph. in Luc. 10. Theophylact concurres with Hierome in his conceit a∣bout the twelve fountaines, and the seven∣tie Palme trees: and then concludes, that howsoever they were chosen by Christ, , yet were they infe∣riour to the twelve, and afterwards their followers and schollers. Adde hereunto the testimony and consent ofCalvin. in Institut. l 4 c. 3. ss. 4. Calvin, who giving the preheminence unto the A∣postles, as the chief builders of the Church; addes in the next place the Evangelists, such as were Timothy and Titus, & fortassis etiam septuaginta Discipuli, quos secundo ab Apostolis loco Dominus designavit: and perad∣venture also the seventy Disciples, whom Christ appointed in the second place after his Apostles. Besides,Ep. ad Ocea∣num. S. Hierome giveth it for a Maxime, Qui provehitur, de minore ad majus provehitur, that he which is promoted, is promoted from a lower ranke unto an higher. Matthias therefore, having beene formerly of the Seventy, and afterwards advanced into the ranke and number of the Twelve, in the place of Judas: it must needs follow that the twelve Apostles shined in an higher sphere than these lesser lumina∣ries. Now that Matthias had before bin one of the seventy, appeareth by the concur∣rent testimonies of Euseb. lib. 1. Eccles. Hist. c. 12. & l. 2. cap. 1. and of Epiphanius contr.
haeres. 20. n. 4. to whom, for brevity sake, I referre the Reader. And this the rather, because the Scripture is so full & pregnant in it; it being a condition, or qualification, if you will, required byAct. 1. v. 21. S. Peter, in those that were the Candidates for so high a dig∣nity, that they accompanied the Apostles all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst them. And that we know none did, but the Seventy onely. So then it is most cleare, and manifest, both by authority of Scripture, and consent of Fathers, that our Saviour instituted in his Church two rankes of Ministers, the one subordinate unto the other: and consequently, laid the first foundations of it, in such a Fatherly, and moderate imparity, as bound all following times and ages, that would not willingly oppose so Divine an ordinance, to observe the like. And yet it is not to be thought, that this superiority thus by him established, doth contradict those other passages of holy Scripture, wherein he doth prohibit all do∣minion over one another. They much mi∣stake the businesse who conceive it so. The Jewes in generall, and all the followers of Christ particularly, expected that the pro∣mised Messiah should come with power, restore againe the lustre of the Jewish King∣dome, and free them from that yoke and
bondage, which by the Romans had beene laid upon them. We thought,24.21. said Cleophas, that this had beene hee that should have delive∣red Israel. And what hee thought, was so∣lemnely expected by all the rest.Act. 1.6. Domi∣ne, si in tempore hoc restitues regnum Israel, Lord, say they, even in the very moment of his Ascension, wilt thou at this time restore againe the Kingdome unto Israel? Upon which fancie and imagination, no marvell if they harboured some ambitious thought; eve∣ry one hoping for the neerest places, both of power and trust about his person. This was the greatnesse which they aimed at: and this our Saviour laboured to divert them from: by interdicting all such power and Empire, as Princes, and the favorites of Princes have upon their vassals.Mat. 20.25. Luk. 22.25. Yee know (saith hee) that the Princes of the Gen∣tiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them: Vobis autem non sic, But so it shall not be amongst you. Where plainly it appeares, both by the text and context: first, that this strife and contestation was onely amongst the twelve Apostles; and therefore howsoe∣ver it may prove that there was to be a pa∣rity or equality amongst themselves, yet it will never prove, but that they were, and might be still superiour unto the Seventy. And secondly, that Christ our Saviour
doth not prohibit them the use and exer∣cise of all authority, on those who were inferiour and subordinate to them; but on∣le such authority as the Princes of the Gen∣tiles, and the great Lords and Ministers a∣bout them did exercise upon their subjects. The power and government of the Apo∣stles in the Church of Christ was meerly , such as a Father beareth unto his chil∣dren: but not , a Lordly, and impe∣rious rule, such as a Master exerciseth on his slaves and servants:1 Pet. 5.3. Not as Lords over Gods inheritance,2 Cor. 2.24. but as the helpers of their joy, say the two Apostles. And herein stands the difference, according unto that ofChrysost. in oper. imper. in Mat. hom. 35. Chry∣sostome, Principes mundi ideo fiunt, ut domi∣nentur minoribus suis, The Princes of the earth were made to this end and purpose, that they might Lord it over their inferi∣ours, and make them slaves, and spoyle them, and devour them, abasing them un∣to the death, for their owne profit and glo∣ry: Principes autem Ecclesiae fiunt, &c. But the Governours or Princes of the Church were instituted to another end. viz. To serve their inferiours, and to minister unto them all such things, as they have received from the Lord. This eminence and superiority over all the Church, which was thus settled in the Apostles by our Lord and Saviour, will
appeare more fully, if we consult the se∣verall ministrations committed unto them, and to them alone. For unto them alone it was, that Christ committed the whole pow∣er of preaching of his holy Word, admini∣string his blessed Sacraments, retaining and forgiving sinnes, ruling and ordering of his flocke: giving them also further pow∣er of instituting, and ordaining such, by whom these severall offices were to be performed till his second comming. None but the Twelve were present with him, when hee ordained the blessed Sacrament of his body and blood: and unto them a∣lone was saidLuk. 22.19. Hoc facite, do this: i. e. take bread, and breake, and blesse it, and di∣stribute it, in remembrance of mee. To the eleven alone it was that he gave commissi∣on toMat. 28.19. go into all the world and preach the Gospell to all creatures, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost. They onely had that power∣full & immediate mission,Joh. 20.21. Sicut misit me Pater, As my Father sent mee, so send I you; and upon them alone he breathed, saying,Joh. 20.22.23. Receive the Holy Ghost: whose sinnes you do remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose sinnes you do retaine, they are retained. Final∣ly, they, and none but they were trusted with the feeding, and the governance of the Flocke of Christ, (the word  in the
Greeke doth imply them both) for howsoe∣verJoh. 21.15.16. Pasce oves meas, was in particular spoken to S. Peter; yet was that charge in∣cumbent on them all, as before wee noted from Saint Austin. By all which passages and texts of Scripture it is cleere and ma∣nifest that the Apostles were by Christ or∣dained to be the sole and ordinary Teach∣ers, Bishops, and Pastors of the Church, next and immediately under his most blessed selfe, who still continuethHeb. 13 20. , the great Shepheard of the Sheepe, as Paul;1 Pet. 2.25. the Shepheard and Bishop of our soules, as Saint Peter cals him. The Seventy had no part in this new Commissi∣on, the dispensation of the word, and Sa∣craments, but at second hand; as they were afterwards intrusted with it, by the holy Apostles, either as Prophets, Presbyters, or Evangelists, according to the measure of the Grace which was given unto them: or specially designed to some part therein, after the Ascension of our Lord and Saviour, by the immediate designation of the Holy Ghost. And when they were entrusted with a part thereof, yet were they still se∣cundi Ordinis, Ministers of a second ranke, inferiour unto the Apostles, both in place and power, to whom all latitude of power was given. Nay, the Apostles tooke an hint from this different mission, to institute two
severall sorts of Ministers in the Church of Christ: the one subordinate unto the other, as were the Seventy unto them. And this by vertue of these words in their Commis∣sion, Ita mitto vos; i. e. as the Arch-Bishop of Spalato very well applyeth it, Sicut ego à Patre habui potestatem eligendi Ministros,De Repub. Eccl. l. 2 c. 3. n. 7. etiam diversi ordinis, ita & vos pariter ha∣beatis. As I received power from my hea∣venly Father, of instituting Ministers, even of divers Orders, so I give it you. And therefore whatsoever the Apostles did therein, they did it after Christs example, and by his authority: and consequently, the imparity of Ministers by them ordai∣ned, was founded on the Law of God, and the originall institution of our Saviour Christ, by whom the power of Ordination was to them committed, and by them unto their Successours in the Church for ever. To bring this Chapter to an end, our Saviour Christ having thus furnished his Apostles with those severall powers, facul∣ties, and preheminences which before wee spake of; he thought it best to recommend them to the blessings of Almighty God, whose worke they were to goe about. And therefore being to take his fare-well of them, did in a very solemne manner be∣stow his benediction on them.Luk. 24.50. Eleva∣tis manibus suis benedixit eis, He lifted up his
hands, and blessed them, as Saint Luke hath it. Which benediction Saint Austin takes to be a consecrating of those holy men un∣to the power and dignity of Bishops.Aug. quaest. N. Test. qu. 14. Ipse enim priusquam in coelos ascenderet, imponens manum Apostolis, ordinavit eos Episcopos: as the Father hath it. Which whether it were so or not, I meane so done with such an outward forme and ceremony, and in that very point of time, is perhaps uncertaine: But sure I am, that for the thing it selfe, which is here delivered, the Fathers, ma∣ny of them do agree with Austin; affir∣ming, passim, in their writings, that the Apostles were made Bishops by our blessed Lord. SaintCyp. lib. 3. Ep 9. Cyprian voucheth it expressely. The Deacons ought to under∣stand, quoniam Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos, & Praepositos Dominus elegit, that the Lord Christ himselfe did choose the Apostles, that is, the Bishops and Rulers of the Church: and that the Apostles after his ascension did ordaine the Deacons to be the Ministers of their Episcopall function, and the necessi∣ties of the Church.Ambros. in 1. ad Cor: c. 12 Saint Ambrose doth affirme the same, Caput itaque in Ecclesia Apostolos posuit, &c. Christ, saith he, made the Apostles the head (or supreme Gover∣nours) of his Church, they being the Legats or Ambassadours of Christ, according un∣to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20. And
then he addes, Ipsi sunt Episcopi, that they were Bishops.In Comment. in Ephes. 4. More plainly in his Com∣ment on the Ephesians, Apostoli Episcopi sunt, Prophetae, explanatores Scripturarum. The A∣postles, saith he, are Bishops, and Prophets, the expositors of Scripture. But because question hath beene made, whether indeed those Commentaries are the workes of Ambrose, or of some other ancient writer; he tels us in his notes on the 43. Ps. that in those words of Christ, Pasce oves meas,De Repub. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. n. 4. Peter was made a Bishop by our Lord and Saviour. Significat Ambrosius Petrum Sacerdotem, hoc est, Episcopum electum, illis verbis, Pasce oves meas: as the place is ci∣ted by the Arch-Bishop of Spalato. And thus Saint Chrysostome speaking of the ele∣ction of the Seven,Chrys. hom. 14. in Act 6. saith plainly, , that then there were no Bishops in the Church, but onely the Apostles. But what need more be said in the pre∣sent businesse, than that which is delive∣red in the holy Scripture, about the surro∣gation of some other in the place of Judas:Act. 1.20. wherein the place or function of an Apo∣stle is plainly called Episcopatus; Episcopa∣tum ejus accipiat alter, let another take his Bishopricke, as the English reads it. His Bi∣shopricke,Chrys. hom. 3. in Act. 1. i. e. saith Chrysostome, , his principality, his Priesthood,
the place of government that belonged un∣to him, had he kept his station. A text most plain and pregnant as the Fathers thought, to prove that the Episcopall dignity was vested in the persons of the Lords A∣postles. The Comment under the name of Ambrose,Ambros. in 1 ad Cor. c. 12. which before we spake of, having said, Ipsi sunt Episcopi, that the A∣postles were Bishops, addes for the proofe thereof these words of Peter, Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter. And the trueId. Serm. 50. Ambrose saying of Judas, that he was a Bishop [E∣piscopus enim & Judas fuit] addes for the proofe thereof the same very text. Fi∣nally, to conclude this matter, Saint Cypri∣an, shewing that Ordinations were not madeNisi sub po∣puli assistentis conscientia. lib. 1. ep. 4. without the privitie of the people, in the Jewish Church, addes that the same was afterwards observed by the holy A∣postles, Quando de ordinando in locum Judae Episcopo; when Peter spake unto the people, about the ordering of a Bishop in the place of Judas. But for a further proofe of this, that the Apostles were ordained Bishops by our Lord & Saviour, we shall see more hereafter in convenient placeVide chap. 6. n. 12. when wee are come to shew, that in the government of the Church, the Bishops were the proper Successors of the Apostles; and so esteemed to be by those, who otherwise were no great friends unto Episcopacie. In the meane
time we may take notice of that impudent assertion of Johannes de Turre cremata: viz. Quod solus Petrus à Christo Episcopus est ordi∣natus:Lib. 2. Summae de Eccl. c. 32. ap. Bell. de Rom. Pont. that Peter, onely Peter was made Bi∣shop by our Saviour Christ, and that the rest of the Apostles received from Peter their Episcopall consecration: wherein I find him seconded by Dominicus Jacobatius, lib. 10. de Concil. Art. 7. A paradoxe so mon∣strous and absurd, that howsoever Bellar∣mine doth reckon it amongst other the Pre∣rogatives of that Apostle, in his first Booke de Romano Pontifice, cap. 23. yet upon better thoughts, he rejects it utterly in his 4. Book upon that argument, Cap. 22. and so I leave it. Thus having showne in what estate the Church was founded by our Saviour, and in what termes he left it unto his Apostles: we must next see what course was tooke by them to promote the same; what use they made of that authority which was trusted to them.
CHAP. II. The foundation of the Church of Hierusalem under the government of Saint James the Apostle, and Simeon, one of the Disciples, the two first Bishops of the same. I. Matthias chosen into the place of Judas. II. The comming of the Holy Ghost: and on whom it fell. III. The greatest measure of the Spirit fell on the Apostles; and so by consequence the grea∣test power. IV. The severall Ministrations in the Church then given; and that in ranking of the same, the Bishops are intended in the name of Pastors. V. The sudden growth of the Church of Hierusalem, and the making of Saint James the first Bishop there. VI. The former point deduced from Scrip∣ture. VII. And proved by the generall consent of Fathers.
VIII. Of the Episcopall chaire, or Throne of Saint James, and his successors in Hieru∣salem. IX. Simeon elected by the Apostles to suc∣ceed Saint James. X. The meaning of the word Episcopus, and from whence borrowed by the Church. XI. The institution of the Presbyters. XII. What interest they had in the common businesse of the Church, whilst Saint James was Bishop. XIII. The Councell of Hierusalem, and what the Presbyters had to do therein. XIV. The institution of the Seven; and to what office they were called. XV. The names of Ecclesiasticall fun∣ctions, promiscuously used in holy Scripture. OUr Saviour Christ having thus authorized his Apostles to preach the Gospell over all the world, to every creature; and given them power as well of ministring the Sacraments, as of retai∣ning and remitting sinnes, as before is said: thought fit to leave them to themselves: onely commanding them toLuk. 24 49. tarry in the City of Hierusalem untill they were indued with further power from on high: whereby they might be fitted for so great a worke.Act. 1.9. And when hee had spoken those things,
while they beheld, hee was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. No sooner was hee gone to the heavenly glo∣ries, but the Apostles with the rest, with∣drew themselves unto Hierusalem, as hee had appointed: where the first care they tooke was, to fill up their number, to surro∣gate some one or other of the Disciples, in the place of Judas, that so the Word of God might be fulfilled, which he had spo∣ken by the Psalmist,Psal. 69 26. Episcopatum ejus ac∣cipiat alter. A businesse of no small impor∣tance, and therefore fit to be imparted unto all the Brethren: not so much that their suffrage, & consent herein was necessary, as that they might together joyne inAct. 1.21. prayer to Almighty God, to direct the action, whose businesse indeed it was, and unto whom alone the whole election properly pertained. All that they did was to pro∣pose two men unto the Lord their God, (EtAct. 1.23. statuerunt duos, saith the text) such as they thought most fit for so great a charge, and so to leave it to his providence, to shew and manifest which of the two he pleased to choose. In the appointment of which two, whether that statuerunt being a verbe of the Plurall number, be to he referred to all the multitude, as Chrysostome is of opini∣on, or onely unto the Apostles, and the Seventy, as some others thinke, it comes
all to one. For the whole number being butAct. 1.15. an hundred and twenty, and being that the Apostles with the Seventy (out of which ranke the nomination of the two was made) made up the number of foure∣score: it must needs be that the appoint∣ment in effect, was in them alone. And though I rather do incline to Chrysostome, in this particular, that the appointment of these two was done by all the multitude in generall; yet I can yeeld by no meanes to the next that followeth.Chrysost. in hom. 3. in Act. For shewing some politicke, and worldly reasons, why Peter did permit the people to have an interest in the businesse, he first asked this question; ; whe∣ther it were not lawfull for Saint Peter to have chose the man. And then hee answe∣reth positively, , that it was most lawfull, but that hee did forbeare to do it, lest he might seeme to do it out of partiali∣tie. In this I must crave leave to dissent from Chrysostome. The power of making an Apostle was too high a priviledge, to be intrusted unto any of the sonnes of A∣dam. Paul was not made Apostle, though an1 Cor. 15. abortive one, as hee calls himselfe,Galat. 1.1. either of men, or by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. What priviledge or power soever Peter had as an Apostle of the Lord in making Bishops, or as a Bishop
of the Church in ordaining Presbyters: he had no power to make Apostles. The Pope might sing Placebo, if it had beene other∣wise: and we should have Apostles more than ten times twelve, if nothing were required unto it, but Saint Peters Fiat. But to proceed: this weighty businesse being thus dispatched, and MatthiasEpiphan. haeres. 20 n. 4. who before was of the Seventy, being numbred with the eleven Apostles, it pleased God to make good his promise of powring on them in a plentifull and signall manner, the gifts and graces of his holy Spirit. Not on the Twelve alone, or the Seventy onely; but on the whole body of the Disciples; even on the whole 120. which before we spake of. I know that Beza, and some o∣thers would limit this effusion of the holy Ghost to the Twelve alone. Why, and to what intent he doth so resolve it, though I may guesse perhaps, yet I will not judge: but sure it is, hee so resolves it.Beza in Act. 2. Solis Apostolis propria est haec Spiritus sancti missio, sicut proprius fuit Apostolatus, as his owne words are, in his Annotations on the text. The same he also doth affirme in his Book de Ministrorum Evangelii gradibus, cap. 5. But herein Beza leaves the Fathers, and the text to boote.Tact. 2. i ep Johannis. Saint Austin tels us, that the Holy Ghost came from hea∣ven, & implevit uno loco sedentes centum
viginti, and filled one hundred and twenty sitting in one place.Hom. 4. in Act. c. 2. Saint Chrysostome affirmes the same, , &c. what, saith he, did it come on the twelve alone, not upon the rest? And then he answereth, , not so by no meanes, it fell on all the 120. which were there as∣sembled. Nor doth he onely say it, but he proves it also, alleaging in defence of his assertion that very plea and argument which was used by Peter, to cleare him∣self, and his associates from the imputation of being drunken with new wine, viz. Hoc est quod dictum fuit per Prophetam Joel,Act. 2.16. This is that which was spoken by the Pro∣phet Joel, I will powre out of my Spirit upon all flesh, &c. Besides, the text and context make it plaine enough, that this effusion of the holy Ghost was upon them all. In the first Chapter of the ActsAct. 1.14. we find them all together (the whole 120.) with one accord: and in the first verse of the second chapter, we find them all together with the same ac∣cord: and then it followeth, that there ap∣peared cloven tongues, like as of fire,Act. 2 3 4. seditque supra singulos eorum, and sate upon each of them; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. If they were all toge∣ther, (as we found before) and all were filled with the Holy Ghost: no question but there were more filled with it than the twelve
Apostles. And when as Peter with the ele∣ven stood up, making an apologie for the rest, and sayingAct. 2.14, 15 These men are not drun∣ken, as ye suppose: it must needs be that o∣thers, besides the twelve, and indeed all the company were suspected of it. Adde, as by way of surplusage, and ex abundanti, that the Seven chosen by the multitude to serve the Tables,Epiphan. haeres. 20. n. 4. who questionlesse were of the number of the Seventy, are said to have beeneAct. 6.3. full of the Holy Ghost, be∣fore that the Apostles had laid hands on them. So then it is most evident, as I conceive it, that the Holy Ghost was given to every one of the Disciples, the whole number of them: to every one according to his place, and station; according to that service and imployment, in which the Lord intended to make use of him. For1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. unto one was given by the spirit the word of wisedome, to another the word of knowledge, and to another the gift of healing by the same spirit: to ano∣ther the working of miracles, to another pro∣phesie, to another discerning of spirits, to ano∣ther divers kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. Every one of them had their severall gifts; the Apostles allHom. 32. in 1. ad Cor. c. 12. , as wee read in Chrysostome. What ever was divi∣ded amongst the residue, for the advance∣ment
of Gods glory, and the improvement of his Church, that was united in the per∣sons of the holy Apostles: whom God had ranked as much above them in their gifts and graces, as they were in place. By meanes whereof it came to passe, that howsoever the Lord out of these 120. made choyce of some to be Evange∣lists, some to be Prophets, and others to be Pastors, Presbyters, and Teachers: yet the Apostles still retained their superiority, or∣dering and directing them in their severall Ministeries, to the best edifying of the Church. For thus wee read how Paul di∣sposed of Timothy and Titus, who were both Evangelists: sending them, as the oc∣casions of the Church required, from Asia to Greece, and then backe to Asia, and thence to Italy. How he sent2 Tim 4. Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia, Tychicus to Ephe∣sus: commanding Erastus to abide at Co∣rinth, and using the ministerie of Luke at Rome. So find wee how hee1 Cor. 14. ordered those that had the spirit of Prophecie, & such as had the gift of tongues; that every one might use his talent unto edification: how he ordained Bishops in one place, Elders or Presbyters in another, as wee shall see here∣after in this following story. The like wee may affirme of Saint Peter also, and of the rest of the Apostles, though there be lesse
left upon record of their Acts, and Wri∣tings, than are remaining of Saint Paul: whose mouthes and pennes being guided by the Holy Ghost, have beene the Canon e∣ver since of all saving truth. For howsoe∣ver Marke and Luke two of the Evange∣lists, have left behind them no small part of the booke of God, of their owne endi∣ting: yet were not either of their writings reckoned as Canonicall in respect of the Au∣thors, but as they had beene taken from the Apostles mouthes, and ratified by their authority, as bothLuk. 1. Saint Luke himselfe, andHieron. in. Marc. Clemens apud Euseb. l. 2. c. 15. the Fathers testifie. And for a fur∣ther marke of difference, betweene the A∣postles and the rest of the Disciples, wee may take this also: that though the rest of the Disciples had all received the Holy Ghost, yet none could give the same but the Apostles only. Insomuch that when Philip the Evangelist had preached the Gospell in Samaria,Act. 8.12. and converted many, and baptized them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ; yet none of them received the Holy Ghost till Peter and Johnv. 14, 15, 17. came down unto them, and prayed for them, and laid their hands on them, as the Scriptures wit∣nesse. That was a priviledge reserved to the Apostles, and to none but them.Hom. 18. in Act. 8. , as it is in Chrysostome. And when the two Apostles
did it, they did it without Philips helpe or cooperation, who joyned not in it, nor contributed at all to so great a worke, for ought we find in holy Scripture. In this regard it is no marvell, if in the enumerating of those ministrations, which did concurre in the first founding of the Church, the Apostles alwaies have preheminence.1 Cor. 12.28. First, Apostles; secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers, &c. as Saint Paul hath ranked them. Nor did he ranke them so by chance, but gave to every one his proper place, , saith SaintHom. 32. in 1. ad Cor. c. 12. Chrysostome, first placing that which was most excellent, and afterwards descending unto those of a lower ranke. Which plainly shewes, that in the compo∣sition of the Church, there was a prius, and posterius in regard of order, a , or more honourable, as the Father calls it, in regard of power: as in the constitution of the body naturall, to which the Church is there resembled, some of the members do direct, and some obey, some of them be∣ing honourable,1 Cor. 12.22, 23. some feeble, but all necessary. The like may also be observed out of the 4. chap. of the same Apostle unto the Ephe∣sians: where the Apostles are first placed, and ranked above the rest of the ministra∣tions, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Tea∣chers: of which some were to be but tem∣porary
in the Church of God: the others to remain for ever. For as SaintHom. 11. in Epes. 4. Chryso∣stome doth exceeding well expound that Scripture, , first, he doth name Apostles, as they in whom all powers and graces were united: Second∣ly, Prophets, such as was Agabus in the Acts: thirdly, Evangelists, , such as had made no progresse in∣to many countries, but preached the Go∣spell in some certaine Regions, as Aqui∣la, and Priscilla: and then Pastors, and Teachers, who had the government of a Country or Nation, , such as were setled, & employed in a cer∣taine place or City, as Timothy and Titus. If then a question should be made, whom S. Paul meaneth here by Pastors and Teachers; I answer it is meant of Bishops, , as the Father hath it, such as were placed over some certaine Cities: and that the Bishops were accounted in the ancient times, the onely ordinary Pastors of the Church, in the roome, and stead of the A∣postles,Chap. 6. n. we shall shew hereafter. And this I am the rather induced to thinke, be∣cause that in the first Epistle to those of Co∣rinth, written when as there were but few Bishops of particular Cities, Saint Paul doth speake of Teachers onely; but here in this to the Ephesians, writ at such time as Ti∣mothy,
and Titus, and many others had for∣merly beene ordained Bishops, hee addes Pastors also. Certaine I am that both Theo∣phylact,Theoph. α Occum. in Ephes. 4.4 11. and Oecumenius do expound the words by Bishops onely, , such Bishops as both Timothy and Titus were by them accoun∣ted. Nay evenHieron. in Ephes. 4. Saint Hierome seemeth to incline this way, making the Prelates of the Church, or the Praesides Ecclesiae, as he calls them there, to be the Pastors and Teachers mentioned by Saint Paul: i. e. Pa∣stores ovium, magistros hominum; Pastors, in reference to their Flocks, Teachers in re∣ference to their Disciples. But to goe on unto our story. Our Sa∣viour having thus enabled and supplyed his labourers with the gifts and graces of his Spirit; it could not be but that the har∣vest went on a pace.Act. 2.41.47 The first day ad∣ded to the Church 3000. soules. And after that, God added daily to it such as should be sa∣ved. The miracle wrought by the hands of the two Apostles at theAct 3.2. Beautifull gate, opened a large dore to the further increase thereof. For presently upon the same, and Peters Sermon made upon that occasion, we find that theAct. 4.4. number of the men which heard the word and beleeved, was about five thousand. Not that there were so many ad∣ded to the former number, as to make up
five thousand in the totall: but that there were five thousand added to the Church, more than had beene formerly:Chrys hom. 10. in Act 4 & hom. 25. in Act. 11. Saint Chrysostome, and Oecumenius both affirming, that there were more converted by this se∣cond Sermon of Saint Peters, than by the first. So that the Church increasing daily more and more,Act. 5.14. multitudes both of men and women being continually added to the Lord;Vers. 26. and their numbers growing dreadfull to the Jewish Magistrates: it seemed good to the Apostles, (who by the intimation of the Spirit found that there would be worke enough else where) to choose one or other of their sacred number, to be the Bishop of that Church, and take charge thereof. And this they did not now by lots, but in the ordinary course and manner of election, pitching on James the sonne of Alpheus, who in regard of consanguinity is some∣times called in ScriptureGal. 1.19. the Lords bro∣ther, and in regard of his exceeding piety, and uprightnesse, was surnamed the Just. Which action I have placed here, even in the cradle of the Church, upon good au∣thority. For first,Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. Eusebius tels us out of Clemens, that this was done , after the ascension of our Savi∣viour;In Scrip. Ec∣cles. Hierome more plainly; statim post passionem Domini, immediately upon his passion. We may with good security con∣clude
from both, that it was done not long after Christs Ascension, assoone almost as the beleevers were increased to a conside∣rable number. And lastly, thatIgnat. in ep. ad Tall. Ignatius hath made Saint Stephen to be the Deacon, or subservient Minister to this James the Bishop of Hierusalem: and then wee must needs place it in some middle time be∣tweene the feast of Pentecost, and the 26. of December, when Saint Stephen was marty∣red. So early did the Lord take care to provide Bishops for his Church, and set apart a speciall Pastor for his holy City. 'Tis true, there is no manifest record hereof in holy Scripture, but then withall it is as true, that in the Scripture there are many pregnant circumstances, whereon the truth hereof may well be grounded.Gal. 1.18, 19. Saint Paul some three yeares after his conversion, went up unto Hierusalem to see Pe∣ter, but found no other of the Apostles there, save onely James the Lords brother. Aske Hierome, who this James was, whom Saint Paul then saw, and he will tell you, that it was James the Bishop of Hierusalem.Hier. in Gal. 1. Hic autem Jacobus Episcopus Hierosolymo∣rum primus fuit, cognomento Justus. And then withall we have the reason why Paul should find him at Hierusalem, more than the rest of the Apostles: viz. because the rest of the Apostles were dispersed abroad,
according to the exigence of their occasi∣ons; and James was there residing on his Pastorall, or Episcopall charge.Gal. 21.1. Fourteene yeares after his conversion, being the ele∣venth yeare after the former enterview, he went up into Hierusalem againe, with Bar∣nabas and Titus: and was together present with them at the first generall Councell held by the Apostles. In which, upon the agitation of the businesse there proposed, the Canon and determination is drawne up positively and expressely, inAct. 15.20 the words of James. Do you desire the reason of it, Peter and others being there? Chry∣sostome on those words of Scripture,Act. 15.13. James answered saying, doth expresse it thus;Hom. 33. in Act. c. 15. v. 23. , this James was Bishop of Hierusalem. And this no question was the reason, why Paul reci∣ting the names of those with whom espe∣cially he had conference at his being there, putsGalat. 2.9. James in the first place before Pe∣ter and John; viz. because that he was Bishop ther, as Estius hath noted on that text. The Councell being ended, Paul returneth to Antioch, and there by reason of some men that came fromVers. 12. James, Peter withdrew, and separated himselfe, eating no longer with the Gentiles. Why takes the Apostle such especiall notice that they came from James, but because they were sent from him, as
from their Bishop, about some businesse of the Church: this James being then Bishop of Hierusalem, [] as bothTheoph. & Oecum. in Gal. 2. Theophylact and Oecumenius note upon the place. Finally, nine yeares after this, being the 58. of Christs nativitie, Paul makes his last journey to Hierusalem: still he findes James there.Act. 21.18. And the day fol∣lowing Paul went in with us unto James, &c. as the text informes us.Chrysost. hom 46. in Act. Chrysostome notes upon the place, that James there spoken of was the Lords brother, , and Bishop of Hierusalem. So that for 20. yeares together, we have apparent evidence in Scripture of James residing at Hierusa∣lem: and that as Bishop there, as the Fa∣thers say. For that Saint James was Bishop of Hierusalem, there is almost no ancient Wri∣ters but beares witnesse of it.Ignat. ep ad Trallian. Ignatius, who was made Bishop of Antiochia within eight yeares after the death and martyr∣dome of this James in their account, who place it latest; makes Stephen to be the Dea∣con of this James, as Clemens and Anacle∣tus were to Peter: which is an implication that James was Bishop of Hierusalem, out of which City we do not find that Stephen e∣ver travelled. Egesippus, who lived neere the Apostles times, makes this James Bi∣shop of Hierusalem, as both SaintHieron. in ac. Hierome
andEuseb. l. 4. c. 21. Eusebius have told us from him. Clemens of Alexandria not long after him,Apud Euseb. hist. l. 2. c. 1. doth affirme the same. And out of him and other monuments of antiquity, Eusebius doth assure us of him, ,Ibid. & l. 7. c. 14. that hee was the first that held the Episcopall throne or chaire in the Church of Hierusa∣lem.Cateh. 4. cap. de cibis. Saint Cyrill Bishop of Hierusalem, speakes of him as of his Predecessour, [] in that Church:Catech. 14. , as the first Bishop of that Diocesse. And Epiphanius for his greater credit, makes him not onely the first Bishop that ever was, Haeres. 29. n. 3. but Bishop of the Lords owne throne:Epiph. adv. haeres. 78. n. 7. , and that too by the Lords appointment. S. Ambrose doth assigne this reason, why Paul going unto Hierusalem to see Peter, should find James there,Ambros. in Gal. 1. quia illic constitutus erat Episcopus ab Apostolis, because that by the rest of the Apostles hee was made Bi∣shop of the place. Saint HieromeDe Scriptor. Eccles. doth not onely affirme as much, as for his be∣ing Bishop of Hierusalem, but also doth lay downe the time of his creation, to be not long after our Redeemers passion: as we saw before. SaintHom. ult. in Ioh. Chrysostome, be∣sides what was alleaged from him in the former section, tels in his Homilies
on Saint Johns Gospell, , that Saint James had the Bishopricke of Hierusalem. Where by the way I cannot but take notice of a lewd forgery, or at the best a grosse mistake of Baronius, who to advance the Soveraignty of the Church of RomeAn. 34. n. 291 will have this James to take the Bishopricke of Hierusa∣lem from Saint Peters hands; and cites this place of Chrysostome for proofe thereof. But surely Chysostome saith no such mat∣ter: for putting the question, how James was made the Bishop of Hierusalem, since Pasce oves meas was said to Peter: returnes this answer, , that Christ made Peter not the Pastor of a particular place, but of all the universe. That James received his Bishopricke from Peter, not one word saith Chrysostome: 'Tis true, the Latin reads it as the Cardinall doth; But such an undertaker as hee was, should have sought the fountaines. As for Saint Austin, he agrees herein with the other Fa∣thers, in his second booke against Cresconi∣us:Cap 37. where speaking of the Church of Hierusalem, he describes it thus, quam primus Apostolus Jacobus Episcopatu suo rexit, where∣of Saint James the Apostle was the first Bi∣shop. Adde here the joynt consent and suf∣frage of 289. Prelates in the sixthConcil. Con∣stant. in Can. 32 Gene∣rall councell of Constantinople, affirming
James the Lords brother to be the first Bi∣shop of Hierusalem: not to say any thing of Oecumenins, and Theophylact, whom before we cited. Never was point in issue tried by a fuller evidence. And yet one other circumstance oc∣curres to confirme the point, which is, that till Eusebius time,Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 14. the chaire, or Cathe∣dra Episcopalis, wherein Saint James was said to be inthroned, was very carefully preserved by his successours, as a sacred monument, and gladly shewed to all that desired to see it: , as the Author hath it. An evidence of no meane consideration, as being vouched by an au∣thor that lived before the superstitious re∣verence and esteeme of Reliques had beene introduced into the world; or any impo∣stures of that kind put upon the people. Unto which testimony of Eusebius, we may adde that of Beda also,Beda Mar∣tyrol. Decemb. 28 who in his Marty∣rologie doth place the memoriall or cōme∣moration of the Apostles inthronizing in that chaire or throne, upon the 27. of De∣cember: wherein I dare not joyne with him as unto the day though I approve his observation of the fact or ceremony, as be∣ing every way conforme to the ancient cu∣stome of the Church. One onely thing I have to adde, and rectifie, which concernes S. James, & is briefly thus. S. HieromeHieron. de Script. Eccles. tels
us out of Egesippus, huic soli licitum esse in∣gredi Sancta Sanctorum; that it was onely lawfull to Saint James to enter into the Ho∣ly of Holies: whereas in truth it should not be huic soli licitum, but huic solitum. And this appeares to be the true and ancient reading, by comparing the translation of Sophronius, with Saint Hieromes text: wherein we have it , &c. that it was his custome so to doe: the Jewes permitting him to enjoy that privi∣ledge, in the declining times of their State and Temple, by reason of the holinesse of his conversation. Finally, to conclude with Hierome,Id. ibid. this blessed man of God was martyred in the 7. yeare of Nero (An. Chr. 63.) postquam triginta annos Hierosoly∣mis rexerat Ecclesiam: after hee had beene Bishop of Hierusalem 30. yeares, that is to say, 29. yeares compleat, and the 30. cur∣rant. By which account it must needs fol∣low, that the making of this James Bishop of Hierusalem, was one of the first actions of the Apostles, after they were endued with the Holy Ghost. James being dead, Simeon another of the Lords disciples, was made the Bishop of that Church, Peter, and Paul, and John, and many other of the Apostles, being then a∣live, and all concurring in this choyce, and consenting to it.Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 10. Eusebius, as he tels the
story, makes it a very solemne businesse, scarce such another Precedent to be found in all antiquity. And he relates it thus, as followeth: , &c. After the martyrdome of James, & the taking of Hie∣rusalem (by the Romans) it is affirmed that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord and Saviour which were yet alive, together with those of the Lords kindred after the flesh, many of whom continued living till that time, resorted thither. Their businesse was to enter into consultation, , whom they should find most worthy to succeed in the place of James: and having well considered of it, they all with one accord, , saith that Author, agreed on Simeon the sonne of Cle∣ophas, one of our Saviours kindred also,). Id Ibid. as fit and worthy to possesse the Epi∣scopall Throne, and looke unto the go∣vernment of that Church or Diocesse. So that in this election there did not onely meete together the Lords kindred, who might perhaps desire to keepe that holy honour in their owne family; not the Di∣sciples onely of the lower ranke, who might perhaps be easily induced to con∣sent thereto, to gratifie the kindred of their Lord and Master: but there met also the Apostles, men guided and directed by the Spirit of God: and all of these comming
from severall parts and countries did, , with one accord, with one unanimous assent, agree upon the choyce of this worthy man, to be the Bishop or chiefe Pastor of the mother City, which place he held untill the time of Trajan, du∣ring whose Empire he received the crowne of Martyrdome, Anno 109. Here then we have two Bishops of Hieru∣salem, made by the generall and joynt consent of the Apostles: and those two Bi∣shops not in name and title, but in power and office; according to the Ecclesiasticall notion of the word, and as the same is taken in the writings of the Fathers before allea∣ged. I know the word Episcopus, in the pri∣mitive and proper notion doth signifie a supervisor or over-seer, as it is rendred in our last translation, Act. 20.4. Such were the officers of the AtheniansSuidas in Episcpo. whom Suidas speakes of, sent by that State to looke into the government of the Cities under their dominion; . And these, saith hee, were called Bi∣shops, and guardians. In this last sense the word is often used by Plutarch,Plutarch. in Numa. as where he calleth Numa, , the Bi∣shop or guardian of the Vestall virgins; and their God Terminus, , the Overseer and preserver of peace and amity. Thus do wee read in Sophocles
of certaine officers called , such as took care about the dead: of others in the civill laws, qui pani,LL. Mune∣rum. & caeteris rebus ve∣nalibus praesunt, which had the oversight of the markets, and those called Episcopi. And thus doth Tully tell us of himselfe,Cicero ad Atticum. l. 7. Vult me Pompeius episcopum esse, &c. that Pompey had made him the overseer, or the guardian of Cāpania, & the whole sea-coast. This be∣ing the meaning of the word in its native sēse, it pleased the holy Ghost to make choice thereof, to signifie the Pastor or superiour Mi∣nister, to whom the governance of the Church was trusted; one who was vested with a cōstant & fixed preheminence, as wel over the Clergie, as the Laity, committed to his charge; such as both Timothy, & Titus are described to be, in S. Pauls epistles,V. Chap. 5. of whō we shall say more hereafter. S. Austin right∣ly understood the word, & the originall of it,De civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 19. when he told us this, Graecum est enim, atque inde ductum vocabulum, quod ille qui praeficitur, eis quibus praeficitur superintēdit, &c. The word, saith he, is Greek originally, and from thence derived, shewing that he which is preferred, or set over others, is bound to take the oversight and care of those whom hee is set over. And so proceeding unto the Etymologie, or grammar of the word, he concludes it thus, ut intelligat se non esse Episcopum, qui praeesse dilexerit, non prodesse,
that hee deserves not to be called a Bishop, which seeketh rather to preferre himselfe, than to profit others. Saint Austin, being himselfe a Bishop, knew well the meaning of the word, according to the Ecclesiasticall notion, and sense thereof. And in that no∣tion, the Scriptures generally, and all the Fathers universally have used the same: out of which word Episcopus (whether Greeke, or Latine) the Germans had their Bischop, & we thence our Bishop. If sometimes in the holy Scripture, the word be used to signifie an ordinarie Presbyter, it is at such times, and such places only, when as the Presbyters had the chiefe governance of the flocks, next & immediately under the Apostles, and where there was no Bishop, properly so called, established over them: as we shall see here∣after in the Churches of S. Pauls plantation. Having thus seene the sudden, and mira∣culous growth of the Church of God, in, and about the City of Hierusalem; and seene the same confirmed and setled in Epi∣scopall government: our next enquirie must be made into the Clergie, which were to be subordinate to him, and to participate of the charge to him entrusted, according to his directions. And in this search, we first encounter with the Presbyters, the first, as well in time, as they are in dignity. The Deacon, though exceeding ancient, yet
comes short in both. We shewed you in the former chapter, how our Redeemer ha∣ving chosen the Twelve Apostles, appointed other Seventy also, and sent them two and two before him, to prepare his way. Of these the Lord made choyce1 Cor. 12. & Eph. .8. of some to be E∣vangelists, and others to be Prophets, some to be Pastors, and Teachers, and others to be helpes in Government, according to the mea∣sure, and the purpose of his grace bestowed upon them, in the effusion of his spirit. And out of these thus fitted and prepared for the worke of God, I doubt not but there were some chosen to assist S. James, in the discharge of the great trust commit∣ted to him, by the common counsell, and consent of the Apostles. Such as were after added unto them, according to the exigen∣ces of that Church, I take it to be all of Saint James ordaining: who being a Bishop, and Apostle, is not to be denied the privi∣ledge of ordaining Presbyters, it being a thing which both the Apostle Paul did doe in all the Churches which he planted, and all succeeding Bishops since have done in their severall Dioceses. Certaine it is, that there were Presbyters in the Church of Hie∣rusalem, before the election of the Seven:gnat. ep. ad Heron. Ignatius telling us that Stephen did mi∣nister, , &c. to James, and to the Presbyters, which were in Hieru∣salem.
And certaine also it is, that the Apo∣stles first, and Bishops afterwards ordained Presbyters, to be assistant with them, and subservient to them, in their severall char∣ges: and this they did, according as the Fa∣thers say, in imitation of our Lord and Sa∣viour; who having chose his twelve Apo∣stles, appointed Seventy others of a lower ranke,Hier. ad Fa∣biolam. Secundos Christi Discipulos, as S. Hierome calls them. Not that the Presby∣ters of the Church do succeed the Seventy, who were not founded in a perpetuity by our Saviour Christ,De Rep. Ec∣cles. l. 2. c. 2 n. 6. as the Archbishop of Spalato hath well observed: but onely that they had a resemblance to them, & were or∣dained ,Concil. Neo-Caesar. Can. 13. as the Coun∣cell of Neo-Caesarea affirmed before, as se∣condary and subservient Ministers in the Church of God. And this is that which Beda tels us in his Comment on the Go∣spell of Saint LukeBeda in Luk. 10. that as the Twelve Apostles did premonstrate the forme of Bi∣shops, so the Presbyters did beare the figure of the Seventy. Another resemblance betweene the Pres∣byters and the Seventy may perhaps be this, that as our Saviour in the choycing of these disciples related to the number of the Elders in the state of Jewrie: so the Apostles thought it fit to give unto the Ministers thus by them ordained (though they regarded
not the number) the name of Elders, accor∣ding to the custome of that State before. Presbyters, they are called in the Greeke ori∣ginalls, which being often rendred Senio∣res in the vulgar Latine, occasioned that our first Translatours (who perhaps looked no further than the Latine) turned it into El∣ders: though I could heartily have wished they had retained the name of Presbyters, as the more proper, and specificall word of the two, by farre. But for these Presbyters of the Church of Hierusalem (from whencesoever they may borrow or derive their name) we find thrice mention of them in the Booke of the Acts, during the time Saint James was Bishop, viz. in the 11. 15. 21. In the first place we read, that when the Disciples which dwelt at Antioch, had made a con∣tribution for the brethren of Judaea,Act. 11. ult they sent it to the Elders there by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. AskeCap. 18. in Act. Apostol. Oecumenius who these Elders were, and he will tell you, , that they were the Apostles. And like enough it is, that the Apostles may be comprehended in that generall name; they being indeed the elder brethren. AskeIn Act. 11. Calvin why this contribution was sent unto the Presby∣ters or Elders, being there were particular officers appointed to attend the poore, as is set downe in the 6. Chap. of the Acts; and
he will tell you, that the Deacons were so appointed over that businesse, that notwith∣standing they were still inferiour unto the Presbyters; nec quicquam sine eorum auctorita∣te agerent, and were not to do any thing therein without their authority. So for that passage in the 21. S. Lukev. 18.19. &c. relates how Paul, at his last going to Hierusalem, went in unto James, and that all the Elders were pre∣sent; and addes withall, what counsell and advice they gave him, for his ingratiating with the Jewes. Here find we James the Bishop attended by his Presbyters, at the re∣ception of Saint Paul: and they together joyning with him in the consultation then in hand, the businesse being great and weighty. And therefore ChrysostomeChrys. in Act. 21. ob∣serves, , that James determined nothing in it, as a Bishop, of his sole authority: but tooke Paul into counsell with him: and that the Presbyters on the other side, carried themselves with great respect and reverence towards him, [] giving him an account, or rea∣son of their following counsell. The Bi∣shop never sit and in a firmer chaire, than when his Chapter doth support it. But that which is indeed the matter of the greatest moment, is that which doth occurre in the 15. chapter of the Acts, tou∣ching the Councell of Hierusalem: wherein
the Presbyters are so often mentioned, as if without their presence and assistance, the Apostles had beene able to determine no∣thing. Some would faine have it so per∣haps, but it will not be. Saint Paul was so assured of the doctrine by him delivered, as not to put it to the triall of a mortall man: and the Apostles of a spirit so infalli∣ble in the things of God, as not to need the counsell and assistance of inferiour persons. How many points of doctrine did Saint Paul determine without repairing to the A∣postles? how many did the Apostles preach and publish without consulting with the Presbyters? Somewhat there must be in it more than ordinary, which did occasion this conjuncture; and is briefly this. Some of the Jewes which had but newly beene initiated in the faith of Christ, and were yet very zealous of their ancient ceremonies,Act. 15.1. came from Hierusalem to Antiochia; and there delivered doctrines contrary unto those which Paul taught before. It seemes there were some Presbyters amongst them, for it is said, they taught the people: and they pretended too, that they did teach no other doctrine, than that which had beene authorized by the Apostles. The doctrine was, that except men would be circumcised af∣ter the manner of Moses, they could not be sa∣ved. Paul might have over-ruled this case,
by his owne authority. But partly for the satisfaction of the Antiochians, and partly for the full conviction of these false tea∣chers, he was content, by revelationGal. 2.2. of the Spirit, to put the matter over to the resolu∣tion of such of the Apostles as were then abiding in Hierusalem: that by their gene∣rall attestation, they might confirme his doctrine to be found, and true. As for the Presbyters, it concerned them to be present also, as well to cleare themselves from au∣thorizing any such false brethren to disturbe the Church, as to prevent the like disor∣ders in the time to come. This is the summe of the proceedings in this businesse. And this doth no way interest the Presby∣ters in the determination of points of faith, further then as they are concerned either in having beene a means to pervert the same; or for the clearing of themselves from the like suspicions. And yet I cannot but af∣firme withall, that pure and primitive anti∣quity did derive from hence the forme, and manner of their Councels: in which the Presbyters did oftentimes concurre, both for voyce and hand, I meane as well in giving of their suffrages, as the subscripti∣on of their names. Certaine I amConcil. Tar∣racon. Can. 13. that in the Councell held in Arragon, An. 490. or thereabout, it was provided among o∣ther things, ut non solum à Cathedralibus,
verum etiam de Diocesanis: that certaine Pres∣byters should be chosen, as well out of the Diocesan, as the Cathedrall Churches, to attend that service; and that the Me∣tropolitan should send out his letters unto that effect: according as is still observed in holding of the Convocation of the Church of England. Next to the constituting of the Presbyters in time and order, was the election of the Seven; and this the Apostles did put over to the people onely: not intermeddling in the same at all, further than in commen∣ding them to the grace of God, that they might faithfully discharge the trust com∣mitted to them. The Church was then in that condition, that the Disciples lived in one place together,Act. 4.32, 34, 35. and had all things common: some of them selling their estates, and laying downe the price thereof at the Apostles feete, that by them it might be distributed as occasion was. But being it fell out,Act. 6.1. that some did thinke them∣selves neglected in the distribution, the Apostles, both to free themselves of so great a trouble, as also to avoid suspicion of being partiall in the businesse, required themAct. 6.3. to make choyce of such trusty men, as they conceived most fit to be the Stewards of their goods, and the dispen∣sers of the common stocke. This was the
charge the Seven were called to by the people: which being no Ecclesiasticall fun∣ction, but a Civill trust; no dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, but a disposi∣tory power of the common treasure: it was most consonant to the rules of reason, that the election of them should be left to the people onely. I know these Seven are commonly both called, and accounted Dea∣cons: but I find no such thing in the texts, or story. Neither in that chapter, nor in all rhe Acts, is the word Deacon to be found: nor find I either Stephen or Philip (of whom the Scripture is most copious) to be so in∣tituled. Philip indeed is calledAct. 21.8. unus de septem, but no more, one of the Seven, but no such stile as Deacon added: which makes me thinke their office was not such as it is conceived. And this I am the rather in∣duced to thinke, because I find Saint Chry∣sostome, and others of the same opinion. SaintHom. 14. in Act. 6. Chrysostome putting it unto the question, what dignity or office these men had, what ordination they received, and namely, whether that of Deacons; makes an∣swer first, that in his time the use was other∣wise, the Presbyters being there intrusted with the distribution of the Churches trea∣sure, and then concludeth, , that it appeared not in his opinion, that they were either Pres∣byters,
or Deacons. The Fathers of the sixt Councell in ConstantinopleConcil. in Trullo, Can. 16. building upon those words of Chrysostome, do affirme the same; determining expressely that those Seven mentioned in the Acts, were not ordained to any ministration at the Lords Table, , but onely to the service and atten∣dance of the Common Tables. In which re∣gardHieron. in epist. ad Euagr. Saint Hierome looking backe unto the primitive institution, doth call the Dea∣cons of his time, mensarum & viduarum Mi∣nistros, in his Epistle to Euagrius. For how∣soever I beleeve not, on my former ground, that the Seven spoken of in the Acts, had either the office or the name of Deacons, as it was used afterwards in the Church of God: yet I deny not but the Church tooke some hint from hence, even in the times of the Apostles, to institute that holy order, & to appoint it to some speciall ministery in Gods publique service: as doth appeare both by the Epistles of Saint Paul, and the Records of primitive and pure antiquity. That Philip did both preach the Go∣spell, and baptize the converts; or that Stephen did both preach the Gospell, and convince the adversarie: related not to any power or faculty which they received by the addition or accesse of this new office. For being they, and all the residue were of
theEpiph. adv. haeres. 20 n. 4. Seventy, as the Fathers say: and that they had received the Holy Ghost before, as theAct. 6.3. Scriptures tell us: their preaching and baptizing, must relate to their former calling. And it had beene a degradation from their former dignity, being Presby∣ters at the least before, to be made Deacons now. Thus have we seene the instituting of the severall orders of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, in the holy Hierarchie: accor∣ding to those severall names, which were in tract of time appropriated to their seve∣rall functions in the Church of God. And certainly it did require some space of time, to estrange words from their naturall to a borrowed sense, to bring them to an Eccle∣siasticall, from a Civill notion. So that it is no wonder, if at first the names and appel∣lations of these severall functions were used promiscuously, before that time had limited and restrained them to that ex∣presse and setled signification which they still retaine. That glorious name of an A∣postle, which of it selfe did signifie a Mes∣senger, (Graecè Apostoli, Latinè Missi appel∣lantur,Tract. 54 in Evang. Iohannis. as Saint Austin hath it) was gi∣ven by Christ as a peculiar name to his twelve Disciples. And yet we find it some∣times given to inferiour persons, as toRom. 16.7. Andronicus and Junias, in the 16. chap.
to the Romans: sometimes reverting to its primitive and ancient use, as where the Messengers of the Churches are called Apostles, asCap. 8.23. in the 2. to those of Corinth, Aposto∣li Ecclesiarum gloria Christi; the Messengers of the Churches are the glory of Christ. So was it aso with that reverend and ve∣nerable title of Episcopus, borrowed and re∣strained from its generall use, to signifie an Overseer in the Church of God: one who was trusted with the government, and su∣per-intendencie of the flocke of Christ committed to him: according to the ac∣ceptation of the word in the most aucient Authors of the Christian Church. And yet sometimes wee find it given unto the Pres∣byters, as in theCap. 1. v. 1. first of the Philippians: in which Paul writing to the Bishops and Dea∣cons, is thought by Bishops to meane Presby∣ters: partly because the Presbyters had then the government of that Church under the Apostle, and partly because it was against the ancient Apostolicall constitution, that there should be many Bishops (properly so called) in one City. Thus also, for the title Presbyter, which by the Church was used to signifie, not as before, an ancient man, which is the native sense, and constru∣ction of it; but one in holy orders, such as in after times were called by the name of Priests: it grew so generall for a while,
as to include both Bishops, and Apostles also; asBeza. Annot. in 1 Pet. 5.1. Beza notes upon the first Epistle of Saint Peter, chap. 5. And that perhaps upon the reason given by Ambrose,Ambros. in 1. ad Tim. c. 3. Omnis Epi∣scopus Presbyter, non tamen omnis Presbyter E∣piscopus, because that every Bishop was a Presbyter, although not every Presbyter a Bishop. And yet sometimes we find in Scrip∣ture, that it returned unto its primitive, and originall use: as in the first to Tim. cap. 5. v. 1. in which , is used to signifie an ancient man. , an ancient wo∣man, as by the text and context doth at full appeare. The like occurreth some∣times also in the ancient Writers. Last of all, for the word Diaconus, which in it selfe doth signifie any common Minister, or do∣mesticke servant, the Church made use thereof to denote such men, as served in the inferiour ministeries of the Congregation; such as according to the Ecclesiasticall no∣tion of the word we now call Deacons, as inPhil. 1.1. the first of the Philippians, and in the ancient Writers passim. Yet did it not so easily put off its originall nature, but that it did sometimes revert to it againe: as in the 13. of the Romans,Rom. 13.4. in which the Magi∣strate is called Diaconus, being the publike minister of justice under God Almighty; and Phoebe in the 16.Vers 1. of the same Epistle, is called , a servant of the Church
of Cenchrea. Indeed the marvell is not much that it should be so long before the Church could fasten and appropriate these particu∣lar names to the particular officers of, and in the same; considering how long it was before she got a name unto herselfe. The word , which is used in Scripture to denote the Church, doth signifie a∣mongst the ancient learned Writers, a meeting or assembly of the people for their common businesse: asIn Acharn. Act. 1 sen 4. . Not to omit the Thracians to the common Councell. So in Arstophanes. The like we find also in Thucidides,Histor. l. 1. , that having constitu∣ted the assembly, they fell upon their alter∣cations. The first time that wee find it used to denote the Church, is Mat. 16.18. and after frequently in holy Scripture: yet so, that it returned sometimes to its native sense, as in the 19. of the Acts, wherein wee read, , that the assembly (of the Ephesians) was confused, v. 32. and , he dismissed the assem∣bly, v. 41. And therefore they which from identity of names in holy Scripture, con∣clude identity of offices in the Church of Christ; and will have Presbyter, and Episco∣pus to be both one calling, because the names are sometimes used promiscuously in the first beginnings: may with like
equity conclude that every Deacon is a Ma∣gistrate, and every Presbyter an Apostle, or that the Church of Ephesus was nothing else than an assembly of the Citizens in the Towne-hall there, for the dispatch of busi∣nesse which concerned the Corporation. CHAP. III. The Churches planted by Saint Peter, and his Disciples, originally founded in Episcopacie. I. The founding of the Church of Anti∣och by Saint Peter; the first Bishop there. II. A reconciliation of the difference about his successors in the same. III. A list of Bishops planted by him in the Churches of the Circumcision. IV. Proofe thereof from Saint Peters ge∣nerall Epistle to the Jewes dispersed. V. And from Saint Pauls unto the He∣brewes. VI. Saint Pauls Praepositus, no other than a Bishop, in the opinion of the Fathers. VII. Saint Peter the first Bishop of the Church of Rome.
VIII. The difference about his next suc∣cessors there, reconciled also. IX. An answer unto such objections as have beene made against Saint Peters being Bishop of Rome. X. Saint Marke the first Bishop of Alex∣andria, and of his Successours. XI. Notes on the observations of Epipha∣nius, and Saint Hierome, about the Church of Alexandria. XII. An observation of Saint Ambrose applyed unto the former businesse. XIII. Of Churches founded by Saint Pe∣ter, in Italy, France, Germany, and the Isle of Britaine, and of the Bishops in them insti∣tuted. : It is the observation of SaintHom. in Act. cap. 11. Chrysostom, that the Church never thriveth better than in persecutions. And this hee speakes, on the dispersion of the Disciples after the martyrdome of Stephen: then which there could not any thing fall out more fortunately, for the advancement of the Gospell.Act. 11.19 They which were scattered abroad (saith the holy Text) upon the perse∣cution which arose about Stephen, travelled as farre as Phoenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch,
preaching the Word to none but the Jewes only. At first indeed to none but the Jews alone. The Vision had not yet appeared to Peter, to authorize his going in unto the Gentiles: nor had Cornelius and his houshold, as yet beene made partakers of the Holy Ghost. The Jewes were they to whom the promi∣ses of God had first been made: who as they were dispersed into many places; so did Gods Word goe after them, and found them out; either converting them unto the Faith, or else convincing them of their incredulity. But in no City of the East were they so thicke set; as in Antiochia, the regall seate and City of the Kings of Syria: in which by ancientIoseph. An∣tiqu. Iud. l. 12. c. 3. priviledge, first granted by Seleucus Nicanor, they were all free Denizens, and enjoyed all immu∣nities whatsoever, with the Greekes and MacedonsIoseph. de Bello Iud. l. 7. c. 24.. This made them plant here in great multitudes, together with their Wives and Children: and so by conse∣quence, the greater opportunity was offe∣red for the enlargement of the Church. Newes hereof being brought unto Hieru∣salem, and Peace by that time being setled throughout the Churches, Saint PeterAct. 9.31, 32, as hee passed throughout all quarters, is said to have come downe unto Antioch also, and to have undertaken the charge therof; as be∣ing the most famous City of the Easterne
parts. It's true, the Scriptures tell us nothing of this, but the Fathers doe: and nega∣tive proofes from Scripture, in a point of History, are of no authority. OrigenHomil. 6. in Lucam. calls Ignatius, Episcopum Antiochiae post Pe∣trum secundum, the second that was Bishop of Antioch after Peter: and therefore Pe∣ter must of necessary consequence be first Bishop there. EusebiusEuseb. eccle. hist. l. 3. c. 35. saith the same with Origen, as to Saint Peters being Bishop there, and so doth Felix Pope of Rome, in the fifth Councell of Constantinople, Acti∣one prima. But not to trust to consequences onely, though those cleare enough; Euse∣biusId. in Chron. in his Chronicon, saith expressely, Pe∣trus Apostolus Ecclesiam Antiochenam funda∣vit, ibique Cathedram adeptus sedit, that Pe∣ter the Apostle founded the Church of An∣tioch, and sate Bishop there. S. HieromeHieron. in c. 2. ad Galat. doth affirme the same, Primum Episcopum Antiochenae Ecclesiae Petrum fuisse, and makes it one of those things which Saint Luke o∣mitted. Luke being an attendant of Saint Paul in his peregrinations, tooke not such speciall and particular notice of Saint Pe∣rers actions: and therefore his omission of it is no argument that it was not so. More of Saint Peters being Bishop of the Church of Antioch, see in the same Saint Hierome in his Book de Ecclesiast. Scriptoribus: And in Saint GregoriesIpse firma∣vit sedem in qua septem annis quamvis disces∣surus sedit. Greg Epistles; lib. 6. ep. 37.
where he is said to have continued Bishop there seven yeares; as indeed most authors doe agree. This founding of the Church of Anti∣och by Saint Peter, and his assuming of the Bishopricke or charge thereof, is by Eusebi∣usEuseb. in Chron. placed in the fourth yeare of the 203 Olympiad: which falleth by computation into that 38. yeare of Christs Nativity, be∣ing the fourth yeare after his Ascension. But then withall, we must restraine Saint Pe∣ters Bishopricke in Antioch, and his foun∣dation of that Church, only unto the Jew∣ish Congregations there. Preaching unto the Gentiles, was not yet thought lawfull. And when it was, it pleased God to make choyce of others to promote that worke. Whereof when tidings came untoAct. 11.22. Ibid. 25. Hie∣rusalem, they sent forth Barnabas that hee should goe as farre as Antioch: And when he found the taske too great for himselfe alone, he went to Tarsus, saith the Text, to seeke for Saul, whom he brought with him to that City. By these the gaining of the Gentiles in that famous City, was begun and finished. In this regard Saint Paul is to be reckoned a co-founder at the least of the Church of Antioch; and so IgnatiusIgnat. ep. ad Magnes. doth account them, in his Epistle to the Magnesians, where he relateth that the Disciples were first called Christians at
Antiochia, , the Church whereof was founded by Paul and Peter. And this may serve to recon∣cile the difference which doth occurre a∣mongst the Ancient writers, about Saint Peters next successour in the See of Anti∣och. Origen,Homil. de transt. Ignatii. Chrysostome,Dialog. 1. Theodoret, and Felix, whom before we spake of, doe make Ignatius to be Saint Peters next suc∣cessour: where by the way we have Saint Peters being Bishop there, avowed by Chrysostome and Theodoret, into the bargaine. And on the other side,Hist. l. 3. c. 16. Eusebius, and Saintde script. ec∣cles. in Ignatio. Hierome place Euodius first, and after his decease, Ignatius: wherein Igna∣tiusEpist ad An∣tioch. doth himselfe concurre with them, counselling or exhorting the Antiochians, to call to minde Euodius that most holy Bishop , who first received the go∣vernment of that Church from the holy Apostles. Now for the reconciliation of this difference, taking it first for granted, as I thinke we may, that at first there were in Antiochia two severall Congregations of converted Christians, the one of Jewes, the other of the Gentiles, whereof Saint Peter and Saint Paul were the severall heads: the Authour of the Constitutions ascribed toConstitut. A∣postol. l. 7 c. 48. Clemens (who in a matter of this nature may well bee credited) will
give us an handsom hint: informing us that (the Apostles being to betake themselves to their other businesse, or the businesse ra∣ther of the Lord) Saint Peter did ordaine Euodius, and Saint Paul, Ignatius, to be the Bishops there in their severall charges. Upon which ground Baronius doth infer, and not improbably, that the wall of se∣paration being beaten downe, and both the Congregations of Antiochia, made in∣to one Church,Baron. An∣nal. Eccl. An. 45 n. 14. Ignatius did willingly resigne his present interest unto Euodius, whom he succeeded also after his decease. But be this how it will, certaine I am that the preferment of Euodius to the See of Antioch, is placed by Eusebius in the 45. yeare of Christs Nativity: who having sate there sixe and twenty yeares, did leave the same unto Ignatius, Anno 71. Saint John, and perhaps other of the Apostles, being then alive. More then so,Serm. de Ig∣nat. Tom. 5. p. 499. edit. Savil. Chry∣sostome affirmes expressely, not onely that some of the Apostles were then alive, but that he was made Bishop by them; , and that the hands of the Apostles touched his holy head. And so much for the Bishops of Antiochia, which lived and were co-temporary with the Apostles. But to goe forwards with Saint Peter, having thus setled and confirmed the
Church of Antioch, and by this preaching to Cornelius opened a doore unto the Go∣spell in Caesarea, and amongst the Gentiles; he followed on the course of his Apostle∣ship: Preaching unto the Jewes dispersed in the Easterne parts, as namely through∣out Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and By∣thinia,1 Pet. 1.1. as himselfe intimates in his first Epistle. And when he was to leave those parts, and make for Italy, he left them not without a Ministery: nor did he leave that ministery without some Bishops, to governe and direct the flocke. The Roman Martyro∣logie doth reckon in these Churches of Saint Peters founding,Februar. 2. Cornelius, the first fruites of the Gentiles, Quem B. Petrus Episcopali honore sublimavit, made by him Bishop of Caesarea.Citat. ap. Baron. An. 44. n. 10. Metaphrastes, if hee may be credited, as in most things, which doe not tend to miracles, I thinke he may, relateth that Saint Peter in his peregrinati∣on did ordaine Bishops in the Churches of Sidon, Berytus, and Laodicea; that he made Marson Bishop of Tripolis, and Prochorus of Nicomedia: and finally that in the Pro∣vinces of Pontus, Cappadocia, and Bythinia, he did not onely plant Churches, but he founded Bishoprickes. But waving these things as I finde them, and the report of Agapetus in the fifth Councell of Constan∣tinople, that the first Bishop of Bizantium
Concil. Con∣stant. 5. Act. 2. was of Peters founding, though of un∣questionable credit: let us repaire unto the Scriptures. There finde we the Apostles stir∣ring up the Pastors to have a care unto the flocke.1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders which are amongst you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witnesse of the sufferings of Christ, Feed the flocke of God which is among you. AskeOecumen. in 1. Pet. cap. 5. Oecumenius who these Presbyters, or Elders were, and he will tell you they were Bishops. And then he gives this reason of it, , that Bishops are called Presbyters in the booke of Acts. But Oecumenius, being of a later standing, may possibly bee un∣dervalued, when he speakes alone: and therefore we will stare super vias antiquas, enquire amongst the ancients, and aske their Judgements in the case. And here we meete with Gregory Nazianzen,Nazian. in Apologet. who pencilling and describing a perfect Prelate, makes amongst others, this to be a speci∣all quality belonging to him, , not to constraine their people to the works of piety by force & vi∣olence, but to allure them by perswasions. For proofe whereof hee instanceth in this present Text, Feede the flocke of Christ which is among you, not by constraint, but willingly, of a ready minde. But this construction may be verifyed
from the Text it selfe, as well as from the Glosses of the Ancient Writers; and that from three particular words or phrases, that occurre therein. For first, Saint Peter calling himselfe their Fellow Presbyter,  in the Greeke, shewes plaine∣ly that they were not simple Presbyters, which he thus exhorteth, but Presbyters in∣vested with some higher dignity, such as had some resemblance of the Apostolicall Function. In which regard Saint John the Apostle in his two last Epistles, cals him∣selfe a Presbyter, the Elder, as our English reades it. Which word he used, asOecum. in 2 Ioh. epl. 1. v. 1. Oe∣cumenius hath observed, either because he was growne aged when he wrote the same, , or intimating that he was a Bishop, according as the word Pres∣byter would beare in those former times. And why not thus, since Beza doth af∣firme on those words of Saint Peter,Beza An∣not. in 1 Pet. c. 5. Ge∣nerale esse nomen Presbyteri, that the name of Presbyter was very generall: so gene∣rall as it seemes by him, ut etiam ipsi Aposto∣li hoc nomine comprehendantur, that even the holy Apostles are comprised therein. And therefore Beza being Judge, Saint Peter may meane Bishops here, though hee calls them Presbyters. And that hee meaneth Bishops, may be also gathered from the word , Feed ye the flocke which is among you:
, in the Greeke not signifying to feed onely, and no more then so; but such a feeding as implyeth a rule or governance annexed unto it, which is the proper Act of Bishops. Inferiour Presbyters may , feed the particular flocke committed to them by the word of Doctrine: The Bi∣shop onely may , so feede them with the word of Doctrine, as that he also rule them with the rodde of Disci∣pline. In this respect as the Apostle joynes the1 Pet. 2.25. Shepherd and the Bishop in a line to∣gether: So primitive Antiquity did arme the Bishop with a Crozier or Pastorall staffe, to shew the union of those Offices in the selfe-same person. But hereof wee shall speake more fully in another place: And indeed neede not speake more of it upon this occasion, considering that there is a∣nother word behinde in Saint Peters Text, which putteth the matter out of question. Feede ye the flocke of God which is among you, saith the Apostle, , saith the Text, taking the oversight thereof, as our English reades it; doing the Office of a Bishop, as the word doth signifie. The ordinary Pres∣byters may be called ,Phil 3.17. cap. 9. v 9. or Seers if you will, according to the notion of that word, in the first of Samuel: the Bishops are , such as doe over-see the Seers. So then the Presbyters whom Saint Peter
speakes of, being such as might , and , both feede, and Oversee, and Governe; it is apparent they were Bishops, and not simple Presbyters. But in this point Saint Peter shal not goe alone; Saint Paul will put in for a share, and keepe him company: who writing to the Hebrewes, even to the very Hebrewes of Saint Peters Province; doth advise them thus, , &c.Heb. 13.17 Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your soules, as they that must give account, &c. If you would know of ChrysostomeChrysost. in 13. ad Heb. who these Rulers are, hee will tell you that they are the Prstors of the Church, whom. if you take away from the Flocke of Christ, , you utterly destroy, and lay waste the whole. Next askeTheopy. in 13. ad Heb. Theophylact, then whom none ever better scanned that Fathers writings, what hee meanes by Pastors; and hee will tell you, , that he speakes of Bishops. The very same saithOecumen. in lcum. Oecumenius, noting withall that , which we read submit, doth signifie , a very pun∣ctuall and exact obedience. But to goe higher yet then so, Ignatius the Apostles Scholler, one that both knew Saint Paul, and conversed with him, will tell us that the Rulers, or , which Saint Paul
here speaketh of, were no other than Bi∣shops. For laying downe this exhortation to the Trallenses, , be subject to your Bishop, as unto the Lord; he gives the selfe-same reason of it, which Saint Paul here doth, viz. Because he watch∣eth for your Soules, as one that is to render an account to Almighty God, The like we also finde in the Canons commonly ascribed to the Apostles; which questionlesse are very ancient; in which, the obedience and con∣formitie which is there required of the Presbyters and Deacons, to the directions of their Bishop, is grounded on that very rea∣son, alledged before. And for the word,  of Saint Paul, it is not such a stranger in the writings of the elder times, but that they use it for a Bishop; as may ap∣peare by that of the Historian, where hee calls Polycarpus Bishop of the Church of Smyrna,Eusch. hist. l. 3. cap. 30 . the  of that Church; Ignatius writing, as he saith, not onely to the Church of Smyrna, , but also unto Polycarpus Bi∣shop of the same. Id. l. 14. c. 14. .Where lest it may be thought that the preposition doth adde unto the nature of the word, we find the same Historian speak∣ing of the same Polycarpus in another place; where he gives notice of an Epistle writ∣ten in the name of the Church of Smyrna;
, of which this Polycar∣pus had the Governement, and a Bishop doubtlesse. In the which place , is con∣forme most fully to the  of Saint Paul, differing no otherwise then the verbe and participle. Now those which in the Greeke are cal∣led , in all the old translations that I have met with, are called Praepositi; Obedite Praepositis vestris, as the Latines read it: and amongst them Praepositi are taken generally for the same with Bishops. Saint CyprianCyprian. l. 1. p. 3. thus, Ob hoc Ecclesiae praepositum prosequitur; for this cause doth the enemy pursue him that is set over the Church, that the Gover∣nour thereof being once removed, he may with greater violence destroy the same. More clearely in another placeId. lib. 3. ep 14., What danger is not to be feared, saith he, by of∣fending the Lord, when some of the Priests not remembring their place, nei∣ther thinking that they have a Bishop set over them, challenge the whole govern∣ment unto themselves, Cum contumeliâ & contemptu Praepositi, even with the re∣proach and contempt of the Prelate, or him that is set over them? Most cleare∣ly yetId. lib. 3. ep. 9., where speaking of the insolen∣cy of a Deacon towards his Bishop, he makes Episcopus, and Praepositus to bee one same thing; willing the Deacon, Episcopo, Praeposi∣to
suo plena humilitate satisfacere, with all humility to satisfie his Bishop, or Praepositus. Saint Austin speakes as fully to this pur∣pose, as Saint Cyprian did.De civitat. Dei l. 1. c 9. Ad hoc enim speculatores, i. e. populorum Praepositi in Ec∣clesiis constituti sunt, &c. For this end are Bishops (for speculatores and Episcopi, are the same Office, though in divers words) I meane the Prelates or Praepositi, ordain∣ed in the Churches, that they should not spare to rebuke sinne. In the same worke De civitate,Id l. 20. c. 9 hee speakes plainer yet. For speaking of these words of the Divine, I saw seates, and some sitting on them, and judgement was given, hee expounds it thus. This is not to be understood, saith he, of the last judgement: Sed sedes prae∣positorum, & ipsi Praepositi intelligendi sunt, per quos Ecclesia nunc gubernatur, but the seates of the Praepositi, and the Praepositi themselves, by whom the Church is now governed (and they were Bishops doublesse in Saint Austins time) must be understood. More of this word who list to see, may finde it in that learned Tract of Bishop Bilson, entituled, The pe petuall government of Christs ChurchChap. 9.; who is copious in it. Beza indeed, the better to beare off this blow, hath turned Praepositos into Ductores; and instead of Governours, hath given us Leaders. Where if he meane
such Leaders, as the word importeth, Lea∣ders of Armies, such as Command in chiefe, Lieutenants Generally, hee will get little by the bargaine. But if he meane by Leaders, onely guides and conducts,Paraeus com∣ment. in Heb. 13 Paraeus, though hee follow him in his translation, will leave him to himselfe in his Exposition: who by Ductores under∣standeth Ecclesiae Pastores & gubernatores, the Pastors and Governours of the Church. Neither can BezaBeza An∣not. in Heb. 13.17. possibly deny, but that those here are called Ductores, qui ali∣bi Episcopi vocantur, which elsewhere are entituled Bishops. But where hee doth ob∣serve, that because the Apostle speaketh of PraepositiEx eo quod lquitur Paulus in plurali nume∣ro. Ibid. in the Plurall number, therefore Episcopall jurisdiction was not then in use; it being indeed against the an∣cient course and Canons, to have two Bi∣shops in one Church: there could not any thing be spoken, (to pretermit the incivility of his expression) more silly and unwor∣thy of so great a Clerke. For who knows not that the Jewes being dispersed into ma∣ny Provinces and Cities, must have seve∣rall Churches; and therefore severall Bi∣shops, or Praepositos, to beare Rule over them? This businesse being thus passe over, and the Churches of Saint Peters planting in the Easterne parts, being thus left unto the care
and charge of severall Bishops: we will next follow him into the West. And there wee finde him taking on himselfe the care of the Church of Rome, or rather, of the Church of God in Rome, consisting for the most part then of converted Jewes. The current of antiquity runnes so cleare this way, that he must needs corrupt the foun∣taines, who undertakes to trouble or di∣sturbe the streame. His being there, and founding of that Church, his being Bishop there, and suffering there an ignominious, yet a glorious death, for the sake of Christ; are such noted truths, that it were labour lost to insist upon them. Onely I shall di∣rect the Reader to such pregnant places in the most ancient and incorrupted Wri∣ters, as may give satisfaction in those points to any one that will take paines to looke upon them. And first to looke upon the Greekes, he may find Papias and Clemens, an∣cient Writers both, alleaged to this purpose by Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 14. Caius, & Dionysius Bishops of Corinth, both of good antiquity, alleaged in the same booke, cap. . Eusebius speaking for himselfe, not onely in the 13. chap. of the same booke also, but also in his Chronicon, in which he notes the yeare of his first comming to that City, to be the 44. after Christs nativity. See to this purpose also, Saint Chrysostome in his Ho∣mily
De Petro & Paulo, Saint Cyrill of Ale∣xandria, in his Epistle to Pope Celestine: Theodoret, Sozomen, and others. Next for the Latines, there is hardly any but saith somewhat in it: whereof see Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3. Tertullian in his booke de praescript. adv. haeret. Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 21. Optatus, lib. 2. contr. Parmen. Hierome in his tract. De Eccl. Scriptoribus, Saint Austin in Epist. 165. and other places, not to descend to later Wri∣ters of the Latine Churches, whose interest it may seeme to be. To close this point,Aug. ep. 165 Saint Austin, whom I named last, shall speake once for all, who reckoning up the Bishops in the Church of Rome, thus be∣gins his Catalogue: Si enim, &c. If the succession of the Bishops there be a thing considerable, quanto certius, & verè salu∣briter ab ipso Petro numeramus? how much more certainly, and assuredly do wee begin the same with Peter, who bare the figure of the whole Church? And then goes on, Petro successit Linus, Linus suc∣ceeded Peter, Clemens him, and so to Ana∣stasius, who then held the See. Nor can it be replyed that Peter tooke the Church of Rome into his Apostolicall care, and had not the Episcopall charge thereof, as some now suppose. The tables of suc∣cession make that cleare enough. Saint Pe∣ter the Apostle could have no Successours, but
the Bishop might. Linus, or whosoever else succeeded, nor did, nor could pretend suc∣cession to the preheminences, & miraculous priviledges, which were required necessari∣ly unto the making of an Apostle, challenge an interest by succession, in his Pastorall of∣fice they both might and did. The Writers of all ages since do afford them that. One∣ly the difference is amongst them, who was the first that did succeed him in his Pa∣storall charge. S. Austin gives it unto Linus, as before we saw: next Clemens, and then Anacletus. IrenaeusAdv. haeres. l. 3. e. 3. doth agree with Austin, placing Linus first, but placing Anacletus second, and then Clemens third: and so dothHaeres 26. Epiphanius also.Lib 2. contr. Parmen. Optatus reckoneth them, as before in Austin. SaintHieron de Script Eccles. in Clement. Hierome sometimes ranketh them, as Irenaeus, and Epiphanius did, Linus, Cletus, Clemens; and sometimes placethId ibid. in Petro. Cle∣mens first, as Tertullian, and plerique Latino∣rum, most of the ancient Latine writers had done before. I know there is much paines taken to compose this difference amongst our Antiquaries, those most especially of the Papall party. But in my mind there cannot be a better course taken to ef∣fect the same, than that which was obser∣ved before in the case of Antioch. And to ef∣fect this composition, Ignatius, and some other Fathers give a ground as probable, as
that which was laid downe before in the former businesse. For first it is affirmed by Irenaeus, thatIren. l. 3 c. 3 S. Paul had as great an in∣terest in the foundation of the Church of Rome, as Saint Peter had. A duobus Apostolis Petro & Paulo Romae fundatae & constitutae Ec∣clesiae: as his own words are. The like saithAdv. haeres. 27. num. 6. Epiphanius in another language, ma∣king both of them Bishops of that Church. Next it is said expressely by Ignatius,Ep. ad Tral. who might well speake on certaine know∣ledge living in those times, that Anacletus (for I conceive that Cletus, & Anacletus were the same) was Deacon to S. Peter, and Linus Deacon to Saint Paul, who doth indeed make mention of him in his second Epistle unto Timothy. This ground thus laid, why may we not conceive, as before in Antioch, that in the first planting of the Church of Rome, there were two severall Churches, or con∣gregations; that of the circumcision being collected by Saint Peter, that of the Gentiles first drawne together by Saint Paul; each of them being Bishop, or chiefe Pastor of their Congregations? Secondly, that when the two Apostles perceived the time of their sufferings to draw neere, Peter ordained Anacletus Bishop of the Churches of the Circumcision, and that Paul did commit to Linus the government of the Churches of the Gentiles: both whom they had employ∣ed
before as Deputies and Substitutes to attend these charges, whilst they them∣selves did travell to and fro, as occasion was, and the necessities of the Church re∣quired. Thirdly and lastly, that Linus be∣ing dead, Clemens (who had before beene specially designed by Saint Peter to possesse his place) succeeded Bishop of the Churches of the Gentiles there, who finally surviving Cletus, or Anacletus, call him which you will, and the division betweene Jew and Gentile being worne away, united the two Churches in his person, as the sole Bishop of the whole. And this I am the rather in∣duced to thinke, because that, &c. Epiph. haer. 27. Epiphanius making up a catalogue of the Popes of Rome, first joynes together Peter and Paul, next coupleth with the like conjunction Linus and Cletus: and after brings in Cle∣mens, Euaristus, Alexander, &c. in a line suc∣cessively. And yet the Tables of successi∣on may well stand as they have done hi∣therto; first Linus, after Cletus, and thirdly Clemens: because that Linus dying first, left Cletus in possession of the Pastorall charge, and Cletus dying before Clemens, left him the sole surviver of the three, which possibly may be the reason why ma∣ny of the Latines reckon Clemens for the first Bishop after Peter: whom they con∣ceive to be sole Bishop of that Church: as
indeed it was, before there was a Church of Gentiles founded in that famous Citie. For being formerly designed by Saint Pe∣ter to be his Successour, and afterward en∣joying the whole charge alone, as Peter for a season did: it might not seeme improper to report him for the second Bishop; that is the second of the whole. And then again, Clemens is placed by some next and imme∣mediately after Linus, whose successor he was in the direct line, as Bishop of the more famous Church, viz. of the Gentiles; and by some also after Cletus, whom he succeeded at the last, in the line collaterall. However, be this so, or not, we have three Bishops sitting in the Church of Rome be∣tweene the martyrdome of Peter, and the death of John: first, Linus, who held the same twelve yeares: Cletus or Anacletus, who survived, and held twelve yeares more: and Clemens, finally, who suffered martyrdome at Rome, the next yeare after the decease of Saint John at Ephesus. I take it then for a most manifest and un∣doubted truth, not onely that Saint Peter was at Rome, but that he also tooke upon him the Episcopall charge, and was the Bishop of that City. The Arguments de∣vised in this later Age to evince the con∣trary, do nothing lesse in my opinion, than prove the point for which they were first
devised. For first it is objected, that the E∣piscopall charge requiring residence, could not consist with that of an Apostle, who was to be perpetually in motion. Which ar∣gument, if it be of any force, will militate as well against Saint James his being Bi∣shop of Hierusalem, as against Saint Peters being Bishop of the Church of Rome. And then will CalvinComment. in Act. c. 21. come in very oppor∣tunely in to helpe us, who speaking of Saint James his constant residence in Hierusalem, doth resolve it thus. Quanquā cōmune illi cū reliquis collegis mandatū erat, &c. Although, saith he, the Lords cōmandement of prea∣ching to all Nations, was common unto him with the residue of the Lords Apostles, yet I conceive, that they did so divide the charg amongst thē, as to leave him alwaies at Hierusalem, whither such store of stran∣gers did use continually to resort. Id enim perinde erat ac si Evangelium longè longé∣que promulgâsset in locis remotis; for that, saith he, was as sufficient, as if he had pro∣mulgated, or preached the Gospell in the parts remote. This if it may be used for James, will serve for Peter. Assuredly there was a greater confluence of all sorts of strangers to the City of Rome, than used to be unto Hierusalem: and therefore Peter be∣ing there, might spread abroad the Gospell with the greater speed, and with no lesse
successe than those others did, who did not fixe themselves in a certaine station. But whereasInstitut. l. 4. c. 6. n. 14, 15. Calvin doth object in another place, that Saint Paul writing to the Ro∣mans, and saluting many of the Saints there, makes no speech of Peter; and that wri∣ting many of his Epistles from the City of Rome, he makes no mention of him neither: this may inferre indeed, that Saint Peter was then absent, when those things were done, as one that had not so immured him∣selfe in the walls of Rome, but that he tra∣velled up and downe in severall quarters of the world: doing sometimes the office of an Apostle, discharging otherwhiles the place and function of a Bishop. All the Epi∣stles of Saint Paul which beare date from Rome, were written in the first two yeares of his being there: and therefore any argument derived from thence must be ve∣ry weake, either to prove that Peter ne∣ver was at Rome, or never Bishop of that place: being so many ancient Writers do affirme them both. And yet I would not have the Papists thinke that this makes any more for the Popes supremacie, because he sits in Peters seat: than it did make for Vi∣bius RufusDion. in Tiber. hist. l 57 to attaine Tullies eloquence, or Caesars power, because he married Tullies widow, and bought Caesars chaire; though the poore Gentleman, as the story tel∣leth
us, , did presume on both. But to goe on, the Church of Christ being thus settled by Saint Peter, both in Rome, and Antioch: his next great care is for Alexandria; the great and most renow∣ned City in the parts of Africa: that so there might be no prime City in all the ha∣bitable world, to which the Gospell was not preached. In the discharge of this great businesse, was Saint Marke employed; a principall and constant follower of Saint Peters, who mentioneth him in his Epistle by the name1 Pet. 5.13. of sonne. The Church which is at Babylon saluteth you, and so doth Marcus my sonne. The planting of this Church is thus remembred by EusebiusEuseb. hist. l. 2. c. 15. , &c It is affirmed, saith he, that Marke did first (of all Christs followers) passe into Egypt, and there promulge and preach the Gospell, which before he writ; and that hee first did plant the Church of Alexandria: in which his undertakings had so good successe, that on his very first endeavours, , as the Author hath it, great multitudes both of men and wo∣men did beleeve in Christ; his holinesse, and strict behaviour gaining much upon them. This Church as he first founded in the faith of Christ, so did he take upon
himselfe the charge thereof, and became Bi∣shop of the same. This witnesseth S. Hie∣rome of him,Hieron. in Proem. super Matt. Marcus interpres Petri Apostoli, & Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus Episcopus: that Mark the interpreter of S. Peter, was the first Bishop of the Church of Alexandria. The same he also doth affirme in his Epi∣stle to Euagrius; whereof more anon. And whenEuseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23. . Eusebius doth informe us, that in the eighth yeare of the Emperour Nero, Anianus a right godly man, , as the story calls him, succeeded Marke the Evangelist in Alexan∣dria: he doth inferre ex consequenti, that Marke was Bishop there before him. So that it seemeth he sate there 19. yeares by this account. For he came hither An. 45. being the third of Claudius Caesar; and finished his course in the eighth of Nero, which was the 64. of our Redeemer. Finally,Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 12. . Ania∣nus having continued Bishop here 23. years, dyed in the 4. yeare of Domitianus, being An. Chr. 87. and had Abilius to succeed him: after whom Cerdo did succeed, in the yeare 100. what time Abilius left this world, S. John the Apostle being yet alive. So that there were foure Bishops of Alexandria suc∣ceeding one another in that weighty charge, during the lives of the Apostles: a pregnant evidence that they both institu∣ted and approved the calling.
Now for the Church of Alexandria, there are somethings observed by the Fathers, which are worth our noting, and may give great light to the present businesse; It is ob∣served byHaeres. 66. n. 6. Epiphanius, that Alexandria ne∣ver had two Bishops, , as had other cities: which words not rightly under∣stood have made someSmectymn. p. 53. conceive, that an∣ciently Bishops were the same with Presbyters, it being against the usuall custome to have two Bishops in one Church or city. But if we looke considerately upon Epiphanius, there is no such matter: all that he drives at being this, that whereas in most other Churches, for the preventing of schismes and factions amongst the people, in the electing of their Bishops, it had beene ordinary for the Bishop yet in place, to consecrate some one or other that should assist him whilst he lived, and succeed after his decease: onely the Church of Ale∣xandria never had that custome. And they that had that custome, as it seemes, did not like it well: for whereas ValeriusAug. ep. 110. Bishop of Hippo, out of a vehement desire to have S. Austin his successour, did consecrate or or∣daine him Bishop, whilst as himselfe was yet alive. Saint Austin was resolved for his part not to do the like: it being a thing pro∣hibited by the Nicene Councell. Quod ergo reprehensum est in me, nolo reprehendi in filio meo, as he there resolveth. So that the place
in Epiphanius tendeth unto this alone, viz. to shew the reason why Athanasius could not succeed Alexander in that See, though by him designed: which was, that he being yet alive, it was against the custome of that Church to ordaine another. SaintEp. ad Euag. Hie∣rome, secondly, observeth, that the Presby∣ters of Alexandria, unum ex se electum in ex∣celsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nomina∣bant, did use to choose one from amongst themselves, whom being placed in a more eminent degree, than any of the rest, they called a Bishop. And this, saith he, continued in that Church, à Marco Evangelista, ad He∣raclam & Dionysium Episcopos: from the time of Mark the Evangelist untill the Bishopricks of Heraclas and Dionysius. Some hereuponSmectymn. p. 31. inferre, that the persons who brought in the imparitie of Ministers into the Church, were not the Apostles, but the Presbyters. An inference as faulty, as was that before. All that Saint Hierome meanes is this, that from the time of Marke, till the daies of Heraclas and Dionysius, the Presbyters of Alexandria had no other Bishop than one whom they had chosen out of their owne body: just as a man may say, on the like occasion, that from the first foundation till the time of Sr H. Savill, the Colledge of Eaton never had a Provost but one, whom they had cho∣sen out of their owne society. NowEuseb. hist. l. 6. c. 12. . He∣raclas
before he was ordained Bishop was not a Presbyter of that Church, although a Reader in the Schooles of that famous City; & belike Dionysius also was. And therefore it is well observed by theAnnal. An. 1248. n. 5. Cardinall; that Hierome writing to Euagrius relateth, quid in ea Ecclesia usque ad haec Dionysii tempora in electione Epi∣scoporum agi consueverit: what was the usage of the Church of Alexandria in the election of their Bishops, untill the times of Dionysius. However wee have gained thus much by Hierome, that from Mark downward till those times, and a long time after, there wanted not a Bishop, properly so called, in that fa∣mous Church: and therefore sure they came not first into the Church, Diaboli instinctu,Hier. Com∣ment. in Ep. ad Titum. by the devils instinct, as hee elsewhere saith. There is another observation in the Com∣mentaries ascribed to Ambrose, which having some resemblance unto that before, and a like sinister use being made thereof: I shall here lay downe: and after give some Anno∣tations on it to explaine the place. The Au∣thor of those Commentaries affirmeth, thatComment. in Eph. c. 4. Timothy whom Paul created Presbyter, was by him called a Bishop, because the first Presbyters were called Bishops: it being the custome of the Church (for so I thinke the sense must be made up) ut recedente eo sequens ei succederet; that he [the first] de∣parting,
the next in order should succeed. But being it was found that the following Presbyters were utterly unworthy of so high preferment, that course was altered; and it was provided by a Councell, ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum, &c. that merit, and not seniority should raise a man, hee being appointed by the suf∣frages of many Priests, to be a Bishop, lest an unfit person rashly should usurpe the place, and so become a publicke scandall. These are the Authors words, be he who he will. And from hence BezaResp. ad tract. de divers. minist. gradibus c. 23. doth collect that Bishops differed not from Presbyters in the Apostles times; that there was onely in every place a President of the Presbytery, who called them together, and proposed things needfull for their consideration; that this priority went round by course, every one holding it in his turne for a weeke, or more, according as the Priests in the Jewish Temple had their weekly courses: and fi∣nally, that this Apostolicall and primitive or∣der was after changed, upon the motives, and inducements before remembred. Some of ourSnectymn. p. 31. moderne writers against Episco∣pacie, have gone more warily to worke than so, affirming from those words of Ambrose (or whosoever was the Author) that this Rectorship, or priority was devolved at first from one Elder to another by succession;
when he who was in the place was re∣moved, the next in order amongst the Elders succeeded: and that this course was after changed, the better to keepe out un∣worthy men, it being made a matter of election: and not a matter of succession. These men come neere the point in their exposition, though they keepe farre enough in the application, inferring hence that the imparity of Ministers came in otherwise, than by divine Authority. For by com∣paring this of Ambrose, with that before mentioned out of Hierome, the meaning of the Author will be onely this, that as in some places the Presbyters elected one of their owne Presbytery to be their Bi∣shop: so for preventing of Ambition, and avoiding faction, they did agree amongst themselves, ut uno recedente, that as the place did vaike by death or deprivation, by resignation, cession, banishment, or any o∣ther meanes whatever, the Senior of the whole Presbytery should succeed therein; as the Lord Major is chosen for his yeere in London. But after upon sight of those incon∣veniences, which did thence arise, it was thought fit in their election of the person, rather to looke upon his merit, then his Se∣niority. So that for all this place of Ambrose (were those Comments his) the Bishop may enjoy a fixt preheminence, and hold it
by divine authoritie, not by humane ordi∣nances. But to returne unto Saint Peter, and to the Churches by him planted, and founded by him in Episcopacie in these Westerne parts; I shall in part relie on the Authority of the Martyrologie of the Church of Rome: though so farre onely, and no further, as it is backed by venerable Bede, and Vsuardus, an∣cient Writers both, the latest living in theBellarm. de Scriptor. yeare 800. and besides them, in some particulars by other Authors of farre more Antiquitie. And these, for better methods sake, we will behold according to the seve∣rall Countries, into which Saint Peter either went himselfe, or sent forth his Disciples to them, to preach the Gospell. And first for Italy, besides the Church of Rome before remembred. We findIn Annal. Eccles. A. 60. Epaphroditus, (not he that is commemorated by Saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Philippians asIn Annal. Eccles. A. 60. Baronius witnesseth against himselfe)Rom Mar∣tyr. Mart. 22. à beato Pe∣tro Apostolo Episcopus illius Civitatis ordina∣tus, made Bishop by Saint Peter of Tarracina, of old called Anxur: PancratiusApril. 3. made by Saint Peter Bishop of Tauromenium in the Isle o Sicilie; as the Greeks also do affirme in their Menologia: MarcianusIun. 4. Bishop of Sy∣racusa, to whom the said Menologies do beare record also: HermagorasIulii. 12. a Disciple of Saint Marke, the first Bishop of Aquileia,
now in the Signeurie of Venice: PaulinusIulii 12. the first Bishop of Luques in Tuscanie: A∣pollinaris,Iulii 23. created by Saint Peter the first Bishop of Ravenna, in praise of whomChrys. serm. 128. Chrysologus, one of his Successours, and an holy Father, hath composed a Panegyricke: MarcusRom. Martyr. Apr. 28. ordained Bishop of Atina, at Saint Peters first comming into Italie: and last of all Prosdocimus the first Bishop of PaduaNovemb. 7. à Beato Petro ordinatus, made Bishop thereof by Saint Peter. Next to passe over into France, we find there XystusSept. 1. the first Bishop of Rhemes, and FrontoOctob. 25. Bishop of Perigort [Petragorricis;] ordained both by this Apo∣stle: As also Julianus the first Bishop of MayneIan. 27. Cononiensium in the Latine) of his ordination. And besides these we read that TrophimusActs. once one of S. Pauls Disciples was by Saint Peter made the first Bishop ofMartyrol. Rom. Decem. 29. Arles. And this besides the Martyrolo∣gies, and other Authors cited by Baronius in his Annotations, appeareth by that memo∣rable eontroversie in the time of Pope Leo, before the Bishop of Vienna, the chiefe City of Daulphine, and him of Arles, for the place and dignity of Metropolitan. In pro∣secution of the which it is affirmedEpist contr. Provinc. ad S. Leonem. in fine. lib. by the Suffragans, or Com-provinciall Bishops of the Province of Arles: quod prima inter Gal∣lias Arelatensis Civitas missum à Beatissimo Petro Apostolo, Sanctum Trophimum, habere
meruit Sacerdotem; that first of all the Cities of Gaul, that of Arles did obtaine the happi∣nesse to have Saint Trophimus for their Bi∣shop, (for so Sacerdos must be read in that whole Epistle) sent to them from the most blessed Apostle Saint Peter, to preach the Gospell. For Spaine, we find this testimony once for all,Rom. Martyr Maij 15. that Ctesiphon, Torquatus, Secundus, Caecilius, Judaletius, Hesychius, and Euphrasius; Romae à Sanctis Apostolis Episcopi ordinati; & ad praedicandum verbum Dei in Hispanias directi: having beene ordained Bishops at Rome by the Apostles (viz. Saint Peter, and Saint Paul) were sent into Spaine to preach the Gospell: and in most likeli∣hood, were Bishops of those Cities, in which they suffered, the names whereof occurre in the Martyrologie. If we passe further into Germany, we may there see Eucherius, one of S. Peters Disciples also, by him employed to preach the Gospell to that Nation; which having done with good effect in the City of Triers, Primus ejusdem Civitatis Episcopus,Decemb. 8. hee was made the first Bishop of that City. And unto this Methodius also doth attest, as he is cited by Marianus Scotus, who tells us,Ap mar. Scotum in- An. 72. 74. that after he had held the Bishoprick 23. yeares, Valerio Trevericae Ecclesiae culmen dereliquit, he left the government of that Church unto Valerius, who together with Maternus, (both being Disciples of Saint
Peter) did attend him thither: & that Mater∣nus after fifteene yeares did succeed Vale∣rius, continuing Bishop there 40. yeares to∣gether. I should much wrong our part of Britaine, should I leave out that, as if neg∣lected by the Apostle, concerning which wee are informed by Metaphrastes (whose credit hath beene elsewhere vindicated) that this ApostleCommem. Petri & Pauli ad diem 29. Iunii. comming into Britain, and tarrying there a certaine time, and en∣lightning many with the word of grace, , did constitute Churches, and ordaine Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons in the same. Which action as he placeth in the twelfth yeare of Nero, being the 67. of our Redeemer: so he professeth, that hee had his information out of some writings of Eusebius, which have not come unto our hands, but with a great deale more of that Authors workes, have perished in the ru∣ines and wracke of time. Nor is it strange that the Apostle should make so many of his Disciples Bishops, before or shortly after they were sent abroad to gaine the nations to the Faith; that being the usuall course in the like imployments: as may appeare by AustinsBeda hist. Eccl. l. 1 c. 27. being consecrated Bishop, imme∣diately after his first comming into England. The reason was, as I conceive it, that if God prospered their endeavours with desired
successe, they might be furnished with a power of ordaining Presbyters, for their as∣sistance in that service. And so much for the Churches planted by Saint Peter, and by his Disciples. CHAP. IV. The Bishoping of Timothy and Ti∣tus, and others of Saint Pauls Di∣sciples. I. The conversion of Paul, and his ordaining to the place of an Apostle. II. The Presbyters created by Saint Paul, Act. 14. of what sort they were. III. Whether the Presbyters, or Presby∣tery did lay on hands with Paul, in any of his ordinations. IV. The people had no voyce in the election of their Presbyters, in these early times. V. Bishops not founded by Saint Paul at first, in the particular Churches by him plan∣ted, and upon what reasons. VI. The short time of the Churches of Saint Pauls plantation, continued without Bishops over them.
VII. Timothy made Bishop of Ephesus, by Saint Paul, according to the generall con∣sent of Fathers. VIII. The time when Timothy was first made Bishop, according to the Holy Scripture. IX. Titus made Bishop of the Cretans; and the truth verifyed herein by the Ancient Wri∣ters. X. An answer unto such objections as have beene made against the subscription of the Epi∣stle unto Titus. XI. The Bishopping of Dionysus the A∣reopagite, Aristarchus, Gaius, Epaphrodi∣tus, Epaphras, and Archippus. XII. As also of Silus, Sosthenes, Sosipa∣ter, Crescens, and Aristobulus. XIII. The Office of a Bishop, not incom∣patible with that of an Evangelist. WEE are now come unto Saint Paul, and to the Churches by him planted, where wee shall meete with clearer evidence from Scripture then before we had. A man that did at first most ea∣gerly afflict the poore Church of Christ; as if it were the destiny not of David onely, but also of the Sonne of David, to be per∣secuted by the hands of Saul. But as theRhemist. Testam. Act. 15. Rhemists well observe, that the conten∣tion
betweene Paul and Barnabas, fell out unto the great increase of Christianity: so did this persecution raised by Saul, fall out unto the great improvement of the Go∣spell. For by this meanes, the Disciples being scattered and dispersed abroad, the Gospell was by them disseminated in all the parts and Countries where they came: and Saul himselfe being taken off, even in the middle of his fury, became the greatest instrument of Gods power and glory, in the converting of the Gentiles. For present∣ly upon his owne conversion, we finde him Preaching in theAct 9.20.22. Synagogues of Dama∣scus, thence taking a long journey intoGal. 1.17.18. Arabia, from thence returning to Hierusa∣lem, afterwards travelling towardsAct. 9.30. Tar∣sus his owne native soyle, and thence brought back toAct. 11.26. Antioch, by the meanes of Barnabas. And all this while I looke up∣on him as an Evangelist onely, a constant, and a zealous Preacher of the Gospell of Christ, in every Region where he travel∣led. His calling unto the Apostleship, was not untill the Holy Ghost had said unto the ProphetsAct. 13.1.2. Lucius, Simeon, and Manahen, ministring then in Antiochia, Separate mi∣hi Barnabam & Saulum, separate me Barna∣bas and Saul, for the worke whereunto I have called them. An extraordinary call, and therefore done by extraordinary meanes,
and Ministers. For being the persons here employed in this Ordination, neither were Apostles, nor yet advanced for ought wee finde, unto the estate and honour of E∣piscopacy: it must bee reckoned amongst those extraordinaries, which God pleased to worke, in, and about the calling of this blessed Apostle. Of which we may affirme withChrysostom hom. 20. in Act. Chrysostome, , that of the things which did befall Saint Paul in his whole vocation, there was nothing Ordinary, but every part was acted by the hand of God. God in his extraor∣dinary workes, tyes not himselfe to ordina∣ry meanes and courses, but takes such waies and doth imploy such instruments, as him∣selfe best pleaseth, for the more evident demonstration of his power and glory. So that however Simeon, Manahen, and Lucius did lay hands upon him; yet being the call and designation was so miraculous, hee might well say that he was made an ApostleGal. 1. v. 1. neither of men, nor by men, but of Jesus Christ and God the Father.Hom. 27. in Act. Chrysostome so expounds the place, Not of Men, , so to make it manifest, that he received not his call from them; nor by men, because he was not sent by them, but by the Spirit. As for the worke, to which he was thus separated by the Lord, aske the said Father what it was,
and he will tell you , that it was the office of an Apostle: and that hee was ordained an Apostle here, , that he might Preach the Gospell with the greater power. Aske who it was that did ordaine him, and he will tell you, that how∣soever Manahen, Lucius and Simeon, did lay hands upon him, , yet he received his Ordination by the Holy Ghost. And certainely, that he had not the Apostleship before, may be made mani∣fest by that which followed after. For we doe not finde in all the story of his Acts, that either he ordained Presbyters, or gave the Holy Ghost, or wrought any miracles, which were the2 Cor. 12.12. signes of his Apostleship; before this solemne Ordination, or imposi∣tion of the hands of the said three Pro∣phets: as afterwards we find he did in se∣verall places of that booke, and shall now shew (as it relates unto our present busines) in that which followeth. Paul being thus advanced by God the Fa∣ther, and his Sonne Jesus Christ, to the high place of an Apostle, immediaiely applyeth himselfe unto the same: Preaching the Word with power,Act. 13.11. &c. & miracles, in the Isle of Cyprus, from thence proceeding to Pam∣philia and other Provinces of the lesser A∣sia, every where gaining Soules to Almigh∣ty God. Having spent three yeares in those
parts of Asia, and planted Churches in a great part thereof, he had a mind to goe a∣gaine to Antioch,Act. 14.26 from whence he had been recommended to the grace of God, for the worke which he had fulfilled. But fearing lest the Doctrine he had Preached amongst them, might either be forgotten, or produce no profit, if there were none left to attend that service: before he went, hee thought it fit∣ting to found a Ministery amongst them, in their severall Churches. To this end, They (i. e. He and Barnabas) ordainedAct. 14.23. them Presbyters in every Church, wth prayer and fasting: and that being done, they recom∣mended him unto the Lord, in whom they be∣leeved. This is the first Ordination which wee finde of Presbyters in holy Scripture; though doubtlesse there were many before this time. The Church could neither be instructed, nor consist at all, without an ordinary Minister left amongst the people, for the Administration of the Word and Sacraments. However, this being as I said, the first record thereof in holy Scrip∣ture; we will consider hereupon, first to what Office they were called, which are here called Presbyters; Secondly, by whom they were Ordained; and thirdly, by what meanes they were called unto it. First, for the Office what it was, I finde some diffe∣rence amongst Expositors, as well new as
old. Beza conceives the word in a gene∣rall sense, and to include at once, Pastors and Deacons, and who ever else were set a∣part for the rule and governement of the Churches to them committed.Annot. in Act. 14. v. 23. Presby∣teros, i. e. Pastores, Diaconos, & alios Eccle∣siae gubernationi praefectos, as his owne words are. Here we have Pastors, Deacons, Gover∣nours, included in this one word Presbyters. AskeLyra. in Act. 14. Lyra who those governours were, which Beza cals praefecti in a general name, and he will tell you they were Bishops. No∣mine Presbyterorum hic intelliguntur etiam alii Ecclesiae Ministri; ut Episcopi & Dia∣coni: Under the name of Presbyters, saith he, are comprehended also other Ecclesi∣asticall Ministers, as Bishops and Deacons. TheGloss. Ordi∣nar. in Act. 14. ordinary glosse agrees herewith, as to that of Bishops; and gives this reason for the same, Illo autem tempore ejusdem erant nominis Episcopi & Presbyteri, that in that time Bishops and Presbyters were called by the same name. AndOecum. in Act. 14. Oecumenius holds together with them, as to that of Deacons: noting that Paul and Barnabas had Episco∣pall authority, , in that they did not onely ordaine Deacons, but also Presbyters. So that it seemeth Saint Paul provided here against all occasions, setling the Churches by him planted in so sure a way, that there was nothing left at random,
which either did relate to government, or point of Doctrine. And yet if any shall contend, that those who here are called Presbyters, were bur simply such, accor∣ding to the notion of that word, as it is now used; I shall not much insist upon it. I onely shew what other Authours have affirmed herein; and so leave it off. The next thing here to be considered, is who they were that were the Agents in this Ordination. Cum constituissent illis, when they had Ordained: and they, is there a re∣lative, and points to Paul and Barnabas, mentioned v. 20. They preached the Go∣spell, they returned to Lystra, and finally they here Ordained. Of any one that laid hands with them on these Presbyters heads, which was the ceremony by them used in this Ordination (as the word  doth plainely manifest) ne My Lucilianum, not a word in Scripture. Indeed it cannot be conceived that in those places wherein there were no men in Sacred Orders, any should joyne with the Apostles in that sacred Action. So that the Presbyters, which were here ordained, could have no other hands laid on them than those of Paul and Barna∣bas, if they joyned together; and did not rather severally and apart performe that ceremony. And if that the Apostles by the imposition of their owne hands only, could
performe it now; how came they to bee shortned after? how came they so devested of that sacred priviledge, as to want others to be joyned with them, and not to make a Presbyter without the co-assistancy of the Presbytery? The Holy Ghost was no lesse powerfull in them after this, then it had beene formerly: neither did Paul or want or crave the helpe of any, in giving of the Holy Ghost on the like occasions, in the times that followed. Certaine I am, when Paul was at Ephesus, thoughAct. 19. v. 6 Timothy, and others were then present with him, yet none but hee laid hands upon the twelve Disciples: And yet upon the laying on of his hands, The Holy Ghost came on them, and they spake with tongues and prophesied. Which if it were an Act of Ordination, as Beza thinkesBeza Annot. in Act. 19. v. 1., and it is likely so to be, because the Text saith, that they spake with tongues and prophesied: then have we here more Presbyters created by laying on of Pauls hands onely, without helpe of others. As for that passage in the first Epistle to Timo∣thy1 Tim. 4.14, wherin the Presbytery may be thought to lay hands upon him; let it be ballanced with another in the second Epistle2 Tim. 1.6., where the Apostle doth assume the whole performance to himselfe, as his proper Act: and then the difference which ap∣peares will be quickly ended. If Timothy
received those gifts which did enable him for the Holy Ministery, by laying on of Pauls hands onely, as it seemes hee did; what interest could the Presbytery challenge in that sacred Action? If hee received it joyntly from the Presbytery; what influence had Saint Pauls hands on him, more then all the rest? Assuredly Saint Pauls hands were not growne so impotent, that they needed helpe; or that hee could not give the graces of the Holy Ghost, by laying on his owne hands onely, as he had done for∣merly. And therefore if the Presbytery did concurre herein, it was not that the busi∣nesse could not bee performed without them, but either to declare the good affe∣ctions which they did beare unto the per∣son, or to expresse their joyfull approbati∣on of his calling to that sacred function1 Tim. 1.16. & 1 Tim. 4.14., of whom so many Prophesies had gone out before; or finally to contribute their pray∣ers and blessings, to the solemnity of so grave and great a worke. And so, I thinke, the businesse will be best made up, if Paul be suffered to enjoy the honour of giving unto Timothy, by the imposition of his hands, the gifts and graces of the Spirit; and the Presbytery be permitted not to want their share in the performance of the out∣ward ceremony. Certainely that the pow∣er of Ordination was in one alone, that is
to say, in the Apostle, is affirmed by Cal∣vinCalvin in 2 ad Tim. 1. v. 6.. Who having canvassed the point, doth resolve at last, Unum tantum fuisse qui manus imponeret: Which is indeed the safest tenet, and most agreeable unto Antiquity. And therefore Estius, in my minde, did resolve it well, when hee did thus divide the businesse:Estius in 1 ad Tim. c. 4. v. 14 Ceremoniam impositionis manuum, a pluribus fuisse adhi∣bitam; sed solum Paulum ea peregisse, quae [Sacramento] erant substantialia. Unlesse perhaps we may conceive, as perhaps we may, that Timothy received two Ordinati∣ons: the one unto the Office of a Presbyter, in which the Presbytery might concurre, as to the outward pompe or ceremony; the other to the function of a Bishop, in which, because the Presbyters might not concurre, no not so much as to the out∣ward Act or ceremony, he was Ordained by laying on of Pauls hands onely. The last thing offred to consideration, is the election of the persons which are here ordained; which some refer unto the peo∣ple: Concerning that the word , which Saint Luke here useth, doth signifie a popular manner of election, used by the holding up of hands.Beza Annot. in Act. 14.23. Ortum est hoc verbum ex Graecorum consuetudine, qui porrectis mani∣bus suffragia ferebant, as Beza notes it on the place: who hereupon translates the word,
Cum per suffragia creassent, wherein he hath beene followed by some Translators of our Bibles, who expresse it thus, When they had created Elders by election. But whatsoever use the word might have in the old Greeke Writers; assuredly, it either had no such use now; or if it had, it quite excludes the people of those Churches, from having a∣ny hand in this Election. , however used amongst the Grecians, to signifie the approbation of the people, testifyed by the holding up of their hands: yet in the Church-construction, it signifyeth Ordi∣nation, done by the laying on of hands. And this, to save the labour of a further search, is very throughly avouched byCalvin in Act. c. 14. v. 23. Calvin, where he acknowledgeth, that a∣mongst Ecclesiasticall Writers, the word , was used pro solenni ordinationis ritu, for the solemne ceremony of Ordina∣tion, which is in holy Scripture called im∣position of hands. Particular instances hereof he that lists to see, may finde them gathered to his hand in the learned worke of BishopThe perpet. governm. of Ch. Ch. c. 7. Bilson, before remembred. But whereasCalvin ut supra. Calvin hence collecteth, that Paul and Barnabas permitted the electi∣on of these Presbyters to the common suf∣frage of the people, and that themselves did onely preside therein, Quasi moderato∣res, ne quid tumultuose fieret, onely as Mo∣derators
of the businesse, to see that it was fairely carryed: what other ground soever he might have for his conjecture; assured∣ly hee could collect none from the word here used. For if that  did signifie election by holding up of hands,Id. ibid. quali∣liter in Comitiis populi fieri solet, as in assem∣blies of the people it did use to be; as hee himselfe affirmes it doth: then certainely none but Paul and Barnabas holding up their hands, (for none but they were  in the present businesse) the whole election of these Presbyters must be given to them. But indeed it was neither so, nor so. Neither the Apostle nor the people had any hand in the elections of those times, but the Spirit of God, which evi∣dently did designe and marke out those men, whom God intended to imploy in his holy Ministery. The words of Paul to Timothy make this cleare enough, where it is said,1 Tim 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophesie, &c. and that there went some1 Tim. 1.18. prophesies be∣fore concerning Timothy, the same Saint Paul hath told us in the first chapter of that first Epistle.Hom. 5. in 1 ad Tim. c. 1. Chrysostome notes upon these words, that in those times , the Priests and Ministers of God were made by prophesie, that is, saith he, , by the Holy Ghost.
And this he proves by the selection of Paul and Barnabas to the worke of God, which was done by prophesie and by the Spirit. And finally glossing on those words, Noli negligere gratiam, &c. he doth thus expresse it, , God, saith he, did e∣lect thee to this weighty charge, he hath committed no small part of his Church unto thee; , no mor∣tall man had any hand in that designati∣on: and therefore take thou heed that thou disgrace not, nor dishonour so Di∣vine a calling.Theodor. & Oecum. in locum More might be said, both from (k) Theodoret and Oecumenius, to con∣firme this Truth; but that I thinke it is suf∣ficiently confirmed already. So then, the Presbyters of these times, be∣ing of Gods especiall choyce, his owne de∣signation; and those upon the laying on of such holy hands, furnished by the spirit with such gifts and graces as might enable them sufficiently to discharge their calling: the marvell is the lesse, if in those early dayes, at the first dawning, as it were, of Christianity, we finde so little speech of Bishops. In the ordayning of these Pres∣byters, as also of the like in other places, the Apostles might, and did no question, com∣municate unto them, such, and so much au∣thority, as might invest them with a power of government, during the times of their
owne necessary absence from those severall Churches. So that however they were Presbyters in Degree and Order, yet they both were and might be trusted with an E∣piscopall jurisdiction in their severall Cities; even as some Deanes, although but simply Presbyters, are with us in England. And of this ranke I take it were the Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus,Act. 20.28. whom the A∣postle calleth by the name of Bishops: that is to say, Presbyters by their Order and De∣gree, but Bishops in regard of their jurisdi∣ction. Such also those ordained by Saint Paul in the Church ofPhili. 1.1. Philippos, whom the Apostle mentioneth in the very en∣trance of his Epistle to that people. Which as it may bee some occasion, why Bishops properly so called, were not ordained by the Apostles, in the first planting of some Churches: so there are other reasons al∣leaged for it, and are briefely these. For first, although the Presbyters in those times were by the Holy Ghost endued with ma∣ny excellent gifts and graces, requisite to the Preaching of the Word, yet the Apo∣stles might not thinke fit to trust them with the chiefe government, till they had fully seene, ayd perfectly made tryall of their a∣bilities and parts that way. And this is that which EpiphaniusEpiphan. adv. haeres. 75. n. 5. meaneth in his dispute against Acrius, saying,
, &c. that where there were no fit men to discharge that Office, the place remained without a Bishop: but where necessity required, and that there wanted not fit men to supply the place, there Bishops forthwith were appointed. But that which I conceive to be the principall reason, was this, that the Apostle did reserve unto himselfe the chiefe authority in all the Churches of his plan∣ting, so long as he continued in, or about those places: And this he exercised either by personall visitations, mention whereof is made in the 14.21. and 15.36. of the Booke of Acts; or else by his rescripts and mandates, as in his sentencing of the incestu∣ous Corinthian, although absent thence. But when hee was resolved to takeAct. 19.21. a journey to Hierusalem, and from thence to Rome; not knowing when hee should re∣turne to those Easterne parts, and knowing well that multitude of governours doe oft breed confusions, and that equality of Mi∣nisters did oft end in factions: he then re∣solved to give them Bishops, to place a Chiefe, in and above each severall Presby∣tery, over every City; committing unto them that power aswell of Ordinations, as inflicting censures, which he had formerly reserved to himselfe alone. This great A∣postle, as for some space of time he taught
the Church, without helpe of Presbyters; so for another while he did rule the same without helpe of Bishops. A time there was wherein there were no Bishops, but the A∣postles onely, to direct the Church; and so there was a time wherein there were no Presbyters, but they, to instruct the same. However it must be confessed that there was a time, in which some Churches had no Bishops. And this, if any, was the time that SaintHieron. in Tit. c. 1. Hierome speakes of, Cum com∣muni Presbyterorum consilio ecclesiae guberna∣bantur, when as the Churches were gover∣ned by the common counsaile of the Pres∣byters. But sure it was so short a time, that had not the good Father taken a distaste a∣gainst Episcopacy, by reason of some diffe∣rences, which hee had with John the Bi∣shop of Hierusalem: hee could not easily have observed it. For whether Bishops were ordainedId. ad Eua∣grium. In Schismatis remedium, as he saith elsewhere, for the preventing of those Schismes, and factions which were then risen in the Church; or that they were appointed by the Apostles to supply their absence, when they withdrew themselves unto further Countries: this government of the Church in common by the Presby∣ters, will prove of very short continuance. For from the first planting of the Church in Corinth, which was in Anno 53. unto
the writingBaronius so computes it. Annal. of his first Epistle to that Church and people, in which hee doth complaine of the schismes amongst them,Hieron. in Titum. c. 1. was but foure whole yeares. And yet it doth appeare by that place in Hierome, for ought I can see, that the divisions of the people in Religion, some saying I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, every one cleaving unto him by whom he had recei∣ved Baptisme, were the occasion that it was decreed throughout the world, as that Fa∣ther saith, Ut unus de Presbyteris electus, su∣perponeretur caeteris, that one of the Pres∣byters should be set over the rest, to whom the care of all the Church should apper∣taine, that so the seedes of schisme might be rooted up. And from the time when Paul ordained those Presbyters, in Lystra and Iconium, and those other Churches, which was in Anno 48. according as Baronius cal∣culates it, unto Saint Pauls returne unto Hierusalem, which was in Anno 58. are but ten whole yeares. Before which time, im∣mediately upon his resolution to undertake that journey, and from thence to Rome, he had appointed Bishops in the Churches of his owne plantation: so that the governe∣ment of the Presbyters, in the largest and most liberall allowance that can be given them, will be too short a time to plead pre∣scription. Now that Saint Paul ordained
Bishops in many of the Asian Cities, or in the Churches of those Cities which him∣selfe had planted, before his last going thence into Greece and Macedon: may well be gathered out of Irenaeus, who lived both neere those times, and in those parts, and possibly might have seene and knowne some of the Bishops of this first foundati∣on. Now Irenaeus hisIren. l. 3. c. 14. words are these. In Mileto enim convocatis Episcopis & Presby∣teris, qui erant ab Epheso & reliquis proximis civitatibus, &c. Paul, saith he, calling to∣gether in Miletum, the Bishops and Pres∣byters, which were of Ephesus, and other the adjoyning Cities, told them what things were like to happen to him in Hierusalem, whither he meant to goe be∣fore the Feast. Out of which words of Irenaeus I collect thus much. First, that those Presbyters whom Paul called to Mile∣tum, to meete him there, were not all of Ephesus, though all called from Ephesus: Ephesus being first appointed for the Ran∣devouz, or place of meeting: and second∣ly, that amongst those Presbyters there were some whom Paul had dignified with the stile and place of Bishops: In which regard the Assembly being of a mixt condition, they are entituled by both names; especi∣ally those Presbyters which had as yet no Bishops over them, having the charge and
jurisdiction of their Churches, under the Apostles, as before was said. And this per∣haps may be one reason, why the Apostle in his speech to that assembly, makes no words of Timothy: who being present with the rest, received his charge together with them: as also why he gave the Presbyters of Ephesus no particular charge, how to be∣have themselves before their Bishop; there being many Bishops there, which were not under the command of Timothy. How∣ever we may gather thus much out of Ire∣naeus, that though wee find not in the Scrip∣ture the particular names of such as had Episcopall authority committed to them, but Timothy & Titus: yet that there were some o∣ther Bishops at that time of S. Pauls ordina∣tion, who doubtlesse tooke as great a care for Thessalonica and Philippos, for Lystra and Iconium, as for Crete and Ephesus. And that these two were by Saint Paul made Bishops of those places, will appeare most fully, by the concurrent testimonie of auncient Wri∣ters. And first for Timothy, that he was Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, and the first Bi∣shop there, appeareth by an ancient trea∣tise of his death and martyrdome, bea∣ring the name of Polycrates, who was him∣selfe not onely Bishop of this Church of Ephesus, but borne also within sixe or se∣ven
and thirty yeares after the writing of the Revelation by Saint John. Which trea∣tise of Polycrates entituled, De martyrio Timo∣thei, is extant amongst the lives of Saints, printe at Lovaine, An. 1585. and cited by the learned Primate of Armagh in his briefe Discourse touching the originall of Epi∣scopacie. Certaine I am thatSigebertus de Eccl. Script. Sigebertus doth report Polycrates to be the author of a booke entituled, De passione Sancti Timothei Apostoli; but whether that it ever came un∣to the hands of those of Lovaine, I am not able to determine. More like it is, the book is perished, and the fragments of the Trea∣tise which remaine in Photius,Photius in Biblith. n. 254. touching the death and martyrdome of Timothy, is all which have escaped that shipwracke. And yet in those poore fragments there is proofe enough that Timothy was Bishop of the Church of Ephesus: in which it is expresly said,  that Timothy was both ordained and inthro∣ned Bishop of the Metropolis of Ephesus by the great Apostle. Secondly, this appeareth by the testimony of Eusebius, who reckning up Saint Pauls assistants, his , and coad∣jutors, as it were, bringeth in Timothy for one; and this addes thus of him,Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 4. , that as histories recorded of him,
he was the first Bishop of the Diocese of E∣phesus. Thirdly, byEpiph. haer. 75. n. 5. Epiphanius, who in a glance gives him the power and stile of Bishop, where he relateth, , that the Apostle speaking unto Ti∣mothy, being then a Bishop, doth advise him thus, Rebuke not an Elder, &c. Fourthly, byAmbr. Praef. in Epist. 1. ad Timoth. Ambrose, if the worke be his, who in the preface to his Commentaries on the Epistles unto Timothy, thus resolves the point, Hunc ergo jam creatum Episcopum, in∣struit per Epistolam; that being now ordai∣ned a Bishop, he was instructed by Saint Pauls Epistle, how to dispose and order the Church of God. Fifthly, byHieron. de Script. Eccles. Hierome, who in his Tract De Eccles. Scriptoribus, doth affirme of Timothy, Ephesiorum Episco∣pum ordinatum à Beato Paulo, that he was or∣dained Bishop of the Ephesians by Saint Paul. Sixthly, byChrysst. Hom. in 1. ad Tim. et in Praef. ad eand. Chrysostome, as in ma∣ny places, so most significantly and expres∣ly in his Comment on the Epistle to the Philippians, saying, Paul saith in his Epistle unto Timothy, Fulfill thy ministrie, , being then a Bishop: , for that he was a Bishop appeares by Pauls wri∣ting thus unto him, Lay hands hastily on no man. Seventhly,Cocil. Chal. Act. 11. by Leontius Bishop of Magnesia, one of the Fathers in the great Councell of Chalcedon, affirming publikely, , that from blessed
Timothy unto his times, there had beene 26. Bishops of the Church of Ephesus. Eighth∣ly, byDe cura Pastorali pars 2. c. 11. Gregory the Great, where he saith that Paul admonisheth his scholler Timothy, Praelatum gregi, being now made the Prelate of a flocke, to attend to reading. Ninthly, byCom. in 1. ad Tim. c. 1. Sedulius an ancient writer of the Scotish Na∣tion, who lived about the middle of the first Century, affirming on the credit of old histo∣rie, Timotheum istum fuisse Episcopum in Ephe∣so; that Timothy to whom Paul wrote, had beene Bishop of Ephesus. Tenthly, by Pri∣masius, (f) a writer of the first 600. yeares,Primas. in Tim. 1. Ep. 1. c. 4. who in the Preface to his Commentaries on the first to Timothy, gives us this short note, Timotheus Episcopus fuit, & Discipulus Pauli; that Timothy was a Bishop, and Pauls Disci∣ple: and in his Comment on the text, saith that he had the grace, or the gift of Prophe∣sie, cum ordinatione Episcopatus, with his or∣dination to a Bishopricke. 11. BySubscript. ep. 2. ad Tim. the subscription of the second Epistle, where he is called positively, , the first that was ordained Bishop of the Ephesians. 12. ByIn Praefat. in 1. ad Tim. Theophylact, who giveth this reason of Saint Pauls writing un∣to Timothy, because that in a Church new constitute , &c. it was not easie to informe a Bishop of all things inci∣den unto his place by word of mouth: and further in his Comment on the fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle,In cap. 4. v. 14, 15. doth twice or thrice give Timothy the name of Bishop. 13. ByOecum. in 1. ad Tim. c. 1. Oecumenius, whom on these words of the Epistle, I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, gives this glosse or descant: , for there, (or of that place) he ordained him Bishop. An evidence so cleare and fu l, that BezaBeza Annot. in 1. ad Tim.  c. 5. v. 19. though he would not call him Bishop, con∣fesseth him to be President, or , of the Ephesine Presbytery, and that he had authority to receive accusations and com∣plaints against a Presbyter, and to judge ac∣cordingly. Which what it is else then to be a Bishop, is beyond my fancie to ima∣gine. Now for the time in which he was appoin∣ted Bishop of the Church of Ephesus (for on the right stating of that point,1 Tim. 1.3. the clearing of many difficulties doth depend) it may be best gathered from those words in the first Epistle, where Paul relates, that he besought him to abide still at Ephesus, when he himselfe went into Macedonia. Now S. Pauls journey into Macedonia, which is here intended, is is not that mentioned Act. 16. for then there was no Church of Ephesus to be Bishop of. Paul had not then seeneAct. 18.19. & 19.1, 2, 3, &c. Ephesus at all, nor planted any Church there till a good while after. Nor could it be when he left Ephesus, to goe the second time into Macedo∣nia,
mention whereof is made in the 20. Chapter, for he had sentAct. 19.22. Timotheus, and Erastus before him thither. But it was after he had stayed three moneths in Greece,Act. 20.3. when hearing that the Jewes laid wait for him as he went about to saile into Syria, hee changed his course, and purposed to re∣turne through Macedonia. Then was it, as he went that time into Macedonia, that hee brake the businesse unto Timothy, requiring or beseeching him to goe to Ephesus, to set up his aboad in that populous City, and un∣dertake the government of the Church thereof. To which when Timothy had con∣descended, he was sent beforeAct. 20 5. with Ari∣starchus and the rest, tarrying at Troas in ex∣pectation of the Apostles comming. And there he was most like to be, when the A∣postles first Epistle came unto his hands, be∣ing written not from Laodicea, as the sub∣scription doth pretend, but , out of Macedonia, asAthan. in Synop Sacrae Script. Athanasius doth ex∣pressely say in his Synopsis. For howsoever the1 Tim. 3.14. Apostle hoped to come to him shortly, and to instruct him more at large for that weighty businesse: yet well considering how many lets, and hindrances might in∣tervene, he thought it not amisse to prevent the worst; and send that letter of instructi∣ons in the meane time to him;1 Tim. 1.15 that hee might know how to behave himselfe in the house
of God. After this time, I find not that the Apostle did employ Timothy in any other generall service which concerned the Church: or that he called him from Ephe∣sus, being once got thither, save that he sent for him to make hast to Rome2 Tim. 4.21. immediately on his first cōming to that City, to be assistant to him there in that dangerous exigencie. A thing that both the one might crave, and the other doe, without detracting any thing at all from the Episcopall place and power which Timothy had taken on him: all the E∣pistles wherin the name of Timothy is joyned with Pauls, being writ within the compasse of two yeares, which was so short an ab∣sence from his Pastorall charge, as might be very easily dispensed withal, especially when the publique service of the Church was concerned so highly. I know that some of e∣minent noteB. Downham, in the Sermon at Lambeth. p. 76, 77, 78, and others. the better to avoid some appea∣ring difficulties that concerne this businesse, will not have Timothy made Bishop of the Church of Ephesus till after the Apostles comming unto Rome. But the second of the two Epistles doth very throughly refute that fancie; in which Saint Paul acquaints him how he had disposed of his retinue;Tim. 4. Ti∣tus being gone into Dalmatia,Taking it, as it seemeth, in his way to Crete. Crescens to Ga∣latia, Erastus taking up his aboad at Corinth, and Trophimus left at Miletum sicke: taking great care to have the Cloake and Parch∣ments
which were left at Troas, where Ti∣mothy stayed for him, Act. 20. to be sent speedily unto him. Where by the way, Mi∣letum, where Paul left Trophimus sicke, was not that towne of lesser Asia, unto the which the Elders were called from Ephesus, for after that we find him at Hierusalem, Act. 21.29. nor was it at the Iland called Meleta,Annal. Eccl. An. 59. n. 1. as Baronius thinkes, on which Saint Paul was cast by shipwracke, Act. 28. such altera∣tions or corrections not being easily allow∣able in holy Scripture. For being that there is in the Isle of Crete a towne called Mile∣tus, as StraboConditorem ex Mileto, quae in Creta est, Sarpedonem ac∣cipientes. Geogr. l. 2. testifieth; and that Saint Paul in his voyage from Hierusalem to Rome, sayled under Crete, and hovered for a while about that coast, Act. 27.7, 8, &c. that is most like to be the place, and there I leave him. For being thus fallen on the coast of Crete, I thinke it seasonable to enquire some newes of Titus: whom the Apostle much a∣bout the time that Timothy undertooke the charge of Ephesus, had made the Bishop of this Iland.An. 57. n. 209. Baronius thinkes, and not im∣probably, that at Saint Pauls last going out of Asia into MacedoniaAct. 20.2. when he had gone over those parts, and given them much ex∣hortation, and having so done went into Greece: that this his going into Greece was by and through the Aegean sea; that in his passage thither he put in at Crete: and fi∣nally,
that he left Titus here, ad curandam Ecclesiam, whom hee made Bishop for that purpose. This is most like to be the time, the circumstances of the text and story so well agreeing thereunto: for till this time, Titus was either attendant on S. Paul in person, or sent from place to place on his occasions and dispatches; as may appeare by looking on the concordances of holy Scripture. Now that Titus was ordained the first Bi∣shop of Crete, hath beene affirmed by seve∣rall authors of good both credit and anti∣quity. For first EusebiusEccles. hist. l. 3. c. 4. making a Cata∣logue of Saint Pauls assistants, or fellow-la∣bourers, and reckoning Timothy amongst them, whom he recordeth for the first Bi∣shop of the Church of Ephesus, addes pre∣sently, , and so was Titus also, the first Bishop of Crete.Ambr. praef. in ep. ad Titum. Saint Ambrose in the Preface to his Com∣mentaries, on the Epistle unto Titus, doth affirme as much, Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum, the Apostle consecrated Titus a Bishop, and therefore doth admonish him to be solicitous for the well ordering of the Church committed to him.Hieron. in Tit. c. 1. v 5. Saint Hie∣rome, writing on these words in that Epistle, For this cause left I thee in Crete, &c. doth ap∣ply them thus, Audiant Episcopi qui habent con∣stituendi Presbyteros per singulas urbes potestatē, Let Bishops marke this well who have autho∣rity
to ordaine Presbyters in every City, on what conditions, to what persons (for that I take to be his meaning) Ecclesiasticall or∣ders are to be conferred. Which is a strong insinuation, that Titus having that authority, must be needs a Bishop. More evidently in his Catalogue of Writers, or inId. de Scrip. Eccles. in Tit. Sophro∣nius at the least, if those few names were by him added to that Catalogue. Titus Episco∣pus Cretae, Titus the Bishop of Crete did preach the Gospell both in that, and the adjacent Ilands.Apud Oecu∣men. Praef. ad Tim. Theodoret proposing first this question, why Paul should rather write to Timothy and Titus, then to Luke and Silas; returnes this answer to the same, that Luke and Silas were still with him, , but those had entrusted with the government of Churches. But more particularlyAp eund. in Praef. ad Titu▪ Titus a famous Disci∣ple of Saint Paul, , was by him ordained Bishop of Crete, being a place of great extent; with a Commission also to ordaine Bishops under him.Theoph. in praef. ad. Tit. Theophylact in his preface unto this Epistle, doth affirme the same: using almost his very words. And OecumeniusOecum. in Tit. c. 1. v. 5. on the text doth declare as much, saying, that Paul gave Titus autho∣rity of ordaining Bishops, Crete being of too large a quantitie to be committed unto one alone; , having first consecrate or made him Bishop. Finally, the
subscription of this Epistle calls Titus the first Bishop of the Church of the Creti∣ans: which evidence, though questioned now of late, is of good Authority. For some of late, who are not willing that antiquity should afford such grounds, for Titus being Bishop of the Church of Crete, have amongst other arguments de∣vised against it, found an irreparable flaw, as they conceive, in this subscription. BezaAnnotat. in Ep. ad Tit. in fine who herein led the way, disproves the whole subscription as suppositious, because it is there said, that it was written from Ni∣copolis of Macedonia. A thing, saith he, which cannot be, for the Apostle doth not say, , I will winter here, but , illic, I will winter there: and therefore he was somewhere else when he wrote this Epistle. But AthanasiusIn Synopsi sacr. script. who lived nee∣rer the Apostles times, affirmes it to bee written from Nicopolis; and so doth Hie∣romeAd Paulum & Eustochium. in his Preface unto that Epistle. The Syriack translation dates it also thence, as is confessed by them that adhere to Be∣za. Theophylact,Comment. in Epl. ad Tit. and Oecumenius agree herein with Athanasius, and the ancient Co∣pies. As for the criticisme it is neither here, nor there; for Saint Paul being still in mo∣tion, might appoint Titus to repaire unto Nicopolis, letting him understand that how∣soever he disposed of himselfe in the mean
time, yet he intended there to winter; and so he might well say, though he was at Ni∣copolis when he writ the same. That Titus is there called the first Bishop of Crete, or of the Church of theSmectymn. p. 54. Cretians, is ano∣ther hint, that some have tooke to vilifie the credit of the said subscription; asking if ever there were such a second Bishop? Assuredly, the Realme of England is as faire and large a circuite, as the Isle of Crete: And yet I doe not finde it used as argument, that Austin the Monke had neither any hand in the converting of the English, or was not the first Archbishop of the See of Canter∣bury; because it is affirmed in Beda's Histo∣ry,Beza hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 27. Archiepiscopus genti Anglorum or∣dinatus est, that he was ordained the Arch-Bishop of the English Nation. And for an answer to the question, we need but looke into EusebiusHist. Eccle. l. 4. c. 20. ., where we shall finde Pi∣nytus a right godly man, called in plaine termes Bishop of Crete; Cretae Episcopus, saith the Latine, , as the Greeke Originall: the selfe-same stile, which is excepted at in Titus. Now, whereas it is said, that Titus was left no otherwise in Crete, then as Pauls Vicar Generall, Com∣missary, or Substitute, to order those things in such sort as he had appointed, which he could not dispatch himselfe, when he was there present; this can by no meanes be
admitted: the rules prescribed unto him, and Timothy, being for the most part of that nature, as doe agree with the condition of perpetuall Governours, and not of tempo∣rary and removeable Substitutes. As for the anticipation of the time, which I see some use, relating that Saint Paul with Titus, ha∣ving passed through Syria, and Cilicia, to confirme the Churches, did from Cilicia, passe over into Crete; where the Apostle having Preached the Gospell, left Titus for a while to set things in Order: although I cannot easily tell on what Authority the report is built, yet I can easily discerne that it can hardly stand with Scripture. Wee read indeed in the 15. Chapter of the Acts, that he went thorow Syria and Cilicia confir∣ming the Churches; ver. ult. and in the first words of the following Chapter, we find him at Derbe and LystraAct. 14.6. hist. Eccl. l 4. c. 20. . Cities of Lycao∣nia, the very next Province to Cilicia Northward, from which it is divided by a branch of the Mountain Taurus. Now whe∣ther of the two it be more probable, that Paul should passe immediately from Cilicia unto Lycaonia, upon the usuall cōmon road; or fetch a voyage into Crete, asSmectymn. p. 50. these men suppose, and be transported backe againe unto Lycaonia, being an in-land Country farre from any Sea, (which could not bee without some miracle, or great hiatus in
the story) I leave to any man to be imagi∣ned. Timothy and Titus being thus setled in their Episcopall Sees, we must passe on, to see if we can meet with any other of Saint Pauls Disciples, or his assistants if you will, that were entrusted with the like Authority. And first we meete with Dionysius, the Are∣opagite, ordained by Saint Paul, (as is most likely) the first Bishop of Athens; but how∣soever, questionlesse ordained the first Bi∣shop there. Another Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, who in all probability was borne whilst Saint John was living,Ap. Euseb.  Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 22. . as also, l. 3. c. 4. doth ex∣pressely say it: viz. that Dionysius the A∣reopagite being converted to the Faith by the Apostle Paul, , was first ordained Bishop of the Church of Athens. The foresaid Dionysius the Corinthian doth also tell us, thatAp. Euseb. l. c. 22. . Publius succeeded the Areopagite, after him Quadratus; both which were di∣sciples of the Apostles: the former of the two, being conceived to be the same, whose Father, PaulAct. 28.8. cured so miraculously, in the Isle of Malta. Next for the Church of Thessalonica, the Martyrologies informe us that Aristarchus,August. 4. one of Pauls Compa∣nions, ab eodem Apostolo Thessalonicensium E∣piscopus ordinatus, was by him ordained Bi∣shop of the Thessalonians. And after him suc∣ceeded
Caius, whom Saint Paul mention∣eth in his Epistle to the Romans, by the name of Gaius,Rom. 16.23 the host, as he calls him, of the whole Church. Certaine I am, that O∣rigenComment. in Epi. ad Rom. c. 16. reports him to be Bishop here, and that upon the knowne tradition of his Elders. Fertur sane ex traditione majorum, quod hic Caius Episcopus fuerit Thessalonicen∣sis Ecclesiae, as his owne words are. So for the Church of the Philippians, Saint Paul hath told us of Epaphroditus, one whom he mentioneth oftentimesPhil. 2.25. in his Epistle to that people, that he was not onely his Bro∣ther, and Companion in labour, and his fel∣low Souldier; Vestrum autem Apostolum, but he was also their Apostle. Aske of TheodoretTheodor. in 1 ad Tim. c. 3. what Saint Paul there meaneth, and he will tell you that he was their Bishop. For in his Comment on the first to Timothy, he gives this note, Eos qui nunc vocantur Epis∣copi, nominabant Apostolos, that in those times in which Saint Paul writ that Epistle, those who are now called Bishops, were called A∣postles. And this he proves out of this pas∣sage of Saint Paul, that so, in this respect, [ita Philippensium Apostolus erat Epaphrodi∣tus] Epaphroditus is called the Apostle of the Philippians. Which cleerely sheweth, that in his opinion, Epaphroditus was Bishop of the Philippians, as Titus of the Cretans, and Timothy of the Ephesians, in whom he after∣wards
doth instance. Beza indeed doth render the Greeke word , by the Latine, Legatus; in which he hath beene followed by the latter English, who read it messenger.Calvin in Philip. c. 2. But Calvin doth not one∣ly keepe himselfe to the old translation, though he take notice of the other; but he preferres the old before it; Sed prior sensus meliùs convenit, as more agreeable unto the meaning of the place. For the Colos∣sians next, we finde the names of Epaphras, and Archippus, their two first Bishops, in the Epistle to that Church. And first for Epaphras, it is conceived that he first prea∣ched the Faith of Christ to the Colossians: And this Saint Paul doth seeme to intimate in the first Chapter of the same Epistle,ver. 7. saying, As ye also learned of Epaphras our deare fellow servant. Certaine it is, that in the Martyrologies, he is affirmed to be the Bishop of this Church,Iulii. 19. ab eodem Aposto∣lo ordinatus, and that he was ordained Bi∣shop by the hands of Paul. But being after Prisoner with Saint Paul at Rome, Archip∣pus undertooke the Episcopall charge, whom PaulColos 4.17 exhorteth to take heed unto the Ministery which hee had received of the Lord, and to fulfill it. Most sure I am, that AmbroseAmbros. in Colos. 4. writing on those words, doth make Archippus Bishop of Colossi, by the name of their Praepositus, or governour, of
which seev. cap. 3 n. 5 before: adding withall that after Epaphras had seasoned them in the Truth of God, hic accepit regendam eorum Ecclesiam, Archippus tooke the government of that Church upon him. For other of Saint Pauls Disciples, we finde in Dorotheus, if he may be credited, that Silas, Pauls most individuall compa∣nionDorotheus in Synopsi., was Bishop of the Church of Co∣rinth, the truth whereof shall be examined more at large, in the second Century: and that Sosipater, mention of whom is made, Acts 20, was ordained Bishop of Iconium, wherein Hippolitus concurring with him, doth make the matter the more probable. Of Sosthenes, (of whom see Acts 18. 1 Cor. 1.) the same two Authors doe report, that he was Bishop of Colophon, one of the Ci∣ties of the lesser Asia. But leaving these more Easterne Countries, let us look home∣ward towards the West. And there we find that Crescens, whom Saint Paul, at his first comming unto Rome,2 Tim. 4. had sent into Ga∣latia to confirme the Churches; was after by him sent on the like occasion into Gaule, or Gallia, there to Preach the Gospell: for so I rather choose to atone the businesse, than correct the Text, and reade it Crescens in GalliamEpiphan. haeres. 51. n. 11. with Epiphanius. For ha∣ving with so good successe beene employ∣ed formerly in Galatia; he might with bet∣ter
comfort undertake the service of Prea∣ching Christ unto the Gaules, whereof the Galatians were a branch or Colonie. Now that he did indeed Preach Christs Gospell there, is affirmed positively both byEpiphan. haeres. 51. Epiphanius andTheodor. in Epl. 2 ad Tim. Theodoret, two very e∣minent and ancient writers: andAdo in Chron. Ado Viennensis, a Writer though of lesser stan∣ding, yet of good repute, affirmeth that he was put upon this employment, quo tem∣pore Paulus in Hispanias pervenisse creditur, at such time as it is conceived that the A∣postle Paul went into Spaine, which was in Anno 61. as Baronius thinketh, there being left, and having planted a Church of Christ, in the City of Vienna, (now in that Province which is called Daulphine) he be∣came the first Bishop of the same;Decemb. 29 Pri∣mus ejusdem Civitatis Episcopus, saith the Martyrologie. And to this, Ado, one of his successors, also doth agree; adding with∣allin Chronico. that after hee had sate there some few yeares, he returned backe againe into Galatia, leaving one Zacharias to succeed him. Finally, not to leave out Britaine, it is recorded in the Greeke Menologies, that Aristobulus (whom Saint Paul speakes of Rom. 16.) being one of the Seventy, and afterwards a follower of Saint Paul,Menolog. Graec. in Martii. 14. was by him ordained Bishop of Britaine, (,
as the words there are) a region full of fierce and savage people; and that ha∣ving there setled the Church, and ordai∣ned Presbyters and Deacons in the same, he did there also end his life. The Reve∣rend Primate ofDe Britan∣nic. eccl. prim. c. 1. Armagh, out of a frag∣ment attributed to Heleca, sometimes Bi∣shop of Saragossa in Spaine, doth recite a passage, wherein it is affirmed of this Ari∣stobulus, missum in Angliam Episcopum, that he was sent Bishop into England, for so the Authour calleth this Country according to the name it had when he writ the same. But these things which relate to the British Churches, I rather shall referre to our lear∣ned Antiquaries, to be considered of more fully; than affirme any thing my selfe. But to looke backe on Timothy and Ti∣tus, whom wee left lately in their severall Churches, I heare it said, that notwith∣standing all those proofes before produced from the ancient, yet being Evangelists, as they were, they could be no BishopsSmectymn. p. 48. Bishops being tyed to the particular care of that flocke or Church, over which God had made them Overseers; but the Evan∣gelists being Planetary, sent up and downe from place to place, by the Apostles, as the necessities of the Church required. Besides that moving in an higher sphere than that of Bishops, and being Co-partners with
Saint Paul in his Apostleship or Apostolicall functionVnbishop∣ping of Tim. & Tit. p. 36., it had beene a devesting of themselves of their Apostolicall jurisdiction, and preheminence, to become Bishops at the last, and so descend from a superior to an inferiour Office. For answer where∣unto we need say but this, that the gift of being an Evangelist, might, and did fall on any ranke of ordinary Ministers, as might that also of the Prophet. Philip one of the seven, a Deacon, as it is generally concei∣ved, but howsoever Ministring unto the Church, in an inferiour place or Office, was notwithstanding an Evangelist: and Agabus, though perhaps but a simple Pres∣byter, one of the Seventy past all question, was a Prophet too. Philip, as hee was one of the seven, was tyed to a particular em∣ployment, and of necessity, sometimes, mustAct. 6.12. leave the Word of God to serve Ta∣bles. Yet the same Philip, as he was fur∣nished by the Lord with gifts and graces, for gaining soules to God Almighty, and doing the worke of an Evangelist, must leave the serving of those Tables to Preach the Word. And Agabus, if he were a Pres∣byter, whether ofAct. 11.27, 28. & 21.10. Hierusalem, from whence he is twice said to come, or of some other Church, that I will not say, might notwithstanding his employment in a particular Church, repaire to Antioch, or
Caesarea, as the Spirit willed him, there to discharge the office of a Prophet. So then both Timothy and Titus might he Bishops, as to their ordinary place and calling; though in relation unto their extraordinary gifts, they were both Evangelists. As for their falling from an higher, to a lower functi∣on, from an Evangelist unto a Bishop; I cannot possibly perceive where the fall should be. They that object this, will not say, but Timothy, at the least, was made a Presbyter, for wherefore else did the Pres∣byterie (which they so much stand on) lay hands upon him. And certainely, if it were no diminution from an Evangelist to be∣come a Presbyter; it was a preferment unto the Evangelist, from being but a Presbyter to become a Bishop. But for the Bishopping ef Timothy and Titus, as to the quod sit of it, that so they were, in the opinion of all Ancient Writers, wee have said enough. We will next looke on the authority com∣mitted to them, to see what further proofe hereof may be brought from that.
CHAP. V. Of the authority and jurisdiction gi∣ven by the word of God, to Ti∣mothy and Titus, and in them, to all other Bishops. I. The authority committed unto Timothy and Titus, was to be perpetuall, and not person∣all onely. II. The power of Ordination intrusted on∣ly unto Bishops by the Word of God, according to the judgement of the Fathers. III. Bishops alone both might, and did Ordaine, without their Presbyters. IV. That Presbyters might not ordaine without a Bishop, proved by the memorable case of Colluthus and Ischyras. V. As by those also of Maximus, and a Spanish Bishop. VI. In what respects, the joynt assistance of the Presbyters was required herein. VII. The case of the Reformed Chur∣ches beyond the Seas, declared, and qualifyed. VIII. The care of ordering Gods Divine Service, a worke peculiar to the Bishop.
IX. To whom the Ministration also of the Sacraments doth in chiefe belong. X. Bishops to have a care that Gods word be preached: and to encou age those that take paines that way. XI. Bishops to silence, and correct such Presbyters, as preach other doctrines. XII. As also to reprove and reject the he∣retique. XIII. The censure and correction of inferi∣our Presbyters, doth belong to Bishops. XIV. And of Lay-people also, if they walk unworthy of their Christian calling. XV. Conjecturall proofes that the descripti∣on of a Bishop, in the fi st to Timothy, is of a Bishop truly and properly so called. THey who object that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, and so by consequence no Bishops, have also said, and left in wriing, that the authority committed to them by Saint Paul, did not belong to them at all, as Bishops,Vnbishop∣ping of Tim. & Tit. p. 60, 61, &c. but Evangelists onely. But this, if ponde∣red as it ought, hath no ground to stand on. The calling of Evangelists, as it was Extra∣ordinary, so it was but temporarie, to last no longer, than the first planting of the Church, for which so many signall gifts and graces of the holy Spirit, were at first
powred on the Disciples. I know not any Orthodoxe Writer, who doth not in this point agree withCom. in 4. ad Eph. v. 11. Calvin: who in his Comment on the Epistle to the Ephesians, gives us this instruction, Deum Apostolis, Evangelistis & Prophetis, Ecclesiam suam non nisi ad tempus ornasse, that God ador∣ned his Church with Prophets, Evange∣lists and Apostles, for a season onely: ha∣ving before observed, that of all those holy ministrations there recited, Postrema tantum duo perpetua esse, the two last, (viz. Pastors and Teachers, which he takes for two) were to be perpetuall. But on the other side, po∣wer to ordaine fit Ministers, of what sort so∣ever, as also to reprove and censure those that behaved themselves unworthily; authority to convent and reject an hereticke, to punish by the censures of the Church, all such as give offence and scandall to the Congregation by their exorbitant and un∣ruly living: this ought to be perpetuall in in the Church of Christ. This the Apostle seemes to intimate, when he said to Timothy,1 Tim. 6.14. I charge thee in the sight of God, and before Jesus Christ, that thou keepe this Commande∣ment without spot, and unreprovable, untill the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now Ti∣mothy was not like to live till Christs second comming; the Apostle, past all question, ne∣ver meant it so: therefore the power, and
charge here given to exercise the same, ac∣cording to the Apostles rules and precepts was not personall onely: but such as was to appertaine to him, and to his successours for ever, even till the appearing of our Lord and Saviour. The like expression do wee find in SaintMat. 28. ult. Matthew, when our Re∣deemer said unto his Apostles, Behold I am with you alwaies even unto the end of the world. Not alwaies certainly with his Apostles, not to the end of the world with those very men, to whom he did addresse himselfe when he spake these words; for they being mortall men have beene dead long since. Non solis hoc Apostolis dictum esse,Harmon. E∣vangel. this was no perso∣nall promise then, saith Calvin truly. With them and their successours hee might al∣waies be, and to the end of the world give them his assistance. Cum vobis & successori∣bus vestris,In Mat. 28. as Denis the Carthusian very well observeth. Saint Paul then gives this charge to Timothy, and in him unto all his successours in the Episcopall function; which should continue in the Church till Christs second cumming. And therefore I conceive the annotation of the ordinary glosse to be sound and good, in Timotheo omnibus succes∣soribus loquitur Apostolus,Glossa Or∣dinar. in 1 Tim. 6. that this was spoke in Timothy unto all his successors. And so the Commentaries under the name of Ambrose do informe us also, saying, that
Paul was not so solicitous for Timothy, as for his successours,In 1. Tim. 6. ut exemplo Timothei Ec∣clesiae ordinationem custodirent: that they might learne by his example (i. e. by practising those directions which were given to him) to looke unto the ordering of the Church. This ground thus laid, we must next looke on the authority which the Apostle gave to Timothy and Titus, and in them to all other Bishops. And the best way to looke upon it is, to divide the same as the Schoole-men do, into potestas ordinis, and potestas jurisdictio∣nis, the power of order, and the power of jurisdiction: in each of which there occurre divers things to be considered. First, for the power of Order, besides what every Bishop doth, and may lawfully performe, by ver∣tue of the Orders hee received as Presbyter, there is a power of Order conferred upon him as a Bishop: and that's indeed the power of Ordination, or giving Orders, which seemes so proper and peculiar to the Bishops office, as not to be communicable to any else. Paul gives it as a speciall charge to TimothyTim. 5.22. to lay hands hastily on no man: which caution doubtlesse had beene given in vaine, in case the Presbyters of Ephesus might have done it, as well as he. And Ti∣tus seemes to have beene left in Crete for this purpose chiefly,Tit. 1. v. 5. that he might ordaine Presbyters in every City: which questionlesse
had beene unnecessary, in case an ordinary Presbyter might have done the same. The Fathers have observed from these texts of Scripture, that none but Bishops strictly and properly so called (according as the word was used when they lived that said it) have any power of Ordination. EpiphaniusHaeres. 75. n. 4. in his dispute against Aërius, observes this dif∣ference betwixt Bishops & Presbyters, (whom the hereticke would faine have had to be the same) that the Presbyter by administring the Sacrament of Baptisme, did beget chil∣dren to the Church: but that the Bishop by the power of ordination, , did beget Fathers to the same. A power from which he utterly excludes the Presby∣ter; and gives good reason for it too: for how, saith hee, can he ordaine, or constitute a Presbyter, , which in his ordination did receive no power to impose hands upon another?Hom. 11. in 1 Tim. c. 3. Chryso∣stome speaking of the difference betweene a Bishop, and a Presbyter, makes it consist in no∣thing else, but in this power of Ordination. , &c. onely in laying on of hands, saith hee, or in ordination, a Bi∣shop is before, or above a Presbyter; and have that power onely inherent in them, which the others have not. HieromeEpistola ad Euagr. al∣though a great advancer of the place and office of the Presbyter, excludes him from
the power of ordination, or any interest therein. Quid enim facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod Presbyter non faciat? What, saith he, doth a Bishop, saving ordination, more than a Presbyter may do? Neither doth Hierome speake de facto, and not de ju∣re, quid facit, not quid debet facere:Smectymn. p. 37. as I observe the place to be both cited and ap∣plied in some late discourses. Hieromes non faciat, is as good as non debet facere: and they that looke upon him well, will find he pleads not of the possession onely, but the right and title. And we may see his meaning by the passage formerly alleaged upon the words of Paul to Titus, cap. 1. v. 5. Audiant Episcopi qui habent constituendi Presbyteros per singulas urbes potestatem. By which it seems that Bishops onely had the power of ordai∣ning Presbyters; and that they did both claime, and enjoy the same from this grant to Titus. For further clearing of this point, there are two things to be declared and made evi∣dent, first that the power of ordination was so inherent in the person of a Bishop, that he alone both might and did sometimes or∣daine, without help of Presbyters: and se∣condly, that the Presbyters might not do the same without the Bishop. And first that an∣ciently the Bishops of the Church both might, and did ordaine, without the helpe or
co-assistance of the Presbyters, appeareth by the ordination of OrigenEuseb. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 7. n. unto the office of a Presbyter by Theoctistus Bishop of Caesa∣rea, and Alexander Bishop of Hierusalem, who laid hands upon him; , as my Author hath it. Which act of theirs when it was quarrelled by Demetrius, he did not plead in barre, that there were no Presbyters assistant in it; but that the party had done somewhat (and we know what 'twas) by which hee was con∣ceived to be uncapable of holy Orders. So whenId. l. 6. c. 35. . the Bishop, whosoever he was, out of an affectation which he bare unto Novatus (not being yet a Separatist from the Church of God) desired, , the Clergie being all against it, to or∣daine him Presbyter: the matter stood upon, as the story testifieth, was not the Bishops being the sole agent in it, but because it was forbidden by the ancient Canons, that any one who had beene formerly baptized be∣ing sicke in bed, (and that had beene No∣vatus case) should be assumed into the Cler∣gie. But not to make a further search into particulars, which are vast and infinite: we have two notable cases that reflect this way, and in them two such generall Ma∣ximes as will make all sure. In the third Councell of Carthage holden in or about the yeare 390. it was proposed byConcil. Car∣thag. 3. Ca 45. Aure∣lius
then Metropolitan of Carthage, that it might be lawfull for him to choose or take Presbyters out of the Chuches of his Suffra∣gans, and to ordaine them Bishops of such Cities as were unprovided: and that the Bishops of those Churches, whose Clarkes, or Presbyters they were, might not be suf∣fered to oppose. To which when al the Fa∣thers had agreed. Posthumianus one of the Prelates there assembled, puts this case, that if a Bishop had but one Presbyter onely, Numquid debet illi ipse unus Presbyter auferri, whether that one Presbyter should be taken from him. Aurelius thereunto replyeth, Episcopum unum esse posse, per quem dignatione divina Presbyteri multi constitui possunt, that a Bishop by Gods grace might make many Presbyters, and therefore that on such occa∣sions, his one and onely Presbyter must be yeelded up upon demand. By which it is most cleare and evident, that a Bishop may alone performe the Act or Ceremony of Ordination, not having any Presbyter at all to joyne with him in it. The like occurreth in the second Councell of Sevill (held in the yeare 617. or thereabouts) concerningConcil. Hi∣spalens. 2. c. 5. Frangitanus a Presbyter of the Church of Corduba, who by the Bishop of that See; (a ruffling Prelate, as appeareth byCap. 6. the fol∣lowing Chapter) had beene deposed from his Ministerie: the cause being brought be∣fore
the Councell, and the whole processe openly declared unto them, the man was presently restored to his Orders, and the sen∣tence passed against him declared to be ir∣regular, and contrary to the ancient Canons, whereby it was enacted that no Clergie∣man should be deposed without the judge∣ment of a Synod. And then it followeth, Episcopus sacerdotibus & ministris solus dare honorem potest, auferre solus non potest; that Bishops solely of themselves, may conferre holy orders on Priests and Deacons, but solely of their owne authority, they could not de∣pose them. So then it is most cleare and evident, that Bishops might and did ordaine, without their Presbyters, might not the Presbyters do the like sometimes, without their Bishop? Certainly nothing lesse than so: or if they did attempt it at any time, the whole act was not onely censured and condemned as un∣canonicall, but adjudged void and null, from the first beginning. For besides that which hath beene said before, from Hie∣rome, Chrysostome, and Epiphanius, touch∣ing the limitation of this power to the Bi∣shops onely; there are three booke-cases in the point, which put the matter out of que∣stion: Colluthus,Athanas. in Apol. 2. Edit. Gr. Lat. p. 784. once a Presbyter of Ale∣xandria, falling at difference with his Bi∣shop, usurpes upon the Bishops office, and
ordaines certaine Presbyters, himselfe be∣ing one. This businesse being canvassed in the Councell of Alexandria, before that famous Confessor Hosius, and other Bishops there assembled: Colluthus was comman∣ded to carry himselfe for a Presbyter only, as indeed he was: and all the Presbyters of his ordaining reduced to the same con∣dition, , in which they were before the said Ordina∣tion. Where by the way instead ofLutet. 1627. Col∣luthus the last edition of this Author in Greeke and Latine, doth read Catholicus: which must be mended as before, in the relation of this story; where we haveP. 732. 792. Colluthus, and not Catholicus. But to pro∣ceed. It hapned afterwards that Ischy∣ras one of the Pseudo-Presbyters ordained by Colluthus, accusedId. ibid. p. 757. Macarius (one of the Presbyters of Athanasius) for a pretended violence to be offered to him, then ministring at the holy TableId. ibid. p. 732. So that the businesse being brought at last unto the judgement of a Councell; and the point in issue being this, whether this Ischyras were a Presbyter, or not; and so by conse∣quence a dispenser of those sacred myste∣ries: he was returned no Presbyter, by the full consent of all the Prelates then assem∣bled. The reason was, because he was or∣dained by Colluthus, ,
who died a Presbyter; and that his ordina∣tions had beene all made void, and those that had received them at his hands, , became lay a∣gaine, and in that state received the bles∣sed sacrament as the lay-men did. And this saith Athanasius was a thing so publique, , that no man ever doubted of the truth thereof. The second case was that of Maximus,Greg. Presb. in vita Nazian. once a familiar friend of Gregory Nazi∣anzens, at such time as he was Bishop of Constantinople; and by him, having taken a good liking to him, admitted into the Clergie of that Church. But Maximus be∣ing an ungratefull wretch, complots with others like himselfe, to be made Bishop of that City: and thereupon negotiates with Peter, then Patriarch of Alexandria, to or∣daine him Bishop of the same; which be∣ing done accordingly, (for Maximus was by birth of Egypt, and possibly might have good friends there, besides his money) and the whole City in a great distemper about the businesse: the whole cause came at last to be debated in the first generall Councell of Constantinople,Conc. Const. 1. cap. 4. where on full hearing of the matter it was thus decreed, viz. that Maximus neither was to be taken for a Bishop, , nor any of those he had ordained to be accoun∣ted
of the Clergy, or remaine in any order or degree thereof. Where note, that how∣soever Maximus came unlawfully unto the Bishopricke of Constantinople, by meanes whereof all the Acts done by him as a Bi∣shop, were made void and frustrate: yet if as Presbyter, to which degree he had beene lawfully ordained by Nazianzen, he might have given the imposition of hands, the Pres∣byters by him ordained, would have held good still. But the third case comes nee∣rest to the businesse, yet as it is thus re∣ported in the CouncellConcil. Hisp. 11. c. 5. of Sevill before remembred. A Bishop of the Church of Spaine, being troubled with sore eyes, and having some presented to him to be ordai∣ned Presbyters and Deacons, did onely lay his hands upon them, suffering a Presbyter that stood by, to read the words of ordina∣tion. This comming to be scanned in the aforesaid Councell, upon mature delibe∣ration it is thus determined. First, for the Presbyter, which assisted, that for his bold∣nesse and presumption, he had beene sub∣ject to the Councels censure, but that hee was before deceased: next for the Presbyter & Deacons, who were so ordained, that they should actually be deposed from all sacred oders. Concluding thus, Tales enim merito judicati sunt removendi, quia pravè inventi sunt constituti; that they were worthily ad∣judged
to lose those orders, which they had wrongfully received. So little influence had the Presbyters in the essentiall parts of Ordi∣nation, as that their bare reading of the words (though required to it by the Bi∣shop) was adjudged enough, not onely to make them liable to the Churches censure, but also for their sakes to make void the Action. Nay so severe and and punctuall was the Church herein, that whereas cer∣taine Bishops of those times, whether con∣sulting their owne ease, or willing to de∣cline so great a burthen, had suffered their Chorepiscopi: aswell those which were sim∣ply Presbyters, as such as had Episcopall or∣dination (for two there were) to performe this office: it was forbiddenConcil Gan∣grens. Can. 13. absolutely in the one, limited and restrained in the other sort,Concil. An∣tioch. l. Can. 10 as by the Canons of the two an∣cient Synods of Gangra, and Antioch, doth at full appeare. It is true indeed, that anciently, as long, for ought I know, as there is any monu∣ment, or record of true antiquity, the Pres∣byters have joyned their hands to, and with the Bishops, in the performance, and dis∣charge of this great solemnity. And hereof there are many evidences that affirme the same, as well in matter of fact, as in point of Law. Saint Cyprian, one of the ancientest of the Fathers, which now are extant, af∣firmes,
Cyprian. E 33. or l. 2. ep. 5. that in the ordination of Aure∣lius unto the office of a Reader in the Church of Carthage, he used the hands of his Colleagues. Hunc igitur à me, & a Col∣legis, qui praesentes aderant, ordinatum sciatis, as he reports the matter in a letter to his charge at Carthage. Where by Colleagues it is most likely that he meanes his Presby∣ters; first, because that Epistle was written during the time of his retreat, and priva∣cie; what time it is not probable, that any of his Suffragan Bishops di esort unto him: and secondly, because those words, qui praesentes aderant, are so conforme unto the practise of that Church in the times suc∣ceeding. For in the fourth CouncellConcil. Car. 4. Can. 3. of Carthage held in the yeare 401. it was de∣creed, that when a Presbyter was ordained, the Bishop blessing him, and holding his hand upon his head, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput illius teneant; all the Presbyters which are present shall likewise lay their hands upon his head, neere the hands of the Bishop. And in the same Coun∣cell it was further ordered,Id. Can. 12 that the Bishop should not ordaine a Clergie-man, sine consilio clericorum suorum, without the counsell of his Clergie: which also doth appeare to be Cyprians practise, in the first words of the Epistle before remembred.
But then it is as true withall, that this conjunction of the Presbyters in the solem∣nities of this Act, was rather ad honorem Sa∣cerdotii, quam essentiam operis, more for the honour of the Priesthood, than for the es∣sence of the worke. Nor did the laying on of the Presbyters hands conferre upon the party that was ordained any power or or∣der: but onely testified their consent unto the businesse, and approbation of the man, according to the purpose and intent of the last of the two Canons before alleaged. And for the first Canon, if you marke it well, it doth not say, that if there be no Presbyters in place, the Bishop should de∣ferre the ordination till they came: but Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, if any Presbyters were present at the doing of it, they should lay their hands upon his head, neere the Bishops hands. So that however anciently, in the purest times, the Presbyters which were then present, both might and did im∣pose hands with the Bishop, upon the man to be ordained; and so concurred in the per∣formance of the outward cremonie: yet the whole power of ordination was vested in the person of the Bishop onely, as to the essence of the worke. And this appears yet further, by some passages in the Civill lawes, prescribed for the ordering of Ec∣clesiasticall Ministers; by which, upon
neglect or contempt thereof, the Presby∣ters were not obnoxious unto punishment that joyned with the Bishop, because they had no power to hinder what he meant to do. But the Bishop onely, qui ordinat, or, qui ordinationem imponit, he in whom rested the authority, by laying on, or by withhol∣ding of his hands, either to frustrate or make good the action: he was accomptable unto the lawes, if hee should transgresse them: for which consultCited by B. Bilson. c. 13. Novell. Consti∣tut. 123. Ca. 16. and Novell. Constitut. 6. And so it also stood in the Churches pra∣ctise; as apreareth plainly by the degrada∣tions of Basilius,Sozimen. hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23. . Eleusius, and Elpidius, three ancient Bishops, because that (amongst other things) they had advanced some men unto holy orders, contrary to the lawes, and ordinances of the Church: of which Elpidius was deposed on no other reason, but on that alone. Now had the Presbyters beene agents in ordaining as well as the Bishop, and the imposing of their hands so necessary, that the businesse could not be performed without them: there had beene neither equity, nor reason in it, to let them scape Scot-free, and punish the poore Bishops onely, for that in which the Pres∣byters were as much in fault. Against all this, I meete with no objecti∣on in Antiquity, but what hath casually
beene incountred in the former passages. This present age doth yeeld one, and a great one too, which is the case of the Re∣formed Churches beyond the Seas: who finding an aversenesse of the Bishops at the first, to give them orders, unlesse they would desert the worke of Reformation, which they had in hand, were faine to have re∣course to Presbyters, for their Ordinations, in which estate they still continue. That thus it wasAugust. Con. in fine., appeareth by the Augustane Confession, the Authours and Abetters of the which complaine, that the Bishop would admit none unto sacred Orders, Nisi jurent se puram Evangelii Doctrinam nolle docere, except they would be sworne not to Preach the Gospell according to the grounds and Principles of their Reforma∣tion. For their parts they professed, Non id agi ut dominatio excipiatur Episcopis, that they had no intention to deprive the Bi∣shops of their Authority in the Church; but onely that they might have liberty to Preach the Gospell, and be eased of some few rites and ceremonies, which could not be observed without grievous sinne. This if it could not be obtained, and that a schisme did follow thereupon, it did concerne the Bishops to looke unto it, how they would make up their account to Almighty God. So that the Bishops
thus refusing to admit them into holy Or∣ders, which was the publique ordinary doore of entrance into the Ministery of the Church; necessity compelled them at the last, to enter in by private wayes, and impose hands on one another. In which particular the case of the Reformed Churches may not unfitly be resembled unto that of Scipio,Valer. Maxim. l. 3. c. 7. as it is thus related in the story. Upon some want of money for the furthe∣rance of the necessary affaires of State, he demanded a supply from the common trea∣sury. But when the Questor, pretending that it was against the Lawes, refused to open it; himselfe a private person, seised upon the keyes: Et patefacto aerario, legem necessitati cedere coegit, and made the Law give way to the necessities of the Com∣mon wealth. So in like manner, the bet∣ter to reforme Religion, many good men made suite to be supplyed out of the com∣mon treafuries of the Church; to be ad∣mitted to the Ministery, according to the common course of Ordination. Which when it was denyed them by the Bishops, the Churches Questors in this case, they ra∣ther chose to seise upon the keyes, and re∣ceive Ordination from the hands of private persons, then that the Church should bee unfurnished. This I conceive to be the Case, at the first beginning. But whether
with the change of their condition, the case be altered, or whether they continue in the state they were; I am not able to say any thing. It is a good old saying, and to that I keepe me; , that where I am a stranger, I must be no med∣ler. Hitherto of the power of Ordination, committed by Saint Paul to his two Bishops of Ephesus and Crete, and in them to all o∣ther Bishops whatsoever. Wee must next looke upon the power of jurisdiction, and that consists in these particulars: First, in the ordering of Gods Service, and the Ad∣ministration of his Sacraments. Secondly, in the Preaching of his Word, censuring those that broach strange Doctrines; and on the other side encouraging and reward∣ing such as are laborious in their calling: and Lastly, in correction of the manners of such as walke unworthy of the Gospell of Christ, whether of the Clergie, or the Lai∣ty. To these three heads, we may reduce the severall points and branches of Ecclesi∣asticall jurisdiction; so farre forth as the same hath beene committed by the word of God, and by the practise of the Church, unto the managing and care of Bishops. First for the ordering of Gods service, and all things thereunto pertaining, Saint Paul gave Timothy this direction,1 Tim. 2.1. that first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thankes be made for all men: for Kings, and all that be in authority, that men may leade a quiet and a peaceable life, in all god∣linesse and honesty. This, as it was a common duty, and appertayning unto every man in his severall place: so the Apostle leaves it unto Timothy, to see that men performed this duty, and were not suffered to neglect it. For that the prayers here intended, were not the private Prayers of particular persons, but the publique of the Congregati∣on, is agreed on all sides. Calvin conceives it so for the Protestant writers,Calvin in 1 ad Tim. c. 2. Paulus simpliciter jubet quoties orationes publicae ha∣bentur, that Paul doth here appoint what he would have to bee comprized in our pub∣lique Prayers. Estius, for the Pontificians, doth resolve so also, that the place must be understoodEstius in 1 ad Tim. c. 2. de publicis Ecclesiae precibus, of the publique Prayers, of and in the Con∣gregation. And that the Westerne Chur∣ches may not stand aloneTheophyl. & Oecum. in locum. Theophylact, and Oecumenius doe expound the words, , of the daily service used in the Church of God, who also call it , the first Christian duty. Now askeChrysost. in 1 ad Tim. c 2. of Chrysostome, to whom it doth belong to see this duty carefully discharged as it ought to be; and he will tell you tis the Priest, or , as he
which is the common Father of the Uni∣verse, and therefore to take care of all, as doth the Lord, whose Priest or  he is. And aske ofOecum. ibid. Oecumenius, then whom none better understood that Fathers wri∣tings, whom he doth there meane by the Priest, or , and he will tell you that it is the Bishop. , &c. It doth, saith he, belong unto the Bishop, as the common Father, to make Prayers for all men, faithfull and infidels, friends and enemies, persecuters and slanderers. Lyra speakes home and fully to this pur∣pose also. For this he makes to be secun∣dus actus ad Episcopum pertinens, the second Act belonging to the Bishops Office, that prayers be offered unto God. The ministration of the Sacraments, being a principall part of Gods publique service, and comprehending Prayers and supplicati∣ons, and giving of thankes, must bee looked on next. And this we finde to be commit∣ted principally to the Bishops care, and by their hands to such inferiour Ministers in the Church of God, as they thought fit to trust with so great a charge. ToMat. 28.19 teach and to Baptize, was given in the charge to the Apostles; and unto none but they did Christ say,Luk. 22.19 hoc facite, that they should take the bread and breake and blesse it, and so deliver it to the Communicants. So
also in the blessing and distributing of the other element. This power they left in generall to their Successours, to the Bishops chiefely, and such as were found worthy of so high a trust, by their permission.Epi. ad Smyrnens. Ignatius who lived neerest to our Saviours time, and had beene conversant with the Apostles, doth expressely say it. , &c. It is not lawfull without the Bishop, either to Baptize, or make Oblations, or cele∣brate the Eucharist, or finally to keepe the Love-feasts, or , which were then in use (for those I take it were the  which the Father speakes of.) Tertullian for the second Century doth affirme as much.Tertul. de Baptismo. c. 17. The right, saith he, of giving Baptisme, be∣longs to the Chiefe Priest, that is, the Bi∣shop; next to the Presbyters or Deacons; non tamen sine autoritate Episcopi, yet not with∣out the Bishops Licence or authority. In the third Century, the Councell held in LaodiceaConcil. Lao∣dic. Can. 57. . is as plaine and full, save that indeed it is more generall, in which the Presbyter is tyed from doing any thing (i. e. such things as appertaine to his ministrati∣on) , without the knowledge of his Bishop. Saint HieromeHieron. adv Luciferian. finally, no great advancer of the Episcopall authority and jurisdiction, having conside∣red of it better, doth conclude at last, that
if the Bishop had not a preheminence in the Church of God, there would be presently almost as many Schismes as Priests. And hence it is, saith he, Ut sine Episcopi missi∣one neque Presbyter, neque Diaconus jus habeat baptizandi, that without lawfull mission from the Bishop, neither the Presbyter nor Deacons might Baptize. Not that I thinke there was required in Hieromes time, a spe∣ciall Licence from the Bishop, for every mi∣nisteriall Act, that men in either of those Orders were to execute, but that they had no interest therein, then what was speci∣ally given them by, and from the Bishop, in their Ordination. As for the Act of Preaching, which was at first discharged by the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, according to the gifts that God had given them for the performance of the same: when as the Church beganne to settle, it was conferred by the Apostles on the severall Presbyters by themselves or∣dained: as doth appeare by Saint Pauls exhortation to the Presbyters, which hee called from Ephesus unto Miletum. To this as Timothy had beene used before,2 Tim, 4.5 doing the worke of an Evangelist: so he was still required to ply it, being called unto the Office of a Bishop: Saint Paul conjuring him before God and Christ, that notwith∣standing the diversions, which might hap∣pen
to him by reason of his Episcopall place and jurisdiction,2 Tim. 4.2. he should Preach the Word, and not to Preach it onely in his own particular,2 Tim. 2 15 shewing himselfe a Workeman that needed not to bee ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright: but seeing that others also did the like, according to the trust re∣posed in them; whether they had beene formerly ordained by the Apostles, or might be by himselfe ordained in times succeed∣ing. Those that discharge this duty both with care and conscience,1 Tim. 5.17 guiding, and governing that portion of the Church a∣right, wherewith they are intrusted, and diligently labouring in the word and Doctrine: by the Apostle are accounted worthy of dou∣ble honour. Which questionlesse Saint Paul had never represented unto Timothy, but that it did belong unto him, as a part of his Episcopall power and Office, to see that men fo painefull in their calling, and so dis∣creete in point of government, should be rewarded and incouraged accordingly. By honour in this place, the Apostle doth not onely meane respect and reverence; but sup∣port and maintenance: as appeares plainely by that which is alledged from holy Scri∣pture, viz. Thou shalt not muzzle the Oxe that treadeth out the Corne: and, The labourer is worthy of his hire. ChrysostomeChrysost. hom. 15. in 1 Tim. 5. so ex∣pounds the word, ,
, by honour here is meant both reverence and a supply of all things ne∣cessary: with whom agree theAmbros. in locum. Com∣mentaries which passe under the name of Ambrose. CalvinCalvin in 1. ad. Tim. c. 5. affirmes the like for our moderne Writers. Victum praeci∣pue suppeditari jubet Pastoribus qui docendo sunt occupati; Paul here commandeth that necessary maintenance be allowed the Pa∣stor, who laboureth in the Word and Do∣ctrine: And hereto Beza agreeth also in his Annotations on the place. Now we know well that in those times wherein Paul wrote to Timothy, and a long time after, the dis∣pensation of the Churches Treasury was for the most part in the Bishop, and at his appointment. For, as in the beginnings of the Gospell, the Faithfull sold their Lands, and goods,Act. 4. v. ult. and laid the money at the A∣postles feete, by them to be distributed, as the necessities of the Church required: So in succeeding times, all the Oblations of the faithfull were returned in unto the Bi∣shop of the place, and by him disposed of. We need not stand on many Authours in so cleare a businesse. Zonaras telling plaine∣ly, that at the first, the Bishop had the ab∣solute and sole disposing of the revenues of the Church;Zonaras in Concil. Chalce∣don. Ca. 26. , no man whoever, being privy to their doings in it. And that they did accordingly dispose
thereof, to every man according to his parts and industry, doth appeare by Cypri∣an, where he informeth us, that hee ha∣ving advanced Celerinus, a Confessor of great renoune amongst that people, and no lesse eminent indeed for his parts and piety, un∣to the Office of a Reader,Cypr. Ep. 34 vel l. 4. ep 5. he had allot∣ted unto him, and to Aurelius (one of equall vertue) then a Reader also, Ut sportulis iisdem cum Presbyteris honorentur, that they should have an equall share in the distribution, with the Priests or Presbyters. But many times so fell out, that those to whom the Ministery of the word was tru∣sted, preached1 Tim. 1.3 other doctrine to the peo∣ple then that which had beene taught by the Apostles,Tit. 1.10.11. Vaine talkers; and deceivers, which subverted whole houses, teaching things they should not, and that for filthy lucres sake. What must the Bishop doe to them? Hee must first charge them1 Tim. 1.4. not to Preach such doctrines, which rather minister questions then godly edyfying: And if they will not hear∣ken to, nor obey this charge, , he mustTit 1.9 stop their mouthes, let them be silenced in plaine English. The silencing of such Ministers as deceive the people, and preach such things they should not, even for lucres sake, to the subverting of whole families, is no new matter, as we see, in the Church of God. Saint Paul here gives
it as in charge to Titus, and to all Bishops in his person. Certaine I am that Chryso∣stomeChrysost. tom. 2. n. Tit. 1. doth so expound it. If thou pre∣vailest not, saith he, by admonitions, be not afraid, , silentium iis impone, the Translatour reads it, but silence them, that others may the better be preserved by it.Hieron. in Can. Tit. Hierome doth so translate it also, quibus oportet silentium indici, such men must be commanded silence. And for the charge of Paul to Timothy, that he should charge those false Apostles which hee speakes of, not to Preach strange doctrines: it carryes with it an authority that must be exercised. For this cause I required thee to abide at Ephe∣sus, , not that thou shouldst intreate, but command such men,Theophyl. in 1 ad Tim. c. 1 to Preach no other doctrines then they had from me. (q) Theophylact on those words, puts the question thus, in the words of Chrysostome, , it may bee asked, saith he, whether that Timothy were then Bishop when Paul wrote this to him. To which he answereth of himselfe, , that it is most probable: giving this rea∣son of the same, because hee is to charge those men not to teach other doctrines.Oecumen. in locum. Occumenius is more positive in the point, and affirmes expresly on these words, that Paul had made him Bishop there, before that time. And Lyra,Lyra in 1 Tim. c. 1. if he may bee
heard, makes this generall use of the A∣postles exhortation, that the first Act here recommended to a Bishop, is falsae doctri∣nae extirpatio, the extirpation of false do∣ctrine. This part of jurisdiction, with those that follow, I shall declare onely, but not ex∣emplifie. For being matters meerely pra∣cticall, and the proceedings on Record, they will occurre hereafter, as occasion is, in this following History. And that which followeth first, is very neere of kinne in∣deed unto that before. For many times it happeneth so, that howsoever men bee charged not to teach strange doctrines, and that their mouthes be stopped, and they put to silence: yet they will persevere however in their wicked courses, and obstinately continue in the same, untill at last their obstinacy ends in heresie. What course is to be taken upon such occasions? The A∣postle hath resolved that also.Tit. 3.10. A man that is an Hereticke, saith he, after the first and second admonition, is to be rejected. Re∣jected? but by whom? why, by Titus sure∣ly. The words are spoken unto him in the second person, and such as did possesse the same place and office.Estius in Ep. ad Tit. c. 3. Hanc sive admo∣nitionem, sive correptionem, intellige ab Epi∣scopo faciendam, &c. This , which Saint Paul here speakes of, whether that
it be meant of gentle admonition, or se∣vere reproofe, must bee done onely by the Bishop, and that not as a private per∣son, but as the governour of the Church, and that both with authority and power, by which he also may denounce him ex∣communicate, if hee amend not on the same. So Estius, in his Comment on the place: and herewith Calvin doth accord,Calvin. in Titum. c. 3. Tito scribens Paulus, non disserit de Officio magistratus, sed quid Episcopo conveniat. Paul, saith he, writing unto Titus, disputes not of the Office of the civill Magistrate, but of the duty of a Bishop. And this in answer unto some, who had collected from these words of the Apostle, that Heretickes were to be encountred with no sharper weapon, then that of Excommunication, nec esse ultra in eos saeviendum, and that there was no o∣ther course to bee taken with them. In which these Modernes say no more, as to the exercise and discharge of the Episcopall function in this case, then what the Anci∣ents said before. I marvaile, saith Saint Hierome,Hieron. ad Riparium, adv. Vigilant. a. speaking of Vigilantius, a broacher of strange (or other) Doctrines in the Church of Christ, that the Bishop in whose Diocesse he is said to be a Pres∣byter, hath so long given way to his im∣piety: Et non virgâ Apostolica, virgáque ferreâ confringere vas inutile; and that hee
hath not rather broke in pieces with the A∣postolike rod, a rod of iron, this so unprofita∣ble a vessell. In which as the good father manifests his owne zeale and fervour; so hee declareth therewithall, what was the Bi∣shops power and office in the present busi∣nesse. The last part of Episcopall jurisdiction, which we have to speake of, is the correction of ill manners, whether in the Presbyters, or in the people: concerning which the Apostle gives both power to Timothie, and command to use it. First, for the Presbyters, Against an1 Tim 5.19, 20. Elder receive not an accusation but before two or three witnesses: but if they be convicted, them that sinne rebuke before all, that others also may feare. In the declaring of which power, I take for granted, that the Apostle heer by Elder, doth meane a Presbyter, according to the Ecclesiasticall notion of that word: though I know thatHom. 15. in 1 Tim. in locum. Chry∣sostome, and after him Theophylact and Oecumenius, doe take it only for a man well growne in yeers. And then the meaning of Saint Paul will be briefly this, that partly in regard of the devills malice, apt to calum∣niate men of that holy function; and partly to a∣voide the scandall which may thence arise, Timothy, and in him all other Bishops should be very cautious in their proceedings against men of that profession. But if they finde
them guiltie, on examination, then not to smother or conceale the matter, but censure and rebuke them openly, that others may take heed of the like offences. The Commentaries under the name ofAmb. in 1. ad Tim. c. 5. Ambrose, doe ex∣pound it so, Quoniam non facile credi debet de Presbytero crimen, &c. Because a crime or accusation is not rashly to be credited against a Presbyter: yet if the same prove manifest and undeniable; Saint Paul commandeth that in regard of his irregular conversation, hee be rebuked and censured publikely, that others may be thereby terrified; And this, saith he, non solum ordinatis sed & plebi proficit, will not be onely profitable unto men in Orders, but to lay people also. Herewith agreeth, as to the making of these Elders to be men in Orders, the Comment upon this Epistle, ascribed to Hierome:Hier. in Ep. 1. ad Ti. Presbyters then are subject unto censure; but to whose censure are they subject? Not unto one anothers surely, that would breed confusion; but to the censure of their Bishop, , saithEpipha, haer. 75. n. 5. Epiphanius; hee speakes to Timo∣thie, being a Bishop, not to receive an accusation against a Presbyter,Thcoph. in 1. ad Tim. c. 5. Theophylact also saith the same. For having told us, that if a Presby∣ter, upon examination of the businesse bee found delinquent, hee must bee sharpely and severely censured, that others may bee terrify∣ed thereby; he ads,
that it becomes a Bishop (in such cases) to bee sterne and awfull.Lyra in cund. locum. Lyra observes the like in his Glosse or Postills, Viz. that the proceedings against inferiour Clergie-men, in fore exterio∣ri, in a judiciarie way, is a peculiar of the Bishops. But what need more bee said than that of BezaBeza Annot. in 1. ad Tim. 5. who noteth on these very words, that Timothie, to whom this power or charge was given, was President or , at that time of the Ephesian Clergie. Which is a plaine acknowledgement, in my o∣pinion, that the correction of the Clergie, by the law of God, doth appertaine unto the Bishop, the , or President of the Presby∣terie, call him what you will. For what need we contend for words, when wee have the matter? And this appeareth by the severall Councells of Nice and Antioch, Sardica, Turin, Africa and Sevill: in all and every of the which the Censure and proceedings against a Presbyter, are left to their owne Bishops seve∣rally: but a course taken therewithall for their ease and remedie, in case their owne Bi∣shops should proceed against them, out of heat or passion. For the Lay-people next, that Paul gave Ti∣mothy a power of correcting them, appeares by the instructions which hee gives him for the discharge of this authoritie, towards all sorts of people: whether that they be old or young, of what sex soever. Old men, if they offend,
must be handled gently, respect being had un∣to their yeers.1. Tim. 5. Rebuke not an Elder, but en∣treat him as a Father: i. e. saith Chrysostome,Hom. 13. in 1. ad Tim. take him not up with harshnesse and severitie, but doe it with such temperance and meeknes, as thou wouldest doe unto thy Father, if hee gave offence. His reason is, because it is an irksome thing unto good persons to be repre∣hended, , especially by one younger than themselves, as then Timothy was. The like regard was to be had to old Women al∣so, for the selfe same reason. As for the young∣er men, they were to be rebuked as brethren, with greater freedome than before, but still with lenitie. , the sawce of reprehension must be sweet, though the meat be sowre. Nor was this power committed only unto Timothy, but in him to all other Bishops, of all times and pla∣ces, , so saithOccumen. in 1. ad Tim. c. 5. Oecumenius. The function of a Bishop was not instituted in the Church of God, quasi Cle∣ro impositus inspector,Beza de tri∣plici Episcop. as Beza hath it; that he might oversee the Clergie onely: but for the well ordering and governance of all Gods people. Episcopi Grace, speculatores latinè di∣cuntur, populi respectu, He that is called a Bishop in the Greek, saith Isidore,Isidor. Ety∣mol. l. 7. c. 12. is called an over∣seer in the Latine, and that in reference to the people. And then he gives this reason of it, quod speculetur & prospiciat populorum infra se posito∣rum
mores & vitam, because hee overseeth the lives and conversation of the people, which are under him. The like saith Austin,Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 19. as to the reason of the name, and the intent of their preheminencie: the like PateriusPater. in Psalm. 106. on the Psalmes; and thither I referre the Reader. As for the execution of this power, how, and by whom the same was exercised, being a matter meerely practicall, we shall encounter it hereaf∣ter, as occasion is, in the successe and prosecu∣tion of this storie. Onely take this of Austin for a taste or relish, where saying, that there is no greater punishment in the Church, than that condemnation,Aug. de Cor∣rep. & grat. c. 16. quam Episcopale judicium fa∣cit, which is pronounced by the Bishop: hee addes, that notwithstanding this, necessitas pa∣storalis habet separare ab ovibus sanis morbidam, the Pastor must needs separate the scabbie and infected sheepe from the sound and healthie, lest the whole flock be made obnoxious to so great a danger. What interest or concurrent jurisdiction, the Presbyters did either challenge or enjoy in these publike censures, wee shall see hereafter. But sure, for ought appears to me, S. Paul addresseth his discourse to the Bishop on¦ly: who if, in the succeeding Ages, hee used the Counsell and assistance of his Presbyters, in the affaires and weightier matters of the Church; hee did but as a warie and wise man would on the like occasions. I would here offer, if I might, some conje∣cturall
proofes, that the description of a Bishop in the first to Timothie, is of a Bishop truly and properly so called, according as the word was used and appropriated by the Ancient Wri∣ters. I know the generall current of Interpre∣ters is against me in it, by whom the word E∣piscopus, is said to signifie in that place, as wel the Presbyter as the Bishop. Which I conceive they doe upon this reason chiefly, because Saint Paul having prescribed the qualities, which are required in a Bishop; passeth directly on to the description of a Deacon. But if wee look upon it well, I doubt not but we shall per∣ceive some reasons, which may incline unto the contrarie. For first, Saint Paul speakes of a Bishop1 Tim. 3.2. in the singular number, but of inferi∣our Ministers in the plurall. One Church, or Citie, though it had many Presbyters, had one Bishop onely: And therefore wee may reasona∣bly conceive, that the Apostle speaking of a Bishop, in the singular number, speakes of him in his proper and true capacitie, as one distin∣guished from, and above the Presbyters. Se∣condly, the Apostle seemeth to require in him an Act of Government, as being a man, that is,1 Tim. 3.5. to take a care of the Church of God: and thereupon gives order for an inquisition to be had upon him, whether he hath ruled his owne house well. (t) Chrysostome hereupon observes, that the Church is likened to an house or fa∣milie, wherein there is a Wife and Chil∣dren,
Men-servants and Maid-servants, , all which are subject to the government of the husband, who is the Father of the Familie. So is it in the Church, saith hee, the  or Governour whereof is to take care for widows, virgins, all Gods sonnes and servants. A care of too transcendent and sublime a nature, to be en∣trusted unto every common Presbyter, or dis∣charged by him; who as ourIn the Pre∣face. Hooker well observeth, though he be somewhat better able to speake, is as litle to judge, as another man: And if not fit to judge, no fit man to governe. Thirdly,1 Tim. 3.2. Saint Paul requireth in a Bishop, that1 Tim. 3.2. he be given to Hospitalitie: i. e. that hee receive the stranger, entertaine the native, and i a word, admitt all commers. Hie∣romeHier. in Tit. c. 1. doth so expound it, saying, that if a Lay-man entertaine but two or three, hospi∣talitatis officium implebit, hee hath exceeding well complied with all the rules of hospitalitie: Episcopus nisi omnes receperit, inhumanus est; but that the Bishop is accounted a Chule or Nig∣gard, if his house be not open unto all. Which howsoever it might possibly agree in those ancient tmes, to the condition of a Bishop, who had the keeping and disposing of the Churches treasures: yet I can see no possibilitie how it ould be expected from the Presbyter, that out of his poore pittance from the Sportula, hee should be able to performe it. For I beleeve
not that the Lord intended to worke miracles daily, as in the lengthning and increasing the poore womans oyle. Fourthly and lastly, it is required by Saint Paul, that his Bishop must not be , a1. Tim. 3.6. a Novice as our English reades it, and exceeding rightly: that is, asChrysost. & Theophyl. in loc. Chry∣sostome, and out of himChrysost. & Theophyl. in loc. Theophylact expound the word, , one newly chatechi∣sed as it were, lately instructed in the faith. Now who knoweth not, but that in the begin∣nings of the Church, some of these new-plants, these , must of necessitie be taken into holy orders, for the increase and propagation of the Gospel. The Presbyters were many, but the Bishops few. And therefore howsoever there might be found sufficient standards, upon the which to graft a Bishop: yet I can hard∣ly finde a possibilitie, of furnishing the gar∣den of the Church with a fit number of Presby∣ters, unlesse we take them from the nurserie. Hence I collect, that this description of a Bi∣shop in S. Paul to Timothie, is of a Bishop truly and properly so called; and that it doth not also include the Presbyter. If then it be demanded, whether S. Paul hath utterly omitted to speake of Presbyters, I answer, no; but that we have them in the next Paragraph, Diaconos si∣militer: which word howsoever in our last translation, it bee rendred Deacons: Yet in our old translation, and in that of Coverdale, we reade it Ministers, according to the generall
and native meaning of the word. An Exposi∣tion neither new, nor forced. Not new, forCalv. in 1. ad Tim. c. 3. v. 8. Calvin doth acknowledge, alies ad Presby∣teros referre Episcopo inferiores, that some refer∣red those words to Presbyters, subordinate or in∣ferior to the Bishop. Not forced, for if wee search the Scripture, wee shall there per∣ceive that generally Diaconus is rendred Mi∣nister: and that not only in the Gospells, before that Deacons had been instituted in the Church of God; but also in S. Pauls Epistles, after the planting of the Church, when all the Officers therein had their bounds and limits. Thus the Apostle speaking of himselfe, and of Apol∣los,1 Cor. 3.5. saith that they were , the Ministers by whom that people did beleeve; himself he calleth, , a Minister of the new Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. , a Minister of GOD, 2 Cor. 6.4. , a Minister of the Gospel, Eph. 3.7. Coloss. 1.23. Thus Tychicus i called , a faithfull Minister, Ephes. 6.26. and againe, Coloss. 4.7. and so is Epaphras entituled, Coloss. 1.7. Thus Timothie is called , 1 Thess. 3.2. , a good Minister, in this very Epistle; and fi∣nally is required in the next to this, not onely to doe the worke of an Evangelist, but ,2 Tim. 4.5. to fulfill his Ministe∣rie. Hence I inferre, that since Diaconus is a word of so large extent, as to include Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, I see no inconveni∣ence that can follow on it, if it include the of∣fice of the Presbyter or Elder also: and let the Bi∣shop have the former Character to himselfe a∣lone, to whom of right it doth belong. But this I onely offer to consideration, as my private thoughts: not being so farre wedded to mine owne opinions, but that on better reasons I may be divorced, when ever they are laid be∣fore me.
CHAP. VI. Of the Estate of holy Church, particularly of the Asian Churches, toward the latter dayes of S. John the Apostle. (1) THe time of S. Iohn's comming into Asia. (2) All the Seven Churches, ex∣cept Ephesus, of his Plantation. (3) that the Angels of those Churches were the Bishops of them, in the opinion of the Fathers, (4) and of some Protestant Divines of name and emi∣nence. (5) Conclusive reasons for the same, (6) who most like to be the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, (7) that Polycarpus was the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. (8) Touching the An∣gel of the Church of Pergamus, and of Thyatira, (9) As also of the Churches of Sardis, Philadel∣phia, and Laodicea. (10) What Successours these severall Angels had in the severall Chur∣ches. (11) Of other Churches founded in Epis∣copacy, by S. Iohn the Apostle. (12) S. Iohn de∣ceasing, left the government of the Church to Bishops, as to the Successours of the Apostles; (13) the ordinary Pastors of the Church; (14) and the Vicars of Christ. (15) A briefe view of the estate of holy Church in this first Century. Wee now proceed unto S. Iohn, and to the Churches of his time, those most especially
which he did either plant or water: who living till the end of this present Century, and being the last Surviver of that Glorious company of the Apostles, could not but see the Church of Christ in her fullest growth, in her protection, both for strength and beauty. Of this Apostle we find not any thing in Scripture, from his descent unto Samaria,Acts 8.14. when he accompanied S. Peter thither, by the appoyntment of the re∣sidue of that goodly fellowship, untill the writing of the Revelation. The interveening passages of his life and preaching, we must make up out of such fragments of antiquity, and records of story, as are come safe unto our hands. Where first I must needs disallow the conceit of those, who carry him I know not how to Ephesus, ma∣king him an inhabitant there, and taking with him to that place, the Mother of our Lord and Saviour: which must needs be, if ever it had beene at all, about the 44. yeere after Christs nativity, that being the time wherein the Apostles and Disciples were dispersed a∣broad,Acts 12.1. &c. upon the persecution raised by Herod. But that it was not then, nor a long time after, will appeare by this, that when Paul came to preach & reside at Ephesus, which was in Anno. 55. above ten yeers after, there was so little knowledge of the faith of Christ, that they had not so much as heard there c was any Holy ghost; being baptized only,Acts 19.2.3. as themselves confessed, unto John's baptisme. A thing which could not
possibly be supposed, without a great deale of reproach and ignominy to this blessed Apo∣stle, had he beene here a resiant, as by some re∣ported. And after this, though we are well assu∣red of his being here, yet then he could not have in houshold with him the blessed Mother of our Lord; who dyed in their account, that put it off untill the latest Anno. 48. seven years before the comming of S. Paul to Ephesus. And therefore I agree rather unto Epiphanius, as to the maine and matter of his negative, though not as to the reason of it.Epiphan. hae∣res. 76. n. 11. For where he tels us, d that when IOHN went downe to Asia, , hee tooke not the blessed Virgin with him; I hold it to be absolutely true, past contradiction. But wher he buildeth his negation upon an  the silence of the Scripture in it; I hold that reason to be insufficient: there being many things of undoubted verity, whereof there is no mention in the Holy Scripture. And I agree too unto e Epiphanius,Epiph. ibid. n. 2. where he tels us this, that S. Iohn's comming into Asia was  when he began to be in yeares; the Holy ghost then calling of him thither, as well to pro∣pagate the Gospel where it was not preached; as to confirme it where it had beene shaken by the force of Heresie. Into what parts the Spi∣rit did before command him, it is hard to say. Some likelyhood there is, that he did preach the Gospel amongst the Parthians, (some of
which nation had beene present at Hierusalem at the first giving of the Holy ghost)Possidius in Iudic. operum August. his first Epistle being inscribed,Acts 2.9. ad Parthos, as some an∣tients say. August. qu. Evang. l. 2, chap. 39.But that he came at last to Asia, and there preached the Gospel, is a thing past question. Eusebius,Ecc. histor. l. 3. Cap. 1. out of Origen, doth expressely say it. And though that peece of Origen be lost out of which Eusebius tooke the same; yet wee may take it on his word without more authori∣ty. Nor did he only preach the Gospel in those parts of Asia, strictly and properly so called; but he also planted many Churches, & founded in them many Bishopricks. All the 7. Churches, except that of Ephesus to which he writ his Reve∣lation, were partly, if not totally his foundati∣on: and in all them he constituted Bishops, as we shall manifest & declare anon. And as for Ephe∣sus, although he came too late to plant it, yet he came time enough to water it; to settle and confirme the same: being much weakned and endangered by the sorceries and devises of Apol∣lonius Tyanaeus, who for some time did there∣in dwell; as also by the heresies of Ebion and Cerinthus, who at that time lived, and therefore rightly doth Ignatius, who then lived also, joyn himIgnat. Epist. ad Ephes. p. 226. Edit. Ve∣dean. with Paul and Timothy, as a Co-foun∣der of that Church. But being in the middle of his course, he was sent prisoner unto Rom, Anno 92. thence confined to Patmos, where he conti∣nued till the death of the Emperour Domitian,
which was in Anno. 99. during which time he writ the Revelation. And of those Churches I conceive it was that Tertullian speaketh, where pleading in defence of the Catholik Faith, delive∣red by the Apostles, to the Churches by them severally planted, and by the Bishops of those Churches taught, & in their successions: he thus brings them in,Tertul. lib. 4 contra Marci. Cap. 5. Habemus et Iohannis alumnas Ecclesias, &c. We have saith he, the Churches founded by S. Iohn. For howsoever Marcion doth reject his Revelation, Ordo tamen Episcopo∣rum, yet the succession of their Bishops recko∣ned up unto their originall, will stand for Iohn to be their founder. And probable at their request it was, that he writ his Gospell. For that he writ it at the intreaty of the Asian Bi∣shops,Hier. descrip. Ecc. in Iohan. & prooem. in Evang. 8. Matth. Rogatus ab Asiae Episcopis, is positively affirmed by Hierome: though like enough it is, that other Bishops besides those of his owne foundation, might contribute their requests, and importunities to so good a purpose, be∣ing all equally afflicted with the pest of Here∣sies. The quality and condition of these Asian Churches, S. Iohn doth punctually describe in his Revelation, written in Anno. 97. when as he had beene foure or five yeeres confined to Pat∣mos. It seemeth those Churches, most of them at the lest, on the Calamity which befell the A∣postle in his deportation, being deprived of the benefit of so divine and excellent a spirit, and
pressed by the importunity of these active he∣reticks, willing to make the best advantage of the present time, began to stagger in the faith, wax cold in their affection to the Gospell, and to give way to such false Teachers as were crept in amongst them, to rectifie what was amisse amongst them, and to informe them of their errours, did he direct unto them his Apocalypse, m To the seven Churches in Asia;Apoc. 1.4. so it doth begin. But when he comes unto particulars, to give them every one their particular charge, from him who walked in the midst of the Golden Candle∣sticks; then he addresseth his discourse to the Angels only, the Angels of those severall Chur∣ches.Apoc. 2.1. Cap. 8.12, n Unto the Angell of the Church of Ephesus; and to the o Angell of the Church of Smyrna; and to the Angell af the Church of Pergamus; & sic de caeteris. Now aske the Fathers what those An∣gels were, and they will tell you that they were the Bishops of those severall Churches. p S. Austin writing on these words, Vnto the Angell of the Church of Ephesus,August. Ep. 162. in fine. &c. makes this observation, Divina voce sub Angeli nomine laudatur praeposi∣tus Eeclesiae, that the Bishop or Governour of the Church, (remember what was, said before of the word q Praepositus) is praised by the voice of Christ,Vid. chap. 3. n. 5. under the name of an Angell: But first he gives a reason of his resolution, shewing that this expostulation could not be applyed to those Ministring spirits in the heavens, because they still retained their First love to God; and
therefore must be understood, de praepositis Ec∣clesiae, of the Ruers or Governours of the Church, who had given way to false Apostles. The like occurreth in his comment on the Revelation, wherein he maketh the Angels of these Churches, to be Episcopi aut praepositi Ec∣clesiarum, the Bishops or Rulers of the same. The Commentaries under the name of Ambrose, poynting unto this place of the Apocalypse, give us this short note, r Angelos Episcopos dicit,Amb. in 1 Cor cap. 11. that by Angels there he meaneth Bishops. And these abscribed to Hierome, writing on those words, Because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11. Angels observes the same, s Angelos ecclesiis presidentes dicit,Hier. ib. that there by Angels S. Paul intends the Presidents or Rulers of the Churches. Finally OecumeniusOecumen. ca. 1. in Apoca. saith the same, who speaking of the 7. Churches in Asia, to whom S John addresseth his discour∣ses, observes to that John ascribs to them,  an equall or proportiona∣ble number of governing Angels. And on those words the 7. stars are the Angels of the 7. Churches, u makes this glosse or Comment,  that hee calleth these Angels,Id. cap. 2. in Apocal. governours of Churches by the name of stars, because they borrow all their light from the Sun of Righteousnesse. For Protestant Writers which affirme the same, I begin with those which speake most ge∣nerally and indefinitely: where first we have Se∣bastian Meyer, Ecclesiarum Prefecti, & stellae &
Angel,citta. apud Marlorat. in Cap. 1. Apoca. v. 20. in sacris literis dicuntur; the Gover∣nours of Churches are called, saith he, in ho∣ly Scripture, by the name of Stars, and An∣gels.Bullin. con. 6. in Apocal. Bullenger to the same effect, Angeli sunt legati Dei, Pastores Ecclesiarum, the Angels are the Messengers of God, the Pastors of the Churches; in which, lest possibly wee might mistake his meaning, in the word Pastor, hee tels us not long after, that he meanes the Bi∣shop, for speaking of the Angel, or the Pastor of the Church of Smyrna, he tels us that hee was that Polycarpus,id. in con. 9. as it was indeed, Ordinatus ab Apostolis, ab ipso inquam Iohanne Episcopus, who was ordeined Bishop of that Church by the Apostles, nay by Iohn himselfe. ParaeusPaaeus in Apocal. Cap. 1. v, 20. is as generall as the other two, but far more ex∣presse. Episcopos vocat stellas, &c. The Bishops are called Stars, saith he, because they ought to out-shine others, aswell in purity of Do∣ctrine, as sincerity of Conversation in the Church of God: eosdem Angelos vocat, quia sunt Legati Dei ad Ecclesiam, and they are al∣so called Angels, because they are the Legats or Embassadors of God to his holy Church. And lest we should mistake our selves, and him, in the word Episcopus, he laboureth to find out the Bishop of each severall Church, as wee shall see hereafter in that inquisition: for those who speake to the particular, wee begin with Beza,Beza Annot. Apoc. c, 2.1. who on those words, unto the An∣gel of the Church of Ephesus, gives this Annota∣tion.
Angelo, i. e. , quem nimirum oportuit imprimis de his rebus admoneri, &c. To the An∣gel, that is, saith he, to the chiefe President, whom it behoved to have the notice of the charge there given, and by him to the rest of his Colleague, and the whole congregation: but fearing lest this exposition might give some advantage, fot the upholding of the Hierarchie, which he so laboured to pul down, he addes, de proprio, that notwithstanding this acknowledgement, Episcopall authority, be∣ing a thing of mans invention, hinc statui, nec potest, nec debet, nor may, nor ought to have any ground from hence. Finally,Marlorat. Ecc. Exposit. in Apocal. c. 2. v. 1. Marlorat himselfe on those very words, shewes that how ever there were many things in the Church of Ephesus, which required reformation, both in the Clergy and the people; Non tamen populum aggreditur, sed Clerum, yet the Apostle doth not apply himselfe unto the people, but the Cler∣gy. Nor doth he fashion his discourse to the Clergy generally, Sed ad Principem Cleri, Epis∣copum utique, but to the chief or Principall of the Clergy, which was the Bishop. Nay, Marlorat goes further yet, and he as he layeth downe his interpretation,Idem Ibid. so he doth also give a reason of it; and such a one as may well satisfie any man of reason. His reason is, Nam Pastor non modo pro propriis, &c. Because the Pastor is not onely to render an account to the supreame judge, for his owne sins a∣lone,
but for the sins of all his flock, if any of them by his sloth or negligence do chance to perish. And certainly this reason is of speciall use and efficacy to the poynt in hand. For if the Lord doe looke for an account at the Pa∣stors hand, for every sheepe that shall be lost by his sloth or negligence: it must needs fol∣low thereupon, that those of whom so strict a reckoning is expected must not have power on∣ly to perswade and counsaile, but also to cor∣rect and censure, and by their owne proper & innate authority, to rectifie such things as are amisse in their severall charges. The Sonne of God is neither so unjust, as that the Pastor should be charged with those enormities, which he hath no authority to amend or recti∣fie: nor so forgetfull as to threaten and rebuke the Pastor, not onely for the peoples fauts, but the Errata of the Presbyters, in case he were not trusted with a greater power then any of the rest, for that end and purpose. Which be∣ing so, and that our Saviour by S. Iohn doth send out his sumōns neither unto the Church in generall, nor to the Presbyters in common, but to the Angell of each Church in the singu∣lar number: it is most plaine and evident, as I conceive, that in the time of writing the Apo∣calypse, as long time before it, the Church of Christ had certaine Pastors, of more eminent note, when they (as we) intituled Bishops, which governed as well the Presbyters, as the rest of
the Flocke; and those the Son of God ac∣knowledgeth for stars and Angels. And how∣soever the inferiour Pastors both are, and may be called Angels, in a generall sense, as Messen∣gers and Ministers of God Almighty: yet if it be the Angell in the singular number, the An∣gell in the way of eminence and , it is peculiar onely to the Bishop. Now that each Church of those remembred in that Booke, had his proper Angell, and that they were not governed by a Corporation or Colledge of Presbyters, to whom those seve∣rall Epistles might be sent, by the name of An∣gels, the word Angell being to be taken col∣lectively, and not individually,Smectymn. p. 52. as some men suppose, is in the next place to be shewed. And first for proofe, there is a pregnant evi∣dence in a discourse or treatise touching the Martyrdome of Timothy: the Author of the which relates, that after S. Iohn the Apostle was revoked from his exile,apud Phot. in Biblioth. n. 254. by the sentence of Nerua, he betooke himselfe to the Metropo∣lis of Ephesus: , and being assisted with the presence of the seven Bishops, he tooke upon himselfe the government of the Metropolis of the Ephesians and there continued preaching the Doctrine of salvation till the time of Traian. Which as it is an evident and convincing proofe, that the seaven Churches had their severall Bishops, to each Church one Bishop: so is it no such dif∣ficult
matter, to find out most of them by name, and what Church each of them did go∣verne.V. Paraem in Apocal. cap. 2. And first for Ephesus, some have concei∣ved that Timothy was stil alive, & Bishop at that time when the Apcocalypse was written: which hotly is defended by Alcasar, against Ribera, Lyra, and Pererius, who opine the contrary. But surely Timothy it could not be, as doth ap∣peare in part by that which was alledged out of the treatise of his Martyrdome, which if it were not written by Polycrates) is yet very an∣tient, and authenticke: wherein he is conceived to be dead before: but principally by the quality and condition of that blessed Evangelist, so plentifully endued with the Holy ghost, so emi∣nent in piety, and all heavenly graces, that no man can conceive him lyable to the accusatiō, with which the Angell of that Church is charged. And therefore it must either be that Iohn, when (on the death of Timothy, as I con∣ceive) S. Iohn ordained Bishop of this Church, as is reported in the Constitutions,Constitut. A∣post. l. 7. c. 48. ascri∣bed to Clemens: or else Onesimus, another of the Successors of Timothy in the See of Ephesus, who is intituled Bishop of it in the Epistle of Ig∣natius, wrtten to that Church; within twelve yeeres after the writing of the Revelation.Igna. in Epst. ad Ephes. In which Epistle Ignatius blessing God for so good a Bishop, admonisheth the people of their duty, , in submitting themselves unto his judgement, or concurring
with it, as their whole Presbytery did: which harmony of the Bishop and his Presbyters, he doth compare  unto the con∣cord of the Strings and Harpe. In which he speakes if you observe, as of a Bishop that had beene long confirmed, and setled in his place of government; and knew the temper of his people: one that was vested with a constant, and fixt preheminence above his Presbyters, not with a temporary Presidency, and no more then so. But whatsoever doubt or scruple may be made, about Onesimus, his being Bishop, or Angell at this time, of the Church of Ephesus; certaine I am, there can be none pretended a∣gainst Polycarpus, as if he were not then the Angell of the Church of Smyrna: he being made Bishop of that See 13 yeeres before, as Bullinger computes the time, and holding it a long while after, no lesse then 74 yeeres,Bullenger in Apocal. Conc. 9, as the Annals reckon it, without vicissitude or alte∣ration. Now that this Polycarpus was Bishop of this Church of Smyrna, appeares by such a cloud of witnesses, as he that questioneth it, may with equall reason, make doubt of yester∣day.Ignat. Epist. ad Polycarp. And first we have Ignatius Bishop of An∣tioch, one of his Co-temporaries, who taking him in transitu, as he was led from Syria, to∣wards Rome to suffer Martyrdome, did after write to him an Epistle, in which he stileth him, in the superscriptiō, ,
the Bishop of the Church of Smyrna. Irenaeus, one of his disciples,Irenaeus apud Eus. l 4. c. 10. & con. haeres. l. 3. c. 3. and who had often heard the goodman discourse of his conversatiō with S. Iohn, reporteth that he was not only taught by the Apostles, and had conversed with many of those who had seene Christ in the flesh, ; but also was by them appoynted Bishop of the Church in Smyrna. Next comes in the whole Church of Smyrna,apud Euseb. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 15. in their En∣cyclicall Epistle of his death, and Matyrrdom, where he is called an Apostolicall and Prophe∣ticall Doctor, , and Bishop of the Catholike Church of Smyrna.ap. Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. After them speakes Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, one of the Successours of Onesimus, and so by consequence his neighbour, who being 38 yeeres of age at the time of the death of Polycarpus, attesteth to him, saying amongst other things,  that he had beene both Bishop and Mar∣tyr in Smyrna.Tertul. lib. de praescript. Tertullian who lived about the same time with Polycrates, though in another clime or region, is more particular in the poynt: not only making him Bishop of Smyrna, as the others do; but a Iohanne collocatum refert, making him to be placed or established there by S. Iohn the Apostle.Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 30. From these hands, and no doubt from many others, it came at last to Eusebius, B. of Caesarea, by whom it is affirmed that he was made Bishop of the Church of
Smyrna, , by those which had beheld the Lord, and were his Ministers. S. Hierome finally doth informe us, that he was a Disciple of S. Iohns,De Scriptor. Eccl. n Poly∣car. & ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus ordinatus, and by him ordai∣ned Bishop of Smyrna. By which it is most clear and evident that he was the Angell or Bishop of this Church, and thereto constituted by S. Iohn, other of the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord and Saviour, concurring in the Ordination. No titular or nominall Bishop on∣ly, but such a one as had a body of Presbyters assistant and subservient to him, as doth most evidently appeare out of Ignatius his Epistle unto those of Smyrna; wherein he telleth them,Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrnn.  &c. that they ought not to doe any thing, no not so much as to ad∣minister the Sacrament, without the consent and approbation of their Bishop. The Angell of the Church of Pergamus is next in order; but who this was, is not so easie to determine. That there had beene a Bishop of this Church before, is proved by Paraeus out of Aretas Caesariesis,Paraes Com. in Apocal. c. 2. who makes Antipas (whom we find mentioned Apocal. 2.13) to be the Pastor of this Church under the Empire of Domitian, who being cruelly put to dath by the Pergamenians, successor ejus haud duiè fuit iste, ad quem scribit, his successour, as there Paraeus doth observe, must out of questi∣on be the man, to whom as to the Angell of
that Church, these things are written. And he informes us this withall, that similis supplicii metu, for fear of the like punishment which An∣tipas suffred, though he continued constant in the faith of Christ, he might grow more re∣misse and negligent in looking to his Pastorall Office. So then, the Angell of this Church, was Pergamensis Episcopus,Id. in v. 14. the Bishop of Perga∣mus, as he plainly cals him; and possibly may be that Gaius whom Clemens makes to be ordai∣ned Bishop of this Church, by the hands of some of the Apostles. Or if not he, yet questi∣onlesse some one particular person, as Paaeus saith: this we may rely upon, though his name we know not. Next is the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, Antistes Thyatirensis, that is, the Bishop of Thyatira,Id. in v. 18. saith Paraeus. That Thyati∣ra had a Bishop, as other the seven Churches had, was affirmed before. And probably the Bishop of it at this time, might be that Car∣pus, who by the name of Carpus Bishop of Thy∣atira did suffer Martyrdome, during the per∣secution raised by Antoninus;Apr. 13. Euseb. l. 4. c. 14. whereof consult the Martyrologies, compared with Eusebius lib. 4. How ever we may take what Paraeus gives us, that the Angell of this Church was the Bishop of it, one singular and individuall person, to whom our Saviour doth direct his charge: though there be somewhat in the text, which is alledged to the contrary. For where∣as in the two former Epistles, and the begin∣ning
of the present, the stile is singular,Apoc. 2.2.4.9.13.14.19.20. I know thy workes, and I have somewhat against thee, here on a suddaine, as it were, the stile is altered, and it is Vobis autem dico, but I say to you,Apoc. 2.24. and unto the rest in Thyatira. Hence some infer,Smectym. p. 53. that by the word Angell in that place, is meant not any one singular person, but the whole com∣pany of Presbyters; and by the rest, the re∣sidue of that people there: the people gover∣ned, and the governours in the plurall number. But this as I conceive, will availe but little: these alterations or enallages of number, being no rare matters in the Scripture: as doth ap∣peare by that so memorable place in the first of Timothy, Salvabitur autem si permanserint,1 Tim. 2.15. where the Apostle doth begin in she, and end in they. Besides it is observed, that the antienter and better Copies, read it without the co∣pulative, , I say to you,Apoc, 2.24. the rest in Thyatira; the spirit thete addressing his discourse to those godly men, that had not knowne the depths of Satan. And so, besides the antient Copy, sent hither by the Patriarke of Constantinople,Def. of the humble Re∣monstr. p. 105. Primasius in Apoc. l. 1. c. 2. and cited by my Ld. B. of Exeter, doth Primasius read it. Vobis autem dico, reliqui qui estis Thyatirae. Paraeus also doth ob∣serve, Veterem sine copula, that the old Latine hath not the conjunction; and that Andreas and Montanus doe adhere to that. So that for all this observation, the Angell of this Church was a singular person. And this
doth further yet appeare (since we are fallen upon these Criticismes) by some antient rea∣dings of the 20. verse. For whereas now wee read in our usuall Copies, , the woman Iesebel,Cited in the Def. of the Remonstr. p. 105. the old Greeke Copy from Constantinople, writ above 1300. yeeres agoe, doth read it , thy wife Iesebel, and so doth that also of Aretas Caesariensis.In Can. Apoc. And this doth seeme to be the ancienter and the truer reading,Epistola. 52. as being followed by S. Cyprian, and Primasius also;In Can. Apo▪ a. (the first of which liked 1400 yeers agone) in whom we read uxorem tu∣am. And though I grant that the Originall stan∣ding thus, may be translated thy woman Iesebel, or that woman of thine Iesebel,Vindication &c. p. 140. in marg. as I perceive some men would have it: yet then it must be granted therewithall, that the Angell of this Church was one singular, individuall person, not a bo∣dy Collective. It could not otherwise be thine, but yours. The fifth in order of these Angels, is he of Sardis, Ecclesiae Antistes, the Bishop of that Church,Paraeus in A∣pocal. c. 3. v. 1. as Paraeus noteth: and hee observes withall, vetres quosdam, that some ancient writers, conceive that Melito, of whom Euse∣bius speaketh. lib. 4. cap. 26. was then the Bi∣shop of this Church, and probably it might be so. For howsoever he excepteth against this opinion, because that Melito was Bishop of this place under Antoninus, tamdiu vero Melito∣nem, Sardibus praefuisse non est verisimile, and
therefore that it is not likely that he should so long hold this Bishopricke: yet granting it in Polycarpus, tamdiu Smyrnensibus praefuisse, that he was Bishop of Smyrna for as long a time; I see no reason why the like may not bee gran∣ted of the other also: as for his other reason, that Melito is commended for his sanctimony, and the Angell here accused for his Hypo∣crisie; it may well be, that though this An∣gel were accused of Hypocrisie, at the present time, yet having many good things in him, he might be brought unto a sence thereof, upon this admonition from our Lord and Saviour, and so become a carefull, and a painefull Pa∣stour. So that the ancient Writers, as Paraeus saith, reporting that this Angel was that Meli∣to, may be believed, for ought I see unto the contrary, in that affirmation, and this I am the rather inclined to thinke, because I find a tract of Melitos, inscribed Onesimo Fratri,Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 25. unto One∣simus his Brother, who was the Angell of the Church of Ephesus, as before was said, which shewes they lived together in one age or time. The Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, must be looked on next, whom some conceive to be Quadratus, a scholler or disciple of the Apo∣stles, of whom Eusebius speakes, lib. 3. cap. 37.Paraeus in Apocal. c. 3. But surely if Eusebius speakes of him at all, it is as Bishop of Athens, not of Philadelphia; un∣lesse perhaps we may conceive that being first Bishop of Philadelphia, he was translated after∣wards
to Athens, (Publius the Bishop being dead, whom he there succeeded) which I some∣what doubt. But whatsoever was his name, or whether he were that Demetrius, who as Cle∣mens saith, was by S. Paul, made Bishop of this place; I take him for the very man whom Ignatius speaks of in his Epistle to this people: where speaking of their Bishop, he tels them this, that at the very first sight of him he did plainely see,Ignat. ad Phi∣ladelphens. , that neither of his one desire, nor by choyce of man was he preferred unto that place, but by the love of Jesus Christ, and God the Fa∣ther: commending him for modesty, and for a carefull walking in Gods Commandements, being like Zachary, without reproofe, and final∣ly, not only free from passion, but perfectly a∣dorned with all kind of vertue. A commenda∣tion very well agreeing with that bestowed up∣on this Angel by the Holy Ghost; as did the Character of the Angell of the Church of Smyrna, agree unto the quality of Polycarpus the then Bishop of it: it being generally ob∣served, as it is most true, that onely these two Angels are presented to us, without fault or blemish.Paraeus in A∣pocal. cap. 3. Last of all, for the Angell of the Church of Laodicea, Paraeus, as before concei∣veth, that he was the Bishop; quis vero fuerit, nos latet; but who this Bishop was, that he cannot tell. Onely he notes him for a man, qui Episcopi titulum perfunctoriè sustineret, that onely had the
name of Bishop, but not one lively sparke of Piety, being wholly taken up with luxury, and the love of money. But whether he were Lucius mentioned by S. Paul, Rom. 16. whom Doro∣theus makes to be Bishop here; or one Archip∣pus, said by Clemens to be the Bishop of this Church; or Sagaris,Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23. who by Polycrates is affir∣med to be the Bishop of this place; I am not able to say positively: though I incline rather unto Sagaris, whose Martyrdome being tou∣ched upon by Melito,Id. l. 4. c 25. in his bookes de Pascha∣te, is a strong argument that he departed some good time before him, and so most like to be the man. Nor is it any obstacle unto this conjecture,Apocal. 3.16. that Christ did threaten to spew this Angel out of his mouth; being he called him to repentance, and promised him a throne,V. 19.20.21. if he o∣vercame. To bring this businesse to an end, these An∣gels as they had a singularity▪ in reference unto that personall authority which each of them enjoyed in his severall Church: so had they all and every one of them a singularity, in the succession thereunto. For sure it were no diffi∣cult matter to a diligent eye, to find out many of their successours, in those severall Sees▪ since that of Laodicea, which was in most apparant danger to lose its Candlesticke, retained a continual and constant successours of Bishops there, from the death of Sagaris, to the Nicene Councill, and a long time after. Where, by
the way, I must needs rectifie Paraeus in this one particular,Paraeus in Apocal. . 3. v. who shewing that this Church of Laodicea, did afterwards recover & get strength againe, instanceth in Anatolius and Stephanus, both eminent and learned men, and both Bi∣shops there: whereas indeed they were not Bi∣shops of this Laodicea, but of Laodicea in Syri∣a, (called antiently Seleucia Tetrapolis) as hee might easily have seene, by a more carefull looking on those places of Eusebius, which himselfe hath cited: Now in the Nicene Coun∣cell, if we like of that, we find the Successours of those severall Angels, subscribing severally to the Acts thereof, amongst other Prelates of tht time:Act. Conc. Nic. in subscri. as viz. Menophanes of Ephesus, Eu∣tychius, B. of Smyrna, for the province of Asia; Artemidorus B. of Sardis, Soron or Serras B. of Thyatira, Ethymasius B. of Philadelphia, for the province of Lydia; and finally Nunechius B. of this Laodicea, for the province of Phrygia, for Theodotus, who by Bilson is affirmed to have subscribed as Bishop of this Laodicea,Perpe. gover. chap. 13. p. 269. was Bi∣shop of Laodicea in the province of Syria, a∣mongst the Bishops of which province his sub∣scription is: which I marvell that most learned and industrious Prelate did not see. And though we find not him of Pergamus, amongst them there; yet after in the Councell of Chalce∣don, doth his name occur. In fine, by the per∣son that speaketh to the Pastors, and those seven Churches, and the name he gives them, it
is plaine and evident, that their vocation was not onely confirmed by the Lord himselfe, but their Commission expressed. He speaketh, that hath best right to appoynt what Pastors he would have to guide his flocke, till himselfe come to judgement: the name he giveth them, sheweth their power and charge to be delive∣red them from God; and consequently each of them in his severall charge and City, must have Commission to reforme the errours and abuses in their severall Churches, at whose hands it shall be required, by him that shall sit judge to take account of their doings. And so much for the Angels of the seven Churches in Aia, remembred in the booke o the Revelation. But to goe forwards to S. Iohn, the Author of it▪ immediately on his returne from Patmos, he sets himselfe unto the reformation of these Churches, calling together the Bishops of the same, as before we shewed: and governing both those and the adjoyning Churches of Asia mi∣nor, by his Apostolicall authority and prehe∣minence. Which having done, on the intreaty and request of some godly men,Clemens Alex. ap. Euseb. hist. l. 2. c. 17. he went unto the neighbour nations, , in some places instituting or ordaining Bi∣shops, in others rectifying and reforming the whole Churches, and in a word, by the di∣rection of the spirit, founding a Clergy in the same. It seemes the journey was not farre, the places which he visited being said to be
, the neighbouring nations: and in∣deed the Apostle was now growne too old, to endure much travell, being neere an hundred, at this time. And therefore I conceive that the Episcopall Sees of Tralli and Magnesia, were of this foundation:Concil. Chal. in subscript. being Cities not farre off, and after reckoned as the Suffragans of the Archb. or Metropolitan of Ephesus. Certaine I am, that they were both of the Sees of Bi∣shops,Ignat. Epist. ad Mgnesi. as doth appeare by the Epistles of Igna∣tius; in which he nameth Polybius, Bishop of Trallis, and Damas Bishop of Magnesia: and those not titular Bishops onely, but, such as were to bee obeyed, , without gain-saying; and without whose al∣lowance, there was a  layed upon the Presbyters, who were not to doe any thing in their ministrations, but by his authority. One other Bishop there is said to be of S. Iohn's ordaining,Clem. Alex. ap. Euseb. hist. l. 2. c. 17. viz. the Young-man which Clemens speakes of, whose aspect being liked by the Apostle, he left him to the care and tutorage of an ancient Bishop of those parts. And when the Young-man afterwards for want of carefull looking to, became debauched, & made himself the Captaine of a crew of Out lawes; the blessed Saint with much adoe, reclaimed him from that wretched course, and afterwards ha∣ving new moulded him and prepared him for it, , made him a Bishop in the Church. But whether that the word will beare
that sense, as to the making him a Bishop, or that it only doth imply, that S. Iohn placed him in some function of the holy Ministery, Eccle∣siae ministerio praefecit, as Christopherson reades it, I will not contend. Only I cannot but observe, that where the Bishop to whose care he was committed, is in the prosecution of the Story,Vnbishopping of Tim. & Tit. p. 126. called : some have collected from the same, that Bishops in those times were no more then Presbyters. But this will prove, if better looked on, but a plaine mistake: the word  in that place, noting the Bi∣shops age, and not his office, as doth appeare by that which followeth in the Story, where he is called , which certainly doth signi∣fie an ancient man, but not a Presbyter. The Asian Churches being thus setled and confirmed in the faith of Christ, partly by the paines and travaile of this blessed man, but principally by the Gospell, and other peeces of Divine holy Scripture, by him written, and published about this time, hee went unto the Lord his God in a good old age, being then 98 yeares old, as Beda reckoneth,Beda de sex aetatibus. in the beginning of the second century, Anno 101, according to the computation of Baronius:In Annal. Ecc. the Church at his departure hee left firmely grounded in all the points of faith and doctrine, taught by Christ our Saviour, as well setled in the out∣ward government, the polity and administra∣tion of the same, which had beene framed by
the Apostles, according to the patterne and example of their Lord and Master. For being that the Church was borne of Seed immortall, and they themselves though excellent and di∣vine, yet still mortall men: it did concerne the Church in an high degree, to be provided of a perpetuity, or if you will an immortality of Over-seers, both for the sowing of this Seed, and for the ordering of the Church, or the field it selfe. This since they could doe in person, they were to doe it by their Successours; who by their Office were to be the ordinary Pa∣stors of the Church, and the Vicars of Christ. Now if you aske the Fathers who they were, that were accounted in their times and ages, the Successours of the Apostles; they will with one accord make answer that the Bishops were. To take them as they lived in order, it is affirmed expressely by Irenaeus,Iren. l. 3. c. 3. one who con∣versed familiarly with Polycarpus, S. Iohn's disci∣ple. He speaking of those Bishops which were ordained by the Apostles, and shewing what perfections were in them required; then addes, Quos & Successores relinquebant suum ipsorum lo¦cum magisterii tradentes, whom they did eve to be their Successours, delivering unto them their owne place of government.Cypr. Epist. 42. vel. l. 2. ep. 10. S. Cyprian next writing to Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome, ex∣horts him to endeavour to preserve that unity, Per Apostolos nobis Successoribus tradiam, which was cōmended by the Apostles, unto them their
Successours. So in another place, speaking of the commission which our Saviour gave to his Apostles,Id Epist. 69. vel. l. 4. ep. 0. he addes that it was also given to those Praepositi, rulers and governours of the Church, Qui Apostolis Vicaria ordinatione succe∣dunt, which by their ordination have beene substituted as Successours to them. And least we should mistake his meaning in te word Praepositi,Firmil. ep. Cy. Epist. 75. Firmilianus another Bishop of those times, in an Epistle unto Cyprian, useth insteed thereof the word Episcopi, not varying in the rest from those very words, which Cpri∣an had used before. Hierome,Hieron. a Mrcell. adu. Mont. although concei∣ved by some to be an adversary o the Bishops, doth affirme as much. Where speaking of Mn∣tanus and his faction, he shewes this difference betwixt them▪ and the Church of God: viz. that they had cast the Bishop downewards, made him to be the Third in order; Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent, but in the Ca∣tholick-Church of Christ, the Bishops held the place or roome of the Apostles. The like he saith in his Epistle to Euagrius,Id. ad Euag. where spea∣king of the parity of Bishops amongst them∣selves, that the eminency of their Churches did make no difference in their authority; he gives this reason of the same, Omnes Apostolorum suc∣cessores sunt, because they were all Successours to the Apostles. So also in his Comments on the Booke of Psalmes, writing upon those words, Insteed of thy Fathers,Id. in Psalm. 44. thou shalt have chil∣dren,
he tels us that at first, the Apostles were the Fathers of the Church; but they being gon, Habes pro his Episcopos filios, the Church had Bi∣shops in their steed: which though they were her children, as begotten by her, Sunt tamen & patres tui, yet they were also Fathers to her, in that she was directed and guided by them. S. Austin,August. in Psal. 44. on the same words hath the like conceit, the Fathers of the Church, saith he, were the Lords Apostls; Pro Apostolis filii nati sunt tibi, constituti sunt Episcopi, insteed of those Fathers, the Church hath children, Bishops that be or∣dained in her, such whom she calleth Fathers, though her selfe begat them, & constituit in Se∣dibus patrum, and placed them in the seats or thrones of those holy Fathers. The like the same S. Austin in another place,August. Epist. 42. Id. Epist. 42. the root, &c. S. Austin to the same effect. The root, saith he, of Christian Religion, is by the seats of the Apostles, & Successiones Episcoporum, and the succession of the Bishops, dispersed and pro∣pagated over all the word. And so S. Gregory discoursing of the power of binding and loo∣sing,Grego. Magr. hom. 26. committed by the Lord unto his Apo∣stles, applyes it thus: Horum nunc in Ecclesià locum Episcopi tenent, that now the Bishops hold their places i the Church of Christ. Not that the Bishops doe succeed them in their personall graces, their mighty power of working Mira∣cles, speaking with tongues, giving the Holy Ghost, and others, such as these, which were
meerly temporary: but in their Pastorall charge and government, as the chiefe Rulers of the Church, the ordinary Pastors of the flocke of Christ. Now that the Bishops are the ordinary Pa∣stors of the Church, and so conceived to be by the ancient Fathers, will be made evident by as good authority as the poynt before.Ignat. Epist. ad Antioch. Ig∣natius, who conversed with most of the Apo∣stles, writing unto the Antiochians, requireth them to call to mind Euodius (who was his Pre∣decessor, in the See of Antioch) , their most blessed Pastor.Tertull. de fu∣ga in persecut. Tertullian discoursing on those words of Christ, The hire∣ling seeth the Woolfe comming and fleeth; but that the Good Shepherd layeth down his life for the sheep, Ioh. 10. inferreth thereupon, Praepositos Eccle∣siae in persecutione fugere non oportere, that the Prelates or governours of the Church, are not to flye in persecution. By which it is most clear, (not to dispute the truth of his assrtion) that Pastor & Praepositus Ecclesiae doe come both to one. S. Cyprian in his tract de Alatore,Cyp. de Ale∣toe. is more plaine and positive, Nam ut constaret nos, i. e. Episcopos, Pastores esse ovium Spiritualium, &c. that it might evidently appeare, saith he, that wee, the Bishops, are the Pastors of the Flocke of Christ he said to Peter, feed my Sheepe. And in another place, (for feare the former Booke may prove none of his) expostulating with Pupianus, who charged him, as it seemeth,Id. Epist 69. for
some defect in his administration, he thus drives the poynt. Behold, saith he, for these six yeeres, Nec fraternitas habuerit Episcopoum, neither the brother-hood hath had a Bishop, nor the pople a Praepositus or Ruler, nor the Flocke a Pastor, nor the Church a governour, nor Christ a Prelate, nor God a Priest. Where plainely, Pastor and Episcopus and so all the rest are made to be the same one function. More clearely in another place of the same Epistle, where he defineth a Church to be Plebs sacerdoti adunata, & Pastori suo grex adhaerens, that is to say, a people joyned or united rather to their Priest, a Flock adhering to their Pastor. Where by Sacerdos, as before, (and in other Authors of the first times) he meaneth no other then a Bishop, as doth appeare by that which follow∣eth. Vnde scire debes Episcopaum in Ecclesi &c. From whom thou oughtest to understand, saith he, the Bishop to be in the Church, and the Church to be also in the Bishop▪ & that whoe∣ver is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church. Optatus saith the same in briefe,Opta. de schis∣matc. lib. 1. by whom Pa∣stor sine groge, & Episcopus sine populo, a Bishop without a Church or people, & a pastor without a Flocke, are joyned together as Synonyma. S. Austin speaking of two sorts of over-seers in the fold of Christ, some of them being children, and the others hirelings;August. tract. 46. in Iob. then addes, Praepositi autem qui filii sunt, Pastores sunt, the Rulers which are children (of the Church) they are
the Pastors. And i another place not long since cited, speaking of Episcopale judicium,I . de corrept. & gr. c. 15. the condemnation that attends the Bishops sen∣tence; he presently subjoynes, Pastoralis tamen necessitas, that yet the necessity incumbent on the Pastorall Office, doth many times inflict such sentences for the publicke safety of the Flocke. I might be infinite in this search, but that I have spok somewhat to the poynt already: and am moreover saved all further labour in it, by our learned Andrewes,Resp. ad Epis. Petri Molinaei. affirming positively and expressely, Apud veteres Pastorum nomen vix adhiberi, nisi cum de Episcopis loquuntur, the name of Pastor is scarce used among the Ancients, but when they have occasion to speake of Bi∣shops. And Binius in his notes upon the Coun∣cels, excepts against a fragment of the Synod of Rhemes, said to be held Anno 630. as not of that antiquity which is there pretended: nd that he doth upon this reason onely, Eo quod ti∣tulum Pastoris tribuat Parocho, because the stile of Pastor is there given to the common Presby∣ter, contrary to the usage of those elder times.Tom. 3. part 2 p. 978. And certainly it is no wonder that it should be so, that he who is Episcopus & Pastor animarum, the Bishop and Pastor of our soules,1 Petri 2.25. as S. Peter cals him, should conferre on them both his ti∣tles: since he hath substituted and appoynted them to be his Vicars, here on earth. The Pope may chalenge, if he will this title, to himselfe a∣lone: but since antiquity hath given it to all Bi∣shops
equally, to every one as much as to him of Rome.Ambros. in i. ad Cor. cap. 11. S. Ambrose hath resolved it generally, Episcopus personam habet Christi, the Bishop, saith he, sustaineth the person of Christ▪ & therefore every woman ought to behave her selfe before the Bishop, as before her Judge: giving this rea∣son therewithall, Quia Vicarius domini est, be∣cause he is the Vicar of the Lord. The Cōmen∣taries on S. Mathew,Opus imper∣fect. in Matth. hom. 17. ascribed to Chrysostom, doth affirme the same: where shewing that such men as persecuted or molested those of the holy Sacer∣dotal order, were either gentiles, or at lest sordid and senselesse Christians: he gives his reason for the same: Quia nec intelligunt, nec considerant, sa∣cerdotes Christi Vicarios esse, because they neither understand nor doe consider, that the Bishop, (whom hee there meaneth by Sacerdotes) are the Vicars of Christ.Lib. qu. ver. & N. test. qu 127. S. Austin to the same ef∣fect, as before, S Ambrose. The Bishop is to be more pure and pious then another man, for he seemeth to susteine the person of God: Est enim Vicarius ejus, for he is his Vicar. The Fathers in the Councel of Compeigne,Concil. Com. Anno 833. thus. Scire omnes convenit, it behoveth all men to understand what is the nature of the government or Mini∣stery of Bishops, Quos constat esse Christi Vica∣rios, who, as it evidently appeares, are the Vicars of Christ.Petr. Blesens. Srm. 47. Nay even Blesensis, though he li∣ved and writ when the Papacy was at the height, makes this Description of a Bishop. Ordina∣tur Christi Vicarius, Ecclesiae Praelatus, &c.
he is ordained a vicar of Christ, a Prelate of the Church, a Father of men, and a Pastor of Soules: So farre the Ancients have attested to the present businesse, and yet there is one Testimony more, which as it is more ancient, so it is as pertinent as any hitherto produced, viz. The Declaration of the Fathers in the Councell of Carthage, anno 258. or rather the attestation of the Fathers to that which was af∣fimed by Clarus of Muscala, one of the Bishops there assembled,Conc. Carth. sub. Cypr. who being to give his vote upon the businesse then in agitation, first thus layd his his grounds. Manifesta est sententia Domini nostri, &c. The judgement of our Lord and Saviour JESUS Christ is plaine and evident, bequeathing that authority unto his Apostles, which had been given him by his Fa∣ther: to which Apostles we are now the suc∣cessours, eadem potestate ecclesiam Domini guber∣nantes, governing the Church by that autho∣rity, which they had before. In which we see a cleare and manifest derivation of this power, this Vicarship, from God the Father unto Christ, from Christ to his Apostles, and by them also to the Bishops, and their successours in the Church for ever. Not that each Bi∣shop in particular hath some particular Apostle whom he doth succeed; I conceive not so: but that the Bishops, generally doe succeed the Apostles, and are in generall Vicars unto Christ our Saviour, as to the generall government of
the Church of God.De Rep eccles. l. 2. c 5. n. 3 Apostolis datos esse Epi∣scopos successores, non singulis Apostolis, sed in solidum universis; as the unfortunate Arch. B. of Spalato hath right well observed, conforme unto the Tenet of the Fathers, in this very point. The summe of these three sections then, in briefe is this, Christ by the mission which he had from his heavenly Father, de∣volves all power on his Apostles, for teaching, governing and directing his little flock: and they being sensible of their own mortality, or∣daine by like authority a line of Bishops to suc∣ceed them, ad consummationem seculi, by whom that care might be perpetuated. In whom, as there is plenitudo potestatis, a ful∣nesse of authority for that end and purpose; the Bishop, as is said by AmbroseAmb. in ep. 4., being made up of all the orders in the Church (nam in Episcopo omnes ordines sunt, as his words there are:) so he both doth & may assume such and so many associates, assistants, and subservi∣ent ministers in partem oneris, for the scharge of this great trust; as were ased by the Apo∣stles, or ordained by them rer, for the pub∣lick service of the Church. Thus have we seen the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour, dispersed in very little time, over all parts and quarters of the world: of so much of it at the least, whereof the Acts and monu∣ments have been recorded to posterity: and therewith a transmission also of that forme of
government, which was begotten by it, and grew up with it. Nor is there any doubt at all, but that into what coasts soever the Lords Apostles preached the one, they also in the same did plant the other. The late discove∣ries of those parts and Countries which were unknown unto our Predecessours, make this cleare enough: there being no place nor Re∣gion how remote soever, where there was ex∣tant any thing of the Christian Faith, in which there were not found as apparent footsteps of the Episcopall forme of government. A preg∣nant evidence, that as the Lords Apostles were by the holy Ghost instructed in that Faith, which they were to preach; so by the same eternall Spirit they were directed to that forme of go∣vernment, which they were to plant. They could not else have fallen so unanimously on the selfe same project: nor had God blessed it with so flourishing and faire increase, a growth so suddaine and miraculous; had it not been a graft of his own heavenly planting. Which graft, what root it tooke in this present Age, in little more then halfe an hundred yeers af∣ter Christs Ascension; we shall best see by look∣ing on this briefe Chronologie, which I have drawn to that intent.
The state of Holy Church in this first CENTURY. Anno Chr. 34. OƲR Saviour Christ suffered and rose again, and ascended into glory. S. James made Bishop of Hierusalem. Anno Chr. 35. The conversion of Paul. Anno Chr. 39. S. Peter takes upon him the Bishoprick (or government of the Church) of Antioch. Anno Chr. 41. S. Peter Baptizeth Cornelius and his fami∣ly, opening the doore of life unto the Gentiles. Anno Chr. 43. The Disciples first called Christians at An∣tiochia. Anno Chr. 44. Bishops ordained by Saint Peter, in the Churches of Sidon, Berytus, and Laodicea of Syria, and other Cities of the East. Saint Peter commeth to Rome, and underta∣keth the government of the Churches of the Circumcision founded in that City. Paul and Barnabas called forth by the holy Ghost, to the Apostleship of the Gentiles. Anno Chr. 45. Euodius made Bishop of Antioch. Saint Mark ordaineth Bishop of Alexandria.
Anno Chr. 46. Saint Peter ordaineth many of his Di∣sciples Bishops, and sendeth them abroad into France, Italy and Spaine. Anno Chr. 49. S. Paul ordaineth Presbyters in Churches of his plantation. Anno Chr. 50. Eucherius one of S. Peters Disciples, made Bishop of the Church of Triers in Germany. Anno Chr. 51. The Jewes banished from Rome by Claudi∣us Caesar: in which regard, S. Peter leaving Rome committeth the government of his Church to Cletus, by birth a Roman. The Apostolicall Councell in Hierusalem. S. Paul maketh his first journey into Macedonia. Anno Chr. 52. S. Paul first Preacheth at Athens, Corinth, &c. Anno Chr. 55. S. Paul taketh up his aboad at Ephesus, and from thence writeth to those of Corinth. Anno Chr. 57. Timothy ordained by S. Paul the first Bi∣shop of Ephesus. Titus ordained Bishop of Crete by the same A∣postle. Other of Pauls Disciples ordained Bishops for the Eastern Churches. Anno Chr. 58. S. Paul calleth the Elders from Ephesus to Miletum. Anno Chr. 59. S. Paul brought Prisoner unto Rome, takes on himselfe the government of the Churches of the Gentiles there. Anno Chr. 60. Archippus Bishop of the Colossians. Epaphroditus ordained Bishop of the Philip∣pians.
Anno Chr. 61. Crescens made Bishop of Vienna in Daul∣phine. Paul passeth into Spaine, leaving the Church of Rome to the care of Linus. Anno Chr. 63. Simeon elected Bishop of Hierusalem in the place of James, by the joynt consent of the A∣postles and Disciples. Anno Chr. 64. Anianus succeedeth Mark in the Bishoprick of Alexandria. Anno Chr. 67. S. Peter planteth Churches, and ordaineth Bishops, in the Isle of Britaine. Anno Chr. 68. Peter and Paul returne to Rome. Anno Chr. 69. The martyrdom of Peter and Paul at Rome by command of Nero. Anno Chr. 70. Linus and Cletus (or Anacletus) succeed the two Apostles in the government of their Churches there. Anno Chr. 71. Ignatius succeedeth Euodius in the See of Antioch. Anno Chr. 74. Valerius succeedes Eucherius in the Church of Triers. Anno Chr. 80. S. John taketh up his abode in Asia, plan∣ting and confirming the Churches there, and ordaining Bishops in the same. Anno Chr. 81. Linus being dead, Clemens succeedeth him in the government of the Church of the Gen∣tiles, in Rome. Anno Chr. 84. Polycarpus made Bishop of Smyrna by S. John. Anno Chr. 87. Abilius succeedeth Anianus in the Bishop∣rick of Alexandria.
Anno Chr. 92. S. John confined unto Patmos, by Domi∣tianus. Anno Chr. 93. Cletus (or Anacletus) being dead, the Chur∣ches of the Circumcision in the City of Rome and parts adjoyning, became united with the Gentiles, under the government of Clemens. Anno Chr. 97. S. John writeth the Apocalypse to the Se∣ven Churches in Asia. Anno Chr. 98. S. John restored to Ephesus, foundeth the Churches of Trallis and Magnesia, ordaining Bishops in them both, as in other places. Anno Chr. 99. At the intreaty of the Asian Bishops, S. John writeth his Gospell. Anno Chr. 100. Cerdo succeedes Abilius in the Bishoprick of Alexandria. Anno Chr. 101. S. John dieth at Ephesus in a good old age; leaving the government of the Church in the hands of Bishops, as Successours to the A∣postles, and the Vicars of Christ. The end of the first Part.
