12358 99853762 19157
THE GREAT DAY, OR, A SERMON, SETTING forth the desperate estate and condition of the wic∣ked at the day of Iudge∣ment. Preached at Saint Andrews in Holborne at London. By Nathaniel Grenfeild, Master of Artes, and Preacher of the Word of God at Whit-feild in Ox∣fordshire. LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Io∣sias Harrison, and are to be sold at the Golden Anchor in Pater¦noster row. 1615.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR GEORGE SPEAKE, Knight, N. G. wisheth heartily all happinesse. SIR, THe Wise mans cen∣sure concerning the many Booke-makers of his time,Morbus insanabilie scribendi cacoë∣thes, Iuuenal. Quod de scriptis sa∣cris autho∣re spiritu sanctdici non po∣test, ve∣rū de illis, quae vanitas humana exculpit quotidie, Fayius. Traditiones, decreta Pontificum, Canones generalium consiliorum, quoad obsequij & fidei necessitatem praeser∣tim refelluntur. mee thinks, as much tax∣eth this Writing world of ours, wherein men are almost no men, vnlesse they be men in print; all is but a Cōmentarie vpon the Prea∣chers
words; Of making many bookes there is no end, Eccl. 12.12. I wish to God that there were once an end (which I feare me, will not bee vn∣till the world ends) of making such books, as serue to no end, but to the cor∣rupting of maners, infecting the hart, weakening zeale; and that some good Augustus would banish them, (as hee did fleshly Amato∣riae Nafo∣nis, in qui∣bus non est tutum rudem ex∣erceri, Erasmus. Ouid) out of our Bethel, Christian England, into some Betha∣uen, into some Idolatrous, Superstiti∣ous, and Heathenish Nation, that wor∣ship the Sunne and the Moone, Castor and Pollux, Rats and Mice, in stead of the true God of Heauen; or sent backe for Vagrants into Italy, or the Stewes of Rome, where, like an adulte∣rous broode, they were first borne and bred; or that they were all serued with the same sauce,Stapleton. Praefat. Moral. as (by Stapletons re∣port) Saint Ephraim wittily vsed two
bookes of Apollinaris, who finding them in a womans keeping, borrowed them of her, and glued the leaues so hard together, as the booke could neuer after be opened. For (as one saith well) ten Sermons at Pauls Crosse doe not so much good for moouing men to true doctrine, as one of these bookes doe harme, with entising men to ill liuing; and that more Papists are made by the merry bookes of Italy, then by the ear∣nest bookes of Louaine; so that they doe not only win the wils of the weake vnto wantonnesse, but tend some∣thing to the corrupting of true religi∣on. Saint Iames reprooues very sharp∣ly those, that with the same tongue blesse God, & curse man, Iam. 3.9. why then should the same Caracters set foorth Machiauels workes and Mo∣ses writings, Christ and Belial, the vn∣chast loue of wanton Heathens, and the
chast and reciprocall loue of Christ and his Church? But as for such bookes as haue our Sauiour for their subiect, the holy Ghost for their Author, Gods glory for their end; that are like so ma∣ny Cannons planted against the Gates of hel, that tend wholly to the demolish∣ing of Satans Kingdome, vndermining the Bulwarks of Babylon, but building vp the Walles of Ierusalem, why should not the sound of such goe foorth into the ends of the world? and when they sound foorth, the end of the world? To which end, I haue preacht pend, and through the importunitie of others, contrarie to mine owne minde and meaning when I preached, now im∣printed this little Tract and Treatise; how free I am from Salomons cen∣sure of such as print themselues, let him that is wiser then Salomon bee a witnesse: I am bold to fly vnto your
Worship, and to entreate you, that you would vouchsafe to bee cald a Patron vnto it, as you are to learning, though farre (I must confesse) below your wor∣thinesse: The many testimonies of your loue from time to time toward my eldest Brother and my selfe, doe challenge more at our hands, then my penne can expresse, or the weakenesse of our vtmost power make the least re∣quitall. A handfull of water was fit∣ter to be powred into a Beggars dish, then to be presented vnto a King: yet a King accepted of it, though a beggar gaue it, because he gaue what he had, and had no better to giue: nay, it is ac∣ceptable to God (if we haue no greater gift to offer) to cast a mite into the Lords Treasurie: whereby I am indu∣ced to conceiue, that you will no lesse willingly accept of this Paper gift of mine, a Schollars Mite, the truest testi∣moniall
of mine intimate affecti∣ons, and manifestation of my duty: what is wanting, shall bee supplied in praying for you vnto God, for your preseruation, and for an encrease in all spirituall graces, namely, of faith, which may keepe you from trembling at the day of your death, and in the day of Iudgement. From Whitfield, Iuly the 10. Your Worships to be com∣manded in the Lord, NATH. GRENFEILD.
THE GREAT DAY. REVEL. 6.15.16.17. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the chiefe Captains, and the mighty men, and euery bondman, and euery free man, hid themselues in the dennes, and in the rockes of moun∣taines, And said to the mountaines, and rocks, Fall on vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that fitteth vpon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe:
For the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? THis Chapter contains in it sixe parts, and euery part the ope∣ning of a Seale by the Lambe, and eue∣rie seale a distinct mystery: the foure first Seales being opened, mention is made of foure Ri∣ders, riding vpon foure horses, of foure different colours, a white, vers. 2. a red, vers. 4. a blacke, vers. 5. a pale, verse 8. vn∣to the beholding whereof, Saint Iohn was inuited. The first Rider is described by two adiuncts,Adiunctis. Arcu. Corona. Effectu. Fine. a Bow and a Crowne was giuen vnto him, vers. 2. Secondly, by the effect, conquering. Thirdly, by the end, to conquer, vers. 2. The second Seale being opened, the second Rider, which Saint Iohn was willed for to come and see, is descri∣bed:Potestate. Instrumen∣to. first, by his power, power was gi∣uen vnto him, &c. vers. 4. Secondly, by
an instrument; there was giuen vnto him a great sword. The third Rider is described by a paire of Ballances, he that sate on this horse, had a paire of Ballances in his hand, vers. 5. the mystery whereof is vnfolded by a sounding voice, vers. 6. The fourth Seale being opened, there came foorth a Rider vpon a pale horse, and the Rider is described, first, by his name, death. Secondly, by a com∣panion, hell followed with him: and both are described by their power; power was giuen vnto them, &c. vers. 8. The inter∣pretation of these foure horses, is as my∣sticall as Nebuchadnezzars dreame, and may very well beare the selfe same interpretation, which Daniel gaue of that great Image, whose head was of gold, brest and armes of siluer, belly and thighes of brasse, legges of iron, Dan. 2.32.33. This Image was an Emblem, or representation of the foure Monar∣chies of the World; the Monarchie of the Assyrians, or Caldeans; the Monar∣chie of the Medes and Persians; the
Monarchie of the Grecians; the Mo∣narchie of the Romans: and as Gold, of all other mettals is the best, and purest; and therefore it is said, that Heauenly Ierusalem is a Citie of pure Gold, Apoc. 21.18. So White is the best, and chie∣fest of all colours; and therefore it is said, that the Saints were clothed with white Robes, vers. 11. Which colour is consecrated to innocency, puritie, victorie and felicitie; and therefore it is said, that the head of the Image was of fine Gold, Dan. 2.32. And that the first horse was white, vers. 2. so the first Mo∣narchie, viz. of the Caldeans (though full of crueltie) was the best, and a gol∣den Age, comparatiuely in respect of the rest: but the last of all was the worst of all: the Romane Emperours outstripped all the rest, in their bloudy proiects, and vnspeakable cruelties; for who can reckon vp all their expedi∣tions of warre, so many funerals of Ci∣tizens, massacring of so many millions of men, depopulations and dispeopling of so many Countries, burnings of so
many Cities, such a prodigall profusi∣on of blood when this Roman horse ru∣shed forth? in so much, that the fourth part of the Earth was slaine with the sword of this fierce Beast, as it is, vers. 8. The crueltie of all preceding Emperors was clemencie, being compared with these Romans, whose Drummes soun∣ded nothing else but blood and death, and their little finger was bigger, then the loines of all their predecessours. The fifth Seale being opened, Saint Iohn saw the Soules of blessed Martyrs lying vnder the Altar, and crying for reuenge; where first hee shewes the es∣sence of true Martyrs: they were killed,Pseudo-martyrs. (so may false Martyrs) 'tis a good cause that makes a Martyr, and therefore it is said, that they were killed for the word of God, and for the testimonie of the truth, verse 9. The words may haue re∣ference either vnto the Church Mili∣tant, who may bee termed Martyrs, though they bee neuer killed, and though they neuer striue to bloud, viz. when Christians are rayled at, reuiled,
scorned, disgraced, abused, false witnes∣ses suborned, either to empaire the cre∣dit of their person, or empeach the sin∣ceritie of their profession: for the Deuil first letteth loose the tongues of the wicked to speake ill, before he letteth loose their hands to doe ill. Thus that Protomartyr Steuen was gnashed at with the teeth of the wicked, Actes 7.54. before he was stoned; and they subor∣ned men, which said, Wee haue heard him speake blasphemous words, &c. Actes 6.11. Thus our Sauiour, before he suffered, endured such contradicti∣ons of sinners, accounted sometimes for a seditious person, a wine-bibber, a friend to Publicans and sinners, one that had a Deuill, one that preached false do∣ctrine, &c. And thus Paul, before hee sealed Peters confession with his bloud, he was accounted for a mad man,August. l. 10 confess. a se∣ducer of the people, and for one not worthy to liue: Lingua impiorum est quotidiana fornax, The tongue of the wicked is a fornace, wherein Gods children are tryed; and there is not a man or mem∣ber
of this little poore despised Church, whether zealous Preacher, or sincere Professor, but must be tryed in this O∣uen of euill speaking: for as long as you are in the world, and are not of the world, the world will hate you, and speake euill of you, Ioh. 15.19. Or the words, as it should seeme, may in a better sense onely bee referred vnto that heauenly troope of blessed Souldiers discharged the field, with the losse of life, and for a reward of this their perseuerance, stri∣uing vnto bloud, are clothed with white Robes; which crie for reuenge, either in respect of vs which doe suffer (for the Saints in Heauen doe pray for vs in generall, howsoeuer they know not our wants in particular) or in re∣spect of themselues which haue suffe∣red, they cry for reuenge (for it is Gods peculiar) either in this life by his tem∣porall plagues or punishments, or by hastening his comming vnto Iudge∣ment, when they shall eternally be re∣warded in that euerlastingly burning Tophet, prepared for all persecuting
Kings and Princes, who haue made ha∣uocke of the Saints. Now the time when this was, Saint Iohn makes it ma∣nifest, that it was after the opening of of the fourth Seale, and after the com∣ming forth of the fourth Horse: for the fiercenesse and furious rage of this Ro∣mish Beast was not vtterly abated, al∣though there was scarce matter left for malice to worke vpon: but no sooner was Christ borne, which was when Au∣gustus Octauius was Emperour, in the two and fortieth yeere of his raigne; and also put to death againe, which was when Tyberius was Emperour, be∣fore the Church had recouered any strength or growth, but Tyranny wai∣ted on her, to deuoure her children as soone as they were borne. There are two distinct times, in which the Church of God suffered most grieuous perse∣cutions; the first was in her Primitiue estate, when by the preaching of the Apostles, the number of beleeuers were multiplied exceedingly; then did the foes encrease, that troubled her
peace and prosperity, bearing euill will to Sion, inueigled by that hellish Dragon, that was set at liberty, ben∣ding and banding all their forces and furies, prosecuting her with all might and malice, did set her againe a bleed∣ing, when shee was yet but a budding. Her most bloudy persecutours were these Romane bloud-thirsty Emperors, Domician, Traian, Nero, Doecius, Dioclesian, Antoninus, Maxentius, Lycinius, and other cruel Tyrants, euen vntil the time of Constantine the Great; by whom the Saints were killed all the day long, and were accounted as sheepe to be slaine. The second time was in these last times, vnder Antichrist, when the whole number of Martyrs shall bee compleatly finished, as it is v. 11. which may also bee diuided into tenne perse∣cutions, if wee reckon vp all those slaughters of blessed Martyrs, which haue beene from the time of Iohn VVickleeue within these 138. yeers,The first persecuti∣on. vn∣till this time throughout all the coasts of Europe. As first vnder King Henry
the fourth and fift, here in England; the  second vnder that generall Councell held in Constantia, and Bohemia; the  third vnder the Bishoppes of Rome, and the neerest Prouinces thereof;  the fourth vnder Charles the fifth Emperour in Germany; the fift vnder Henry the eighth in England; the sixt vnder Henry the second in France; the  seuenth vnder Iames the second, in Scotland: the eight vnder Charles the ninth in France; vnder whose raigne there were within the space of one moneth put to death, aboue twenty  thousand of Martyrs; the ninth was vnder Queene Mary here in England, she that was a second Nero, for her cru∣elty, but yet for the Churches comfort, she was but Nubecula citò transitura▪ A short tempest:Q. Eliza∣beth. for had she liued, then had the Churches chiefest nursing mo∣ther beene bereaued of her life, and we her children should neuer haue inioy∣ed these Halcyonian dayes wherein the Gospel flourisheth in despite eyther of Pope or Turke. During the time of whose raigne, which was but for the
space of fiue yeeres, there were aboue forty thousand liuing bodies of the most choisest Martyrs most cruelly burnt, I say, the liuing bodies, to aggra∣uate the depth of their inraged enuy; for they would not suffer the bones of the dead to rest in their graues, but they must be burnt to ashes, when they were almost rotten to the dust. The  tenth was vnder Philip in Spaine and Flaunders, as in the Spanish Inquisiti∣on we may read more at large; nay, al∣most what part of the earth hath not that drunken VVhore of Rome moyst∣ned with the bloud of Saints? And yet heere is not an end, but still shee is plodding and plotting some secret mischiefe vpon the bed of her fornica∣tions, and hatching still a malicious brood of Serpents and Cockatrices, Men and Deuils, hellish conspiratours, still machinating the workes of dark∣nesse, their fellow-helper being the Deuill, which is the Prince of darknes: and therefore no maruell though the Church triumphant in heauen, and the Church militant vpon earth, doe daily
cry for reuenge vpon that VVhere of Babylon; and the Lord hearing the lowd cry of the Saints, whose bloud cryes as lowd as euer Abels did against his brother Cain, at the length awa∣keth as one out of sleepe, commeth forth as a Giant refreshed with wine, strikes their enemies vpon the thigh, and puts them vnto a perpetuall shame; as you may see at the opening of the sixt seale, when God, in the seuerity of his wrath, summons all Kings and Princes of the earth, which haue been bloudy agents in massacring of Saints, vnto the trembling Tribunal of his generall Iudgement; where the first thing that we may take notice of, is the fearefull alteration of naturall things both in heauen and earth ver. 12.13.14. In the Sunne blacknesse, the Moone became as bloud, and the Starres fell from hea∣uen, heauen departed as a scrowle, the earth shooke, mountaines, and Ilands were moued out of their place; All which are euident demonstrations of that great and fearefull Day; Mark. 13. v. 24.25. Matth. 24. v. 29. Luk. 21.25.
The second is the feare and amazed∣nesse of men: Kings, great men, rich men, chiefe Captaines, bond and free, their hearts did faile them for feare, Luk. 21.26. desiring rather that the earth would swallow them vp aliue, as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, then to behold the countenance of so an∣gry a Iudge, and breathing forth such bootlesse exclamations vnto the sense∣lesse Rocks and helplesse Mountaines, Fall vpon vs, couer vs from the wrath of the Lambe, v. 15.16. All which doe immediately goe before the day of Iudgement, vers. 17.11. I had rather wade with the Lambe in the shallow, lest with the Elephant plunging my selfe into the depth, I should be drow∣ned in the depth; which is a iust iudge∣ment of God vpon all rash enterpri∣zing spirits, and curious inquisitors in∣to the vnsearchable secrets and myste∣ries past finding out of almighty God, to be giuen ouer vnto their owne pri∣uate spirits, and to lose themselues in the Labyrinth of their owne selfe mo∣tions, and all because they will not
confesse their ignorance, and content themselues with a sober knowledge, Rom. 12.3. but wil be wise aboue what is written. Once, sure I am of this, that the Scriptures doe containe in them all things necessary to saluation, and that they are riddles, and mysteries, darke, and obscure vnto none, but vnto those that perish. Amidst variety of Interpretors, some inclining vnto a Litterall, some vnto an Allegorical, some vnto a Tropolo∣gical sense, I doubt not but that I may safely lay downe this plaine and litte∣rall exposition, viz. That this Text set∣teth forth the desperate estate and con∣dition of the wicked, at the dreadfull day of Iudgement: wherein I obserue  these parts. First, an enumeration of particulars, concluding an vniuersall. Kings, great men, rich men, chiefe Cap∣taines, mighty men, bond men, free men, that is, some of all sorts and sexes; all  the wicked: Secondly, their straight & desperate estate; in seeking such boot∣lesse refuges, They hid themselues in dens and in the rockes of Mountaines, v. 15.
Thirdly, their lamentable, yet fruitlesse  exclamations: They said vnto the Moun∣taines and Rockes, Fal vpon vs, & hide vs from the presence of him, &c. v. 16. Last∣ly, the reason of all; For the Great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? The Kings of the earth] not Romani Principes, the Princes of Rome; that had bin too plaine, and it had bin a meanes to haue exasperated the malice of those bloudy Emperours more cruelly to imbrue their hands in the bloud of Saints: for Kings that are Tyrants, and rich men that are wedded to the world, can hardly indure to heare of their downefall and destruction, but they will rage more furiously, and re∣double their cruelty; so Herod slew all the children that were in Bethlem and in all the coasts therof from two yeeres old and vnder, when the Wise-men told him that Iesus was borne, and that He should be the King of the Iewes, Matth. 2. v. 2.16. Therefore Saint Iohn noting their power and malice, being that they are Kings and rich men, doth for the Churches safety, of set pur∣pose,
conceale their names: so the A∣postle Saint Paul in the second to the Thessalonians, c. 2. v. 3.4. describing the downefall of the Pope of Rome, hee calls him not in plaine and direct tearmes, Antichrist, or the Pope, but  That man of sin, , That sonne of perditi∣on which exalteth himselfe, , Aboue all that is called God, describing the nature of him so, that it can be competent vnto none, but vnto the Pope of Rome. . Vegetius l. 2. c. 2. dere mili∣tari.Tribuni, the chiefe Captaines] such as were set ouer a thousand souldiers, such amongst the Romans were called Tribunes: and a Romane Legion con∣sisted of six thousand souldiers: by which finite agnomination the Deuils shewed, that the number of their in∣fernall Kingdome was infinite, My name is Legion: for we are many. Euery bond and euery free-man] that is, all the wicked: but especially those that haue beene actors of the Kings decrees, and executioners of new deui∣sed tortures, in the persecution of the Saints.
Hid themselues in dennes] Some there are (and that not a few) that would haue this to bee vnderstood fi∣guratiuely of the corrupt estate of the Church, and of the last persecution of Antichrist, when the Popish Prelacy had gotten the supremacy. The Sunne, say they, is Christ, blacke and obscured, not in himselfe; but in the hearts of men. The Moone is the Church, which resembles the Moone waxing and waning; and shee borrowes her light from Christ. The Starres are the Do∣ctors of the Church, Teachers and Preachers of the Word; Falling to the earth]. i. slaine by the wicked, which seeme to men to fall to the earth; when as indeede, if faithfull in their in∣deuours to worke a sinners conuersi∣on, they shine like starres for euer and euer, Dan. 1 2. v. 3. The Heauen, say they, is the sacred Bible and Canoni∣call Scripture; containing in it the re∣uealed will of the King of Heauen, by meanes whereof we are led vnto Hea∣uen, as the Wise-men were to Christ by the conduct of a Star,Ioh. 5.39. Matth. 2. v. 9.
Within the Pages of this holy Writ, Christ, the Church, the Ministers, are placed like the Sunne, Moone, and Starres in the Firmament of Heauen; This Heauen departed in the raigne of Antichrist, and became as a clasped Booke in respect of the vse of it, for al∣most as good as if it had not beene at all, then the people neuer a iot the bet∣ter by it, when the Laiety might not read it; but through the Priests specta∣cles: when Images were Lay-mens Bookes, and sacred Scripture departed like a scrole, that is, lockt vp in an vn∣knowne tongue. Earthquakes doe signifie seditions, alterations, mutati∣ons of Kingdomes, and Empires; such as began in the Papacy, and doe not end as yet; but still doth that exceeding dreadfull beast, Daniel 7. v. 19. stirre vp seditions, disturbe cōmon peace, shake Kingdomes, blowe vp Parliaments, cut off and anathemize Kings, by the thunder-bolt of excommunication, yea and afterwards Canonize Deuils for Saints; if they would aduenture to kill Kings.
The Mountaynes are, say they, the Prophets whom the breath of Anti∣christ doth ouer-turne, and by the same breath of that not erring Man of sinne, doe the Schole-Doctors by their false glosses and peruerse interpretations, corrupt, depraue, and ouer-throw the sense of the Prophets. The Ilands, say they, are the workes and writings of Philosophers, which the same Doctors doe peruert some o∣ther way, beyond the minde and mea∣ning of Philosophers, so that there is nothing cōmon with the Prophets, nor with true Philosophie. Kings and rich men, &c. are the Monarchs of the world, and other priuate men made subiect to the Popes Catholicall and V∣niuersall Supremacy, when Kings must hold the stirrup, and kisse the greasy feet of that triple-crownd Monster. Hid themselues in dennes] that is (say they) the Cels, Cloysters, Solitary pla∣ces, Nests of Nunnes, and vnsociable Monkes. I will not disallow of this al∣legorizing interpretation, for it may very well stand for current: but accor∣ding
to the simple sense and meaning of the words, as they lye nakedly to be considered, and if Scripture may inter∣pret Scripture, the Prophet Isaiah ma∣keth them playne; expounding this place in the selfe same termes, or this place expounding that, both setting forth the narrow strait, and desperate perplexity, which the wicked are brought vnto; They shall goe into the holes of the Rocks, and into the Caues of the earth, for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of his Maiesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth, Isaiah 2.19. yea, and to strike a deeper dread and horror into the hearts of the wicked, he doth ingeminate it, like that triple woe in the eight of the Reuelation, vers. 21. And said to the Mountaynes & Rocks, Fall on vs, &c.] Here the holy Ghost doth allude vnto two places of Scrip∣ture; the first is the tenth of Hosea v. 8. the second, is the 23. of Luke vers. 30. both describing the desperate estate of the wicked; where our Sauiour spea∣keth of a certayne time, when these things should be, after hee had spoken
of the destruction of Ierusalem, which was a type of the consummation of the world, and dissolution of al things; but in Hosea, the Prophet speaketh of the captiuity of Israel, which was a figure of Ierusalems vtter diuastation, and the worlds finall destruction, as Hierome obserueth vpon that place: It was an old dotage of Aquinas vpon this place, who, as his custome is, to turne all things into Allegories, doth wrest this place of Kings and chiefe Captaines, and would haue it to be vnderstood of the Romish Clergy, the Bishops, the Arch∣bishops, and the rest of that rabble, cloistred Monks, and Masse-muttering Priests, crying vnto the Mountaines, that is, inuocating the Saints, imploring their patrocinie and their safeguarding protection, from the wrath that is to come. But these cursed Crue, that rob Christ of his honor, who is that one on∣ly Mediator, 1. Tim. 2.5. pro quo nullus interpellat, sed ipse per omnibus, as Au∣gustine defines a Mediator; by making as many Mediators as there are Saints departed, shal at that day find the Saints
no better then Iobs friends, miserable comforters, and that the inuocating of them shall be no more regarded, then the shouting and crying of the Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18. v. 27. Hide vs from the face of him that sit∣teth vpon the Throne, and from the voice of the Lambe.) But how shall the wic∣ked and vnfaithfull bee able to speake these words, when as they neuer knew Christ sitting in his Throne, nor vn∣derstood him to be the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sinnes of the World? as Peter told the Iewes, that through ignorance they did crucifie Christ, as did also their Gouernours, Acts 3. v. 17. for had they knowne, they would neuer haue crucified the Lord of glory.Sol. I will not insist vpon any curious distinction, either of Logicians, or Schole diuines concerning ignorance. In briefe I an∣swere thus, that the wicked out of the horror, and hellish despaire of a distra∣cted conscience, partly by reason of that imminent danger without them, & the guilt of cōscience within them, they shall be compeld to acknowledge
Christ to bee that Incarnated Word of truth, sent out of the bosome of the Fa∣ther, and to be that Lambe of God slaine for as many as beleeue: then they shall see, know, & be made to acknowledge him; though in their life time they cal∣led his sacred Deitie into question, yet then shal they acknowledge him with∣out all question. As Pharaoh at the first answered Moses and Aaron, intreating him from the Lord, to let the children of Israel goe, that they may celebrate a feast to the Lord in the wildernesse. Quis est Deus, Who is the Lord? as though he had thought (belike) that there had bin no God, as Atheists say in their heart, There is no God, Psal. 14.1. or that he himselfe had beene God onely, Exod. 5.2. yet afterward hee learned a new lesson, being instructed by diuers sorts of afflictions, which were as so many Sermons to conuict and conuince him of Atheisme, and was compelled to ac∣knowledge God, to be the Authour of them, Exod. 8. and he only to be pray∣ed vnto, Exod. 14. So shall the wicked at that day, howsoeuer at this day they
doe scorne, deride, and not beleeue in Christ to be Iesus, a Messias, a Sauiour, but persecute him in his members, Act. 9.4. when they see the truth of prophesies fulfilled, the destruction at hand, their owne dismall desolation drawing neer, then shall they acknow∣ledge Christ to be the Sonne of God, the Sauiour of the world, the Redeemer of Israel. For the great day of his wrath is come.] ,, Iude 6. the great day: where we may note the vniuersality of it; all the dayes of iudgement going before, were but types and figures, but Epitomes and com∣pends of that day, that great day, that is to come; the drowning of the old world was a great day, the burning of Sodome and Gomorrah, a great day, the ransac∣king of Ierusalem, a great day; yet all these together will not expresse and shew forth the least part of that dread∣fully incomparable great day, that is to come. And who can stand?) It is a Meta∣phor drawne from those, that whiles some eminent danger hangeth ouer
their heads, cannot looke vp, but spee∣dily they flie away, vntill they are out of breath, their spirits spent, & so they fall groueling to the ground; so saith our Sauiour Christ, mens hearts shall faile them for feare, and for looking after those things that shall come to the world, Luke 21.16. The cause of this their fly∣ing is not only the fearefull apparitions of heauen, as presages and prognosti∣cations of their dismall doome, but Erynnis conscientiae, as Melancthon cals it, the sting of conscience, like a fiend of hell, dogs and driues them; for the wicked flie when none pursueth them, Pro. 28.1. They therefore are said to stand, that are not terrified & appaled, which are not cast downe, neither in body nor minde, but doe confidently expect and wait their Masters comming; & there∣fore it was our Sauiours counsaile vnto his Disciples, and in them vnto his whole Church, hauing forewarned them that he would come vpon them, at a time, that they wote not of, as trauell vpon a woman, as a thiefe in the night, he doth fore-arme them too, by willing
them to be frequent in watching, fer∣uent in prayer; Watch therefore, & pray continually, that you may be counted wor∣thy to escape all these things that shall come to passe, and that you may bee able to stand before the Sonne of man, Luke 21.36. Thus hauing Analysed the whole Chapter, diuided my Text, and expoun∣ded the wordes, I draw forth this ge∣nerall doctrine, and it flowes naturall, of its owne accord, without any vio∣lent strayning, or iniury vnto the Text: this is the doctrine:1. Doct. that the state and condition of the wicked is full of horror at the day of iudgement. This is proued by phrases of Scrip∣ture: First, It is called the Lords day, the day of the Lord, intimating there∣by, that as the wicked haue had their day, the terme of their life, wherein they dare as boldly to commit sinne, as if they should neuer come to iudge∣ment, and as the Prophet Amos spea∣keth, putting farre off the euill day, and approching to the seat of iniquity, Amos 6.3. so likewise the Lord will haue his
day: and these are the dayes of vengeance, saith our Sauiour Christ, Luke 21. v. 22. wherein the Lord will execute the se∣uerity of his wrath, vpon sinne and sin∣ners. Secondly, it is called the day of wrath; now, the wrath of a King is the messen∣ger of death, how much more the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, the breath of whose nostrils kindleth that euerla∣stingly burning Tophet, and his wrath abideth for euer vpon the children of disobedience, in that burning Lake of hell fire; for they that haue iustly pro∣uoked the Lord vnto wrath in this their life time, by fornication, by vnclean∣nesse, by inordinate affection, by euill con∣cupiscence, by couetousnesse, which is Ido∣latry, by wrath, by anger, by malicious∣nesse, by cursed and filthy speaking, Co∣los. 3.5.8. shall be sure to finde the re∣compence and their reward; wrath for wrath, the very fruit of their owne fruitlesse works, for, for these things sake the wrath of God commeth vpon the chil∣dren of disobedience, Colos. 3.6. tempo∣rally by manifest iudgements of his
wrath, and eternally in hell, where his wrath abideth for euer and for euer; in that dungeon of Dogs, that is, among the wicked, whose estate is worse then a Dogs; as namely, Inchanters, Whore∣mongers, Murtherers, Idolaters, and whosoeuer loueth or maketh lyes, Reuel. 22.15. Thirdly, our Sauiour Christ speaking of that day, saith; that it should come vpon the world, as trauell vpon a wo∣man with child: which is not onely to be vnderstood of the vncertainty of it when it will come, (yet as sure will it come as trauell vpon a woman with child:) but the similitude holds true in another sense; that as a woman with child drawing neere to her trauell, is in sorrow, and cryeth in her paines, Isay 26.17. (a punishment peculiar to that sex, by reason of our first Parents transgres∣sion, Gen. 3.16.) she doth oftentimes send foorth bitter sighes, and sobbes, grieuous grones, & lamentable cryes, vncertayne whether her issue will bee a Beniamin, the sonne of her right hand, or a Benoni, the sonne of her sorrow &
death, yet still doth shee lift vp her eyes vnto the Hils, from whence commeth her helpe; so the wicked shall lift vp their eyes vnto the Hils, for they shall cry vnto the Hils for helpe, vnto the Moun∣taynes for succour, and vnto the Rocks for safety, yet they shall receiue none from neither. Me thinkes, I heare not onely Ieroms Trumpet sounding in mine Surgite mortui, ve∣nite ad iudicium. eares; but a horrible howling of a promiscuous multitude; a greater mourning, weeping, and lamentation was neuer heard in Rama, Matt. 2.18. Pa∣rents weeping for their children, chil∣dren for their parents; the husband for the wife, the wife for the husband; yet can they not helpe one another, but as they haue beene companions in sin, so shal they be cōpanions in torments, and such torments that are matchlesse, farre beyond the paynes of women, for her paynes end, either with a happy birth, or with as happy a buriall; for better is the day of death, then the day wherein we are borne: but the paines of the wicked are endles, easelesse, reme∣dilesse, and as they haue conceiued ini∣quity,
so shall they receiue the fruit thereof. Fourthly, S. Iohn describing the mise∣rable estate & condition of the Church vnder Antichrist, doth very liuely set forth the desperate estate and cōdition of the wicked, at the day of iudgemēt: they shall seeke for death in those dayes, and shall not finde it, they shall desire to dye, and death shall flye from them, Re∣uel.. Arist. l. 3. Ethic. 9.6. Death, according to the Phi∣losopher, is of all terribles the most ter∣rible, and vnto the naturall man it is euen death to remember death, yet full glad would the wicked bee, if they might returne to their graue againe, & neuer heare and feele that dreadfull doome of diuine iustice, denounced and inflicted vpon them, at that last e∣uerlasting iudgement in Hell,Gregor. Moral. Vbi erit miseris mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defe∣ctus sine defectu, quia mors ibi semper in∣cipit, & deficere nescit; where the wic∣ked shal be euer burning, and yet neuer consume; euer dying, and yet neuer dead; for there is death without a death, an end without an end, because
death alwayes begins, and knowes not how to end. If Death be acceptable vn∣to the aged, whose strength faileth, and are vexed with all kinde of euill things, Eccles. 41. vers. 2. and are depriued of all kinde of good, belonging vnto a naturall life, as of Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling, Feeling, how much more welcome would Death bee vnto the wicked at that dreadfull day of iudgement, whē they are banished out of the society of Saints, excluded out of heauen, sent packing to hell, where their sight shall bee afflicted with vn∣comfortable darknesse, and vgly De∣uils, their smelling with noisome stinks, their taste with rauenous hunger and bitternesse of gall, their hearing with hideous and horrible cryes, their fee∣ling with intolerable fire; yet notwith∣standing, death shall bee far from them, Hell must be their habitation, the De∣uils their companions, and they must embrace flames of fire in their armes, for their inheritance. 5. The Prophet Malachie in his fourth Chapter, vers. 1. prophecying of
the terrible day of the Lords comming, compares and likens it to an Ouen: Be∣hold, the day commeth, that shall burne as an Ouen, and all the proud, yea, and all that doe wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that commeth shall burne them vp, so that there shall not bee left neither roote nor branch. The Ouen whereinto the three Children were cast, was excee∣ding fearefull, being made seuen times more hotte, then it was wont to bee, and yet not an haire of their head was burnt, nor their coates changed, nor any smell of fire came vpon them, Dan. 3.27. But how dreadfull shall this fornace of hell be, being so infinitely hotter then that was! Our Sauiour Christ calls it a fornace of fire, Mat. 13.42.50. S. Iohn the Diuine, a lake of fire and brimstone, Reuel. 21.8. The Apostle to the He∣brewes, a deuouring fire, Heb. 10.27. an vnquenchable fire, Matth. 3.12. where∣in all vnbeleeuers, and the abominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and all lyars, the proud, and all that doe wickedly, shall be fuell: for they shal be bound in sheaues and bundles, saith
our Sauiour Christ, Matth. 13.30. The Adulterer and the Adulteresse in one bundle, the Drunkard and the Glutton in another bundle, the Couetous and Extortioner in another bundle, the Vsurer and the Oppressor in another bundle, the Swearer and the false Swea∣rer in another bundle, the Contemners of God and Breakers of his Sabbaths in another bundle, and shall bee cast as faggots and fire-brands into this Ouen, into this fornace, into this lake of brim∣stone, into this deuouring and vnquencha∣ble fire; vbi nec tortores deficient, nec tor∣ti miseri morientur, where their tor∣ments shall neuer cease, but there shal be torments alwaies for the body, and body alwaies for the torments, world without end. 6. Our Sauiour Christ setting forth the desperate estate, and condition of of the wicked at that day, saith,Anxietas gentium in consilij in∣opia, Bez. vsque ad desperatio∣nem, Ierom. that there shall be distresse of nations with perplexitie, Luke 21. the word  and  properly belongs vnto cap∣tiues and prisoners, that are so shut vp in dungeons, or close prisoners, and
brought vnto such a doubtfull and nar∣row strait, that there is no meanes pos∣sible for them to get out:Regiomen∣taenus in Brussia. or alluding vnto some kind of prisons, wherein the partie imprisoned is in such a perplexi∣tie, that he can neither sit, stand vpright, nor lye vpon the ground: such is the e∣state of the wicked at that day; they are in such a strait, in such a perplexitie, e∣uen vnto desperation, that they see no meanes possible to escape the hand of God. If they looke vpward, there is Index iratus,Greg. an angry Iudge; if they looke downeward, there is horrendum inferni chaos, the horrible wide gaping mouth of hell; if they looke on the one side of them, there are peccata accusan∣tia, their sinnes accusing them, if they looke on the other side of them, there are infinita daemonia ad supplicium tra∣hentia,Anselm. a Legion of deuils ready to draw them to execution; if they looke with∣out them, there is mundus ardens, a world of fire burning round about them, ready to deuoure them; if they looke within them, there is conscientia vrens, a griping conscience, the worme
that neuer dieth; Latere erit impossibile, to lye hid it wil be impossible, apparere erit intolerabile, to goe forward 'twill be intolerable. No maruell therefore though at the worlds end, men bee at their wits end, Luke. 21.26. Hinc illae lachrimae, hence arise Esaus teares, to no end nor purpose; Hinc eiulatuum angustiae, hence ariseth a horrible how∣ling, when all the wicked shall be gathered together as prisoners in the pit, and shal be shut vp inprison, Isaiah 23, 22. to be ar∣raigned at the barre of Gods tribunall, and to receiue according to those things, which they haue done in the flesh, 2. Cor. 5.10. Then tribulation and anguish, nay, desperation shal be vpon the soule of euery one that doth euil, Rom. 2.9. then shall the wicked not bee able to stand; because they haue walked in the counsell of the wicked, and stood too long in the way of sinners, Psa. 1.1. They cannot sit; because they haue been too long sit fast in sin, and Moablike, haue weltred in the dregges of their owne impieties, or as the Psalmist speaketh, haue sit too long in the seate of the scorne∣full.
They cannot lye along vpon the ground, because they haue had a suffici∣ent portion of rest already, they haue li∣ued at case all their life long, and done nothing but stretch themselues vpon their beds of downe, spent their daies in chambering and wantonnes, taking thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof; and like the Israelites, sit downe to eate and drinke, and so rise vp to play: but now their ioy shall be turned into heauinesse, their mirth into mourning, their singing into sighing, their case and rest into caselesse paines, and restlesse torments, for the wicked shall be turned into hell, and so shal al they that doe forget God. If wee looke backe againe vnto the Text, the Parent of my doctrine, wee shall finde, that it will yeeld much strength to the confirmation of this truth; then shall the Kings of the earth, and great men, and rich men, &c. They that in their life time haue beene a∣ble to controle whole Kingdoms with their countenance, and chase before them millions of men, shal be compeld
to seeke such weak shelters, such boot∣lesse refuges, as to hide themselues in dennes, creepe into the craggie rockes, and hollow vaults of the earth, as though that the infinitely-discerning eye of Almighty God could not finde them out: though they could goe downe into the very depth of the sea, or center of the earth, whither can they goe or clime from the al-discerning eie of Almightie God? though in their life time they thinke, that they shall neuer be remooued, but are as seemingly safe as Nebuchadnezar, or as secure from dan∣ger as Edom, though now their great∣nesse reacheth vnto heauen, and their do∣minion to the ends of the earth, Dan. 4.19 though now they build themselues state∣ly houses, for the honour of their Maiesty, vers. 27. Though now they seeme to dwell in the clefts of the rocks, secure and farre inough remote out of danger; moun∣ting aloft like Eagles in the aire, making their nest among the Starres, Obad. v. 3. as though no danger should euer come nigh their dwellings. Yet Kings with their Armies then shall flie, and be dis∣comfited,
and yet cannot flie from the presence of God, nor from beyond the reach of his arme. Thus you see, that the truth of this doctrine is confirmed by many proofes, that the estate and condition of the wicked is full of hor∣ror, at the dreadfull day of Iudge∣ment. Ob signorum multitudi∣nem.Now the reasons of this doctrine are many: the first is this, by reason of the manifold signes, and fearefull appariti∣ons both in heauen and earth, which will strike an horror, dread and ama∣zednesse into the hearts of the wicked: Saint Matthew describes them thus; the Sunne shall bee darkened, and the Moone shall not giue her light, the Stars shall fall from heauen, and the Powers of heauen shall be shaken, Mat. 24.29. The words are to be vnderstood not meta∣phorically, but properly of the alterati∣on of the works of nature; as adiuncts, circumstances, and fearefull presages of that dismall day; when the Sunne shall not stand still only, as at the prayer of Iosuah, Ios. 10.12. neither shall it one∣ly goe backward ten degrees, as vpon
Ahaz Diall, Isa. 38.8. but it shall be as blacke as a sackcloth of haire, Reuel. 6.12. We reade, that there was an exceeding great darknesse of the Sunne at our Sa∣uiours Passion throughout all the land, and many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose, Matth. 27.52. How fearefull then, and how wonderfull shall the comming of Christ vnto Iudgement be, when the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, and all the powerfull influ∣ences of heauen, shal grow blacke, dus∣kie, and vtterly be obscured? when all the dead, Saints, and sinners, great and small, both in Sea and land, shall come forth of their graues, whereof the first was a type and figure,Mat. 24.31 when the Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with a shoute, and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God, 1. Thes. 4.16. Saint Luke likewise de∣scribes the circumstances of that day thus, There shall be signes in the Sunne, and in the Moone, and in the Starres, the Sea, and the waters shal roare, mens harts shall faile them for feare, and for looking after these things that shall come vpon
the world, Luk. 21. vers. 25. An Earth∣quake of it selfe is very fearefull; as threatning the ruines of Citties, ha∣zarding the subuersion of many stately buildings, & shaking the very founda∣tions of Kings Palaces; and the inun∣dation of waters hath beene very ter∣rible, as our Westerne parts can very well witnesse; when men euen wisht for Noahs Arke againe, and sought the highest places for refuge, against the mercilesse waues of the Sea; some climbing the clifts of craggy rockes, some steeples, some the tops of houses, some trees, some floated vpon the wa∣ters, like Paul & his companions; many were drowned. But now when the Seas shall roare, Rockes shall rent, Mountaines shake and shiuer, and the glorious Heauens become darke and dusky: how shall the hearts of men be appaled with dread and terrour to be∣hold the same: and yet notwith∣standing, these things are but the be∣ginning of sorrowes, saith our Saui∣our Christ, but a Preamble, but a Pro∣em, but a Prologue to the Tragedy.
I am not ignorant but that the darkning of the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres in the holy Scripture, may sometimes bee taken for some kind of calamity ready to fall vpon some particular Kingdome; and that these signes doe not alway denotate properly the last day of Iudgement: but may be referd to some other parti∣cular times of iudgement; as the great ouerthrow of the Babylonish King∣dome, Isa. 13. or the last totall and finall destruction of the Iewes by the Romanes, Luk. 21. or that celestiall and truely Diuine victory of Constan∣tine the Great, against Maxentius and the Romane Gouernours; in the which the great power of almighty God, miraculously shone from heauen, in reuenging the precious bloud of the blessed Martyrs. So the Wise-man ex∣horting vs to thinke on God in youth, and not to deferre repentance vntill we be old; drawes one of his motiues and arguments to induce vs thereunto ab incommodo, from the manifold in∣conueniences and impediments ac∣companying
old age, that will hinder vs from the true performance of so waighty a worke: Repent, saith he, and turne to God while the Sun is not darke, nor the Moone, nor the Starres, Eccles. 12.2. that is, before old age approa∣cheth, when thou shalt haue no more pleasure in thy dayes, then if thou wert shut vp in a darke dungeon, and de∣bard of the comfort and benefit of those great and glorious lights of Heauen. The second reason, Why the state and condition of the wicked is full of hor∣rour at the day of Iudgement,Ob Iudicis, Maiesta∣tem. is, the Ma∣iesty of the Iudge, the beholding of whose countenance, so full of glory and maiesty, shall possesse the hearts of the wicked with amazement and asto∣nishment. Now the Iudge at this great Assise and generall Audit, is Christ himselfe; he that once stood be∣fore the iudgement seat of Pontius Pi∣late to receiue his sentence, shall now summon Pontius Piliate, and all the Potentates of the earth vnto his Consi∣story, to receiue their dreadful doome.
That Christ is the sole Iudge at the last day; they are his owne words. The Father iudgeth no man but hath commit∣ted all iudgement vnto the Sonne, Iohn 5. v. 22. And hath committed vnto him all power and authority to execute iudge∣ment, because he is the Sonne of man, v. 27. Because hee is the Sonne of man; and this cause yeelds vs comfort, else were we in a miserable case, hee doth partake of our nature; and therefore is pittifull, compassionate: yea, farre be∣yond humane reach or reason; the A∣postles likewise were commanded to testifie this truth, and to preach this point; that Christ is ordained by God, to bee Iudge of the quicke and dead, Act. 10. v. 42. So likewise in the 17. Act. 31. Paul preaching to the Atheni∣ans, presseth repentance; and the ar∣gument which he vseth to prouoke them thereunto, is the consideration of the day of Iudgement; when God will iudge the world in righteousnesse by that man, that is, Christ whom hee hath ordained. So likewise the Apostle in the second to the Romanes, ver. 16. God
shall iudge the secrets of men by Iesus Christ. And in the second to Timothy, c. 4. vers. 1. Iesus Christ shall iudge the quicke and dead at his appearing. Wher∣by it is manifest, that neither the Saints nor the Angels, not God himselfe: but mediante Christo, by Christ, into whose hands hee hath resigned all power and authority, shal iudge all the world at the last day. Whereunto if any obiect the words of the Apostle, in the first to the Co∣rinthians the 6. c. v. 2.3. The Saints shall iudge the world, and not onely the world, but the Angels too: I answere, that there is such a narrow band and strict vnion, betwixt Christ and the Saints, that they make one body: so that which is granted vnto the head, is not denied vnto the body: Christ as the chiefe principall vpon that Bench, doth pronounce that sentence already reuealed vnto vs in the Gospel, Matth. 25. v. 41. and the Saints as witnesses, shall subscribe vnto that sentence, and triumph at the iust condemnation of the wicked. This is manifest by the
mouth of our Sauiour Christ, Ye which haue followed me in the regeneration, shal sit vpon twelue Thrones, and iudge the twelue tribes of Israel, Matth. 19. v. 28. or as some of the Fathers doe ex∣pound the place,Amb. Chry. in hunc lo∣cum. The Saints shall iudge the world: Quia exemplo fidei perfidiam mundi damnabunt, as our Sauiour spea∣keth of the Niniuites, and of the Queen of the South; that they should rise vp against the Iewes to condemne them at the day of Iudgement, that is, by the example of their faith, they shall con∣demne them of infidelity. Thus Noah is said, by preparing the Arke, to saue him and his posterity from the generall Deluge of water, to condemne the world of infidelity, who would not beleeue at the preaching of Noah, that the world should bee destroyed with water, as many Atheists and Epicures now a dayes, at our preaching will not be∣leeue, that the world shall be destroy∣ed with fire, Heb. 11. vers. 7. and vnto this Origen saith well;Orig. Hom. in Numb. Non Paulus ipse sed opus Pauli, quod faciebat in Euan∣gelio, iudicabit mundum: So that to
conclude, the Faith, the Life, the Do∣ctrine, the Death of the Saints, for the testimony of the truth, shal condemne the wicked at the last day. And whereas it is said, the Saints shall iudge the Angels (leauing Saint Chrysostomes opinion,In hunc locum. who would by Angels to bee vnderstood Ministers, who are called Angels, Apoc. 2.1. and so the Bishops of the Churches of Asia are called Angels) wee may safely and most truly vnderstand the spirituall powers, Angels that fell from their first estate, and so are become reprobate Deuils: these cursed crue, I say, that are reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darknes, vnto the iudgement of the great day, Iude 6. shall yeeld themselues sub∣iect vnto the censure and sentence of the Saints. Thus hauing shewed, who that Iudge shall be, it remaines that I speake of his Maiesty, as farre as it is reuealed vnto vs in his word. As a King prouiding for warre, maketh choise of such men, as may best serue to set forth the royalty of a King, and for their valour able to
encounter with the best of his approch∣ing enemies: So Christ, when he comes riding vpon the cloudes, to encounter with the inhabitants of the earth, for sinne, he will come in power and great glory, Luke 21.27. and this his power doth consist in a glorious multitude of heauenly attendants; not silly Fisher∣men, as in the dayes of his infirmity, but a glorious troupe of holy Saints and blessed Angels, as consorting with him at the appearing of his Maiesty. Behold,, Iude 14 he commeth, saith S. Iude, with thousand of his Saints, to giue iudgement against all men, and to rebuke all the vngodly; and as Christ shall come with his many Saints, so shall he appeare with his in∣finite troupe and traine of Angels. For thousand thousands shall minister vnto him, and ten thousand thousands shall stand before him, yea he shall come with all his holy Angels, Dan. 7.10. which is to be vnderstood of Christ, & his com∣ming to Iudgement: for in the ninth verse mention is made of the Ancient of dayes, sitting downe vpon his Throne; that is, God the Father: and in
the thirteenth verse it is added, that the Sonne of man approched vnto the An∣cient of daies, which gaue vnto him power, honor and a Kingdome: that is, Christ, into whose hāds, God the Father hath giuen power and authority of iudging the quick and the dead, at the last day. Now if Iehoram was halfe astonished at the furious marching of Iehu & his company, & therefore sent forth horse∣men to meet him, and enquire whether it were peace or no, 2. King. 9.16. how much more will it strike the wicked with amazement, and dreadfull asto∣nishment, when they shall see Christ comming against them with millions of Saints, and Legions of Angels, and no conditions of peace will be accep∣ted of, but he will bruise them with a rod of iron, and breake them in peeces like a Potters Vessel? Psal. 2.9. And hee will not onely come in power, but in glory, in great glory: and no maruaile, for the Father hath glorified him, & will glo∣rifie him againe, when he hath gathe∣red together the Elect, from the foure corners of the earth, and both shall
make one glorious body in that King∣dome, so full of glory, where their Hymnes and Haleluiahs shal be glory, and honor, &c. for euer and for euer. It is the obseruation of some vpon the 24. of Matth. that the Sunne shall bee darkned,Ferus Spangin. and the Moone shall not giue her light, at the bright shining & glo∣rious appearing of Christ Iesus. As greater lights are wont to obscure the lesser (as the bright beames of the Sun, the glimmering light of a Candle) so the exceeding brightnesse and trans∣cendent glory of Christ, at his appea∣ring, shall darken all those glorious lamps and lights of heauen, whose sweet influence, & cōfortable beames wee now enioy day by day. To this S. Iohn the Diuine alludeth.1. Thes. 1.7. Act. 1.11. He had in his right hand seuen starres, and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and his face shone as the Sunne shineth in his strength, Reuel. 1.16. S. Paul setting forth the glory of his comming, saith, He shall come in flaming fire, with the sound of an Archangell: he shall come in the cloudes, and ride vpon the wings of
the winde. Saint Matthew thus; Then shall he sit vpon a Throne of glory, and be∣fore him shall bee gathered all Nations, Matth. 24.31. The gloriousnesse of which Throne Daniel describeth, say∣ing: His Throne was like a fiery flame, and the wheeles like burning fire, Dan. 7.6. And if the Earth and the Sea doe reele too and fro, start and stagger, and flye away▪ Reuel. 20.11. as not being a∣ble to behold the glory, nor endure the face of this approching Iudge: how much lesse shall the wicked bee able to stand, which are inutile terrae pondus, the very chaffe, the drosse, the off∣scouring of the earth, and therefore no maruaile, though they goe into the holes of the Rocks, and into the Caues of the earth, from before the feare of the Lord, and from the glory of his Maiesty, when he shall arise to destroy the earth, Isaiah 2.19. Mallent enim impij esse in inferno, quàm videre faciem irati Iudicis. The wicked had rather be throwne downe to hell, where is vtter darkenesse, then endure the glorious presence of so an∣gry▪ a Iudge. If S. Iohn the blessed Re∣uelator
of heauens secrets, fell at the feet of Christ as dead, when he beheld him, Reu. 1. v. 17. If Moses that man of God, could not indure the face of God: but couered his eyes with a vaile: If the Seraphins that stand about the Throne of God, couer their faces with two of their wings, as not being able to behold the glorious Maiesty of God, how shall the Maiesty of this our great God, euer our Sauiour Iesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. daunt the hearts of the wicked at his appearing, euen more then can be expressed? The third reason, why the estate and condition of the wicked is so full of horrour at the Day of Iudgement, is; by reason of the strict account that they must render: All men without a∣ny exception, Adam and all his posteri∣ty; as many as haue beene dead be∣fore, & as many as are then liuing: and they that are then liuing, shall not pre∣uent them that sleepe: I say all men, and so saith the Apostle, Wee shall all appeare before the Iudgement seat of Christ, Rom. 14. v. 10. Euery one of vs shall giue an
account of himselfe to God, v. 12. And euery man shall receiue the things which are done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it bee good or euill, 2. Cor. 5. v. 10. And not onely all men, but all the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their owne habitati∣on,2. Pet. 3.4. are reserued in euerlasting chaines, vnder darknesse, vnto the Iudgement of the Great Day, Iude, vers. 6. This truth the Deuils themselues did confirme by their desperate crying out, fearing their present executiō, vnto the which they themselues know they are reser∣ued; Quid nobis & tibi, What haue we to doe with thee, Iesus, thou Sonne of God? art thou come to torment vs before the time? Matth. 8. v. 29. And this feare is the chaines and fetters before menti∣oned, in the which the Deuils are ma∣nacled, vntill they bee brought forth vnto the full execution of the wrath of God in Hell, the place of Deuils, and all the damned. And not onely men, and Deuils; but vnreasonable creatures, the heauen and the earth, and whatsoeuer is contained
within this spacious Vniuerse, shall be iudged also after their manner at that day. So saith Saint Peter, The heauens and the earth are reserued vnto fire a∣gainst the day of Iudgement, and of the destruction of vngodly men, and the hea∣uens shall passe away with a noise, that is, they shall passe away from a mutable condition, vnto an immutable degree of perfection; The Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the workes that are therein shall bee burnt vp. Not that the great Fabricke, and glorious workmanship of heauen and earth shal be burnt, and brought to nothing: for the earth remaineth for euer, Eccles. 1. v. 3. Sed ab ea quae nunc habet specie, per ignem tergetur, ea tamen in sua natura seruatur, Greg. l. 17. Moral. c. 5. They shall bee purged of their corruptible qualities, and purified from the filth of their imperfectiōs, as the Sun & Moon shall be no more eclipsed, and sublu∣nary things shall be no more subiect to generation and corruption: but as the gold cast into the fire, is purged frō the drosse, whereby it becomes a refined
substance; so the heauens and the earth shall put on, as it were, new appa∣rell, adorned with a new fashion: for the .fashion of this world passeth away, 1. Cor. 7.31. but not the nature and sub∣stance. Hierom prooueth as much by that place, Isa. 30.26. The light of the Moone shall be as the light of the Sunne, and the light of the Sunne shall be seuen-fold; non interitum significat pristinorum, sed commutationem in melius. Whereby the holy Ghost doth signifie, not a de∣struction of those lights which were before; but a change into a better. Caluin goeth farther, saying; that they shall bee fellowes with the Saints in that glorious estate. And so saith the Apostle, the . Non singu∣la generum, sed genera singulorum, Ordi. Gloss. . Creature (that is the world) shall be deliuered from the bon∣dage of corruption, into the glorious liber∣ty of the Sonnes of God, Rom. 8. v. 21. So Acts 3.21. there is promised a . Non singu∣la generum, sed genera singulorum, Ordi. Gloss. . re∣stauration of all things; So Psal. 10. The heauens shall all wax old as doth a gar∣ment, and they shall be changed, that is, into a better forme and fashion. So S. Iohn saw a new Heauen, and a new
earth, Apo. 21.1. So S. Peter, We looke for a new heauen, and a new earth, according to his promise, &c. v. 13. Hence is it, that the perpetuity of Christ his spiri∣tuall Kingdome, is shadowed out vnto vs by the continuance of the Sun and Moone. His Throne shall be as the Sun, Psal. 89. v. 36.37. and shall be esta∣blished for euermore as the Moone, Psal. 72. ve s. 5. Gods children shall feare him, so long as the Sunne and Moone indureth, vers. 7. And Christ his name shall indure, so long as the Sunne, vers. 17. Therefore it must bee granted, that these creatures shall be re∣stored, and so continue without decay, or corruption; or else it must must bee yeelded, that Christs Kingdome must haue an end, which may not bee gran∣ted. But after what manner this instau∣ration shall be, it is not manifested vn∣to vs in the word of God: and to what end they shall serue, whether as Mo∣numents of Gods glory; it were curio∣sity to search or determine, sufficient is it to know, that they shall bee iudged after their kind.
But if any should obiect against what hath bin spoken, as namely, that al men shall giue an account: The sixt verse of the first Psalme, the wicked shall not stand in Iudgement, And that of Iohn 5.24. He that beleeueth in him that sent me, hath euerlasting life, and shall not come into Iudgement.Lombardus ex Grego∣rio binos facit ordi∣nes Iudi∣candorum, alij iudi∣cantur & pereunt, alij non iudi∣cantur & pereunt, alij iudicantur & regnant, alij non iu∣dicantur & regnant, Lomb. l. 4. dist. 49. These places in∣deed haue much troubled the Fathers, in so much, that Hillarie and Origen were of opinion, that neither the godly Faithfull, nor the wicked Infidels shall be iudged: the one being cleared, the other condemned in their owne con∣science. Ambrose thinketh, that the righteous only shall come into Iudge∣ment, quia festinant innoxij adiudicium, the righteous they do hasten to Iudge∣ment, and long to heare that cōforta∣ble sentence pronounced: Come yee blessed of my Father, &c. But the places may better be reconciled thus: there is a twofold Iudgement, a Iudgement of absolution, and a Iudgement of condem∣nation. The wicked shall not stand in that Iudgement, which the righteous shall receiue, as namely, to bee quitted
and absolued. The latter part of the verse thus expounding the former, nor the sinners in the assembly of the righte∣ous: and the righteous shall not come into Iudgement, that is, shall not bee condemned with the wicked: for they shall both be iudged apart, the one at the right hand,Mat. 25.34.41. Non iudica∣bitur .i. no condemna∣bitur, Irenaeus. the other at the left hand of Christ, and shall receiue a farre diffe∣rent doome, as farre as a curse differs from a blessing, hell from heauen; so that the Texts alleaged are thus to bee reconciled; The righteous shall not come into Iudgement (that is) into condemnation; the wicked shall not stand in Iudgement, (that is) they shall be conuinced in their owne conscience of the iust sentence, and deserued con∣demnation, that they shall not be able to gaine say, or contradict. Now the strictnesse of their account will appeare, if wee, consider how many things they shall bee call'd vn∣to an account for. First,De cogita∣tionibus. of the thoughts of our heartes, though neuer so secret∣ly contriued, though neuer vttered by the tongue, though neuer acted by the
hand, yet if there be a deliberate con∣sent, and free approbation of the will and affections, and a full resolution to put the same in practice, if we had place and fit opportunitie; I say, this sinne of thought shall not goe for nought at the day of Iudgement; else why should the Lord take notice of all the imagina∣tions of the thoughts of his heart? Genes. 6.5. why should the Lord desire so much the heart, My sonne, giue mee thy heart: but because it is the roote and fountaine, either of good or euill? If it be the storehouse of good things, and Treasurie of diuine meditations, it is a Temple meete for God to dwell in: but if it bee a cage of vncleane birds, of euill thoughts, it is already possessed with so many deuils. If the euil thoughts of the heart were not sinnes, and so by a consequent come to Iudgement: Why should the Lord stile himselfe the searcher of the heart, and trier of the reines, were it not so punish? according to the saying of the Wise man; There shall inquisition be made for the thoughts of the vngodly, there shall not a wicked
thought passe in Iudgement, Wis. 1.9. If adultery be a sinne, and lusting after a woman, though it breakes not out into act, be adulterie, Matth. 5.28. And no a∣dulterer shall enter into the Kingdome of Heauen, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. then are the thoughts of the heart sinne, and so by a consequent, they shall come to Iudge∣ment, and shall preuaile in Iudgement. If manslaughter be a sinne, as indeede it is a crying sinne:1. Ioh. 4.15 and if he that hateth his brother be a manslayer, and no man∣slayer shall inherit the Kingdome of Hea∣uen, Reuel. 21.8. then are the thoughts of the heart, sinne, and they shall bee brought foorth to the condemnation of the wicked, at the day of Iudge∣ment. Hence is it, that our Sauiour Christ so sharpely inueigheth against the Scribes and Pharises, who stood so much vpon their owne righteousnesse in fulfilling the Law; thinking that if they did not violate the Law in act, by killing, or committing adultery, or by any other actuall transgression, contra∣ry to the Law of God, that they had performed the Law to a haires bredth.
But our Sauiour reproouing them and their righteousnesse, which they did so much extol, that they should not enter into the Kingdome of Heauen, not∣withstanding this their righteousnesse, sheweth, that there was a stricter course required in performing the Law: for whosoeuer is angry with his bro∣ther vnaduisedly, shall bee culpable of iudgement, Matth. 5.22. The Law con∣demneth euery inclination to be euill, and the heart doth kill as well as the hand, in will, in wish, in desire: the heart committeth adultery, the heart doth steale as well, or rather ill, as the out∣ward members. For if we consent to those wicked motions suggested by Satan, (though wee neuer performe them outwardly in act) yet before God wee haue done the sinne: and if the thought bee truly sinne, farre greater is that sinne of act. Yea, the sinne of thought is not onely a sinne, but is the very originall, the fountaine, and roote, from whence all other sinnes do spring; and therefore saith our Sauiour Christ, That which goeth into the man, de∣fileth
not the man: but those things which come forth from the hart, as euil thoughts, murders adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies, these defile the man, Mat. 15.19. So that there is not a sinne, of what nature soeuer, great or small, from the least infirmitie to the highest blasphemie, but it had its first beginning from the heart: thought is the seede of all sins, and though but a spark at the first, yet wil it encrease into a flame, if it be not repressed. For this is sins gradation, first,Hall. Me∣ditat. there is presented a fit obiect; from the obiect, is raised an il suggestion, suggestion brings on de∣light, delight consent, consent ende∣uour, endeuour practice, practice cu∣stome, custome excuse, excuse defence, defence obstinacie, obstinacy boasting of sinne, and boasting of sinne a repro∣bate sense; when the custome of sinne hath taken away the sense of sinne, and miserable man is sold as a bond∣slaue vnto Satan to commit wickednes, euen with greedines. And therefore Sa∣lomons counsel in this kind is very wor∣thy to be embraced. Keepe thine heart
with all diligence, for thereout commeth life: If thou keepest it not diligently, and warily, thereout will proceed death, Pro∣uerbs, 4.23. As Christs aduice vnto the Church is, that the little Heresies. Foxes be ta∣ken, and bee kild whilest they are but Cubs, (not that they can doe much harme, but if they liue vntill they bee Foxes, they will spoile, kill, and make a prey of any thing whatsoeuer:) euen so the thoughts of the heart at the first, may seeme to be but small sinnes; but if they bee not slaine at the first, and smothered as soone as they be concei∣ued, they will breake forth into actuall transgressions, and so lade the soule with sinne; kill therfore these Cocka∣trices in the egge, slay them whilest they be but Cubs: Oh, happie is he that taketh these young children, and dasheth their braines against the stones: and so much the rather, because they are sinnes, and shall come to Iudgement, for the Lord shall iudge the secrets of men, Rom. 2.16. Secondly, Inquisition shall not only bee made of the thoughts of the heart,
but wee must also giue an account of the words of the mouth: They are the words of him that is the word of truth; Of euery idle word that men shall speake, they shall giue an account thereof at the day of Iudgement, Matth. 12.36. If a man might be called to an account but for his grosser sort of sinnes, as for his Whoredom, Swearing, Cheating, Stea∣ling, Vsuries, Briberies, Extortions, dishallowing of Sabbaths, and the like; there were some hope of safety, al∣though, God knowes, there is no hope of the saluation of such, without a spee∣dy and vnfained repentance; which doth consist in an holy confession of their sinnes; in an hearty sorrowing for the same;Sermonem otiosum vocat ina∣nem, & nullius v∣tilitatis, qui sc: nihil aedificatie∣nis, vel fructus ad∣fert, Mar∣lor. ex Cal. in a faithfull restitution of that which hee hath taken from any man by falsity and wrong, and in a godly reformation of his forepast life: but God will bring into iudgemēt, not onely euery secret thought, but euery idle word: and who, alas, shall be able to answere him, one of a thousand? Iob 9.3. Now an idle word is that, which is spoken without a fruitfull edification
of the hearers: for our wordes ought not onely to be few, but also they must be good, and gracious, they must be sa∣uoury, and well seasoned with the salt of the Sanctuary, and therefore Iob cals the eare the taster of the Word; that as we, in the common foode of our body swallow not any thing downe into the stomack, but what the pallat approues to be good, and the grinders prepare for digestion: so the eare will not giue passage vnto any word, vnlesse it rellish of the Spirit of sanctification, and bee truely good to the vse of edifying, and may conuay some spiritual nourishmēt vnto the soule: and therefore it is the exhortation of the blessed Apostle, Let no cōmunication proceed out of the mouth, but that which is good, to the vse of edify∣ing, that it may minister grace vnto the hearers, Ephes. 4.29. The tongue is the Harbinger of the heart, and the truest Ambassador, both of the minde and meaning, it will soone discry and make manifest vnto others, what Countrey∣men we are, whether we belong vnto the Prouince of Babel, or the Land of
Canaan. If wee belong vnto the Pro∣uince of Heauen, then our speech is of this Countrey, our language is heauen∣ly; we are frequent in praising of God, in talking of his Word, and in telling forth what great things the Lord hath done vnto our soules: as our affections are in heauen, so is our talke of heauen, and heauenly things. But if we belong vnto that infernall Kingdome, then is the speech carnall, sensuall, diabolicall; then is the tongue exercised in the lan∣guage of that Countrey, in swearing, false-swearing, cursing, banning, and blaspheming: then is our communica∣tion such, as may helpe to aduance the Kingdome of Satan, whereof wee our selues are limmes, and whereof hereaf∣ter without repentance, wee shall be e∣uerlastingly burning, and neuer consu∣ming fire-brands. To conclude therefore, if euery man must giue-an account of euery idle word, not tending to the edification of himselfe and others, and of all corrupt and filthy cōmunication, whereby hee hath grieued the holy Spirit of God, E∣phos.
4.30. Tremble then, thou swearing and false swearing tongue, whose Rhe∣torick and Eloquence of cōmon talke, is an execrable oth, nay, as many othes as wordes: thou that canst not sell a penny worth, or a pound weight, with∣out dozens of othes: we haue a world full of such tongues, and because of such kind of tongues the lād mournes; Gods heauy iudgements are gone out against it: if account must bee made of euery idle word, what shall become of that tongue that hath pleaded an vniust cause to the peruerting of Iustice, wre∣sting the Law, to the vtter vndoing of the fatherlesse & widdowes? what shall become of that tongue, that cannot speake a word, in the defence of the poore, vnlesse it be well tipt with gold, the oyle that makes euery ioynt to bee nimble, and euery bad cause to goe for current? If account must bee made of euery idle word, then stand amazed, thou vaine and wanton tongue, vnder∣stand and quake when thou hearest mentioned the terrible day of Iudge∣ment; thou, whose words doe not on∣ly
not tend to edification, but to dis∣grace the Scripture, the word of God it selfe; thou that thinkest no iest wil goe for current, vnlesse it be seasoned with the salt of the Sanctuary: such is the profanenesse of the age in which wee liue, that euery Actor vpon the stage, euery profane Swaggerer, and euery mincing Minion cānot speake a word, but must haue a fling and gird at san∣ctified Scripture; assuredly, thine ac∣count is the greatest, thy case fearefull, thy iudgement intolerable. Let euery man therefore take heede vnto his waies, that he offend not in his tongue; let him refraine his tongue from euill; let him desire the Lord to set a watch before his lips, that he may not speake his owne wordes, but such as the Lord by his word cōmands him to speake; for if our wordes are not such as they ought to be, wee shall giue an account for them at the day of Iudgement. 3. We shall not only be called vn∣to an account for our thoughts,De operi∣bus. and wordes, but also of our works, where∣soeuer and whensoeuer committed,
whether by day, or by night; whether in the field, or in the Citie; whether in the City, or in the house; whether in the house, or in our chamber; whether in our chamber, or in our bed; there is nothing couered, that shall not bee re∣uealed; nothing hid, that shall not bee knowne, and made manifest, before God, before the Angels, before Saints, before the whole world, at the day of Iudgemēt: so saith the blessed Apostle, We must all appeare before the Iudgement seate of Christ, and there receiue accor∣ding to our workes, 2. Cor. 5.10. God will giue vnto euery man according to his waies, and according to the fruit of his works; they that haue done good, shal goe into euerlasting life, but they that haue done ill, shal goe into euerlasting fire: This, God himselfe reuealed to S. Iohn for truth it selfe: I saw the dead, great and small, stand before God, and they were iudged according to their workes, Apoc. 20.12. To this purpose saith August. In quibus actibus quis{que} homo inuentus fuerit, quando exierit de corpore, in his iudicabitur; in what sins
soeuer man goes out of the body vnre∣pented of, of the same hee shall be iud∣ged at the day of Iudgement: as the Preacher therefore concludes his Booke; so will I conclude this point, God will bring euery worke vnto Iudge∣ment, with euery secret thing, whether it be good or euill, Eccles. 12. v. 14. 4. Neither shall we bee onely called vnto an account for our thoughts, our words, and workes: but also for our goods and possessions, how we haue gotten them, how we haue kept them, how wee haue spent them; whether we haue gained our goods through o∣thers hurt, building our houses like the Moth, Iob 27. vers. 12. The Moth is made fatte by spoyling the booke and barkes wherein they liue; so the coue∣tous is made rich in deuouring the poore: Of which sort are these, Vsu∣rers, Extortioners, Cheaters, Brokers, and all couetous Ahabs whatsoeuer, that ioyne house to house, land to land, vntil there be no place for the poore to dwell in: For great men must render great account, when that great Land-Lord
comes to reckon with them, and biddes them giue an account of their steward-ship: for they may be no lon∣ger stewards. Secondly, we shall giue an account how wee haue kept them. Indeed wee are but keepers of our wealth, though wee had the world at will:Amb. l. de Nab. c. 14. Custos es tuarum, non Dominus fa∣cultatum, Thou art but a keeper, thou art not Lord ouer thy goods and sub∣stance.Chrys. Deus enim diuitiarum suarum dispensatores esse voluit, non Dominos: God will haue vs dispensers and dispo∣sers of our goods, vnto the good of o∣thers, and not to bee Lords ouer them our selues; and therfore they be goods, Non quod faciunt bonum, sed vnde faci∣as bonum: not that they make a man good, but because a man by them may doe good, imploying them to the glory of God, & the good of his neighbour, and his owne comfort. First, vnto God, laying out temporall things, for spirituall comforts: in maintaining the Preachers, in defending the Gospell, in repayring his Temples. Secondly, thou must lay them out vpon thy neighbor;
making friends of thine vnrighteous Mammon, as thy Master commands thee, Luk. 16. v. 9. Stips pauperum the∣saurus inopum, was the word of the good Emperour Constantius, The rich mans treasure, is the poore mans stock; so that he that denies them what they stand in need of, denies them their due; of which sort Saint Iames speaks of, that haue their presses full of gar∣ments, and their chests full of coyne: but their gold and siluer is cankered, their garments motheaten, whiles Christ himselfe in the person of a beg∣ger, stands at their doore with an emp∣ty belly, and a naked backe, crying for a morsell of bread to put in their belly, or some old cast garmēt to couer their nakednesse, and yet they are sent away as comfortlesse and as empty-handed, as euer they came thither. No maruell therefore, though Saint Iames so sharp∣ly inueigheth against rich men, against such kinde of keepers of their goods: Goe to now, ye rich men, weep and howle, for the miseries that shall come vpon you; your riches are corrupted, and your gar∣ments
motheaten, your gold and siluer is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witnesse against you, and shall eate vp your flesh, as it were fire; ye haue heaped vp treasure against the last dayes, Iames 5. v. 1.2.3. Thirdly, he shall giue an ac∣count how hee hath spent them; whe∣ther vpon workes of superstition to the dishonour of God; or in the vnne∣cessary quarrels of the Law, to the hin∣derance of his neighbour, or in spen∣ding of them vpon Whores and Har∣lots, vntill pox and penury bee his end; or in surfetting and drunkennesse; to the ruinating of his estate, danger of soule, hurt of body, losse of credite, griefe of friends, vndoing of his chil∣dren;1. Tim. 5.8. and such a one is worse then an In∣fidell. To conclude therfore this point, euery man must giue his account vnto God; the King as wel as the Subiects, the Prince as well as the People, Mini∣sters and Magistrates, Parents and chil∣dren, Masters and seruants, rich and poore, good and bad, and euery trans∣gression from the highest blasphemy, to the least infirmity, must be brought
to a strict tryall at the Day of Iudge∣ment. Which is the third reason ag∣grauating the fearefull estate and con∣dition of the wicked at the Day of Iudgement. The fourth reason why the estate and condition of the wicked is so full of horror at the Day of Iudgement, is, by reason of the multitude of witnes∣ses, and accusers, which shall come forth to witnesse, accuse, and con∣demne them at that Day. As first of all, GOD himselfe aboue them, which knoweth and sealeth vp their sinnes, as it were in a bag, Iob 14.17. And therfore saith Iob, in a case of controuersie that could not bee decided; My witnesse is in heauen. So Samuel declaring to the people his integrity, how vprightly he had conuerst amongst them; hee takes the Lord to be a witnesse betwixt him and the people, 1. Sam. 12. v. 5. Where∣by we may see how fearefull a thing it is, thus to dally with our all-seeing and all-knowing God; as to call his sacred Maiesty, to be a witnes in matters of vn∣truth, cōtrary to our own knowledge,
and the testimony of our owne consci∣ence. For assuredly the Lord will bee a witnesse, a swift witnesse; they are the words of his owne mouth: I will be a swift witnesse against the Sorcerers, a∣gainst the Adulterers, against false swearers, against those that oppresse the hireling in his wages, the widdow and the fatherlesse, and that turne aside the stran∣ger from his right, and feare not me, saith the Lord of hostes, Mal. 3. v. 5. The second sort of accusers are the Deuils, the whole rabble of that infer∣nal Kingdome; the common & sworne aduersaries to all mankind, and if they dare to accuse the brethren, the Saints, and seruants of God: as hee did that perfect and vpright man of God, holy Iob. Assuredly this will bee his practice at that day, he wil bring forth a most exact bill of all our sinnes committed all our life long. Presto erit, saith Augustine, Diabolus ante tribunall Christi, & reci∣tabit verba professtonis nostrae, & obijciet nobis in faciem omnia quae fecimus; in quo die & in quo loco peccauimus, & quae facere debuimus. The Deuil wil be rea∣dy
before the Tribunall of Christ, and will recite the words of what wee haue made profession of, and obiect our owne sinnes to our faces; in what day, and at what place wee did commit them, and all other circumstances; howsoeuer wee now cast them behind our backes, then will hee bring them forth before our faces. It behooues vs therfore, to be watchful ouer our owne wayes, considering the Deuil watch∣eth ouer vs so, that hee wil not let passe any one of our sinnes vnregistred: but will bring them forth to the confusion of the wicked; yea if it were possible, of the Saints, at the day of Iudgement. The third sort of accusers are the An∣gels beside them. I wil not here main∣taine Origens opinion, who saith, Vnus∣quis{que} Angelorum aderit, producens illos quibus praefuit, qui testimonium prohibe∣bit quot annis circa eum laborauit ad bo∣num instigando, sed monita eius spreuit. That as euery man hath his particular Angel attending on him, prouoking him to good, protecting him from e∣uill; euery mans particular Angell shal
witnesse against the wicked at that day. But farre greater is the royalty of Gods children, they haue gards of Angels, thousands of Angels doe inui∣ron them about, and defend them from all their foes, though neuer so many, neuer so mighty; sometime stri∣king off the fetters in which they are tyed prisoners, and making passage for them, by throwing open the dores of the prison; and as these swift-win∣ked messengers doe obserue the wayes of the wicked, whose ministery they haue abused; and as they haue presu∣med to commit sin in the sight of the Angels: the Angels being spectators and eye-witnesses to all their actions, shall bee produced as so many accusers at the day of Iudgement. Tremble then, thou profane and loose liuer, that darest to cōmit that in the sight of the Angels, which thou fearest to doe in the sight of little children. The fourth sort of accusers are the Saints before them, whom they haue despised, scorned, and abused in this life, whom they haue accounted as the
scumme, and the off-scowring of all things, men vnworthy to liue, whom they haue had in derision, and a prouerbe of reproch; as the wicked haue iudged the godly at their pleasure, so the Saints then shal iudge the wicked, the world, that is, the company of the wicked: and they that in this life haue been made the foote-stooles of the wicked, shall then sit vpon Thrones, iudging the twelue Tribes of Israel, Matth. 19.28. The fifth sort of witnesses are the wicked, witnessing against the wicked. The men of Niniue, saith our Sauiour Christ shall rise vp with this generation, and shall condemne it; the Queene of the South shall rise vp with this generation in the Iudgement, and shall condemne it, Matth. 12.40.41. Tyre and Sydon shall witnesse against Corazin and Bethsai∣da, Sodom and Gomorrah against Ca∣pernaum, Ephraim against Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim, the Phari∣ses against the Sadduces, the Sadduces against the Pharisees, the Pope against the Turke, the Turke against the Pope; and they that know not whether there
bee a holy Ghost or no, shall witnesse against the formall Protestants of our time, who often talke of the Spirit, and yet walk after the flesh, hauing a shew of godlinesse, and yet denie the power thereof; yea, and not onely so, but birds of a feather, such as haue been compa∣nions in sinne, and haue had fellow∣ship in the vnfruitfull workes of dark∣nesse, shal witnes one against another; the Egyptians against the Egyptians, the swearer against the swearer, the Ex∣tortioner against the Extortioner, the Vsurer against the Vsurer, the Drun∣kard against the Drunkard, and they that haue slept in the same bed of sin, the Adulterer against the Adulteresse, one wicked wretch shal witnes against onother at the day of Iudgement. And what know we, but that the Satyrs of Virginia may witnesse against many seeming Saints in England at that day? they vnto whom the light of the Gos∣pell hath not dawned as yet, but are nuzled in darknesse, bred in blindnesse, and led along in ignorance, shal doubt∣lesse witnesse against many of vs, that
liue vnder the sound of the Word, en∣ioying the free passage of the Gospell, the pure preaching of the Word of God in season, and out of season, that haue had so many Sermons of repen∣tance that haue had so many threats of Gods Iudgements denounced against vs; and yet wee perseuere in the same sinnes which wee finde condemed by the Word; for where grace is most plen∣tiful, there sin is most sinful: doubtlesse, the Heathens, Pagans, and Infidels, Whores and Harlots, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heauen, before such, as turne the grace of God into wan∣tonnesse. Neither shall the wicked onely one witnesse against another, but they shal all witnes against themselues. Out of the hellish horror of a distracting conscience, they shall witnesse against themselues, and pronounce themselues guiltie of euerlasting condemnation: for when the Ancient of daies shall sit downe vpon his white Throne, before whom Heauen and Earth fled away, then shall the Bookes be opened; and
the Bookes are two, the Booke of the Law, and the Book of thine owne con∣science: The Law will pleade for trans∣gression of her Precepts, and will tell thee what thou shouldest haue done: thy conscience will present vnto thy view, the things which thou hast done, and shall pronounce the sentence of condemnation with so shrill a voice, that thy deafest eare may heare it: this booke of conscience is in thine owne keeping, lockt vp within the closet of thine owne bosome; none can falsifie it, neither is there any thing written in this booke, but what thine owne hand hath subscribed therunto; therfore thou canst not take any exception against it. As was Gods proceeding against Iuda and Ierusalem, such shall his procee∣ding bee against the wicked at the day of Iudgement: before he pronounced their Iudgement, hee appealed vnto their owne consciences, whether they had not deserued, that God should vt∣terly reiect and forsake them; O Inha∣bitants of Ierusalem, and men of Iudah, iudge,Isaiah 5. I pray you, betwixt mee and my
Ʋineyard. Iudge you, that is, looke in∣to your owne consciences, and there reade your owne sinnes, and iudge whether you haue not deserued, that I should take away the hedge: that is, leaue off to defend you from your enemies; and suffer the Babylonians to inuade and spoile you. Make you desolate, that is; destitute of politicall gouernment, and that Briers and Thornes should grow vp: that is, many of you carried away vnto the Idolatrie, and other sins of the Babylonians; and that the clouds should raine no raine: that is, that you should be depriued of all kind of comforts in your captiuitie, altogether pining with sorrow,Psalm. 137 sitting downe by the waters of Ba∣bylon weeping, and hanging vp your Harps vpon the Willow trees that are there∣in. So shall it bee at the day of Iudge∣ment, God will appeale vnto the con∣sciences of the wicked, and the consci∣ences of the wicked shal frame that des∣perate conclusion of euerlasting con∣demnation against themselues. They shall not bee brought to the fight of their sinnes by parables, as Iuda and
Ierusalem here, or as Dauid, 1. Sam. 12. But their sinnes shall be written in the book of their conscience, in such great capitall Letters, that he that runnes may reade it, and so shall they be eui∣dently conuicted and conuinced by the contents of this booke, and testimony of their owne conscience: so that, as Eliphaz said falsely of Iob, thine owne mouth, and not I, condemne thee, shall the iust Iudge of all things at that day speake truly vnto thee by the mouth of thine owne conscience, O thou euill seruant, thine owne conscience bea∣ring witnesse against thee, will I con∣demne thee:Ascendat itaque ho∣mo tribunal mentis suae, si timet, il∣lud memi∣nerit, quod oportet eum ante tribu∣nal Christi exhiberi, August. Hom. 50. Quicquid enim erubesci∣mus confiteri, hoe totum proprijs linguis coram totomundo proclam abimus. Et a∣pertis conscientiarum libris singulis mani∣festabimus: Whatsoeuer, saith Bernard, we now blush to confesse before men, wee shall then proclaime with our own tongues before the whole world, and the booke of our conscience being laid open, wee shall make it manifest vnto all men. The last sort of accusers are the
creatures without them; the crea∣tures, I say, whose vse, by right of inhe∣ritance, belong properly vnto none, saue vnto the children, of God, 1. Cor. 3.25. Rom. 8.32. Howsoeuer, churlish Nabals and couetous Ahabs, by vsur∣pation doe withhold them from them, the sinne that is committed in the vse of them, shall rise vp in iudgement to the condemnation of the wicked. And not onely the sensible creatures, groa∣ning and trauelling in paine, till they be deliuered from the bondage of cor∣ruption, which against their will suf∣fered vnder the wicked: but euen the very senselesse creatures, The heauen shall reueale their iniquity, and the earth shall rise vp against them, Iob 20. v. 27. The stones crying out of the wall, and the beame out of the timber, Heb. 2. v. 11. that is, they that haue erected their houses by iniquity, by oppression, by keeping backe the hirelings wages: this their sinne in so doing, shall wit∣nesse against them, nay, the Moth of the garment, and the rust of their can∣kered coyne, shall witnesse against the
couetous worldling at the last day, Iames 5. v. 3. Nay, the dead Letter of the Bible, which thou carriest about thee, shall witnesse against thee, if thou make not good vse of it. Thus Christ told the Iewes, Doe not thinke that I will accuse you to my Father: there is one that accuseth you, euen Moses in whom yee trust, Iohn 5. v. 45. In illa die vltionis nihil habe bit, quod respondere possit homo pec∣cator, vbi coelum & terra, sol & Luna, & totus mundus stabunt aduersus nos in Te∣stimonium peccatorum nostrorum, Hugo. de S. Ʋictor. In that day what shall sin∣full man answer for himselfe, when the Heauen and the Earth, the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres; nay, the whole world wil stand vp against the wicked, in testimony of their sinnes? and yet if all these should hold their peace, Ipse cogitationes nostrae, & ipsa specialiter opera, stabunt tante oculos nostros, nos ante Deum accusantes, Chrys. super il∣lud, Mat. 24. & virtutes, &c. Our very owne thoughts, & especially our owne workes, shal stand before our eyes, and accuse vs before God.
The fift reason, why the state and cōdition of the wicked is so full of hor∣ror at the day of Iudgement, is, by rea∣son of that fearefull sentence of con∣demnation, pronounced against them by that iust and most vpright Iudge. Their sentence is already reuealed vnto them by our Sauiour Christ, in the 25. of S. Matth. vers. 41. Depart from me, yee cursed, into euerlasting fire, prepared for the Deuill and his Angels. This sen∣tence is very fearefull, whether we re∣spect the words themselues, the Iudge, from whose mouth they doe proceede, or the irreuocablenesse of them. Depart from me,] Those are words of separation; you cursed, wordes of detestation; into euerlasting fire, words of desperation; prepared for the Deuill and his Angels, a dolefull exemplifiea∣tion. Depart from mee: what shall the Creature do, when he is banished from the presence of the Creator: Oh, the bitter fruit of sin, which causeth the Lord to denie that Creature to be his, as not belonging vnto him, but vtterly to disclaime him, which once he made
to his owne Image. O, consider, this in time, who shall receiue thee; when God casts thee out from his face: As∣sure thy selfe, euery Creature shall re∣fuse her comfort to thee, if a drop of cold water might be a reliefe vnto thee, thou shalt not get it. But as thy whole life was but a turning backe from the Lord, a wandring, and a going a who∣ring after lying vanities; at that day thou shalt receaue this for a recom∣pence of thine erring, Depart from me: and who are they that must depart, the cursed: they that in their life time haue beene renowned by great and glorious Titles, as King Prince, Duke, Noble, Reuerend, Worshipfull; now all their glory shall bee turned into shame, their honor into ignominy, and their seemingly blessed estate, shall be turned into a truely cursed: yee cursed depart from me; and whither? into fire: and what fire? euerlasting fire: If this fire were but like that fained fire of Popish Purgatory, where venial sinnes are clensed, & purged, there were some hope that their torments should haue
an end: but they that are cast into this fire, shall there lye, and cry, and fry for euer: Vbi per millia millia annorum cru∣ciandi, nec tamen in secula liberandi,Mat. 9.46. there they shall continue a thousand; nay, ten thousand; nay, a thousand thousand, as many yeares as there are haires vpon thine head, starres in hea∣uen, drops of water in the Sea, Moates in the Sunne, leaues in Autumne, all these must be doubled, nay redoubled, euery one must be a thousand, nay ten thousand, and yet thy torments shall not haue an end, Matth. 22.13. To this purpose, Augustine, setting forth the desperate estate of those that are adiudged to that place, saith: In in∣ferno nulta est redemptio, quoniam qui il∣lic damnatus, & demersus fuerit, vlterius non exibit: In hell there is no redempti∣on, because he that is adiudged to that place, shall neuer come out any more. In inferno nulla est redemptio, quoniam ibi nec pater potest adiuuare filium, nec filius patrem: In hell there is no re∣demption, because there the Father cannot helpe the sonne, nor the sonne
the father. Ibi non inuenitur amicus, aut propinquus, qui valeat argentum, & diui∣tias dare: There is no friend or neigh∣bour to be found, that will giue a sum of money, for the ransome of our soule: None by any meanes can redeeme his bro∣ther, or giue to God a ransome for him, Psal. 49.7. Then shall they weepe and howse bitterly, & by reason of the ex∣tremity of their paines, shal break forth into these or the like lamentable excla∣mations: What hath our pride, our ri∣ches, our honors, our royall dignities, our riotous kinde of life, all our carnall pleasures and delights, what haue they profited vs? loe, al things are past away, like a dreame, like a shaddow, and as a poste that hasted by, as a ship that pas∣seth ouer the waues of the water, or as a bird flowne through the aire, and are become as if they neuer had been, and hither are we adiudged vnto perpetual paynes, and euerlasting punishments. But neither their weeping, nor their crying,August in Ser. ad Erem. nor their screeching, wil auaile them any thing. In inferno nulla est re∣demptio, quoniam ibi gemitus, sunt &
suspiria, & non est qui misereatur: In hell there is no redemption, because there is weeping, sobbing, and sighing, and yet there is none to take pitty. Ibi est dolor, & planctus, & clamor, & non est qui exaudiet: In hell there is sorrow, mourning, crying, and yet none that will heare. Then shall the wicked wish that they had neuer been borne, or that God in their first creation had made them some creatures of another kinde, as Todes, Serpents, or Cockatrices, for then their miseries and shame should haue ended with their liues. Then shall the rent-racking Lādlord wish, that he had neuer oppressed his poore Tenāts. Then shall the couetous Patron wish, that hee had neuer made a prey of the Leuites portion. Then shall the care∣lesse Pastor wish, that he had neuer left his flock vnto the hyrelings, who in¦stead of Preaching the word of God in season, and cut of season, doe tye their flock vnto a slender dyet, either a few cold dead Homilies, or some certayne monethly Sermons, & yet thinke their charge is very sufficiently discharged.
Then shall the couetous Lawyer wish, that hee had neuer sold his tongue for bribes, to pleade against the fatherlesse and widdowes. Then shall the gour∣mandizing Epicure wish, that hee had neuer surfetted at his table, and suffer the poore to starue at his gate. Then shall the carnall Protestant wish, that he had neuer prattled so much of Reli∣gion, and practised so little. Then shall the drunkard wish, that hee had neuer turned so much liquor ouer his tongue, wantonly, & wastfully, and now want a drop of cold water for to coole his tongue. Then shall the wanton forni∣cator wish, that hee had neuer wasted his body, and his goods, vpon the bo∣dy of a strange woman, and withall shall confesse, that breuis est volupt as fornicationis, sed perpetua est poena for∣nicatoris: short is the pleasure of forni∣cation, but perpetuall is the payne of the fornicator. O consider this, in time, all ye that forget God! I will conclude with Chrysostomes meditation: Vtinam homines,Hom. 13. in Epist. ad Rom. in tabernis vinarijs, reliquis{que} commessationibus, & balneis, imo vbique
de gehenna disputarent: I would to God that men, euen in wine Tauernes, Ale∣houses, in their bāquets, in their baths; I will adde, in bawdy houses, yea euery where would dispute of Hell. Non e∣nim sinet in Gehennam incidere, Gehennae meminisse: Men would not run so head∣long to hell, did they but remember hell, did they but meditate on that fire: our common kinde of fire, is but pain∣ted fire, in respect of that; and yet how hardly can we endure our finger neere it an houre? how much lesse shall wee be able, to dwell eternally in that euer∣lastingly burning Lake, of fire and brimstone? With the Deuil and his Angels.] The wicked haue serued the Deuill, all the dayes of their life, and therefore now they must haue an irksome habitation with the Deuils, and portion of tor∣ments with his Angels; as it is said, that the beast and the false Prophet were cast into the place of eternall torments, with the Deuil, Reuel. 20.10. And indeede this conclusion of the wicked doth a∣gree well with their conuersation: as
they haue forsaken God, and followed Satan, in obeying his sinnefull sugge∣stions, now therefore they shall goe their way with Satan, as companions in sinne, so partakers in suffering. The body shall bee tormented, because it would not obey the soule: the soule, because it would follow the rebellious body, both soule and body, because they obeyed the instigation of Satan, and left the directions of Gods holy Spirit. Secondly, this Iudge is so vpright in iudgement, that in giuing of sen∣tence against the wicked: first, hee cannot erre through ignorance, for he searcheth the heart, and tryeth the reines, to giue vnto euery man according to his wayes, and according to the fruit of his workes,Heb. 4.13. Ierem. 17.10. Yea, all things are naked and open to his eyes, before whom we must appeare. Hee that knew Iohn the Baptist in the wombe, and saw Na∣thanael vnder the Fig-tree, doth also know, and see our goings out, and our commings in; he discernes Esau from Iacob; and knowes faire Rahel, from
bleare-eyed Leah: hee knowes the thoughts, and intents of our hearts, the words of our mouthes, and the workes of our hands, Psal. 139.1.2.3.4. and is able to set before vs euen our most se∣cret sinnes. Secondly, he cannot be ouer-swayed with fauour, or friendship. Indeede in earthly Courts, amongst the sonnes of men, wickednesse may bee in the place of Iudgement, Eccles. 3. ver. 16. but in this great Court of heauen, the Iudge will not be parciall to any; God hath no re∣spect of persons, Rom. 2. v. 21. but euery one that feareth God, and worketh righ∣teousnesse, shall bee accepted at that day. Nothing will then preuaile, but a pure heart, and an vpright spirit: and as for the Iudge, with righteousnesse will hee iudge the world,Causa, non persona iu∣dicabitur, Martyr. and the people with equi∣ty, Psal. 58.9. If great men bee found in great sinnes, they shall be adiudged vnto great torments. Tophet is prepa∣red for the King, and the poorest beg∣ger shall then haue as good audience in this Court of Iustice, as the migh∣tiest Monarch in the world.
Thirdly, this Iudge cannot be ouer∣come with power. Indeede amongst the sonnes of men, might oftentimes ouer-comes the right; but vnto this Iudge, all power is giuen both in heauen and earth, Matth. 28.18. He it was that threw the Angels out of heauen; Adam out of Paradise; Saul out of his King∣dome; Nebuchadnezzar out of mens society, to conuerse with beasts: and he it is that wil humble the high lookes of man, and abase the loftinesse of men in that day, Isa. 2.11. As this Iudge cannot be ouer-sway∣ed with power, so can he not be bow∣ed with pity and compassion. The time was indeede when our Sauiour wept ouer Ierusalem, and made a Sermon full of teares, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, Luke 19.41. But now, alas, there is no place for pardon, though Ierusalem should seek it with teares. Could thine eyes then shead as many teares as there are drops of water in the Sea, yet thou couldest not bee able to moue Christ vnto compassion. The day before the trumpet sound, mercy shal be preached
to the penitent, and beleeuers, by the Gospell; but from the time that the sentence is once giuen, there shall ne∣uer be more offring of mercy; the dore shall be closed: though the wicked cry for mercy, & with Esau seeke the bles∣sing with many teares, yet shall they neuer finde it. But as Christ doth now weepe for the sinners conuersion, so wil hee then laugh at the sinners destru∣ction. 5. Lastly, this Iudge cannot be cor∣rupted with bribes, which amongst the sonnes of men peruert iustice, & blinde the eyes of those that sit in Iudgement: for the richest in the world must ap∣peare naked and empty-hāded, before Christ, as naked as euer wee came into the world, and nakeder then euer we went out of the world, by as much as a winding sheet comes vnto: Riches,Pro. 11.4. gold and siluer, auaileth not in the day of wrath, but righteousnes saueth the soule. I will conclude with Augustine:August. de Symb. l. 3. Iudex ille nec gratiâ praeuenietur, nec miseri∣cordiâ flectetur, nec fletibus mitigabi∣tur.
This Iudge will not be preuented with fauour, moued with mercy nor mitiga∣ted with teares, nec sententia eius lata vnquam reuocabitur; neither will the sentence once past against them, euer bee reuoked any more; which is the third thing that I am to speake of. This sentence is the more dreadfull, because it is irreuocable: sentence pro∣ceeding from the Iudgement seate of mortall men, may be reuoked, or stop∣ped by sundry meanes: as first, by ap∣pealing vnto some higher Iudge; as Paul appealed vnto Caesar: but at this great Assise there is no higher Iudge, for he is the onely and blessed Prince, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1. Tim. 6.15. And the Father hath committed all Iudgement vnto him, Ioh. 5.27. 2. The Iudge vpon better and more mature deliberation, may alter his opinion: but there is no alteration of Iudgement, when it is once gone forth from the Throne of the Lord, whose Iudgements are more resolute, then the Decrees of the Medes and Persians, which might not bee altered. When
Esau came to his father for a blessing, which was formerly past to Iacob, his father said, I haue blessed him, and hee shall be blessed, Gen. 27.33. So resolute shall the Lords sentence be at the day of Iudgement: I haue cursed them, and they shall bee cursed: and as Balaam said vnto Balak, The Lord hath blessed, and he cannot reuerse it, Numb. 23.20. So say I, The Lord will not reuerse this his sentence of malediction, Goe ye cursed: neither will hee alter the thing that is gone out of his lippes. 3. By supplication: but, because the wicked turned away their cares from hearing the Lord, whē he entrea∣ted them by his Word, it shall bee iust with God not to lend an eare, when they doe call and cry vnto him: there is not any of that glorious Court of Heauen, that will friend them so much as to speake a word in their behalfe. Should the Saints, whom they euer de∣spised, accounting their life madnesse, and their end to be without honour? Wis. 5.4. Should the Angels, whose Ministry they haue refused and abused? if they
did, should God himselfe heare them, whose Spirit they haue so oftentimes grieued? And therefore Iob said well, There is no vmpire, when God and man are at oddes, Iob 9.33. Now the last Reason which doth aggrauate the horrour of the wicked, is the punishment of losse;Schol. poena damni. the considerati∣on of Heauens banishment, and Hels eternall imprisonment, is a sufficient torture vnto the soule of the wicked, and as Chrysostome iudgeth it to bee much more bitter and irksome, then the paines of Hell;Duplex est damnato∣rum poena: nam & mentem vrit tristitia & corpus flamma, Isidorus de meditatione Ignis gehen∣nalis. yea, worse then a thousand Hells if there were so many, Chrysost. super Mat. Hom. 33. accor∣ding to our Sauiours saying, There shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdome of God, and they themselues thrust out of dore, Luk. 13.18. VVhere shal be Dogges, and Enchanters, and VVhoremongers, and Murtherers, and Idolaters, and whosoe∣uer loueth or maketh lies, Reuel. 22.15. And not only shall they be debard of the ioyes of Heauen, and glory of the
Saints, but they shall be depriued of all Earthly comforts, and all their former delights. The Pome granat tree, the Palm tree, the Apple tree shall wither; the Ap∣ples after which their soule lusted, shall depart from them, and they shall finde none: Yea, if a drop of cold water would comfort them, it shall be denied them; The Epicure shall bee depriued of his daintie dishes, the Drunkard, of his bowles of wine, the Adulterer, of his wanton Mistris, the Couetous, and Vsurer, of their gold, which they made their God. To conclude, they shall be depriued of all Heauenly ioyes, of all earthly comforts. But I will begin to sing a Song of melody, and proclaime a yeere of Iubi∣le vnto the children of God: Console∣mini, consolemini; Lift vp your heads (saith our Sauiour Christ) for your re∣demption draweth neere, Luke 21.28. There is a great Emphasis in the Greeke , which doth signi∣fie a freedome from captiuity, & a re∣storing vnto a former libertie. As if our Sauiour should say, The Church, as lōg
as she is in this world, she is like Israel vnder Pharaoh, held captiue in impri∣sonment and slauerie: But now at this great Assise, there shall be a gaole-deli∣uerie, an euerlasting freedome from all euils whatsoeuer: our life is wouen full of miseries;Psal. 90.10. Diu viuere est diu tor∣queri, Aug. Tertul. vita carcer. the best of it is but labour and griefe. We are borne into the world weeping and bewailing, as it were, our owne ensuing miseries; the progresse of our life is labor, the end is griefe. Ioseph was neuer wearier of the dungeon, Da∣niel of the Den of Lions, Dauid to dwel in the Tents of Kedar, then the chil∣dren of God are to remaine so long in the Land of Egypt, in the Prison of this world; and therefore it is said, that they looke and long for a Citie to come, whose Builder and Maker is God. But then shall we be euerlastingly de∣liuered from all the miseries and cala∣mities, which now we are subiect vnto: the soule shall be deliuered from dis∣ordred passions, as hope, feare, ioy and sorrow: the body from sundry out∣ward calamities, as sicknesse, paine, la∣bour, reproch, from prouocations and
intisements of the wicked world, from the power of the deuil, frō the slauery of sin, from death, from hell; it is our mar∣riage day, when our rotten bones shall be raised out of the dust of the earth: & we shalbe clad with glory, & shal meet Christ in the clouds,1. The. 4.1 & shal be euer with the Lord: Where we shall haue an euer∣lasting Sabbath, ioy vpon euery ones head: sorrow & sighing shal flee away. Thē shal we see God face to face, & that with these eyes, saith Iob. God shall wipe away all teares from our eyes, there shall be nö more death, neither sorrow, nor cry∣ing, neither shal there be any more paine, Reuel. 21.4. There shall be no more Winter, nor Summer, heat nor cold, day nor night, death nor hel. But there shall be Vita sine morte, Dies sine nocte, securitas sine timore, &c. There shall be life without death, day without night, security without feare, pleasure with∣out paine, tranquillity without labour, beauty without deformity, strength without weaknesse, euery thing that is good, without any thing that is bad: To conclude, Eye hath not seene, nor
eare heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that loue him,Isa. 64.4. 1. Cor. 2.9. Let the faithfull soule sigh out this meditation, with blessed Gregory, Bone Iesu, verbum patris, doce me facere volū∣tatem tuam, vt à spiritu tuo bono ductus, ad beatam illam proueniam ciuitatem. O sweet Iesus, thou that art the word of the Father, teach me thy wil, that being guided by thy good Spirit, I may bee brought vnto that Citty, where there is Certa securitas, secura aeternitas, & ae∣terna tranquillitas, & tranquilla foelici∣tas, & foelix suauitas, & suauis iucūditas. Where there is Security, Eternity, Tranquillity, Felicity. Vbi tu Deus cum Patre & Spiritu Sancto, regnas per in∣finita secula.Greg. in Psal. sept. Where thou dost raigne as God, with the holy Ghost, world without end. Let vs therefore stand with our loynes girded, like good ser∣uants waiting for their master: Let vs pray, that this Kingdome would come; & let vs ingeminate that of the Spouse, the Church of Christ, Come, Lord Iesu, come quickly, Apoc. 22.
And here let vs rest our thoughts a while, and settle our meditations on serious consideration of this great day, not curiously to define or determine, how farre, or how neere, the day or yeere when these things shall be, it be∣ing lockt from vs, and kept vnreuey∣led in the secret counsell of God: yet wading herein as farre as Hercules Pil∣lars, that is, as farre as the word of God will conduct: but where the holy Ghost is silent, and hath not a tongue to speake, my penne shall not indite, nor my eare listen thereunto. And first I will set downe the opinions and con∣iectures of others, touching the end of the world. Augustine reckoneth vp six Ages of the world,August. l. 1. in Gen. con. Manichaeos. the first from A∣dam to Noah, the second, from Noah to Abraham, the third from Abraham to Dauid, the fourth from Dauid, to the captiuity of Babylon, the fift frō the captiuity of Babylon vnto Christ, the sixt from Christ, vnto the end of all things, the day of Iudgement. So that this Age in which we liue, is the last Age, and may bee termed the decrepit
and old-age of the world: and if Saint Iohns time was the last howre, then surely these our times are the last mi∣nutes: Then now the end of all things is at hand, and wee are they vpon whom the ends of the world are come, and Christ is ready to iudge the quick and the dead. But how long this last Age, being the dotage of the world, will continue, it is conceald from men and Angels. Au∣gustine told his friend Heschius (curi∣ously inquiring of the end of the world) that hee durst not measure, li∣mit or determine the times and seasons which God hath put in his owne pow∣er; it may be euery mans answere vn∣to all such curious questionists. There are very many of the learned Rabbins,Oraculum a schola Eliae. who being ledde by their owne vaine and weake coniectures, would seeme to set downe a certaine set time of the end of the world, positiuely affirming the world shall indure six thousand yeeres, and those yeeres they doe di∣stribute into two thousand before the Law, two thousand vnder the Law, two thousand after the Law; where∣vpon
some other faine, that the world shall indure six dayes, as it was made in six dayes, & the length of euery day to bee a thousand yeeres; as if it had beene Dauids meaning where he saith, that A thousand yeeres in thy sight are as yesterday, Psal. 90 v. 4. Whereas his meaning is, that all things past, and to come, are present with God. Indeede it is the Deuils policy, because hee would haue vs to put off farre from vs the euill day, and with the sluggard in the Prouerbs, desire yet a little more sleepe, a little more slumber, to busie vs with an infinite many of friuolous, idle, and vnprofitable questions, that we may neglect that one thing which is necessary: as namely, a careful prepara∣tion, rather then a curious inquiry, to watch and pray, according to our Saui∣ours counsell, lest that day come on vs vnawares, and we found sleeping: for as Augustine truly; Prophecies are soo∣ner fulfilled, then vnderstood.Prophetias impleri quā intelligi, Aug. Of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels in heauen, neither the Sonne, but the Father, Mark. 13.32. If our
Sauiour would haue reuealed this day vnto any, doubtlesse hee would haue reuealed it vnto his Apostles, his se∣cretaries, his fauourites, his followers, vnto whom hee imparted greater things, and better things, yet hee tels them flatly, Non est vestrum nosse tem∣pora, &c. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his owne power, Act. 1.7. Of the day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels. The Angels abound with much knowledge, naturall, expe∣rimentall, and reuealed, vnto whom God himselfe doth reueale certaine Ambassages to conuay vnto his chil∣dren, and hauing farre better meanes of knowledge then wee haue, for as much as they know God intuendo, by his looking in his face, Matth. 18.10. But wee haue our knowledge, discur∣rendo, by discussing, reasoning, dispu∣ting, and that not a priori neither, but a posteriori, by his backe parts, as hee hath manifested himselfe in his works, being mirabilis in maximis, mirabilis in minimis, wonderfull in all his workes:
The inuisible things of him are clearely seen in the creation of the world, and are vnderstood by the things that are made, Rom. 1.20. And yet of that day and houre knoweth no man, no, not the Angels in heauen, neither the Sonne. To let passe Epiphanius interpretation,Epiphanij in illum lo∣cum exposi∣tio est valdè arguta & detorta, Martyr. & his witty, but wrested distinction of a twofold knowledge, Executio∣nis Scien∣tiae. I will, vnder the correction of the Learned, shew, how Christ knowes the day, & yet how he is ignorant of it. It should seeme strange, that the wisedome of God should bee ignorant of those things which are in God, neither can it be said, that Christ being GOD and man, in one per∣son together;. his Deity should not in∣forme his Humanity, as our soule doth the body, but leaue it destitute of knowledge: for in Christ, saith the A∣postle. i. in his humane nature, dwelleth the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily, Colos. 2.9. Christ himselfe being the best and truest interpretour of his owne words, thus expounds himselfe, As the Father gaue me commandement, euen so I doe, Iohn 14.31. Therefore because Christ
was sent as an Ambassadour, to declare and manifest the will of the Father, hee would neither do, or speake any thing, but that vnto the which end hee was sent: as therefore hee was an Ambassa∣dour, sent out of the bosome of the Father, he is said to be ignorant, be∣cause he had no commission to reueale it:Aquinas part. 3. q. 10. Art. 2. According to that of Aquinas, Di∣citur nescire, quia non facit scire: He is said not to know, because hee would not haue vs to know; thus hee told his Disciples, It is not for you to know the times and the seasons, Act. 1.7. I will conclude with the saying of Augustine, Ne nos addamus inquirere, quòd ille non addidit dicere,Aug. Epist. 146. Secret things belong vnto the Lord, reuealed things vnto vs, Deu. 29. verse 29. Let vs not dare to pry in∣to the Arke of the Lord, striuing to know that which is impossible for vs to know, it being reserued vnreuealed within the secret bosome of his sacred Maiesty. The word of God affoordeth vs cer∣tayne signes and prognosticks, where∣by wee may conclude of a certainty,
that that day is not farre off: the first is this: The reuealing and comming of An∣tichrist. Antichrist must first come,Antichrist the fore∣runner of the end of the world. so saith the Apostle. That Man of sin must first bee reuealed, before that day come, that sonne of perdition, 2. Thess. 2. ver. 3. Little children, saith S. Iohn, it is the last time: and as you haue heard Antichrist shall come, euen now are there many An∣tichrists, whereby we may know that it is the last time, 1. Ioh. 2.18. I neede not proue that the Pope of Rome is Anti∣christ: many by their writings haue made this plaine and apparent, and dis∣couered that Man of sinne, vnto the whole world, as manifest to bee Anti∣christ, as he is Pope. The second signe, that the day is at hand, is, an Apostasie from Faith, and from sound Doctrine, of which the A∣postle speaketh: Now the Spirit spea∣keth expresly, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the faith, giuing heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Deuils, 1. Tim. 4.1. And is not this time come to passe already? are not many
carryed about like vapours in the ayre, with euery blast of vaine Doctrine, ha∣uing itching eares, affecting alwayes some new fangled point or other? what a dispute beginnes there to bee about that Twinne of our saluation, Faith and Repentance, touching the priority of them? which makes me thinke, that either men haue no repentance, or else no faith: vnlesse both consist vpon the tippe of the tongue, in prattling, not in practice. The third is the promulgation of the Gospell , throughout the whole world. So saith our Sauiour Christ, And this Gospell of the Kingdom shall bee preached throughout the whole world, and then shall the end come, Mat. 24.14. It must bee published among all Nations, Mar. 13.10. And is not the sound thereof already gone forth into the ends of the earth? is it not spred al∣ready from Dan, euen vnto Beersheba? from one Sea coast vnto another? The fourth is, the rising vp of false Christs and false Prophets. Many shall come in my name (saith our Sauiour
Christ) saying, I am Christ, and the time draweth neere, Luke 21.8. And many false Prophets shall arise, and de∣ceiue many, Matth. 24.11. The fift signe is, Iniquity shal abound,The fift signe is the gene∣rality of sinne. Matth. 24.12. There shall bee such a generall infection of sinne, Men shall be louers of their owne selues, couetous, bosters, proude, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, vnthankefull, vnholy, without naturall affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good; Traytors, heady, high minded, louers of pleasures, more then lo∣uers of God, hauing a forme of godlines, but deny the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3.1.2.3.4. And this is Gods ordinary procee∣ding against sinne, hee doth neuer pu∣nish generall, vntill sinne bee growne generall. God neuer washt away the inhabitants of the earth, with the wa∣ters of his wrath, vntill all flesh had cor∣rupted his way vpon the earth, vntill the earth was filled with cruelty, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of mans heart were euill, onely euill, continually euill, Gen. 6.5.11.12. The Lord neuer
rayned downe fire and brimstone from the Lord, out of heauen, vpon those two Cities, Simeon and Leui like, sisters in sinne, vntill hee had made enquiry whether there were any righteous men amongst them; for the Lord, had it not derogated from his Iustice, and so con∣sequently from his glory, in not being a iust reuenger of sinne, was as willing, and as well contented, as Abraham, that Sodom should be saued, for euery petition returned vnto Abraham with some aduantage: and most comforta∣ble is it, the Lord neuer ceased graun∣ting, till Abraham ceased asking; but in the end there being such a penury, such a scarcity, such a nullity of good men, that the Lord destroyed them with fire and brimstone, and so it re∣maines vntill this day, as a monument of Gods wrath,Mare mor∣tuum. a Sea of fire and brim∣stone. If we trauell vnto that great Ci∣ty Ierusalem, the Metropolis of the world, the Lady of the earth, the per∣fection of beauty, wee shall finde it but a heape of stones. But what did moue the Lord to destroy so famous a City,
called the City of God, the habitation of the most Highest, a place where he did delight to dwell? yet sin had made her infamous and odious in the sight of God: the contagion and infection of sinne was generall, and that not only some kinde of sinnes, but all sinne, all oppression, that is, all kinde of sinne:Synechdo∣che speciei. and well may it bee, for oppression is a cry∣ing sinne, and they that make no con∣science of great sinnes, surely, will not make conscience of lesser; and these sinnes were not committed in corners, or by-lanes, but in the open streets, in the market place; men were growne impudent in sinne; all oppression was in the midst of Ierusalem, Ierem. 6. vers. 6. sinne was growne generall, Ierusalem was a denne of Theeues; there was no righteous man found throughout the whole City, that executed iudgement, and sought the truth; No, nor at the Court, amongst the great Men, amōgst the Rulers, amongst the Noblemen, These haue altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bond: no, nor yet amongst the Prophets, for they prophesie false∣ly,
and the Priests beare rule by their meanes, that is, both agree together, in a mutuall and meere collusion of the people, as the Pope with his orders of begging Fryers: first, they robbe and deceiue the people, and then they di∣uide the spoile, Ierem. 5.1.5.31. To conclude, sinne was as generall in Ie∣rusalem, as euer it was in the old world when it was destroyed with water, or in Sodome, that City of pride, luxury, idlenesse, when it was burnt with fire; so Ierusalems punishments were para∣lell to her sinnes; her sinnes were ge∣nerall, her iudgements were as gene∣rall: There is not one stone left vpon another, of so many stately buildings, on which the Iewes so confidently pre∣sumed,Ioseph. l. 6. hist. Iud. and so presumptuously insulted ouer the Romanes, saying, that if the Romans had wings, yet they could not flye ouer their wals, and inuade their City. And is not sinne growne as generall in this world, as euer 'twas in the old world, or in Sodome, or in Ierusalem? may we not as iustly take vp the com∣plaint
of Isay in his time? Both head is sicke, and heart is heauie, Isai 1.5. where, by head (as Interpreters obserue) is meant the King (for the Prophet spea∣keth vnto the Iewes, as if they were one body) and when the Prophet com∣plained of this sicknesse of the head, he meant Ahaz, who then was head of the Kingdome, and his disease was not in the foote, as Asa his gout, but in the corruption of his life, hee did nothing that was right in the sight of the Lord his God, 2. K. 16.2. & the hart is the Priests that if they be such as they should be, may very well resemble the heart, that as the heart communicateth vitall spi∣rits vnto the whole body, so the Mini∣sters of God should endeuour to cre∣ate the life of grace in euery mans soule: But if, like the heart, they do not employ themselues in their peculiar of∣fice and dutie, preaching the Word of God in season and out of season, quick∣ning the members that are dead in sin, and endeuouring daily the conuersion of soules, by wholsome doctrine, and holy conuersation; then are they not
hearts any longer, but harmes, and in Gods due time they shall bee trodden vnder foote like clay in the streete, or cast out with vnsauory salt to the dounghill. The foot may not find fault with head or heart: only I will ingemi∣nate the Prophets words, Both head is sick, and hart is heauy: The matter which I haue in hand, forceth mee to shew the generalitie of sinne, and so conse∣quently the propinquity of the general Iudgement. If God should look downe from heauen vpon the children of men, and marke what is done amisse in this our sinful Sublunarie, he may see that al are gone aside, euen from the highest to the lowest, from the youngest to the eldest, from the richest to the poorest, from the Eagle to the Wren, They are altogether become abominable, there is none that doth good, no, not one, Psalme 14.3. The foundations of the Earth are out of course, sinne hath gotten the vpper hand, iniquity aboundeth, vertue is disgraced, vice aduanced. Sin now adaies is growne vnto such a presump∣tion, and that notwithstanding the
sword of Authoritie, which vnlesse it lay vnsheathed in the hand of the Ma∣gistrate, bearìng it in vaine, were able to destroy this Hydra of sinne, though new heads budded out continually. It it recorded of a French Ambassador in the time of King Richard the third, how he told the King, that there were three great Whores in England, Pride, Couetousnesse, Luxurie: If this Am∣bassador were to come againe, he may tell the King, that there are more then tenne times three; not a sinne but hath his mate: Pride and Ambition, Coue∣tousnesse and Extortion, Adultery and Fornication, Flattery and Dissimulati∣on, Strife and Contention, Swearing and Forswearing, Lying and Cursed speaking, Chambering and Wanton∣nesse, Strife and Enuying; nay, more sinnes then I can name,Si superbi∣entibus an∣gelis Deus nō pepercit, quantò mi∣nùs tibi putredo & vermis? Bernard. and such sinnes as are not to be named. To insist a while vpon some particu∣lars, to begin first with the first, that first sinne of Pride, so hatefull in the highest Eye, that it threw the Angels out of Heauen, whereby they became
reprobate Deuils: and yet no sinne so common, none growne more generall, then this sinne of Pride. Were the daughters of Zion euer more proud and haughtie, then our Dames of Eng∣land? who are so farre from being like women that professe the feare of God, 1. Tim. 2.10. that they scarce looke like the creatures of God, being so mis∣create ofttimes, and so deformed with their French, their Spanish, and their foolish fashions, with their Plumes, Fannes, Feathers and Fardingales, Vel∣uet Vizards, that they looke rather like some Antickes, Maskers, May games? Esaias Text of fashions is multiplied by the fancies of our time: Their bon∣nets, and their bracelets, their slippers and their mufflers, their vailes, their wimples, and their crisping pinnes, their round ty∣ers like the Moone, Isaiah 3.19. Yet he makes no mention of the yellow Ruffes, of their perfumed shagged haire, which neuer grew vpon their ownehead; nor of their painted faces: a pretty artificiall meanes to mend the workmanship of their Maker. But I
thinke, that the Mystery of this art may rather be reduced to the common place of whorishnesse, or in a nearer tearme, the attire of an harlot, Prou. 7. that as Erasmus said of a Lyar, Oftende mihi mendacem, & ostendam tibifurem, shew me a Lyar, and I wil shew thee a thiefe: so shew mee a painted face, may I say, and I will shew thee a whore, for shee dwels at the Signe of a painted face. Neither is this sinne of pride peculiar vnto women onely, but also to men, for they are almost become like vnto wo∣men, as though they were willing to change sexes with them. In the time of Popery, as one saies wittily, England was made an Asse to beare the burthen of the Popes taxations: but now Eng∣land is metamorphosed into an Ape, an imitator of all fashions, of all Coun∣tries and Nations, France, Spaine and Italy, &c. To leaue pride as an vgly monster, and to speake of the generalitie of the sinne of whoredom, which deserues the second place in Satans Kingdome: The base-begotten-bastard-broode that
this sin brings foorth into the world, manifests the generality of it: for almost what Parish within this Kingdom, nay, almost in the whole world, but hath an adulterous issue within it? and wher∣as one hath none, another hath two. Beside, how is the bed of honourable marriage abused by vnlawfull mix∣tures? God that is vnus one, as Bernard, Vnissimus, most one, hath made vnam, one woman vni, for one man, and one man for one woman; so speakes the Prophet; And did hee not make one? where God sends vs backe to the cop∣pie, and first institution of marriage, he made one man for one woman, Adam for Eue, and ioyned them both toge∣ther in one inuiolable band of honora∣ble wedlock, Ge. 2.24. Yet had he abun∣dance of spirit, that is, by that selfe same secret inspiration, whereby Adam be∣came a liuing soule, by that same pow∣erfull influence, if I may so speake, God could haue created more men for one woman, yet he did not. And why would he not? Because he sought a godly seede; that is, as marriage is honourable, so
the fruite of this diuine ordinance should bee holy, not illigitimate, not bastards, not a promiscuous seede, Ma∣lach. 2.15. But alas, how is the ende of marriage peruerted? how doth euery man neigh after his neighbours wife? Ie∣remie 5.8. That is, men are as shame∣lesse, and as resolutely impudent in this filthy fact, like welfed horses, that haue no vnderstanding, Psalm. 32.9. which the Prophet calles the sinne of abomi∣nation, Ezek. 22.11. How doth euery man lay waite at his neighbours doore? Iob 31.4. that is, by priuate stealth, to warme anothers bed, leauing their own cisternes, the wife of their youth, to em∣brace the bosome of the stranger, Prou. 5. But I will leaue this sinne in secret where it is committed: for the silent night onely is guiltie of these vnchast actions, and secret chambers are only priuie vnto these works of darkenesse: this sin is more suspected then knowne, and yet knowne too well, to be too too generall. Drunkennesse may be the third head of this monstrous Hel-hound, and Cer∣berus
of sinne: how generall is this shamelesse, swinish, idle, base, beastly sinne growne! It was once but one mans sinne, and of infirmity too, as not knowing the vertue of the grape,Chrysost. nor the qualitie of that liquor: and long since it hath beene scorned, as the beg∣gers fault. Hence came the Prouerbe, As drunke as the Begger. But now a∣dayes it is reputed not only the Ser∣uingmans complement, but the Gen∣tlemans grace. Seneca spake wel of these times, Habebitur aliquando abrietati ho∣nor, & plurimum caepisse vini, virtus erit, The time shall come, that honour shall be attributed to drunkennesse, and to drinke much wine, shall bee accounted vertue and valour. How many now a∣daies draw their whole Patrimonie thorow their throate; making a pra∣ctice, almost a profession of drunken∣nesse: rising vp earely to follow strong drinke, and so continue vntill night, till wine enflame them? Isaiah 5.11. And as the Wise man speaks, tarrie long at the wine, Prou. 23.29. Our Tauernes, our Innes, and Alehouses, were they well
lookt into by the Magistrate, would yeeld too many of such kind of stayers by, who, vnder pretence of drinking a pot or two, fill their braines ere they go away and emptie their purse. I will not insist any longer in disco∣ring Satans kingdom. From the gene∣ralitie of these sins, we may conclude an vniuersalitie of all the rest. What sin is there, but is growne as generall, as euer the Plague was in any citie or countrie? like Naamans leprosie, it hath ouerspred the whole body; From the sole of the foote, to the crowne of the head, there is no soundnes, but wounds, swellings, & putrifying sores, Isa. 1.6. Sin is growne vnto such an height, and to such a head, that it is safer for a man to commit sin, then to reproue it; and hee that refrai∣neth his foote, and runneth not into the same excesse of riot, shall be a prey, a scorne, a by word, a derision, a laughing stocke. Behold, the regions are white vn∣to haruest, sinne is ripe, euen to the full growth; and therefore assuredly it will not be long ere the Lord sends foorth his Labourers, those winged executio∣ners of his wrath, with sickles in their
hands, to gather the wicked into bun∣dles, that they may be cast into hell. It is the Lords gracious and mercifull dis∣pensation to prorogue a while the tearme of his comming, because wee should haue a little more time to re∣pent in, and so be left without lesse ex∣cuse. Let vs then vse the Lords pati∣ence, as a spurre and prouocation vnto repentance, so saith the blessed Apostle prophesying of the Atheists of our time, who doe not sticke to say, VVhere is the promise of his comming? Sheweth what vse they should make of the see∣ming slacknes of his comming, his long suffering, is an argument that the Lord is not willing, that any should perish, but that al should come to repentāce, 2. Pe. 3.9 And thus mercifully the Lord dealt with the old world; after hee had threatned their destruction, hee gaue thē one hundred and twenty yeeres to re∣pent in, Gen. 6.3. Put not then off farre from thee the euill day: if the Lord seemes slack, it is because thou shoul∣dest flye speedily with Lot vnto Zoar, that is, accelerate thy repentance. Al∣mighty God hath already whet his
sword, and bent his bow, and made it ready, how soeuer he may seeme slack, yet he may easily come before thou art ready; if hee doth come, thou being vnprepared and vnprouided, assuredly he will pay thee home for thus abusing his patience. The Heathen writer could say thus much,Valer. Max. Deum grauitate supplicij compensare tarditatem puniendi, the greatnesse of his punishment shall recompence the slacknesse of his com∣ming, when he doth come: when Deus & dies vltionum conuenerint, when the God of vengeance, and the day of ven∣geance shall meet together, thou shalt bee payed home for altogether. I will conclude with that questioned. Au∣thour to the Hebrewes: Yet a very lit∣tle while, and he that shall come, wil come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. The last vse shall bee an exhorta∣tion to repentance, and that betime, while wee haue time: Walke, saith our Sauiour Christ, in the day, Iohn 11. v. 9. that is, in thy life, which is but a mo∣ment, a spanne of time, The night com∣meth wherein no man can worke, Iohn 9. v. 4. that is, the night of thy death,
which is the conclusion of the day of thy life, and then there is no more time to worke out our saluation. For an Angell hath sworne from heauen, by him that liueth for euermore, that time shall be no more, Apoc. 10.6. that is, after this acceptable time, no more time for repentance, no more daies of saluation. The Apostle wils vs to doe good while we haue time, intimating therby, that af∣ter this time,Cypr. there is no more time. Vi∣tae aut hic amittitur aut tenetur: cùm ist∣hinc excessum fuerit, nullus poenitentiae lo∣cus, nullus satisfactionis effectus: Life here is either got or lost; for when we goe out of the body, there is no place for repentance, no effect of satisfacti∣on; if we haue sinned to day, and haue not repented, it may be wee shall haue leaue of the Lords patience, to learne it better another day: but after the trans∣migration of the soule from the body, there remaines nothing else, but a fear∣full looking for of iudgement. It stands vs therefore vpon the saluation of our soule, to looke before wee leape, to be certaine that wee haue one foote vp∣on the border of Canaan, before wee
leaue our earthly tabernacle. Let vs make our election sure vnto vs, by true and speedy repentance; and seale vp this comfortable conclusion to our soules, that our sinnes are pardoned in the bloud of Christ. Suppose that the generall day of Iudgement were farre off, and that this day of saluation were to shine vpon this Land, still on to the worlds end: yet what is that to thee or mee? the day of grace endeth to thee and mee, at the day of our death; after that, the Lord shall neuer offer mercy vnto vs. It is the gracious and merciful dispensation of almighty God, who when hee may iustly cut thee off, as thou art committing of sinne, and throwe thee downe to hell, yet hee giues thee space and time to repent of this thy sinning, and so thy sinnes may bee done away. Thus our Sauiour speaking of that woman Iezabel: for so the holy Ghost points her out, by the finger, as it were in contempt, saith, That hee gaue her space to repent of her fornication, and shee repented not, Reuel. 2.21. Meaning, hee did let her liue to repent, whereas if hee had cut
her off before, hee had taken from her the time of repentance. Thus after he had threatned a Deluge and destructi∣on vnto the old world, hee gaue them many yeeres to repent, before hee washt them away with the waters of his wrath. He gaue Sodom & Gomorrah, two sinfull Cities, hee gaue them a time to repent. Niniue had a time, Ieru∣salem had a time, two and fortie yeeres after the passion of Christ, the Figge Tree had a time,Chrys. ob∣seruat. the foolish fiue Virgins had a time when they might haue en∣tred, nay, God giues a time, and lends a long space vnto the most prophane, to make them the more inexcusable; Cursed Cain, prophane Esau, desperate Iudas, they had all a time. This graci∣ous proceeding doth the Lord ob∣serue and keepe, and will vnto the worlds end; hee giues vnto some of vs twenty yeeres, vnto some thirty, vnto some forty, vnto some fifty, euen vn∣till gray-headed Age, the blossome of the graue,Hec mo∣mentum vnde de∣pēdet aeter∣nitas, Aug. bids vs prepare our win∣ding sheete. And if in all this time, which in all is but a spanne, a moment, a small scantling, wee let it slippe vntill
our glasse bee all runne out, and the thred of our life cleane cut off; then are wee left without excuse, and our end is damnation. The children of this world are wise in their generation, they take their time and opportunity. The Marchant buyeth while the Mart lasteth, the Souldier fighteth while the battell indureth: the Husband-man soweth while it is winter, reapeth when it is summer. That faithfull mea∣surer of time, heauens great Ornamēt, obserueth his rising and setting. The Sunne, the Moone and Starres keepe their constant reuolution according to the will of their Maker, in the first Creation; The Storke, the Turtle, and the Crane know their appointed time, Ierem. 8.7. But man neglects his time, and lets it steale away one day after ano∣ther, vntill the day of grace bee closed vpon him. Wee are called vpon to re∣pent in the dayes of our youth, before sin is habituated, & custome of sinning hath taken away the sense of sinne. Re∣member thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1. But men for the most part refuse to repent vntill they
be old, and so by a iust iudgement of God, they goe downe to the graue, ha∣uing their bones full of the sinnes of their youth; for how almost is it possible that we should repent truely, when wee be old? repentance is so hard and difficult a thing, a heauy burthen, a difficult duty; Age of it selfe is a burthen, a sicknesse, a languishing disease: the Sergeants and Officers of Death haue arrested e∣uery limbe, & haue taken vp the whole body, as an habitation of death. One crieth with the Shunamites child,Non vita longa, sed longa aegritudo. Alas, my head, alas, my head, another with with Antiochus, My belly, my belly, the third with Asa,Shaking Palsie. My feet, my feete: this mans limbs tremble as a reed shaken with the winde, another mans limbes are like the dead boughes of a dying barke,Dead Pal∣sie. one laboureth in one disease, an∣other in another one in the chollicke, another in the stone; this mans eyes be∣gin to waxe dimme, his eares deafe, his wind-pipes euen stopt vp with flegme, his teeth falling out of his head, his hands possest with the palsie, his legges not able to beare vp his bo∣dy, his knees strike one against ano∣ther,
his backe not able to beare the waight of a Grashopper: and when man is brought vnto such an exigent that hee cannot put off, or put on his owne clothes, how shall he put off sins, and put on newnesse of life? Surely, I see not how he can repent, vnlesse hee repents that he hath liued too long, and therfore they wish for welcome death: when little doe they well consider, that death is the dissolution of a miserable life, but a passage to a worse, a gate, an entrance to hell, if they dye vnrepen∣tant. Augustine his counsell in this case is very heauenly, and very worthy to be embraced.Lib. de V∣tilitat. poen. agend. Age poenitentiam dum sanus es, si sic agis, dico tibi quod securus es, quia poenitentiam egisti eo tempore quo peccare potuisti: si vis agere poeniten∣tiam, quando iam peccare non potes, pec∣cata te dimiserunt, non tu illa: Repent while thou art in good health, if thou dost so, I tell thee, thou art safe, be∣cause thou repētedst, whē thou couldst haue sinned; if thou dost repent, when by reason of the weakenesse of thy bo∣dy, thou art not able to performe the workes of darknesse, sinne hath left
to saue mee.Acts 3.19. Repent therefore, that thy sinnes may bee done away, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of God. and that with all speede. Pha∣raoh bad Moses pray for him to mor∣row: but doe thou repent to day, thou knowest not whether thou shalt liue vntil to morrow, thy life is but a flower flourishing to day, fading to morrow, but a bubble soone blowne vp, soone blowne out: thou maist dine in all thy royalty with Balthasar, carouse in gol∣den bowles, yet ere thy dinner be en∣ded, such is the vncertainty of our flee∣ting life, thy soule may bee diuorced from thy body, and thy body fit for no company, but the wormes. It is not to morrow that God requireth, but to day: To day if you wil heare my voice, Heb. 3.15. Remember that there will be a day, when there will be iudgemēt without mercy, when, if thou neglectst this day of saluation, this acceptable season, thou shalt bee cast to Hell, and there shalt lye in misery, howling, and crying out, O miserable wretch that I am, what did I meane, that I did not confesse my sins, repent and turne
to God, when I was vpon earth? now I see others partakers of heauenly ioyes, and I thrust out and cast into these miserable torments; where thou shalt bee inforced to say, O how iust are Gods iudgements! I was spoken vnto, but I would not heare: I was in∣structed out of Moses and the Pro∣phets, and intreated by the Ministers of Christ to repent; but I stopped mine eares against their admonitions. How doe I iustly feele that, which nothing could make me feare? Let vs not ther∣fore neglect this opportunity, this space which is our life time, & a time which God in mercy hath allotted vnto vs to repent in: after this time repentance will neuer be preached any more, nor sinnes pardoned.Nazian. Hic namque peccato∣rum remissio, vbi peccatorum commissio, hic nobis prompt a medela est, post autem clausa est omnis medicinae falutis, For sinnes are remitted here, where as they were committed. Heere onely haue wee the Balme of Gilead to cure the wounds of a sinfull soule, but hereafter all medicines of saluation shall bee lockt from vs, and we from them.
,Basil. Basil: This present time in which wee liue, is the time of re∣pentance and remission of sinnes. Fru∣stra sibi homo post hoc corpus promittit, quod in hoc corpore comparare neglexit, Augustine.August. And therefore in vaine doth man promise vnto himselfe, that after this life, which he doth neglect to ob∣tain this life. This is our day, the next is the Lords day, wherein he wil come to iudge euery man according to his wayes; as the Tree groweth, so it fal∣leth, and as it falleth, so it lyeth; as men liue, so they die, and as they die, so they come to Iudgement. In what sinnes so∣soeuer wee dye vnrepented of, in the same shall wee bee iudged and condemned. Let vs learne therefore, in our growth to grow the right way, let vs looke toward Ierusalem, growe toward heauen, that is, let vs liue wel, that wee may dye well: so that at the worlds generall Iudgement, at the re∣surrection of the iust, wee may meet our Sauiour in the ayre, and be euer with him, Amen. Come, Lord Iesus, come quickely. FINIS.
