12772 99839594 4029
AN ANATOMIE OF THE METAMOR∣PHO-SED AIAX. Wherein by a tripartite method is plainly, o∣penly, and demonstratiuely, declared, expla∣ned, and eliquidated, by pen, plot, & precept, how vnsauerie places may be made sweet, noysome places made wholesome, filthy pla∣ces made cleanly. Published for the com∣mon benefite of builders, house-keepers, and house-owners. By T. C. Traueller, Aprentice in Poetre, Pria∣ctiser in Musicke, professor of Painting, the mother, daughter, and handmayd of all Muses artes and sciences. Inuide quid mordes? pictoribus atque Poetis. Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field, dwel∣ling in the Black-friers. 1596.
To M. E. S. Esquier. SIr, my maister hauing expresly commaunded mee, to finish a straunge discourse that he had written to you, called the Me∣tamorpho-sis of AIAX, by setting certaine pictures there∣to; there came vnto my minde a tale I had heard, perhaps more merry then mannerly. How a plain, or rather a pleasant Seruingman, wayting on his maister at the Popes Court, happened to be pre∣sent one day, when the Gentleman, after long at∣tendance and great meanes, had obtained the fa∣uour to kisse his holinesse foote. The man seeing what his maister did, first stale out of the chāber, & then ranne out of the house, hiding himselfe for a pretie space. The Gentleman hearing of it, pit∣tied his mans simplicity (who perhaps was crafty knaue inough for all that) and asked why he went away? Alas sir said he, when I saw that a man of your worth and worship, in so publique a place, might kisse but his toe, I doubted they would haue made me, haue kist him in some homelyer place, and so I might haue bene shamed for euer. If that seruingman had cause to runne out of the house, my thinke I may seeme to haue more reason, to runne out of my wits, to haue so strange a taske appointed me; for when the verie face, & head, or title of the booke, seemed so fowle & vn∣sauerie,
vvhat might I thinke the feete or tayle thereof vvere like to proue? Wherefore I would gladly haue shunned so base an office: but hauing my maisters exāple ioyned to his commandement, I tooke hart to me, and first I read ouer the dis∣course, to see what was promist therein on my be∣halfe (viz. certaine pictures.) But I assure you in the reading of it, whether it were the wel hādling of the matter, or my partiall opinion (a fault that I am seldome charged withall) my minde was al∣tered, and I compared the homely title of it, vnto an ilfauored vizer,Or to a road or a snake made in su∣ger, that lookes vn∣sightly, but tasts sweetly. such as I haue seene in stage-playes, whē they daunce Machachinas, which co∣uers as sweet a face sometimes as any is in the cō∣panie. And euen presently therewithall, as if I had bene inspired vvith the spirite of AIAX, me thought I durst haue aduentured with my pen and pensill vpon any thing. For, as the saying is, Painters and Poets, clayme by old enrolment, A charter, to dare all, without controlment. Wherefore by the Priuiledge of this Charter (as also by a Pattent I haue of seruing two pren∣tiships) I vvill go somevvhat beyond the bare wordes of my cōmission, and yet not swarue much from the charge that is layd vpon me. For Sir, I vvould you knew it, though I neuer troubled the schooles at Oxford, with any disputes or degrees, yet I carried there a good schollers bookes after him, and I trust I gat some quaynt phrases amōg them, as namely in steed of praying the Cobler to
set two patches on my shoes, I could haue said, set me two semicircles vpon my suppeditals, vvith much other eloquence beyond the common intelligence. And yet notwithstanding all these great vaunts, I wil not take vpō me, that I am a∣ble to say so much of the Metamorpho-sis, the Etimologie, & the reformation of Don AIAX-house, as my maister hath said, or to defend the vvordes, illustrate the matter, and dilate of the forme as he hath done, for vvho can stand against such an army of Emperours, Kings, Magistrats, Prophets, Poets, All-hallowes, and all prophanes, euen from the Bible to the bable, as are by him brought for enobling of his arguments? Yet for Anatomysing as it vvere of the shape and bodie thereof,M. Plat in his booke a∣gainst fa∣mine, fol. vl∣timo penulti∣mo. because he hath handled that point (in M. Plats opinion) somewhat too briefly for com∣mon vnderstandings, I must heare a litle better open it: for as the old saying is, (bonum quo cō∣munius eo melius) and the old verse is, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.If that which followes of∣fēd the rea∣der, he may turne ouer a leafe or two, or but smell to his sweet gloues, and then the sauor will neuer offend him. Goodnesse is best, when it is common showne, Knowledge were vayne, if knowledge were not knowne. Wherefore now, seriously and in good sadnesse to instruct you, & all Gentlemen of worship, how to reforme all vnsauerie places of your houses, vvhether they be caused by priuies, or sinkes, or such like (for the annoyance comming all of like causes, the remedies neede not be much vnlike,) this you shall do.
In the Priuie that annoyes you,is cestern in the first plot is figu∣red at the letter A. and so likewise in the second plot. first cause a Cesterne containing a barrell or vpward, to be placed either behind the seat, or in any place either in the roome, or aboue it, from vvhence the vvater may by a small pype of leade of an inch be conuayed vnder the seate in the hinder part thereof (but quite out sight) to which pype you must haue a Cocke or a washer to yeeld wa∣ter vvith some pretie strength, when you would let it in.The small pype in the first plot at D. in the 2. E, but it ought to lye out of sight. Next make a vessell of an ouall forme, as broad at the bottome as at the top, ij. foote deep, one foote broad,This vessell is exprest in the first plot H. M. N. in the 2. H. K. xvi. inches long, place this very close to your seate, like the pot of a close stoole, let the ouall incline to the right hand. This vessell may be brick, stone, or leade, but vvhatsoeuer it is, it should haue a Current of 3. inches,The Currēt is exprest in the second plot K. to the backe part of it, (where a sluce of brasse must stand) the bottome, and sides all smooth: and drest vvith pitch, rosin, and waxe,A speciall note. which will keepe it frō taynting with the vrine. In the lowest part of this vessell;In the secōd plot . L. which will be on the right hād, you must fastē the sluce or wa∣sher of brasse with soder or Cimēt, the Cōcaui∣tie or hollow thereof, must be ij. inches and ½. To the washers stopple,In the first plot G. F. in the 2. F. & I. must be a stemme of yron as bigge as a curten rod, strong and euen and perpendicular; vvith a strong skrew at the top of it, to which you must haue a hollow key vvith a vvoorme fit to that skrew.
This skrew must, vvhen the sluce is downe,In the first plot be∣tweene G. I. appeare through the planke not aboue a straw-breadth on the right hand, and being duly pla∣ced, it vvill stand three or foure inches vvyde of the midst of the backe of your seate. Item,This showes in the first plot K. L. In the 2. G. Such are in the backside of watches. that children & busie folke disorder it not, or open the sluce, with putting in their hāds, without a key, you should haue a little buttō, or scallop shell, to bind it down with a vice pinne, so as without the key it vvill not be opened. These things thus placed: all about your vessell and elsewhere, must be passing close pla∣stered vvith good lyme and hayre,Else all is vayne. that no ayre come vp from the vault, but onely at your sluce, vvhich stands close stopt, and euer it must be left, after it is voyded, halfe a foote deepe in cleane vvater. If vvater be plentie, the oftener it is vsed and opened, the sweeter; but if it be scant, once a day is inough, for a neede, though twentie per∣sons should vse it. If the vvater will not run to your Cesterne,These forces as also the great washer you shall buy at the Queenes Brasiers in Lothbery at the Bores head. you may vvith a force of twentie shillings, and a pype of eighteen pence the yard, force it frō the lowest part of your house to the highest. But now on the other side behold the Ana∣tomie.
This is Don AIAX-house, of the new fashion, all in sunder, that a workeman may see what he hath to do. Here are the parts set downe with a rate of the pryses, that a builder may guesse what he hath to pay. A. the cesterne stone or bricke, prise. 0. 6. 8. B. D. E. the pype that comes frō the cesterne, with a stopple to the washer. 0. 3. 6. C. a wast pype▪ 0. 1. 0. F. G. the stem of the great stop∣ple, with a key to it. 0. 1. 6. H. the forme of the vpper brim of the vessell or stoole pot. M. the stoole pot of stone, prise. 0. 8. 0 N. the great brasse sluce, to which is three inches current, to send it down a gallop into the Iax. 0. 10. 0 And least you should mislike with this phrase I had it in a verse of a graue author, that was wont to walke vp and downe the Court, with a forest bill, I haue forgot how it begun (like a beast as he was) but it ended in ryme. O that I were at Oxenford, to eate some Banberie Cakes. I▪ the seate with a peke deuaunt for elbow roome, the whole charge 30. shillings eight pence, yet a mason of my maisters was offred thirtie pounds for the like. Memorandum the scale is about halfe an inche to a foote
Here is the same all put together, that the worke∣man may see if it be well. A. the Cesterne. B. the litle wa∣sher. C. the wast pipe. D. the seate boord. E. the pipe that comes from the Cesterne. F. the Screw. G. the Scallop shell to couer it when it is shut downe. H. the stoole pot. I. the stopple. K. the current. L. the sluce. M. N. the vault into which it falles: alwayes remember that () at noone and at night, emptie it, and leaue it halfe a foote deepe in fayre water. And this being well done, and orderly kept, your worst pri∣uie may be as sweet as your best chamber. But to conclude all this in a few wordes, it is but a standing close stoole easilie emptyed. And by the like reason (o∣ther formes and proportions obserued) all o∣ther places of your house may be kept sweet. Your worships to commaund T. C. traueller.
BVt pah:All this is sweetned with this one sentence. Humani nihil à me alienum puto. what haue I talked off all this while? of AIAX? Pa-pe, what an vnsauorie argument is this? Nay fie, I mar∣uell you would reade it. I haue lost all my credite with our wenches, if they heare that my penne hath thus polluted my paper. But alas,Or, dulcia non meruit qui de∣ignatur ama∣a. it is but my fortune and not my fault; I am forced thereto; when the Maister is in the Imperatiue moode, the mā must obey in the Present tense,Fidelis seruus petuus Asi∣us. though he should be thought for his labour, As in praesenti, perfectum format in aui, vt no nas knaui, &c.Quae mala sint Domini, quae erui commoda ascis. Well, yet you see I haue not forgot all my Grammer. Iwis it were better for vs seruingmen, if you Mai∣sters, would do more in the Datiue case,ondile, qui uum, tege∣ esse diu. and speake lesse in the Imperatiue moodes. If you will be lecherous, we must be bawdes; if you will be quarellous,y your lea∣ maisters. we must be ruffians: and now my Maister playes the Physitiō, I must be Potycarie. If he cast the water, I must minister the clyster, what is the remedie? Delirant domini, famuli plectuntur: iniquum est. The men still beare their Maisters sin, But litle iustice is therein. But a great many of my Maisters betters, may say for themselues: Meae (contendere noli) stultitiam patiuntur opes.Horace. To striue with vs it is but vaine, Our wealth our follies will sustaine. Wherefore now to say somewhat for my
selfe, and as it were to play one bout in mine owne defence (for if Zolus haue already bit∣ten at my Maisters banket, it may be some Momes will mocke me, for my short pit∣tance.) First thefore to answere some Cicero∣niās,Nolo ster curiae dici glauciam. that maintaine that such a word as Ster∣cutius should not be named in ciuilitie. (To omit, that where he condemnes it, there he v∣seth it,De orat. 157. Supra stercus iniectum. and in one place beside) but I would aske some Rhetoricke Reader (for somtimes, Eloquence hath thought it good,De diuina. 92. to giue the sword and buckler place) whether it be not as ciuill a phrase to say, Stercutius is made a Nowne Adiectiue, as these fewe that I will here recite, which if I should English, they world make some perhap cast vp their gorges.Oratio in Pi∣snm. Against Piso, a great noble man, his better in birth, his equall in office. Cum hac me peste & labe confero? Memini∣sticaenum; nescio quo egurgustio te prodire obuo∣luto capite soleatum?Pauci tua lu∣tulenta viti noueramus. Epicure ex ha∣ra product. faetidam nobis popinam ex∣halasti. Vnde tis nos partim turpissimè respon∣dendo, partim faedissimè eructando eiecisti. And against the worthy Anthonie (whom so noble pennes haue celebrated) marke what he saith, & where? euen in the Senat: But first, you must imagine that Anthonie had had a litle mischaunce, while he sate in Iudgement on the Bench (perhaps some foolish Orator, that could not tell a slouenly tale cleanly had
bin arguing, of purgare and reficere cloacam.) Whereby the noble man being queysie, layd open his stomacke, and Tullie, owing him a grudge, a yeare after layes it in his dish, in these sweet wordes. Orem non modo visu faedam;O matter slouēly to be seene, to be heard hate∣full, &c. sed etiam auditu &c. In caetu po. R. negotium publicum gerens, cui ructare turpe esset, is frust is esculētis, vinum, re∣dolentibus, gremiū suū, & totū tribunal impleuit. Thus you see you M. T. C. when it pleased him, to displease others, would vse wordes as bad as the best of vs. But to argue succinctly (as they call it) I say, that that some call scurrilitie, in this booke▪ is indeed but a checke to scurrilitie. I wil proue it.Grāmariās. Musitians. Daunsers. Fensers. Teachers of all sortes, when they wil teach one to mend his fault, will shewe the fault in themselues first. Also the incomparable Poet of our age, to giue a most artificiall reproofe of following the letter too much, cōmits the same fault of purpose. You that do Dixionarie method bring,Syr P. Sid. Into your rymes, running in ratling rowes. Further this booke,A good triall of what spi∣rit a booke is written. where it seemes most loose, marke if it do not stoppe rather then open all gaps of lasciuiousnesse. But least some bad disputers, cōfessing the premisses to be true,This is to you that be Schollers. should denie the cōclu∣sion, let me deale Sillogisticè in moode and fi∣gure. And that the Sillogisme may be sutable
to the proposition,A Sillogisme in Bocardo. let it be in the third figure the fift moode called Bocardo. Some homely words in necessary matters are not to be condemned.Maior. But all ages, all writers, all states,Minor. haue vsed these wordes in these matters. Ergo,Conclusion. the title of the booke should not be condēned Now if any be in so fierse a figure, and in so angrie a moode, that he will reduce all to Barbara, I thinke we should chop lo∣gicke best with such a one in ferio. But if an argument be brought against vs in the second figure,A Sillogisme in the first moode of the second figure. in a sober moode, and in the sacred name of Cesare; in this wise: No wordes obscenous, scurrill, and sordi∣dous,1 should come to modest, chast, and ver∣tuous eares; But all words cōcerning the subiect of the booke,2 are obscenous, scurrill, and sordidous: Ergo, no part of the booke is approuable.3 Faith, then we are all non plus. I would our fe∣stino, had bene caelarent; for there is no deny∣ing nor replying to that moode, but onely say, God saue the Queene, and pray for the Psalme of mercy. Well,Egles stoope not at flyes. yet I trust how euer my maister speeds I shall do wel inough. Aquila non capit muscas. Wherefore to conclude, and to grace my selfe a litle with you and your friends, let me tell you some of my aduētures. A seruāts
boast you know is to be like his master, loe then how many wayes I can liken me to him, First wee are neare of an age,1. This I learne of my cosin M. Tomas Cicero to praise my▪ selfe. past our foole age, neither young nor old. Both of a complexion, enclining to the o∣rientall colour of a Croydon sanguine.2 Like in Disposition,3 not idle, nor well oc∣cupied. One of my kin did teach him at Eaton,4 and one of his kin taught me at Oxford. We haue bene beyond sea,5 but neuer out of the Queenes dominions.Milford. Waterford, be∣cause it is on this side the English pale. In England be∣yond Wales. In Ireland on this side England, where we saw young children mothers at xi, young women old at 23. wee saw some fayre with litle dressing, fat with scant feeding, and warme with thin clothing. Excellent Religion;The 1. they call Gods seruice. Masse in the morning,The 2. they call the Queenes seruice. common prayer at noone;The 3. some thinke the de∣uils seruice. common daunsing at night; we went as vndertakers thither; we came backe ouertakē, as for those that mockt vs so, God and our Lady, and one more go with them. Since this trauell we haue bene both Poe∣ticall,6 and I Musicall & Pictorical, & though we may lye and steale by authoritie, yet we are taken for true men, and haue holpe to hang theeues. At this houre some of our friends,7 thinke vs worthy of better fortunes thē we haue, but
none is our friēd so much to helpe vs to thē. We haue playd, and bene playd with,8 for our writings. Si quis quod fecit, patiatur ius e∣rit equū. If you doe take but such as you giue, it is one for another, but if they that play so, would giue vs but a peece of gold for euerie good verse wee thinke we haue made;Now if the man such praise will haue. wee should leaue some of thē, but poore felowes. But soft,Thē what must he that keepes the knaues Dametus in Arcadia. if I should tell al, he wold say, I am of kin to Sauntus Ablabius. It is no matter, since he makes me to write of Sauntus Acacchius. But now, that you may know I haue bene a dealer in Emblemes, I will conclude with a deuise not sharpe in conceyte,It is good to set a name to the booke: For a booke without name may be called a libell. but of venera∣ble antiquitie, and yet by my masters owne computation, it is not so auncient as Dame Cloacyna, by 1800. yeares and more. Now riddle me what name is this. The (grace of God) guides well both age and youth▪ Fly sin with feare, as harmlesse (hare) doth bound, Like precious (ring) embrace more precious truth, At (tunne) full of good iuyce, not emptie sound, In these right sand. My samos name is found.
