14759 99843561 8304
CATILINE his CONSPIRACY. VVritten by BEN: IONSON. —His non Plebecula gaudet. Verum Equitis quo{que}, iam migrauit ab aure voluptas, Omnis, ad incertos culos, & gaudia vana. LONDON, Printed for Walter Burre. 1611.
TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HO∣NOR, AND VER∣TVE, THE MOST NOBLE WILLIAM EARLE OF PENBROOKE, &c. MY LORD, IN so thicke, and darke an igno∣rance, as now almost couers the Age, I craue leaue to stand neare your light: and, by that, to be read. Poste∣rity may pay your benefit the honor, and thanks; when it shall know, that you dare, in these Iig-giuen times, to
countenance a legitimate Poëme. I must call it so, against all noise of opi∣nion: from whose crude, and ayy reports, I appeale, to that great and singular faculty of Iudgment in your Lordship, able to vindicate truth from error. It is the first (of this race) that e∣uer I dedicated to any Person, and had I not thought it the best, it should haue beene taught a lesse ambition. Now, it apprcheth your censure chearefully, and with the same assurance, that In∣nocency would appeare before a Ma∣gistrate. Your Lo. most faithfull Honorer. Ben. Ionson.
TO THE READER IN ORDINARIE. THE Muses forbid, that I shold restrayne you medling, whom I see alreade busie with the Title,  o∣uer the leaues: It is your owne. I departed with my right, when I let it first abroad. And, now, so secure an Interpreter I am of my chance, that neither praise, nor dispraise from you can af∣fect mee. Though you commend the two first Actes, with the people, because they are the worst; and dislike the Oration of Cicero, in regard you read some pieces of it, at School, and vnderstand them not yet; I shall finde the way to forgiue you. Be any thing you will be, at your owne charge. Would I had deseru'd but halfe so well of it in translation, as that ought to deserue of you in iudgment, if you haue any. I know you will pretend (whosoeuer you are) to haue that, and more. But all pretences are not iust claymes. The commendation of good things may fall within a many, their approbation but in a few▪ for the most commend out of affection, selfe tickling, an easinesse, or imitation: but men iudge only out of know∣ledge. That is the trying faculty. And, to those workes that will beare a Iudge, nothing is more dangerous then a foolish prayse. You will say I shall not haue yours, therfore; but rather the contrary, all vexation of Censure. If I were not aboue such molestations now, I had great cause to thinke vnworthily of my studies, or they had so of mee. But I leaue you to your exercise. Beginne. To the Reader extraordinary. YOu I would vnderstand to be the better Man, though Paces in Court go otherwise: to you I submit my selfe, and worke. Farewell. BEN: IONSON.
To my riend Mr. Ben: Ionson, vpon his Catiline. IF thou had'st itch'd after the wild applause Of common people, and had'st made thy Lawes. In writing, such, as catch'd at present voyce, I should commend the thing, but not thy choyse. But thou hast squar'd thy rules, by what is good; And art, three Ages yet, from vnderstood: And (I dare say) in it, there lies much Wit Lost, till thy Readers can grow vp to it. VVhich they can nere outgrow, to find it ill, But must fall backe againe, or like it still. Franc: Beaumont. To his worthy friend Mr. Ben. Ionson. HE, that dares wrong this Play, it should appeare Dares vtter more, then other men dare heare, That haue their wits about 'hem: yet such men, Deare friend, must see your Booke, and reade; and then, Out of their learned ignorance, cie ill, And lay you by, calling for mad Pasquill, Or Greene's deare Groatsworth, or Tom Coryate, The new Lexicon, with the errant Pate; And picke away, from all these seueral ends, And durtie ones, to make their as-wise friends Beleeeue they are transslaters. Of this, pitty, There is a great plague hanging o're the Citty: Vnlesse she purge her iudgement presently. But, O thou happy man, that must not die
As these things shall: leauing no more behind But a thin memory (like a passing wind) That blowes, and is forgotten, ere they are cold. Thy labours shall out liue thee; and, like gold Stampt for continuance, shall be currant, where There is a Sunne, a People, or a Yeare. Iohn Fletcher. To his worthy beloued friend Mr. BEN. IONSON. HAD the great thoughts of Catiline bene good, The memory of his name, streame of his bloud, His plots past into acts, (which would haue turn'd His Infamy to Fame, though Rome had burn'd) Had not begot him equall grace with men, As this, that he is writ by such a Pen: VVhose inspirations, if great Rome had had, Her good things had bene better'd, and her bad Vndone; the first for ioy, the last for feare, That such a Muse should spread them, to our Yeare. But woe to vs then: for thy laureat brow If Rome enioy'd had, we had wanted now. But, in this Age, where Iigs and Dances moue, How few there are, that this pure worke approue! Yet, better then I rayle at, thou canst scorne Censures, that die, ere they be throughly borne. Each Subiect thou, still thee each Subiect rayses. And whosoeuer thy Booke, himselfe disprayses: Nat. Field.
The names of the Actors. SYLLA'S GHOST. CATILINE. LENTVLVS. CETHEGVS. CVRIVS. AVTRONIVS. VARGVNTEIVS. LONGINVS. LECCA. FVLVIVS. BESTIA. GABINIVS. STATILIVS. CEPARIVS. CORNELIVS. VOLTVRTIVS. AVRELIA. FVLVIA. SEMPRONIA: GALLA. CLCERO. ANTONIVS. CATO. CATVLVS. CRASSVS. CASAR. QV. CICERO. SYLLANVS. FLACCVS. POMTINIVS. SANGA. SENATORS. ALLOBROGES. PETREIVS. SOLDIERS. PORTER. LICTORS. SERVANTS. PAGES. CHORVS.
CATILINE. ACT. j. SYLLA'S Ghost. DO'st thou not feele me, Rome? Not yet? Is night So heauy on thee, and my weight so light? Can Sylla's Ghost arise within thy walles, Lesse threatning, then an earth-quake, the quicke falles Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads Of thy steepe towers? or shrinke to their first beds? Or, as their ruine the large Tyber fils, Make that swell vp, and drowne thy seuen proud hils? What sleepe is this doth seize thee, so like death, And is not it? Wake, feele her, in my breath. Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian Sound, As a dire Vapor, that had cleft the ground, T'ingender with the night, and blast the day; Or like a Pestilence, that should display Infection through the world: which, thus, I doe. Pluto be at thy councels; and into Thy darker bosome enter Sylla's spirit: All, that was mine, and bad, thy brest inherit. Alas, how weake is that, for Catiline! Did I but say (vaine voice) all that was mine? All, that the Gracchi, Cinna, Marius would; What now, had I a body againe, I could, Comming from hell; what Fiendes would wish should be; And Hannibal could not haue wish'd to see: Thinke thou, and practise. Let the long-hid seedes Of treason, in thee, now shoote forth in deedes, Ranker then horror; and thy former facts Not fall in mention, but to vrge new acts:
Conscience of them prouoke thee on to more. Be still thy Incsts, Murders, Rapes before Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestall Nunne; Thy parricide, late, on thine owne naturall Sonne, After his Moher, to make empty way For thy last wicked Nuptials; worse, then they, That fame that act of thy incestuous life, Which got thee, at once, a Daughter, and a Wife. I leaue the slaughters, that thou didst for me, Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee Thy murder of thy Brother, (being so brib'd) And writ him in the list of my proscrib'd After thy fact, to saue thy little shame: Thy incest, with thy Sister, I not name. These are too light. Fate will haue thee pursue Deedes, after which no Mischiefe can be new; The ruine of thy Countrey: Thou wert built For such a worke, and borne for no lesse guilt: What though defeated once th'hast beene, and knowne, Tempt it againe; That is thy act, or none. What all the seuerall Ills, that visite earth, (Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth) Plagues, Famine, Fire could not reach vnto, The Sword, nor Surfets; let thy fury doe: Make all past, present, future ill thine owne; And conquer all example, in thy one. Nor let thy thought finde any vacant time To hate an old, but still a fresher crime Drowne the remembrance; Let not mischiefe cease, But, while it is in punishing, encrease. Conscience, and care die in thee; And be free Not Heau'n it selfe from thy impiety: Let Night grow blacker with thy plots; and Day, At shewing but thy head forth, start away From this halfe-Spheare: and leaue Romes blinded walls T'embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funerals,
And not recouer sight, till their owne flames Doe light them to their ruines. All the names Of thy Confederates, too, be no lesse great In hell, then here; That, when we would repeate Our strengths in Muster, we may name you all, And Furies, vpon you, for Furies, call. Whilst, what you doe, doth strike them into feares, Or make them grieue, and wish your mischiefe theirs. CATILINE. IT is decree'd. Nor shall thy Fate, ô Rome, Resist my vow. Though Hils were set on Hils, And Seas met Seas, to guarde thee; I would through: I, plough vp rockes, steepe as the Alpes, in dust; And laue the Tyrrhene waters, into cloudes; But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud Citty: The ills, that I haue done, cannot be safe But by attempting greater; and I feele A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish handes. And sayes, they haue beene innocent too long. Was I a Man, bred great, as Rome her selfe? One, form'd for all her honors, all her glories? Equall to all her titles? That could stand Close vp, with Atlas; and sustaine her name As strong, as he doth Heau'n? And, was I, Of all her brood, mark'd out for the repulse By her no voice, when I stood Candidate, To be Commander in the Ponticke warre? I will, hereafter, call her Stepdame, euer. If shee can loose her nature, I can loose My piety; and in her stony entrailes Digge me a seate: where, I will liue, againe, The labour of her wombe, and be a burden Weightier then all the Prodigies, and Monsters, That shee hath teem'd with, since shee first knew Mars.
CATILINE, AVRELIA. WHo's there? AVR. Tis I. CAT. Aurelia? AVR. Yes. AVR. Appeare, And breake, like day, my beauty, to this circle: Vpbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long In mounting to that point, which should giue thee Thy prper splendour. Wherefore frownes my sweet? Haue I too long bene absent from these lips, This cheeke, these eyes? what is my trepase? speake. AVR. It seemes, you know, that can accuse your selfe. CAT. I will redeeme it. AVR. Still, you say so. When? CAT. When Orestilla by her bearing well These my retirements, and stolne times for thought Shall giue their effects leaue to call her Queene Or all the world, in place of humbled Rome. AVR. You court me, now. CAT. As I would alwaies, Loue, By  Ambrosiacke kise, and this of Nectar, Wouldst thou but heare as gladly, as I speake. Could my Aurelia thinke, I meant her lesse; When, wooing her, I first remou'd a Wife, And then a Sonne, to make my bed, and house Spatious, and sir t'embrace her? These were deeds Not t'haue begunne with, but to end with more, And greatr: " He that, building, stayes at one " Floore, or the second, hath erected none. 'Twas how to raise thee, I was meditating; To make some act of mine answere thy loue: That loue, that, when my state was now quite sunke, Came with thy wealth, and weighd it vp againe, And made my 'emergent Fortune once more looke Aboue the maine; which, now, shall hit the starres, And sticke my Orestilla, there, amongst 'hem, If any tempest can but make the billow, And any billow can but lift her greatnesse. But, I must pray my loue, she will put on Like habites with my selfe. I haue to doe
With many men, and many natures. Some, That must be blowne, and sooth'd; as Lentulus, Whom I haue heau'd, with magnifying his bloud, And a vaine dreame, out of the Sybill's bookes, That a third man, of that great family Whereof he is descended, the Cornelij, Should be a King in Rome: which I haue hir'd The flatt'ring Augures to interpret him, Cinna, and Sylla dead. Then, bold Cethegus, Whose valour I haue turn'd into his poyson, And prais'd so into daring, as he would Goe on vpon the Gods, kise lightning, wrest The engine from the Cyclop's, and giue fire At face of a full cloud, and stand his ire, When I would bid him moue. Others there are Whom enuie to the state drawes, and pus on, For contumelies receiu'd, (and such are sure ones) As Curius, and the fore-nam'd Lentulus, Both which haue beene degraded, in the Senate, And must haue their disgraces, still, new rub'd, To make 'hem smart, and labour of reuenge. Others, whom meere ambition fires, and dole Of Prouinces abroade, which they haue faind To their crude hopes, and I as amply promis'd: Thee, Lecca▪ Vargunteius, Bestia, Autronius, Some, whom their wants oppresse, as th'idle Captaines Of Sylla's troopes; and diuers Roman Knights (The profuse wasters of their patrimonies) So threatned with debts, as they will, now, Runne any desperate fortune, for a change. These, for a time, we must rlieue, Aurelia, And make our house their saue-gard. Like, for those, That feare the law, or stand within her gripe, For any act past, or to come. Such will From their owne crimes, be factious, as from ours. Some more there be flight Ayrelings, will be wonne,
With dogs, and horses; or, perhaps, a whore; Which must be had: And, if they venter liues, For vs▪ Aurelia, we must hazard honors A little. Get thee store, and change of women, As I haue boyes; and giue 'hem time, and place, And all conniuence: Be thy selfe, too, courtly; And entertaine, and feast, sit vp, and reuell; Call all the great, the fayre, and spirited Dames Of Rome about thee, and beginne a fashion Of freedome, & community. Some will thanke thee, Though the sowre Senate frowne, whose heads must ake In feare, and feeling too. We must not spare Or cost, or modestie. It can but shew Like one of Iuno's, or of Ioue's disguises In eyther thee, or mee; and will as soone, When things succeed, be throwne by, or let fall; As is a vaile put of, a visor chang'd, Or the Scene shifted, in our Theaters. Who's that? It is the voyce of Lentulus. AVR. Or of Cethegus. CAT. In, my faire Aurelia, And thinke vpon these artes: They must not see, How farre you are trusted with these priuacies; Though, by their shoulders, necks, & heads you rise. LENTVLVS. CETHEGVS. CATILINE. IT is, mee thinkes, a Morning, full of Fate. It riseth slowly, as her sollen carre Had all the weights of sleepe, and death hung at it. She is not rosy-fingerd, but swolne blacke. Her face is like a water, turnd to bloud, And her sicke head is bound about with clouds, As if she threatned night, ere noone of day. It does not looke, as it would haue a Hayle Or Health, wish'd in it, as on other Mornes.
CET. Why, all the fitter, Lentulus: Our comming Is not for salutation, we haue businesse. CAT. Said nobly, braue Cethegus. Where's Autronius? CET. Is he not come? CAT. Not here. CET. Nor Vargunteius? CAT. Neither. CET. A fire in their beds, and bosomes, That so will serue their sloth, rather then vertue. They are no Romanes, and at such high neede As now. LEN. Both they, Longinus, Lecca, Curius, Fuluius, Gabinius, gaue me word, last night, By Lucius Bestia, they would all be here, And early. CET. Yes. As you, had I not call'd you. Come, we all sleepe, and are meere Dormice; Flies, A little lesse then dead: More dulnesse hangs On vs, then on the Morne. W'are spirit-bound, In ribs of ice; our whole blouds are one stone; And Honour cannot thaw vs; nor our wants, Though they burne, hot as feuers, to our states. CAT. I muse they would be tardy, at an houre Of so great purpose. CET. If the Gods had call'd Them, to a purpose, they would iust haue come With the same Tortoyse speed, that are thus slo To such an action, which the Gods will enuie. As asking no lesse meanes, then all their powers Conioyn'd, t'effect. I would haue seene Rome burn't, By this time; and her ashes in an Vrne: The Kingdome of the Senate, rent asunder; And the degenerate, talking Gowne, runne frighted, Out of the ayre of Italy. CAT. Spirit of men! Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much I lou these voyces in thee! CET. O the daies Of Sylla's sway, when the free sword tooke leaue To act all that it would! CAT. And was familiar With entrailes, as our Augures! CET. Sonnes kild Fathers, Brothers their Brothers. CAT. And had price and praise. All hate had licence giuen it; all rage raynes. CET. Slaughter bestrid the streets, and stretch'd himselfe
To seeme more huge; whilst to his stayned thighes The gore he drew flow'd vp: and carried downe Whole heapes of limmes, and bodies, through his arch. No Age was spar'd, no Sexe. CAT. Nay, no Degree. CET. Not Infants, in the poch of life were free. The Sicke, the Old, that could but hope a day Longer, by natures bounty, not let stay. Virgins, and Widdowes, Matrons, prognant Wiues, All dyed. CAT. 'Twas crime enough, that they had liues. To strike but only those, that could doe hurt, Was dull, and poore. Some fel to make the number As some the prey. CET. The rugged Charon fainted, Ad ask'd a naue, rather then a boate, To ferry ouer the sad world that came: The mawes, ad dennes of beasts could not receiue The bodies, that those soules were frighted from; Ad e'en te graues were fild with men yet liuing, Whose flight, and feare had mix'd them, with the dead. CAT. And this shall be againe, and more, and more, Now Lentulus, the third Cornelius, Is to stand vp in Rome. LEN. Nay, vrge not that Is so vncertaine. CAT. How! LEN. I meane, not clear'd. And, therefore, not to be reflected on. CAT. The Sybill's leaues vncertaine? or the Comments Of our graue, deepe, diuining men no cleare? LEN. All Prophecies, you know, suffer the torture. CAT. But this, already, hath confess'd without. And so beene weigh'd, examin'd, and compar'd, As 't were malicious ignorance in him, Woud aint in the beliefe. LEN. Doe you beleeue it? CAT. Doe I loue Lentulus? or pray to see it? LEN. The Augures all are constant, I am meant. CAT. They had lost their science else. LEN. They count from Cinna. CAT. And Sylla nex, and so make you the third; All that can say the Sunne is ris'n, must thinke it. LEN. Men marke me more, of late, as I come forth.
CAT. Why, what can they doe lesse? Cinna, and Sylla Are set, and gone: And we must turne our eyes On him that is, and shines. Noble Cethegus, But view him with me, here: He lookes, already, As if he shooke a Scepter, o're the Senate, And the aw'd purple dropt their roddes, and axes. The Statues melt againe; and houshold Gods In grones confesse the trauaile of the City; The very walles sweate blood before the change; And stones start out to ruine, ere it comes. CET. But he, and we, and all are idle still. LEN. I am your creature, Sergius: And what ere The great Cornelian Name shall winne to be, It is not Augury, nor the Sybils Bookes, But Catiline that makes it. CAT. I am shadow To honor'd Lentulus, and Cethegus here, Who are the heires of Mars. CET. By Mars himselfe, Catiline is more my parent: For whose vertue Earth cannot make a shadow great inough, Though Enuie should come too. O, there they'are. Now we shall talke more, though we yet doe nothing. AVTRONIVS, VARGVNTEIVS, LONGINVS, CVRIVS, LECCA, BESTIA, FVLVIVS, GABINIVS, &c. HAile Lucius Catiline. VAR. Haile noble Sergius. LON. Haile Publius Lentulus. CVR. Haile the third Cornelius. LEC. Caius Cethegus haile. CET. Haile sloth, and words, In steed of Men, and Spirits. CAT. Nay, deare Caius; CET, Are your eyes yet vneel'd? Dare they looke day In the dull face? CAT. Hee's zealous, for the'affaire; And blames your tardy comming, Gentlemen. CET. Vnlesse, we had sold our selues to sleepe, and ease, And would be our slaues slaues. CAT. Pray you forbeare. CET. The North is not so starke, and cold. CAT. Cethegus.
BES. We shall redeeme all, if your fire will let vs. CAT. You are too full of lightning, noble Caius. Boy, see all doores be shut, that none approch vs, On this part of the house. Go you, and bid The Priest, he kill the slaue I mark'd last night; And bring me of his bloud, when I shall call him: Till then, waite all without. VAR. How is't, Autronius! AVT. Longinus? LON. Curius? CVR. Lecca? VAR. Feele you nothing? LON. A strange, vnwonted horror doth inuade me, I know not what it is! LEC. The day goes backe, Or else my senses! CVR. As at Atreus feast! FVL. Darknesse growes more & more! LEN. The Vest all flame, I think, be out. GAB. What groane was that? CET. Our phant'sies. Strike fire, out of our selues, and force a day. AVT. Againe it sounds! BES. As all the Citie gaue it! CET. We feare what our selues faine. VAR. What light is this? CVR. Look forth. Len. It still grows greater. LEC. From whēce comes it? LON. A Bloody arme it is, that holds a pine Lighted, aboue the Capitoll: And, now, It waues vnto vs. CAT. Braue, and omenous! Our enterprise is seal'd. CET. In spight of darknesse, That would discountenance it. Looke no more; We loose time, and our selues: To what we came for, Speake Lucius, we attend you. CAT. Noblest Romanes, If you were lesse, or, that your faith, and vertue Did not hold good that title, with your bloud, I should not, now, vnprofitably spend My selfe in words, or catch at emptie hopes, By ayrie waies, for solide certainties. But since in many, and the greatest dangers, I still haue knowne you no lesse true, then valiant, And that I tast, in you, the same affections, To will, or nill, to thinke things good, or bad, Alike with me: (which argues your firme friendship) I dare the boldlier, with you, set on foote, Or leade, vnto this great, and goodliest action.
What I haue thought of it afore, you all Haue heard apart; I then express'd my zeale Vnto the glory; Now, the neede enflames me: When I fore-thinke the hard conditions, Our states must vndergoe, except, in time, We do redeeme our selues to liberty, And breake the yron yoake, forg'd for our necks. For, what lesse can we call it? when we see The common-wealth engross'd so by a few, The Giants of the state, that do, by turnes, Enioy her, and defile her. All the Earth, Her Kings, and Tetrarchs, are their tributaries; People, and Nations pay them hourely stipends: The riches of the world flowes to their coffers, And not, to Romes. While (but those few) the rest, How euer great we are, honest, and valiant, Are hearded with the vulgar; and so kept, As we were onely bred, to consume corne, Or weare out wooll, to drinke the Cities water: Vngrac'd, without authoritie, or marke, Trembling beneath their rods, to whom, (if all Were well in Rome) we should come forth bright axes. All Places, Honors, Offices are theirs; Or where they will conferre 'hem: They leaue vs The dangers, the repulses, iudgements, wants; Which how long will you beare most valiant spirits? Were we not better to fall, once, with vertue, Then draw a wretched, and dishonor'd breath To loose with shame, when these mens pride will laugh? I call the faith of Gods, and Men to question; The power is in our hands; our bodies able; Our mindes as strong; O'th' contrary, in them, All things growne aged, with their wealth, and yeares. There wants, but onely to beginne the businesse, The issue is certaine. CET. LON. On, Let vs go on. CVR. BES. Go on, braue Sergius. CAT. It doth strike my soule,
(And, who can scape the stroke, that hath a soule, Or, but the smallest ayre of Man within him?) To see them swell with treasure; which they poure Out i'their riots, eating, drinking, building, I, i' the sea: planing of Hilles with Valleyes; And raysing Vallies aboue Hilles, whilst wee Haue not, to giue our Bodies Necessaries. They ha' their change of Houses, Manors, Lordships; We scarce a fire, or poore houshold Lar. They buy rare Atticke statues, Tyrian hangings, Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate, Attalicke garments, and, now new-found, Gemmes Since Pompey went for Asia; which they purchase At price of Prouinces. The Riuer Phasis Cannot affourd 'hem Fowle; nor Lucrine Lake Oysters enow: Circei, too, is search'd To please the witty Gluttonie of a meale. Their ancient Habitations they neglect, And set vp new; Then, if the Echo like not In such a roome, they plucke downe those; build newer, Alter them too; and, by all franticke waies, Vexe their wild wealth, as they molest the people, From whom they force it; Yet, they cannot tame, Or ouercome their riches: Not, by making, Bathes, Orchards, Fish-pooles, letting in of seas, Here; and, then there, forcing 'hem out againe, With mountaynous heapes; for which the Earth hath lost Most of her ribbes, as entrayles, being now Wounded no lesse for Marble, then for gold. We, all this while, like calme, benum'd Spectators, Sit, till our seates do cracke; and doe not heare The thundring ruines, whilst, at home, our wants, Abroad, our debts do vrge vs, our states daily Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: And, what Is left, but to be crush'd? Wake, wake braue Friends, And meete the liberty you oft haue wish'd for.
Behold, renowne, riches, and glory court you. Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards. Me thinkes (though I were dumbe) th'affaire it selfe The opportunity, your needes, and dangers, With the braue spoile the warre brings, should inuite you. Vse me your Generall, or Souldier: Neither, My Minde, nor Body shall be wanting to you. And, being Consul, I not doubt t'effect, All that you wish: If Trust not flatter me, And you had, rather, still be slaues, then free. CET. Free, free. LON. Tis freedome. CVR. Freedome we all stand for. CAT. Why, these are noble voices. Nothing wants then, But that we take a solemne Sacrament, To strengthen our designe. CET. And so to act it. Differring hurts, where powers are most prepar'd. AVT. Yet, ere we enter into open act, (With fauour) 't were no losse, if't might be enquir'd What the Condition of these Armes would be? VAR. I, and the meanes, to carry vs through. CAT. How, Friendes! Thinke you, that I would bid you, graspe the winde? Or call you to th'embracing of a cloude? Put your knowne valures on so deare a businesse, And haue no other second then the Danger, Nor other Gyrlond then the losse? Become Your owne assurances. And, for the meanes, Consider, first, the starke security The common wealth is in, now; the whole Senate Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow; Their forces all abroade; of which the greatest, That might annoy vs most, is fardest off, In Asia, vnder Pompey: Those, neare hand, Commanded, by our friendes; one Army' in Spaine, By Cneus Piso; th'other in Mauritania, By Nucerins; both which I haue firme, And fast vnto our Plot. My selfe, then, standing Now to be Consul; with my hop'd Colleague
Caius Antonius, one, no lesse engag'd By his wants then we: And whom I'haue power to melt, And cast in any mould. Beside, some others That will not yet be nam'd, (both sure, and Great ones) Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselues, Strong, for our party; so, that no resistance In nature can be thought. For our reward, then; First, all our Debts are paid; Dangers of Law, Actions, Decrees, Iudgments against vs quitted; The rich Men, as in Sylla's times, proscrib'd, And Publication made of all their goods; That House is yours; That Land is his; Those Waters, Orchards, and wakes a third's: He'has that Honor, And he that Office. Such a Prouince fals To Vargunleius: This to' Autronius: That To bold Cethegus: Rome to Lentulus: You share the World, her Magistracies, Priest-hoods, Wealth, and Felicity amongst you, Friendes; And Catiline your seruant. Would you, Curius, Reuenge the Contumelie stucke vpon you, In being remoued from the Senate? Now, Now, is your time. VVould Publius Lentulus Strike, for the like disgrace? Now, is his time. VVould stout Longinus walke the streets of Rome, Facing the Praetor? Now, has he a time To spurne, and treade the Fasces, into dirt Made of the Vsurers, and the Lictors braines. Is there a Beauty, here in Rome, you loue? An Enemie you would kill? What Head's not yours? VVhose Wife, which Boy, whose Daughter, of what race, That th'Husband, or glad Parents shall not bring you, And boasting of the office? Only, spare Your selues, and you haue all the earth beside, A field, to exercise your longings in. I see you rais'd, and reade your forward mindes High, i' your faces. Bring the wine, and blood
You haue prepar'd there. LON. How! CAT. I haue kill'd a slaue, And of his blood caus'd to be mixt with wine. Fill euery man his bowle. There cannot be A fitter drinke, to make this Sanction in. Here, I beginne the Sacrament to all. O, for a clap of thunder now, as loud, As to be heard through-out the Vniuerse, To tell the world the fact, and to applaude it. Be firme, my hand; not shed a drop: but poure Fiercenese into me, with it; and fell thirst Of more, and more: Till Rome be left as blood-lesse, As euer her feares made her, or the sword. And, when I leaue to wish this to thee, Stepdame Or stop, to effect it, with my powers fainting; So may my blood be drawne, and so drunke vp As is this slaues. LON. And so be mine. LEN. And mine. AVT. And mine. VAR. And mine. CET. Cowne me my bowle yet fuller. Here, I doe drinke this, as I would doe Cato's, Or the new fellow Cicero's: with that vow Which Catiline hath giuen. CVR. So doe I. LEC. And I. BES. And I. FVL. And I. GAB. And all of vs. CAT. Why, now's the businesse safe, & each man strengthned. Sirah, what aile you? PAG. Nothing. BES. Somewhat modest. CAT. Slaue, I will strike your soule out, with my foote, Let me but finde you againe with such a face: You Whelpe. BES. Nay Lucius. CAT. Are you coying it, When I command you to be free, and generall To all? BES. You'll be obseru'd. CAT. Arise, and shew But any least auersion i' your looke To him that bourdes you next, and your throate opens. Noble Confederates, thus farre is perfect. Only your suffrages I will expect, At the assembly for the choosing Consuls, And all the voices you can make by friendes To my election. Then let me worke out Your fortunes, and mine owne. Meane while, all rest
Seal'd vp, and silent, as when rigid frosts Haue bound vp Brookes, and Riuers, forc'd wild beasts Vnto their caues, and birds into the woods, Clownes to their houses, and the Countrey sleepes; That, when the sodaine thaw comes, we may breake Vpon 'hem like a deluge, bearing downe Halfe Rome before vs, and inuade the rest VVith cries, and noise able to wake the Vrnes Of those are dead, and make their ashes fare. " The horrors, that doe strike the world, should come " Loud, and vnlook'd for; Till they strike, be dumbe. CET. Oraculous Sergius. LEN. God-like Catiline. CHORVS. CAn nothing great, and at the height Remaine so long? but it's owne weight VVill ruine it? Or, is't blinde Chance, That still desires new States t'aduance, And quit the old? Else, why must Rome Be by it selfe; now, ouercome? Hath shee not foes inow of those, VVhom shee hath made such, and enclose Her round about? Or, are they none, Except shee first become her owne? O wretchednesse of greatest States, To be obnoxious to these Fates: That cannot keepe, what they doe gaine; And what they raise so ill sustaine. Rome, now, is Mistresse of the whole VVorld, Sea, and Land, to either Pole; And euen that Fortune will destroy The power that made it. Shee doth ioy So  plenty, wealth, and ease, As, now, th'excesse is her disease. Shee builds in gold; And, to the Starres:
As, if shee threatned Heau'n with warres; And seekes for Hell, in quarries deepe, Giuing the fiends, that there doe keepe, A hope of day. Her Women weare The spoiles of Nations, in an eare, Chang'd for the treasure of a shell; And, in their loose attires, doe swell More light then sailes, when all windes play: Yet, are the men more loose then they, More kemb'd, and bath'd, and rub'd, and trim'd, More sleek'd, more soft, and slacker limm'd; As prostitute: so much, that kinde May seeke it selfe there, and not finde. They eate on beds of silke, and gold; At yuorie tables; or, wood sold Dearer then it: and, leauing plate, Doe drinke in stone of higher rate. They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas; Foule euery brooke, and bush; to please Their wanton tasts: and, in request Haue new, and rare things; not the best. Hence comes that wild, and vast expence, That hath enforc'd Romes vertue, thence, Which simple pouerty first made; And, now, ambition doth inuade Her state, with eating auarice, Riot, and euery other vice. Decrees are bought, and Lawes are sold, Honours, and Offices for gold; The peoples voices: And the free Tongues, in the Senate, bribed bee. Such ruine of her manners Rome Doth suffer now, as shee's become (Without the Gods it soone gaine-say) Both her owne spoiler, and owne pray. So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly euen.
With vs, for all the blowes thee giuen; When we, whose vertue conquer'd thee, Thus, by thy vices, ruin'd bee. ACT. ij. FVLVIA, GALLA, SERVANT. THose Romes doe smell extremely; Bring my glasse, And table hither, Galla. GAL. Madame. FVL. Looke VVithin, i'my blew Cabinet, for the pearle I'had sent me last, and bring it. GAL. That from Clodius? FVL. From Caius Caesar. You'are for Clodius, still. Or Curius. Sirha, if Quintus Curius come, I am not in fit moode; I keepe my Chamber: Giue warning so, without. GAL. Is this it? Madame. FVL. Yes, helpe to hang it in mine eare. GAL. Beleeue me, It is a rich one, Madame. FVL. I hope so: It should not be worne there else. Make an end, And binde my haire vp. GAL. As 'twas yesterday? FVL. No, nor the t'other day. When knew you me Appeare, two dayes together, in one dressing? GAL. Will you ha't i'the globe, or spire? FVL. How thou wilt; Any way, so thou wilt doe it, good Impertinence. Thy company, if I slept not very well A nights, would make me, an errant foole, with questions. GAL. Alas Madam. FVL. Nay gentle halfe o'the Dialogue, cease. GAL. I doe it, indeede, but for your exercise, As your Phisitian bids me. FVL. How! Do's he bid you To anger me for exercise? GAL. Not to anger you, But stirre your blood a little: There's difference Betweene luke-warme, and boyling, Madame. FVL. Ioue! Shee meanes to cooke me, I thinke? Pray you, ha'done.
GAL. I meane to dresse you, Madame. FVL. O my Iuno, Be friend to me! Offring at wit, too? Why, Galla! Where hast thou been? GAL. Why, Madame? FVL. What hast thou done VVith thy poore innocent selfe? GAL. Wherfore, sweet Madam? FVL. Thus to come forth, so sodainly, a wit-worme? GAL. It pleases you to flout one. I did dreame Of Ladie Sempronia. FVL. O, the wonder is out. That did infect thee? VVell, and how? GAL. Me thought, Shee did discourse the best. FVL. That euer thou heard'st? GAL. Yes. FVL. I' thy sleepe? Of what was her discourse? GAL. O' the Republicke, Madame, and the State, And how shee was in debt, and where shee meant To raise fresh summes: Shee's a great States-woman. FVL. Thou dreamp'tst all this? GAL. No, but you know she is Madame, And both a Mistresse of the Latine tongue, And of the Greeke. FVL. I, but I neuer dreampt it, Galla, As thou hast done, and therefore you must pardon me. GAL. Indeede, you mocke me, Madame. FVL. Indeede, no. Forth with your learned Ladie: Shee has a wit, too? GAL. A very masculine one. FVL. A shee-Criticke, Galla? And can compose, in verse, and make quicke iests, Modest, or otherwise? GAL. Yes Madame. FVL. She can sing, too? And play on Instruments? GAL. Of all kindes, they say. FVL. And doth dance rarely? GAL. Excellent. So well, As a bald Senator made a iest, and said, 'Twas better, then an honest woman neede. GVL. Tut, shee may beare that. Few wise womens honesties VVill doe their courtship hurt. GAL. Shee's liberall too, Madam. FVL. VVhat of her money, or her honor, pray thee? GAL. Of both, you know not which shee doth spare least. FVL. A comely commendation. GAL. Troth, tis pitty Shee is in yeares. FVL. VVhy Galla? GA. For it is. FVL. O, is that all? I thought thou' hadst had a reason. GAL. VVhy so I haue. Shee has beene a fine Ladie, And, yet, shee dresses herselfe, (except you Madame) One o' the best in Rome: and paints, and hides
Her decayes very well. FVL. They say, it is Rather a visor, then a face shee weares. GAL. They wrong her verily Madame, shee do's sleeke With crums of bread, and milke, and lies a nights In as neate gloues. But shee is faine of late To seeke, more then shee's sought to (the same is) And so spends that way. FVL. Thou knowst all. But Galla, VVhat say you to Catilines Ladie, Orestilla? There is the Gallant. GAL. Shee do's well. Shee has Very good sutes, and very rich: but, then, Shee cannot put 'hem on. Shee knowes not, how To weare a garment. You shall haue her all Iewels, and gold sometimes, so that her selfe Appeares the least part of her selfe. No' in troth, As I liue, Madame, you put 'hem all downe With your meere strength of iudgement; and doe draw, too, The world of Rome to follow you: you attire Your selfe so diuersly, and with that spirit, Still to the noblest humors. They could make Loue to your dresse, although your face were away, they say. FVL. And body too, and ha' the better match on't? Say they not so too, Galla? Now! What newes Trauailes your count'nance with? SER. If't please you, Mada The Ladie Sempronia is lighted at the gate; GAL. Castor, my dreame, my dreame. SER. And comes to see yo GAL. For Venus sake, good Madame see her. FVL. Peac The foole is wild, I thinke. GAL. And heare her talke, Sweet Madame, of State-matters, and the Senate. SEMPRONIA, FVLVIA, GALLA. FVluia, good wench, how dost thou? FVL. Well, Sempronia▪ Whither are you thus early addrest? SEM. To see Aurelia Orestilla. Shee sent for me. I came to call thee, with mee; wilt thou goe? FVL. I cannot now, in troth, I haue some letters To write, and send away. SEM. Alas, I pitty thee.
I ha'bene writing all this night, (and am So very weary) vnto all the Tribes, And Centuries, for their voyces, to helpe Catiline, In his election. We shall make him Consul I hope, amongst vs. Crassus, I, and Caesar Will carry it for him. FVL. Do's he stand for't? SEM. H'is the chiefe Candidate. FVL. Who stands beside? Giue me some wine, and poulder for my teeth. SEM. Here's a good pearle in troth. FVL. A prettie one. SEM. A very orient one. There are Competitors, Caius Antonius, Publius Galbe, Lucius Cassius Longinus, Quintus Cornificiu, Caius Licinius, and that talker, Cicero. But Catiline, and Antonius will be chosen. For foure of the other, Lincinius, Longinus, Galba, and Cornificius will giue way. And Cicero they will not choose. FVL. No? Why▪ SEM. It will be cross'd, by the Nobility. GAL. How she do's vnderstand the common busines! SEM. Nor, were it fit. He is but a new fellow, An In-mate here in Rome (as Catiline calls him) And, the Patricians should doe very ill, To let the Consul-ship be so defil'd As't would be, if he obtain'd it? A meere vpstarr, That has no pedigree, no house, no coate, No ensignes of a family? FVL. He 'has vertue. SEM. Hang vertue, where there is no blood: 'tis vice And, in him, fawcinesse. Why should he presume To be more learned, or more eloquent, Then the Nobility? or boast any quality Worthie a Noble man, himselfe not noble? FVL. 'Twas vertue onely, at first, made all men noble. SEM. I yeeld you, it might, at first, in Romes poore age; When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough, Or garden'd well▪ But, now, we ha' no need, To digge, or loose our sweat for't. We haue wealth,
Fortune and ease, and then their stocke, to spend on, Of Name, for Vertue, which will beare vs out 'Gainst all new commers: and can neuer faile vs, While the succession stayes. And, we must glorifie, A Mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker? 'Cause he has suck'd at Athens? and aduance him, To our owne losse? No Fuluia. There are they Can speake Greeke too, if need were. Caesar and I Haue sate vpon him; so hath Grassus, too; And others. We haue all decreed his rest, For rising farder. GAL. Excellent rare Lady! FVL. Sempronia, you are beholden to my woman, here▪ She do's admire you. SEM. O good Galla, how dost thou? GAL. The better, for your learned Ladiship. SEM. Is this grey poulder, a good Dentifrice? FVL. You see I vse it. SEM. I haue one is whiter. FVL. It may be so. SEM. Yet this smels well. GAL. And clenses Very well, Madam, and resists the crudities. SEM. Fuluia, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now? Which of our great Patricians? FVL. Faith, I keepe No Catalogue of 'hem. Sometimes I haue one, Sometimes another, as the toy takes their blouds. SEM. Thou hast them all. Faith, when was Quintus Curius, Thy speciall seruant, here? FVL. My speciall seruant? SEM. Yes, thy Idolater, I call him. FVL. He may be yours, If you do like him. SEM. How! FVL. He comes, not, here, I haue forbid him, hence. SEM. Venus forbid! FVL. Why? SEM. Your so constant Louer. FVL. So much the rather. I would haue change. So would you too, I am sure. And now, you may haue him. SEM. Hee's fresh yet, Fuluia: Beware, how you do tempt mee. FVL. Faith, for mee, He' is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone, That gaue him season. His good gifts are done. He do's not yeeld the crop that he was wont. And, for the act, I can haue secret fellowes, With backs worth ten of him, and shall plse mee
(Now that the Land is fled) a myriade better. SEM. And those one may command. FVL. Tis true, These Lordings, Your noble Faunes, they are so imperious, saucy, Rude, and as boystrous as Centaures; leaping A Ladie, at first sight. SEM. And must be borne Both with, and out, they thinke. FVL. Tut, Ile obferue None of 'hem all: nor humor 'hem a iot Longer, then they come laden in the hand, And say, here's tone, for th'tother. SEM. Do's Caesar giue well? FVV. They hall all giue, and pay well, that come here If they will haue it; and that iewels, pearle, Plate, or round summes, to buy these. I'am not taken With a Cob-Swan, or a high-mounting Bull, As foolish Leda, and Europa were, But the bright gold, with Danae. For such price, I would endure, a rough, harsh Iupiter, Or ten such thundring Gamsters, and refraine To laugh at 'hem, till they are gone, with my much suffring. SEM. Th'art a most happy wench, that thus canst make Vse of they youth, and freshnesse, in the season: And hast it to make vse of. FVL. (Which is the happinesse.) SEM. I am, now, faine to giue to them, and keepe Musique, and a continuall Table, to inuite 'hem; FVL. Yes, and they studie your kitchin, more then you: SEM. Eate my selfe out with vsury, and my Lord, too, And all my officers, and friends beside, To procure moneyes, for the needfull charge I must be at, to haue 'hem: And, yet, scarce Can I atchieue 'hem, so. FVL. Why, that's because You affect yong faces onely, and smooth chinnes, Sempronia. If youl'd loue beards, and bristles, (One with another, as others doe) or wrinkles— Who's that? Looke Galla. GAL. Tis the partie, Madame. FVL. What party? Has he no name? GAL. Tis Quintus Curius. FVL. Did I not bid 'hem, say, I kept may chamber? GAL. Why, so they do. SEM. Ile leaue you, Fuluia.
FVL. Nay, good Sempronia, stay. SEM. In faith, I will not. FVL. By Iuno, I would not see him. SEM. Ile not hinder you. GAL. You know, he will not be kept out, Madam. SEM. No, Nor shall not, carefull Galla, by my meanes. FVL. As I doe liue, Sempronia. SEM. What needs this? FVL. Go, say, I am asleepe, and ill at ease. SEM. By Castor, no; I'le tell him, you are awake; And very well. Stay Galla. Farewell Fuluia: I know my manners. Why doe you labour, thus, With action, against purpose? Quintus Curius, She is, yfaith, here, and in disposition: FVL. Spight, with your courtesie. How shall I be tortur'd! CVRIVS, FVLVIA, GALLA. WHere are you, fayre one, hat conceale your selfe; And keepe your beauty, within lockes, and barres, here, Like a fooles treasure? FVL. True, she was a foole, When, first she shew'd it to a theefe. CVR. How prety Solennesse! So harsh, and short? FVL. The fooles Artillery, sir. CVR. Then, make my gowne off, for the'encounter. FVL. Stay sir. I am not in the moode. CVR. Ile put you into't. FVL. Best, put your selfe, i'your case againe, and keepe Your furious appetite warme, against you haue place for't. CVR. What! do you coy it? FVL. No sir. I'am not proud. CVR. I would you were. You thinke, this state becomes you? By Hercules, it do's not. Looke i'your glasse, now, And see, how sciruely that countenance shewes; You would be loth to owne it. FVL. I shall not change it. CVR. Faith, but you must; and slacke this bended brow; And shoote lesse scorne: There is a Fortune comming Towards you, Daintie, that will take thee, thus, And set thee aloft, to tread vpon the head Of her owne statue here in Rome. FVL. I wonder, Who let this Promiser in! Did you, good Diligence? Giue him his bribe, againe. Or if you had none,
Pray you demand him, why he is so ventrous, To presse, thus, to my chamber, being for bidden Both, by my selfe, and seruants? CVR. How! This's handsome! And somewhat a new straine! FVL. 'Tis not strain'd, Sir. 'Tis very naturall. CVR. I haue knowne it otherwise, Betweene the parties, though. FVL. For your fore-knowledge, Thanke that, which made it. It will not be so, Hereafter, I assure you. CVR. No, my Mistresse? FVL. No though you bring the same materials. CVR. Heare me, You ouer act when you should vnderdoe. A little call your selfe againe, and thinke. If you doe this to practise on me' or finde At what forc'd distance you can hold your seruant; That' it be an artificiall tricke, to enflame, And fire me more, fearing my loue may neede it, As, heretofore, you ha' done; why, proceede. FVL. As I ha' done heretofore? CVR. Yes, when you'ld faine Your husbands iealousie, your seruants watches, Speake softly, and runne often to the dore, Or to the windore, forme strange feares that were not; As if the pleasure were lesse accomptable, That were secure. FVL. You are an impudent fellow. CVR. And, when you might better haue done it, at the gate, To take me in at the casement. FVL. I take you in? CVR. Yes, you my Lady. And, then, being abed with you, To haue your well taught wayter, here, come running, And cry, her Lord, and hide me without cause, Crush'd in a chest, or thrust vp in a chimney. When he, tame, Crow, was winking at his Farme; Or, had he beene here, and present, would haue kept Both eyes, and beake seal'd vp, for sixe sesterces. FVL. You haue a slanderous, beastly, vnwash'd tongue, I' your rude mouth, and sauouring your selfe, Vn-manner'd Lord. CVR. How now! FVL. It is your title, Sir. Who (since you ha' lost your owne good name, and know not What to loose more) care not, whose honor you wound,
Or fame' you poyson with it. You should goe, And vent your selfe, i' the region, where you liue, Among the Suburbe-Brothels, Baudes, and Brokers, Whither your broken fortunes haue design'd you. CVR. Nay, then I must stop your furie, I see; and plucke The tragicke visor off. Come, Ladie Cypris, Know your owne vertues, quickly. Ile not be Put to the woing of you thus, afresh, At euery turne, for all the Venus in you. Yeeld, and be pliant; or by Pollux —How now? Will Lais turne a Lucrece? FVL. No, but by Castor, Hold off your Rauishers hands, I pierce your heart, else. Ile not be put to kill my selfe, as shee did For you, sweet Tarquine. What? doe you fall off? Nay, it becomes you graciously. Put not vp. You'll sooner draw your weapon on me, I thinke it, Then on the Senate, who haue cast you forth Disgracefully, to be the common tale Of the whole Citty; base, infamous Man: For, were you other, you would there imploy Your desperate dagger. CVR. Fuluia, you doe know The strengths you haue vpon me; Doe not vse Your power too like a Tyran: I can beare, Almost vntill you breake me. FVL. I doe know, Sir, So do's the Senate, too, know, you can beare. CVR. By all the Gods, that Senate will smart deepe For your vpbraidings. I should be right sorry To haue the meanes so to be veng'd on you, (At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them. But, goe you on still: Fare you well, deare Ladie; You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud. You will repent these moodes, and ere't be long, too. I shall ha' you come about, againe. FVL. Doe you thinke so? CVR. Yes, and I know so. FVL. By what Augury? CVR. By the faire Entrailes of the Matrons chests, Gold, Pearle, and Iewels, here in Rome, which Fuluia,
Will then (but late) say that shee might haue shar'd. And, grieuing, misse. FVL. Tut, all your promis'd Mountaines, And Seas, I am so stalely acquainted with—. CVR. But, when you see the vniuersall floud Runne by your coffers; that my Lords, the Senators, Are sold for slaues, their Wiues for bond-women, Their Houses, and fine Gardens giuen away, And all their goods, vnder the Speare, at out-cry, And you haue none of this; but are still Fuluia, Or perhaps lesse, while you are thinking of it: You will aduise then, Coynesse, with your cushion, And looke o' your fingers; say, how you were wish'd; And so, he left, you. FVL. Call him againe, Galla: This is not vsuall, something hangs on this That I must winne out of him. CVR. How now, melt you? FVL. Come, you will laugh, now, at my easinesse? But, 'tis no miracle; Doues, they say, will bill, After their pecking, and their murmuring. CVR. Yes, And then 'tis kindly. I would haue my Loue Angry, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest Of her behauiour. FVL. You doe see, I study How I may please you, then. But you thinke, Curius Tis couetise hath wrought me; If you loue me Change that vnkinde conceipt. CVR. By my lou'd soule, I loue thee, like to it; and 'tis my study, More then mine owne reuenge, to make thee happy. FVL. And'tis that iust reuenge doth make me happy To heare you prosequute: and which, indeede, Hath wonne me, to you, more, then all the hope Of what can else be promis'd. I loue valour Better, then any Ladie loues her face, Or dressing: then my selfe do's. Let me grow Still, where I doe embrace. But what good meanes Ha' you t'effect it? Shall I know your proiect? CVR. Thou shalt, if thou'lt be gracious. FVL. As I can be. CVR. And wilt thou kisse me, then? FVL. As close as shels
Of Cockles meet. CVR. And print 'hem deep? FVL. Quite through Our subtle lips. CVR. And often? FVL. I will sow 'hem. Faster then you can reape. What is your plot? CVR. Why, now my Fuluia lookes, like her bright name, And is her selfe. FVL. Nay, answere me, your plot: I pray thee tell me, Quintus. CVR. I, these sounds Become a Mistresse. Here is harmony. When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you Is not with violence, but seruice. Cruell, A Lady is a fire, gentle, a light. FVL. Will you not tell me, what I aske you? CVR. All, That I can thinke, sweet Loue, or my breast holds, Ile poure into thee. FVL. What is your designe, then? CVR. Ile tell thee; Catiline shall now be Consull: But, you will heare more, shortly. FVL. Nay, deare Loue. CVR. Ile speake it, in thine armes; Let vs goe in. Rome will be sack'd, her wealth will be our prize; By publique ruine, priuate spirits must rise. CHORVS. GReat Father Mars, and greater Ioue, By whose high auspice, Rome hath stood So long; and, first, was built in blood Of your great Nephew, that then stroue Not with his brother, but your Rites: Be present to her now, as then, And let not proud, and factious Men Against your willes oppose their mights. Our Consuls, now, are to be made; O, put it in the publique voice To make a free, and worthy choice; Excluding such as would inuade The Common wealth. Let whom we name Haue wisedome, foresight, fortitude, Be more with faith, then face endu'd,
And study conscience, aboue ame. Such, as not seeke to get the start In State, by power, parts, or bribes, Ambition's baudes; but moue the Tribes By Vertue, modesty, desart. Such, as to iustice will adhaere, What euer great one it offend, And from the' embraced truth not bend For enuie, hatred, gifts, or feare. That, by their deedes, will make it knowne, Whose dignity they doe sustaine; And life, state, glory, all they gaine, Count the Republiques, not their owne. Such the old Bruti, Decij were, The Cipi, Curtij, who did giue Themselues for Rome: And would not liue, As men, good, only for a yeare. Such were the great Camilli, too; The Fabij, Seipio's; that still thought No worke, at price inough, was bought, That for their Countrey they could doe. And, to her honor, so did knit; As all their acts were vnderstood The sinewes of the Publique good: And they themselues, oe soule, with it. These men were truely Magistrates; These neither practis'd force, nor formes; Nor did they leaue the helme, in stormes: And such they are make happy States.
ACT. iij. CICERO, CATO, CATVLVS, ANTONIVS, CRASSVS, CAESAR, CHORVS, LICTORS. GReat Honors are great burdens: But, on whom They'are cast with enuy, he doth beare two loades. His cares must still be double to his ioyes, In any Dignity; where, if he erre He findes no pardon: and, for doing well A most small praise, and that wrung out, by force. I speake this, Romanes, knowing what the weight Of the high charge, you 'haue trusted to me, is. Not, that thereby I would with art decline The good, or greatnesse of your benefit; For, I ascribe it to your singular grace And vow, to owe it to no title else, Except the Gods, that Cicero'is your Consul. I haue no vrnes; no dustie moniments; No broken images of ancestors, Wanting an eare, or nose; no forged tables Of long descents, to boast false honors from; Or be my vndertakers to your trust. But a new Man (as I am stil'd in Rome) Whom you haue dignified; and more, in whom Yo'haue cut a way, and left it ope for vertue Hereafter, to that place, which our Great men Held shut vp, with all rampires, for themselues. Nor haue but few of them, in time bene made Your Consuls so; New men, before mee, none: At my first suite; In my iust yeare; Preferd
To all competitors; and some the noblest. CRA. Now the vaine swels. CAES. Vp glory. CIC. And to haue Your lowde consents, from your owne vtter'd voyces; Not silent bookes: nor from the meaner tribes, But first, and last, the vniuersall concourse. This is my ioy, my gladnesse. But my care, My industrie, and vigilance now must worke, That still your counsell of me be approu'd; Both, by your selues, and those, to whom you haue, With grudge, prefer'd mee: Two things I must labour, That neither they vpbraid, nor you repent you. For euery lapse of mine will, now, be call'd Your error; if I make such: But, my hope is, So to beare through, and out, the Consulship, As spight shall ne're wound you, though it may mee. And, for my selfe, I haue prepar'd this strength, To do so well; as, if there happen ill Vnto me, it shall make the Gods to blush, And be their crime, not mine, that I am enui'd; CAES. O confidence! more new, then is the Man! CIC. I know well, in what termes I doe receiue The Common wealth, how vexed, how perplex'd: In which, there's not that mischiefe, or ill fate, That good men feare not, wicked men expect not. I know, beside, some turbulent practises Alreadie on foote, and rumors of moe dangers, CRA. Or you will make them, if there be none. CIC. Last, I know, 'twas this, which made the enuy, and pride Of the Great Romane bloud bate, and giue way To my election. CAT. Marcus Tullius, true; Our neede made thee our Consull, and thy vertue. CAES. Cato, you will vndoe him, with your praise. CAT. Caesar will hurt himselfe, with his owne enuie. CHO. The voyce of Cato is the voyce of Rome. CAT. The voyce of Rome is the consent of Heauen; And that hath plac'd thee, Cicero, at the helme,
Where thou must render, now, thy selfe a Man, And Master of thy art. Each pettie hand Can steere a ship becalm'd; but he that will Gouerne, and carry her to her ends, must know His tides, his currents; how to shift his sayles; What she will be are in foule, what in faire weathers; Where her springs are, her leaks; & how to stop 'hem; What sands, what shelues, what rocks to threatē her; The forces, and the natures of all winds, Gusts, stormes, & tempests; when her keele ploughs hell And decke knocks heauen: then, to manage her Becomes the name, and office of a Pilot. CIC. Which I'le performe, with all the diligence, And fortitude I haue; not for my yeare, But for my life; except my life be lesse, And that my yeare conclude it: If it must, Your will, lou'd Gods. This heart shall yet employ A day, an houre is left me, so, for Rome. As it shall spring a life, out of my death, To shine, for euer glorious in my facts: " The vicious count their yeares, vertuous their acts. CHO. Most noble Consul! Let vs wait him home. CAES. Most popular Consul he is growne, me thinkes. CRA. How the rout cling to him! CAES. And Cato leads 'hem! CRA. You, his colleague, Antonius, are not look't on. ANT. Not I, nor do I care. CAES, He enioyes rest, And ease, the while: Let th'others spirit toyle, And wake it out, that was inspir'd for turmoyle. CATV. If all reports be true, yet, Caius Caesar, The time hath neede of such a watch, and spirit: CAES. Reports? Do you beleeue 'hem Catulus, Why, he do's make, and breed 'hem for the people; T' endeare his seruice to 'hem. Do you not tast An art, that is so common? Popular men, They must create strange Monsters, and then quell 'hem; To make their artes seeeme something. Would you haue
Such an Herculean Actor in the Scene, And not his Hydra? They must sweat no lesse To fit their properties, then t' expresse their parts. CRA. " Treasons, and guiltie men are made in States " Too oft, to dignifie the Magistrates. CATV. " Those States be wretched, that are forc'd to buy " Their Rulers fame, with their owne infamy. CRA. We therefore, should prouide that ours do not. CAES. That will Antonius make his care. ANT. I shall. CAES. And watch the watcher. CATV. Here comes Catiline. How do's he brooke his late repulse? CAES. I know not. But hardly sure. CAT. Longinus, too, did stand? CAES. At first: But he gaue way vnto his friend. CATV. Who's that come? Lentulus? CAES. Yes, He is againe Taken into the Senate. ANT. And made Praetor. CAT. I know't. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls; CAES. True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then. CATILINE, ANTONIVS, CATVLVS, CAESAR. CRASSVS, LONGI∣NVS, LENTVLVS. HAyle noblest Romanes. The most worthy Consul, I gratulate your Honor. ANT. I could wish It had beene happier, by your fellowship, Most noble Sergius, had it pleas'd the people. CATI. It did not please the Gods; who'instruct the people. And their vnquestion'd pleasures must be seru'd. They know what's fitter for vs, then our selues; And 'twere impiety, to thinke against them. CATV. You beare it rightly, Lucius; and, it glads, mee, To find your thoughts so euen. CATI. I shall still Studie to make them such to Rome, and Heauen. I would withdraw with you, a little, Iulius. CAES. Ile come home to you: Crassus would not ha' you To speake to him, 'fore Quintus Catulus.
CATI. I apprehend you. No, when they shall iudge Honors conuenient for me, I shall haue 'hem, With a full hand: I know it. In meane time, They are no lesse part of the Common-wealth, That doe obey, then those, that doe command. CATV. O, let me kisse your forehead, Lucius. How are you wrongd! CATI. By whom? CATV. Publicke report. That giues you out, to stomacke your repulse; And brooke it deadly. CAT. Sir: she brookes not me. Belieue me rather, and your selfe, now, of mee; It is a kinde of slaunder, to trust rumour. CATV. I know it. And I could be angrie with it. CATI. So may not I. Where it concernes himselfe, Who's angry at a slander, makes it true. CATV. Most noble Sergius! This your temper melts me. CRA. Will you do office to the Consul, Quintus? CAES. That Cato, and the Rout haue done the other? CATV. I waite, when he will goe. Be still your selfe. He wants no state, or honors, that hath vertue, CATI. Did I appeare so tame, as this man thinks mee? Look'd I so poore, so dead? So like that nothing, Which he calls vertuous? O my breast, breake quickly; And shew my friends my in-parts, least they thinke I haue betraid 'hem. LON. Where's Gabinius? LEN. Gone. LON. And Vargunteius? LEN. Slipt away; all shrunke: Now that he mist the Consul-ship. CATI. I am The scorne of bond-men; who are next to beasts. What can I worse pronounce my selfe, that's fitter? The Owle of Rome, whom Boyes, and Girles will hout; That were I set vp, for that woodden God, That keepes our gardens, could not fright the crowes, Or the least Bird from muting on my head. LON. Tis strange how he should misse it. LEN. Is't not stranger, The vpstart Cicero should carry it so, By all consents, from men so much his Masters? LON. Tis true. CATI. To what a shadow, am I melted!
LON. Antonius wan it but by some few voyces. CATI. Strooke through, like ayre, and feele it not. My wounds Close faster, then they're made. LEN. The whole designe, And enterprise is lost by't. All handes quit it, Vpon his fayle. CATI. I grow mad at my patience. It is a Visor that hath poyson'd mee. Would it had burnt me vp, and I died inward: My heart first turn'd to ashes. LON. Here's Cethegus yet. CATILINE, CETHEGVS, LEN∣TVLVS, LONGINVS, CATO. REpulse vpon repulse? An In-mate, Consul? That I could reach the axell, where the pinnes are, Which bolt this frame; that I might pull 'hem out, And plucke all into Chaos, with my selfe. CET. What, are we wishing now? CATI. Yes, my Cethegus. Who would not fall with all the world about him? CET. Not I, that would stand on it, when it falles; And force new Nature out, to make another. These wishings taste of woman, not of Romane. Let vs seeke other armes. CATI. What should we do? CET. Do, & not wish; something, that wishes take not: So sodaine, as the Gods should not preuent, Nor scarce haue time, to feare. CATI. O noble Caius! CET. It likes me better, that you are not Consul. I would not goe through open dores, but breake 'hem; Swim to my ends, through bloud; or build a bridge Of carcasses; make on, vpon the heads Of men, strooke downe, like piles; to reach the liues Of those remaine, and stand: Then is't a pray, When Danger stoppes, and Ruine makes the way. CATI. How thou dost vtter me, braue soule, that may not, At all times, shew such as I am; but bend Vnto occasion? Lentulus, this man,
If all our fire were out, would fetch downe new, Out of the hand of Ioue; and riuet him To Caucasus, should he but frowne: and let His owne gaunt Eagle flie at him, to tire. LEN. Peace, here comes Cato. CAT. Let him come, and heare. I will no more dissemble. Quit vs all; I, and my lou'd Cethegus here, alone Will vndertake this Giants warre, and cary it. LEN. What needs this, Lucius? LON. Sergius be more wary. CATI. Now, Marcus Cato, our new Consuls spie, What is your sowre austerity sent t' explore. CATO. Nothing in thee, licentious Catiline: Halters, and racks cannot expresse from thee More, then thy deeds. Tis onely iudgement waits thee. CATI. Whose? Cato's? shall he iudge me? CAT. No, the Gods▪ " VVho, euer, follow those, they go not with: And Senate; who, with fire, must purge sicke Rome Of noysome Citizens, whereof thou art one. Be gone, or else let mee. Tis bane to draw The same ayre with thee. CET. Strike him. LEN. Hold good Caius; CET, Fearst thou not, Cato? CATO. Rash Cethegus, no. Twere wrong with Rome, when Catiline and thou Do threat, if Cato feard. CATI. The fire you speake of If any flame of it approach my fortunes, Ile quench it, not with water, but with ruine. CATO. You heare this, Romanes. CATI. Beare it to the Consul. CET. I would haue sent away his soule, before him. You are too heauie, Lentulus, and remise; It is for you we labour, and the Kingdome Promis'd you by the Sibyll's. CATI. Which his Praetorship, And some small flattery of the Senate more, Will make him to forget. LEN. You wrong me, Lucius. LON. He wil not need these spurres. CET. The action needs 'hem. " These things, when they proceed not, they goe backward. LEN. Let vs consult then. CET, Let vs, first, take armes. They that denie vs iust things, now, will giue
All that we aske; if once they see our swords. CAT. Our obiects must be sought with wounds, not words. CICERO, FVLVIA. IS there a Heauen? and Gods? and can it be They should so slowly heare, so slowly see? Hath Ioue no thunder? or is Ioue become Stupide as thou art? ô neare-wretched Rome, When both thy Senate, and thy Gods doe sleepe, And neither thine, not their owne States doe keepe! What will awake thee, Heauen? what can excite Thine anger, if this practise be too light? His former drifts partake of former times, But this last plot was only Catilines. O, that it were his last. But he, before Hath safely done so much, hee'll still dare more. Ambition, like a torrent, nere lookes backe; And is a swelling, and the last affection A high minde can put off: being both a Rebell Vnto the soule, and reason, and enforceth All lawes, all conscience, treades vpon religion, And offereth violence to Natures selfe. But here, is that transcends it. A blacke purpose To confound Nature: and to ruine that, Which neuer Age, nor Mankinde can repaire. Sit downe, good Lady; Cicero is lost In this your fable: for, to thinke it true Tempteth my reason. It so farre exceedes All insolent fictions of the tragicke Scene. The Commonwealth, yet panting, vnderneath The stripes, and wounds of a late ciuill warre, Gasping for life, and scarce restor'd to hope; To seeke t'oppresse her, with new cruelty, And vtterly extinguish her long name, With so prodigious, and vnheard-of fiercenesse▪
What sinke of Monsters, wretches of lost minds, Mad after change, and desp'rate in their states, Wearied, and gall'd with their necessities, (For all this I allow them) durst haue thought it? Would not the barbarous deeds haue beene beleeu'd, Of Marius, and Sylla, by our Children, Without, this fact had rise forth greater, for them? All, that they did, was piety, to this. They, yet, but murdred Kinsfolke, Brothers, Parents, Rauish'd the Virgins, and, perhaps, some Matrons; They left the Citty standing, and the Temples: The Gods, and Maiesty of Rome were safe yet. These purpose to fire it, to dispoile them, (Beyond the other euils,) and lay wast The farre-triumphed world: For, vnto whom Rome is too little, what can be inough? FVL. Tis true, my Lord, I had the same discourse. CIC. And, then, to take a horride Sacrament In humane blood, for execution Of this their dire designe; which might be call'd The height of wickednesse: but that, that was higher, For which they did it. FVL. I assure your Lordship, The extreme horror of it almost turn'd me To aire, when first I heard it; I was all A vapor, when 't was told me; And I long'd To vent it any where; 'Twas such a secret, I thought, it would haue burnt me vp. CIC. Good Fuluia, Feare not your act; and lesse repent you of it. FVL. I doe not, my good Lord. I know to whom I haue vtter'd it. CIC. You haue discharg'd it, safely. Should Rome, for whom you haue done the happy seruice, Turne most ingrate; yet were your vertue paid In conscience of the fact: so much good deedes Reward themselues. FVL. My Lord, I did it not To any other ayme, but for it selfe. To no ambition. CIC. You haue learn'd the difference
Of doing office to the publike weale, And priuate friendship, and haue shewne it, Lady. Be still your selfe. I haue sent for Quintus Curius, And (for your vertuous sake) i I can winne him, Yet, to the common wealth; He shall be safe too. FVL Ile vndertake, my Lord, he will be wonne. CIC. Pray you, ioyne with me, then: And helpe to worke him. CICERO, LICTOR, FVLVIA, CVRIVS. HOw now? Is he come? LIC. He'is here, my Lord. CIC. Goe presently, Pray my Colleague Antonius, I may speake with him, About some present businesse of the State; And (as you goe) call on my brother Quintus, And pray him, with the Tribunes to come to me. Bid Curius enter. Fulia, you will aide me? FVL. It is my duty. CIC. O, my noble Lord! I haue to chide you, yfaith. Giue me your hand. Nay, be not troubled; 't shallbe gently, Curius. You looke vpon this Lady? What? Doe you ghesse My businesse, yet? Come, If you frowne, I thunder: Therefore, put on your better lookes, and thoughts. There's nought but faire, and good intended to you▪ And I would make those your complexion. Would you, of whom the Senate had that hope, As, on my knowledge, it was in their purpose, Next sitting, to restore you: as they ha' done The stupide, and vngratefull Lentulus; (Excuse me, that I name you thus, together, For, yet, you are not such) would you, I say, A person both of Blood and Honor, stock't In a long race of vertuous Ancestors, Embarke your selfe for such a hellish action, With Parricides, and Traitors, men turn'd Furies, Out of the wast, and ruine of their fortunes;
(For 'tis despaire, that is the mother of madnesse) Such as want (that, which all Conspirators, But they, haue first) meere colour for their mischiefe? O, I must blush with you. Come, you shall not labour To extenuate your guilt, but quit it cleane; " Bad men excuse their faults, good men will leaue 'hem. " He acts the third crime, that defends the first. Here is a Lady, that hath got the start, I piety, of vs all; and, for whose vertue, I could almost turne Louer, againe: but that Terentia would be ialous. What an honor Hath shee atchieued to her selfe! What voices, Titles, and loud applauses will pursue her, Through euery street! What windores will be fill'd, To shoote eyes at her! What enuy, and griefe in Matrons, They are not shee! when this her act shall seeme Worthier a Chariot, then if Pompey came, VVith Asia chain'd! All this is while shee liues. But dead, her very name will be a Statue, Not wrought for time, but rooted in the minds Of all posterity; when Brasse, and Marble, I, and the Capitol it selfe is dust. FVL. Your Honor thinks too highly of me. CIC. No: I cannot thinke inough. And I would haue Him emulate you. 'Tis no shame, to follow The better precedent. Shee shewes you, Curius, VVhat claime your Countrey laies to you; and what duty You owe to it: Be not afraid, to breake VVith Murderers, and Traytors, for the sauing A life, so neare, and necessary to you, As is your Countries. Thinke but on her right. " No Child can be too naturall to his Parent. Shee is our common Mother, and doth challenge The prime part of vs; Doe not stop, but giue it: " He, that is void of feare, may soone be iust, " And no Religion binds men to be Traitors.
FVL. My Lord, he vnderstands it; and will follow Your sauing counsell. But his shame, yet, stayes him. I know, that he is comming. CVR. Doe you know it? FVL. Yes, let me speake with you. CVR. O you are. FVL. What a I? CVR. Speake not so loud. FVL. I am, what you should be, Come, doe you thinke, I'ld walke in any plot, Where Madame Sempronia should take place of me, And Fuluia come i' the rere, or on the by? That I would be her second, in a businesse, Though it might vantage me all the Sunne sees? It was a seely phant'sie of yours. Apply Your selfe to me, and the Consul, and be wife; Follow the fortune I ha' put you into: You may be some thing this way, and with safety. CIC. Nay, I must tolerate no whisperings, Lady. FVL. Sir, you may heare. I tell him, in the way, Wherein he was, how hazardous his course was. CIC. How hazardous? how certaine to all ruine. Did he, or doe, yet, any of them imagine The Gods would sleepe, to such a Stygian practise, Against that Commonwealth, which they haue founded With so much labour, and like care haue kept, Now neare seuen hundred yeares? It is a madnesse, Wherewith Heauen blinds 'hem, when it would confound 'hem, That they should thinke it. Come, my Curius, I see your nature's right; you shall no more Be mention'd with them: I will call you mine, And trouble this good shame, no farder. Stand Firme for your Countrey; and become a man Honor'd, and lou'd. It were a noble life, To be found dead, embracing her. Know you, What thanks, what titles, what rewards the Senate Will heape vpon you, certaine, for your seruice? Let not a desperate action more engage you, Then safety should; and wicked friendship force VVhat honesty, and vertue cannot worke.
FVL. He tels you right, sweete friend: 'Tis sauing counsaile. CVR. Most noble Consul, I am yours, and ers; I meane my Countries: you' haue form'd me new. Inspiring me, wih what I should be, truely. And I intreate, my faith may not seeme cheaper For springing out of penitence. CIC. Good Curius, It shall be dearer rather, and because Il'd make it such, heare how I trust you more. Keepe still your former face; and mixe againe With thse lost spirits. Runne all their mazes with'hem; For such are treasons. Finde their windings out, And subtle turnings, watch their snaky waies, Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkenesse, VVhere they are faine to creepe vpon their breasts In pathes nere trod by Men, but Wolues, and Panthers. earne, beside Catiline, Lentulus, and those, VVhose names I haue, what new ones they draw in; VVho else are likely; what those Great ones are, They doe not name; what waies they meane to take; And whither their hopes point; to warre: or ruine, By some surprize. Explore all their intents, And what you finde may profit the Republique, Acquaint me with it, either, by your selfe, Or this your vertuous friend, on whom I lay The care of vrging you; Ile see, that Rome Shall proue a thankefull, and a bounteous Mother: Be secret as the night. CVR. And constant Sir. CIC. I doe not doubt it. Though the time cut off All vowes. " The dignity of truth is lost, VVith much protesting▪ Who is there! This way, Least you be seene, and met. And when you come, Be this your token; to this fellow. Light 'hem. O Rome, in what a sicknesse art thou fall'n! How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head Is drown'd in sleepe, and all thy body feu'ry! No noise, n pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
Thy Lethargie is such: or if, by chance, Thou heau'st thy eye-lids vp, thou dost forget Sooner, then thou wert told, thy proper danger. I did vnreuerendly, to blame the Gods, VVho wake for thee, though thou snore to thy selfe. Is it not strange, thou should'st be so diseas'd, And so secure? But more, that the first symptomes Of such a malady, should not rise out From any worthy member, but a base And common strumpet, worthlesse to be nam'd A haire, or part of thee? Thinke, thinke, hereafter, What thy needes were, when thou must vse such meanes: And lay it to thy breast, how much the Gods Vpbraid thy foule neglect of them; by making So vile a thing, the Author of thy safety. They could haue wrought by nobler waies: haue strooke Thy foes with forked lightning; or ramm'd thunder; Throwne hilles vpon 'hem, in the act; haue sent Death, like a dampe, to all their families; Or caus'd their consciences to burst 'hem. But, VVhen they will shew thee what thou art, and make A scornefull difference 'twixt their power, and thee, They helpe thee by such aides, as Geese, and Harlots. How now? What answere? Is he come? LIC. Your Brother, VVill streight be here; and your Colleague Antonius Said, coldly, he would follow me. CIC. I, that Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my feare; He is a man, 'gainst whom I must prouide, That (as hee'll doe no good) he doe no harme; He, though he be not of the plot, will like it, And wish it should proceede; for, vnto men, Prest with their wants, all change is euer welcome. I must with offices, and patience winne him; Make him, by art, that which he is not borne, A friend vnto the publique; and bestow The Prouince on him; which is by the Senate
Decreed to me: That benefit will bind him. Tis well, if some men will doe well, for price; " So few are vertuous, when the reward's away: Nor must I be vnmindfull of my priuate; For which I haue call'd my Brother, and the Tribunes, My Kins-folke, and my Clients to be neare me; " He that stands vp 'gainst Traitors, and their ends, " Shall neede a double guard, of law, and friends: " Especially, in such an enuious State, " That sooner will accuse the Magistrate, " Then the Delinquent; and will rather grieue " The Treason is not acted, then beleeue. CAESAR, CATILINE. THe night growes on; and you are for your meeting: Ile therefore end in few. Be resolute, And put your enterprise in act: The more " Actions of depth, and danger are consider'd, " The lesse assuredly they are perform'd. And thence it hapneth, that the brauest plots (Not executed straight) haue beene discouer'd. Say, you are constant, or another, a third, Or more; there may be yet one wretched spirit, With whom the feare of punishment shall worke 'Boue all the thoughts of honor, and reuenge. You are not, now, to thinke what's best to doe, As in beginnings; but, what must be done, Being thus entred: and slip no aduantage That may secure you. Let 'hem call it mischiefe; " When it is past, and prosper'd, 't will be vertue. " Th'are petty crimes are punish'd, great rewarded. Nor must you thinke of perill; since, " Attempts, Begunne with danger, still doe end with glory: " And, when neede spurres, despaire will be call'd wisdome. Lesse ought the care of men, or fame to fright you;
" For they, that winne, do seldome receiue shame " Of victory: how ere it be atchiu'd; And vengeance, least. For who, besieg'd with wants, Would stop at death, or any thing beyond it? Come, there was neuer any great thing thing, yet, Aspired, but by violence, or fraud: And he that stickes (for folly of a conscience) To reach it—. CAT. Is a good religious foole. CAES. A superstitious slaue, and will die beast. Good night. You know what Crassus thinks, and I, By this: Prepare you wings, as large as sayles, To cut through ayre, and leaue no print behind you. A Serpent, ere he comes to be a Dragon, Do's eate a Bat: and so must you a Consul, That watches. What you doe, doe quickly Sergius. You shall not stir for mee. CAT. Excuse me, lights there. CAES. By no meanes. CAT. Stay then. All good thoughts to Caesar. And like to Crassus. CAES. Mind but your friends counsels. CATILINE, AVRELIA, LECCA. OR, I will beare no mind. How now, Aurelia? Are your confederates come? the Ladies? AVR. Yes. CAT. And is Simpronia there? AVR. She is. CAT. That's well. She ha's a sulphurous spirit, and will take Light at a sparke. Breake with them, gentle loue, About the drawing as many of their Husbands, Into the plot, as can: If not, to rid 'hem. That 'll be the easier practise, vnto some, Who haue bene tir'd with 'hem long. Sollicite Their aydes, for money; and their Seruants helpe, In firing of the Citie, at the time Shall be design'd. Promise 'hem States, and Empires, And men, for Louers, made of better clay, Then euer the old Potter Titan knew. Who's that? O, Porcius Lecca! are they met?
LEC. They are all, here. CAT. Loue, you haue your instructions: Ile trust you with the stuffe you haue to worke on. You'll forme it? Porcius, fetch the siluer Eagle I ga' you in charge. And pray 'hem, they will enter. CATILINE, CETHEGVS, CVRIVS, LENTV∣LVS, VARGVNTEIVS, LONGINVS, GABINIVS, CEPARIVS, AVTRONIVS. &C. O Friends, your faces glad mee. This will be Our last, I hope, of consultation. CAT. So, it had need. CVR. We loose occasion, daily. CAT. I, and our meanes: whereof one woundes me most, That was the fairest. Piso is dead, in Spaine. CET. As we are, here. LON. And, as it is thought, by enuy Of Pompey's followers. LEN. He too's comming backe, Now, out of Asia. CAT. Therefore, what we 'intend We must be swift in. Take your seates, and heare. I haue, alreadie, sent Septimius Into the Picene territorie; and Iulius, To rayse force, for vs, in Apulia: Manlius at Fesulae is (by this time) vp, With the old needie troopes, that follow'd Sylla; And all do but expect, when we will giue The blow at home. Behold this siluer Eagle, Was Marius standard, in the Cimbrian warre, Fatall to Rome; and, as our Augures tell mee, Shall still be so: For which one omenous cause, I haue kept it safe, and done it sacred rites, As to a Godhead; in a Chappell built Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands, To follow it, with vowes of death, and ruine, Strooke silently, and home. So waters speake When they runne deepest. Now's the time, this yeare, The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
As fatall too, to Rome, by all predictions; And, in whch, honor'd Lentulus must rise A King, if he pursue it. CVR. If he doe not, He is not worthy the great destiny. LEN. It is too great for mee, but what the Gods, And their great loues decree me, I must not Seeme carelesse of. CAT. No nor we enuious. We haue enough beside, all Gallia, Belgia, Greece▪ Spayne, and Africke. CVR. and Asia too, Now Pompey is returning. CAT. Noblest Romanes, Me thinkes our lookes, are not so quicke and high, As they were wont. CVR. No? whose is not? CAT. We haue No anger in our eyes▪ no storme, no lightning: Our hate is spent, and fum'd away in vapor, Before our hands be'at worke. I can accuse Not any one, but all of slacknesse. CET. Yes, And be your selfe such, while you do it. CAT. Ha? Tis sharply answerd, Caius, CET. Truly, truly. LEN. Come, let vs each one know his part to doe, And then be accus'd. Leaue these vntimely quarrels. CVR. I would there were more Romes then one, to ruine. CET. More Romes? More Worlds. CVR. Nay then moe Gods, & Natures▪ If they tooke part. LEN. When shall the time be, first? CAT. I thinke the Saturnals. CET. 'Twill be too long. CAT. They are not now farre off, 'tis not a month. CET. A weeke, a day, an houre is too farre off, Now, were the fittest time. CAT. We ha' not laid All things so safe, and readie. CET. While we'are laying, We shall all lie; and grow to earth. Would I Were nothing n it, if not now. These things They should be done, e're thought. CAT. Nay, now your reson Forsakes you, Caius. Thinke, but what commodity That time will minister; the Cities custome Of being, then, i mirth, and feast. LEN. Loos'd whole In pleasure and securitie. AVL. Each house Resolu'd in freedome. CVR. Euery slaue a master.
LON. And they too no meane aides. CVR. Made from their hope Of liberty. LEN. Or hate vnto their Lords. VAR. Tis sure, there cannot be a time found out More apt, and naturall. LEN. Nay, good Cethegus, Why do your passions, now, disturbe our hopes? CET. Why do your hopes delude your certainties? CAT. You must lend him his way. Thinke, for the order, And processe of it. LON. Yes. LEN. I like not fire: 'Twill too much wast my Citie. CAT. Were it embers▪ There will be wealth enough, rak't out of them, To spring a new: It must be fire, or nothing. LON. What else should fright, or terrefie 'hem? VAR. True. In that confusion, must be the chiefe slaughter. CVR. Then we shall kill 'hem brauest. CEP. And in heapes. AVT. Strew Sacrifices. CVR. Make the Earth an Altar. LON, And Rome the fire. LEC. 'Twill be a noble night. VAR. And worth all Sylla's daies. CVR. When Husbands, Wiues, Grandfires, and Nephewes, Seruants, and their Lords, Virgins, and Priests, the Infant, and the Nurse Go all to hell, together, in a fleete. CAT. I would haue you, Longinus, and Statilius, To take the charge o' the firing, which must be, At a signe giuen with a trumpet, done In twelue chiefe places of the Citie, at once. The flaxe, and sulphure, are alreadie laid In, at Cethegus house. So are the weapons. Gabinius, you, with other force, shall stop The pipes, and conduits: And kill those that come For water. CVR. What shall I do? CAT. All will haue Employment, feare not: Ply the execution. CVR. For that, trust me, and Cethegus. CAT. I will be At hand, with the army, to meete those that scape. And Lentulus, begirt you Pompey's house, To seise his sonnes aliue: for they are they Must make our peace with him. All else cut off, As Tarqu did the Poppey heads; or mowers
A field of thistles; or else, vp, as ploughes Do barren lands; and strike together flints, And clods; th'ungratefull Senate, and the People: Till no rage, gone before, or comming after May weigh with yours, though Horror leapt her selfe Into the scale: but, in your violent acts, The fall of torrents, and the noyse of tempests, The boyling of Charybdis, the Seas wildnesse▪ The eating force of flames, and wings of winds, Be all outwrought, by your transcendent furies. It had bene done, ere this, had I bene Consul; We'had had no stop, n let. LEN. How find you Antonius? CAT. The'other ha's wonne him lost, that Cicero Was borne to be my opposition, And stands in all our waies. CVR. Remoue him first. CT. May that, yet, be done sooner? CAT. Would it were done. CVR. VAR. I'll doe't. CET. It is my prouince; none vsurpe it. LEN. What are your meanes? CET. Enquire not. He shall die. Shall, was too slowly said. He'is dying. That Is, yet, too slow. He'is dead. CAT. Braue, only Romane, Whose soule might be the worlds soule, were that dying; Refuse not, yet, the aydes of these your friends: LEN. Here's Vargunteius holds good quarter with him. CAT. And vnder the pretext of clientele And visitation, with the morning Hayle, Will be admitted. CET. What is that to mee? VAR. Yes, we may kill him in his bed, and safely. CET. Safe is your way, then; take it. Mine's mine owne. CAT. Follow him, Vargunteius, and perswade, The morning is the fittest time. LON. The night Will turne all into tumult. LEN. And perhaps Misse of him too. CAT. Intreat, and coniure him. In all our names. LEN. By all our vowes, and friendships.
SEMPRONIA, AVRELIA, FLVIA, to them. WHat! is our Councell broke vp first? AVR. You say, VVomen are greatest talkers. SEM. VVe ha' done; And are now fit for action. LON. VVhich is passion. There's your best actiuity, Lady. SEM. How Knoes your wise fatnesse that? LON. Your Mothers daughter Did teach me, Madame. CET. Come Sempronia, leaue him: He is a Giber. And our present businesse Is of more serious consequence. Aurelia Tells me, you 'haue done most masculinely within, And plaid the Orator. SEM. But we must hasten To our designe as well, and execute: Not hang still, in the feuer of an accident. CAT. You say well, Lady. SEM. I do like our plot Exceeding well, tis sure; and we shall leaue Little to fortune, in it. CAT. Your banquet stayes. Aurelia take her in. VVhere's Fulia? SEM. O the two Louers are coupling. CVR. In good faith, She's very ill, with sitting vp. SEM. Youl'd haue her Laugh, and lie downe. FVL. No, faith, Sempronia, I am not well; I'le take my leaue, it drawes Toward the morning. Curius shall stay with you. Madam, I pray you pardon me, my health I must respect. AVR. Farewell, good Fuluia. CVR. Make hast, and bid him get his guards about him. For Vargunteius, and Cornelius Haue vndertane it, should Cethegus misse: Their reason, that they thinke his open rashesse VVill suffer easier discouerie, Then their attempt; so vailed vnder friendship. Ile bring you to your Coach. Tell him, beside, Of Caesars comming forth, here. CAT. My sweete Madam, VVill you be gone? FVL. I am, my Lord, in truth, In some indisposition. CAT. I do wish
You had all your health, sweet Lady. Lentulus, You'll doe her seruice. LEN. To her coach, and duty. CATILINE. WHat ministers men must, for practise, vse! The rash, th' ambitious, needy, desperate, Foolish, and wretched, eu'n the dregs of Mankinde, To whores, and women! Still, it must be so. Each haue their proper place; and, in their roomes. They are the best. Groomes fittest kindle fires▪ Slaues carry burdens, Butchers are for slaughters, Apothecaries, Butlers, Cookes for poysons; As these for me: Dull, stupide Lentulus, My stale, with whom I stalke; the rash Cethegus, My executioner; and at Longinus, Statilius, Curius, Ceparius, Cimber. My laborers, pioners, and incendiaries; With these domesticke traitors, bosome theeues, VVhom custome hath call'd Wiues; the readiest helpes, To strangle head-strong Husbands; rob the easie; And lend the moneyes, on returnes of lust. Shall Catiline not doe, now, with these aides, So sought, so sorted, something shall be call'd Their labor, but his profit? and make Caesar Repent his ventring counsels, to a spirit, So much his Lord in mischiefe? when all these▪ Shall, like the Brethren sprung of Dragons teeth▪ Ruine each other; and he fall amongst 'hem: VVith Crassus, Pompey, or who else appeares, But like, or neare a great one. May my braine Resolue to water, and my bloud turne phlegme, My hands, drop off, vnworthy of my sword, And that b' inspired, of it selfe, to rip My breast, for my lost entrailes; when I leaue A soule, that will not serue. And who will, are
The same with slaues; such clay I dare not feare. The cruelty, I meane to act, I wish Should be call'd mine, and tary in my name; Whil'st after Ages do toyle out themselues In thinking for the like, but do it lesse: And, were the power of all the fiends let loose, With Fate to boote, it should be, still, example. When, what the Gaule, or Moore could not effect, Nor aemulous Carthage, with their length of spight, Shall be the worke of one, and that my night. CICERO, FVLVIA, QVINTVS. I Thanke your vigilance. VVhere's my brother, Quintus? Call all my seruants vp. Tell noble Curius, And say it to your selfe, you are my Saus; But that's too little for you, you are Rome's: VVhat could I then, hope lesse? O brother! now, The engines I told you of, are working; The machine 'gin's to moue. VVhere are your weapons? Arme all my houshold presently. And charge The Porter, he let no man in, till day. QVI. Not Clients, and your friends? CIC. They weare those names, That come to murther me. Yet send for Cato, And Quintus Catulus; those I dare trust; And Flaccus, and Pomtinius, the Praetors, By the backe way. QVI. Take care, good brother Marcus, Your feares be not form'd greater, then they should; And make your friends gieue, while your enemies laugh. CIC. Tis brothers counsell, and worth thankes, But doe As I intreat you. I prouide, not feare. VVas Caesar there, say you? FVL. Curius sayes, he met him, Comming from thence. CIC. O, so. And, had you a counsell Of Ladies too? VVho was your Speaker, Madam? FVL. She that would be, had there bene fortie more; Sempronia, who had both her Greeke, and Figures;
And, euer and anone, would aske vs, if The witty Consul could haue mended that? Or Orator Cicero could haue said it better? CIC. Shee's my gentle enemy. Would Cethegus Had no more danger in him. But, my guards Are you, great powers; and th' vnbated strengths Of a firme conscience, which shall arme each step Tane for the State; and teach me slacke no pace For feare of malice. How now, Brother? QVI. Cato▪ And Qutus Catulus were comming to you, And Crassus with 'hem. I haue let 'hem in, By th' garden. CIC. What would Crssus haue? QVI. I heare Some whispering 'bout the gate; and making doubt, Whither it be not yet too early, or no? But I doe thinke, they are your friendes, and Clients, Are fearefull to disturbe you. CIC. You will change To 'another thought, anone. Ha' you giu'n the Porter The charge, I will'd you? QVI. Yes. CIC. Withdraw, and hearken. VARGVNTEIVS, CORNELIVS, PORTER, CICERO, CATO, CATVLVS, CRASSVS. THe dore's not open, yet. COR. You' were best to knocke. VAR. Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in, Rush after vs. COR. But where's Cethegus? VAR. He Has left it, since he might not do't his way. POR. Who's there? VAR. A friend, or more. POR. I may not let Any man in, till day. VAR. No? why? COR. Thy reason? POR. I am commanded so. VAR. By whom? COR. I hope We are not discouer'd. VAR. Yes, by reuelation. Pray thee good slaue, who has commanded thee? POR. He that may best, the Consull. VAR. We are his friends. POR. All's one. COR. Best giue your name. VAR. Dost thou heare, fellow? I haue some instant businesse with the Consull. My name is Vargunteius. CIC. True, he knowes it;
And for what friendly office you are sent. Cornelius, too, is there? VAR. We are betraid. CIC. And desperate Cethegus, is he not? VAR. Speake you, he knowes my voice. CIC. What say you to't? COR. You are deceau'd Sir. CIC. No, 'tis you are so▪ Poore, misled men. Your states are yet worth pitty, If you would heare, and change your sauage minds. Leaue to be mad; forsake your purposes Of Treason, Rapine, Murder, Fire, and Horror: The common wealth hath eyes, that wake as sharply Ouer her life, as yours doe for her ruine. Be not deceiu'd, to thinke her lenity Will be perpetuall; or, if Men be wanting, The Gods will be, to such a calling cause. Consider your attempts, and while there's time, Repent you of 'hem. It doth make me tremble There should those spirits yet breath, that when they cannot Liue honestly, would rather perish basely. CATO. You talke to much to 'hem, Marcus, They'are lost. Goe forth, and apprehend 'hem. CATV. If you proue This practise; what should let the Common-wealth To take due vengeance? VAR. Let vs shift, away. The darkenesse hath conceal'd vs, yet: Wee'll say Some haue abus'd our names. COR. Denie it all. CATO. Quintus, what guards ha' you? Call the Tribunes aide▪ And raise the City. Consul, you are too mild, " The foulenesse of some facts takes thence all mercy: Report it to the Senate. Heare: The Gods Grow angry with your patience. " Tis their care, " And must be yours, that guilty men escape not. " As crimes doe grow, Iustice should rouse it selfe. CHORVS. WHat is it, Heauens, you prepare VVith so much swiftnesse, and so sodaine rising?
There are no Sonnes of earth, that dare, Againe, rebellion: or the Gods surprising? The World doth shake, and Nature feares, Yet is the tumult, nd the horror greater VVithin our minds, then in our eares, So much Romes faults (now growne her Fate) doe threat her. The Priests, and People runne about, Each Order, Age, and Sexe amaz'd at other; And, at the ports, all thronging out, As if their safety were to quit their Mother: Yet finde they the same dangers there, From which they make such hast to be preserued; For guilty States doe euer beare The plagues about them, which they haue deserued. And, till those plagues doe get aboue The mountaine of our faults, and there doe sit; VVe see 'hem not. Thus, still we loue The'euill we doe, vntill we suffer it. But, most, ambition, that neare vice To vertue, hath the fate of Rome prouoked; And made, that now Rome's selfe no price, To free her from the death, wherewith she's yoked. That restlesse Ill, that still doth build Vpon successe; and endes not in aspiring: But there beginnes. And nere is fill'd, Whil ought remaines that seemes but worth desiring. VVhere in the Thought, vnlike the Eye, To which things farre, seeme smaller then they are, Deemes all contentment plac'd on high: And thinks there's nothing great, but what is farre. O, that in time, Rome did not cast Her errors vp, this fortune to preuent; T'haue seene her crimes'ere they were past: And felt her faults, before her punishment.
Act. iii. ALLOBROGES. CAn these men feare? who are not only ours, But the worlds masters? Then I see, the Gods Vpbraid our suffrings, or would humble them; By sending these affrights, while we are here: That we might laugh at their ridiculous feare, Whose names, we trembled at, beyond the Alpes. Of all that passe, I doe not see a face Worthy a man, that dares looke vp, and stand One thunder out; but downeward all, like beasts, Running away from euery flash is made. The falling world could not deserue such basenesse. Are we emploid here, by our miseries, Like superstitious fooles (or rather slaues) To plaine our griefes, wrongs, and oppressions, To a meere clothed Senate, whom our folly Hath made, and still intends to keepe our Tyrannes? It is our base petitionary breath That blowes 'hem to this greatnesse; which this pricke Would soone let out, if we were bold, and wretched. When they haue taken all we haue; our goods, Crop, lands, and houses, they will leaue vs this: A weapon, and an arme will still be found, Though naked left, and lower then the ground. CATO, CATVLVS, CICERO. DOe; vrge thine anger, still; good Heauen, and iust. Tell guilty men, what powers are aboue them.
In such a confidence of wickednesse, 'Twas time, they should know something fit to feare. CATV. I neuer saw a morne more full of horror. CATO. To Catiline, and his: But, to iust men, Though Heauen should speake, with all his wrath at once, That, with his breath, the hinges of the world Did cracke; we should stand vpright, and vnfear'd. CIC. Why, so we doe, good Cato. Who be these? CATV. Ambassadours, from the Allobroges, I take 'hem, by their habits. ALL. I, these men Seeme of another race; Let's sue to these There's hope of iustice, with their fortitude. CIC. Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day VVe pray you to forbeare vs: on the morrow VVhat sute you haue, let vs, by Fabius Sanga, (VVhose Patronage your State doth vse) but know it, And, on the Consull's word, you shall receiue Dispatch, or else an answere, worth your patience. ALL. VVe could not hope for more, most worthy Consul. This Magistrate hath strooke an awe into me, And, by his sweetnesse, wonne a more reguard Vnto his place, then all the boistrous moodes That ignorant Greatnesse practiseth, to fill The large, vnfit authority it weares. How easie is a noble spirit discern'd From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out In contumelies, makes a noise, and stinkes. May we finde good, and great men, that know how To stoupe to wants, and meete necessities, And will not turne from any equall suites. " Such men, they doe not succour more the cause, " They vndertake, with fauor, and successe; " Then, by it, their owne idgments they doe raise, " In turning iust mens needes, into their praise.
THE SENATE. PRAE. Roome for the Consuls. Fathers▪ take your places. Here, in the house of Iupiter, the STAYER, By edict from the Consull, Marcus Tullius, You'are met, a frequent Senate. Heare him speake. CIC. Which may be happy, and auspicious still To Rome, and hers. Hono'd and Conscript Fathers, If I were silent, and that all the dangers Threatning the State, and you, were yet so hid In night, or darkenesse, thicker in their breasts, That are the blacke contriuers; so, that no Beme of the light could pierce 'hem: Yet the voice Of Heau'n, this morning, hath spoke loud inough, T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror; And wake you from a sleepe, as dead, as death. I haue, of late, spoke often in this Senate, Touching this argument, but still haue wanted Either your eares, or aith: so' incredible Their plots haue seem'd, or I so vaine, to make These things for mine owne glory, and false greatnesse, As hath beene giuen out. But be it so: When they breake forth, and shall declare themselues, By their too foule effects, then, then, the enuy Of my iust cares will finde another name. For me, I am but one: And this poore life, So lately aim'd at, not an houre yet since, They cannot with more eagernesse pursue, Thn I with gladnesse would lay downe, and loose, To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it. But when I see, they'ld make it but the step To more, and greater; vnto yours, Romes, all: I would with those preserue it, or then fall. CAS. I, I, let you alone, cunning Artificer! See, how his gorget peeres aboue his gowne;
To tell the people, in what danger he was. It was absudly done of Vargunteius, To name himselfe, before he was got in. CRA. It matters not, so they denie it all: And can but carry the lie constantly. Will Catiline be here? CAES. I' haue sent for him. CRA. And ha' you bid him to be confident? CAES. To that his owne necessiy will prompt him. CRA. Seeme to beleeue nothing at all, that Cicero Relates vs. CAES. It will mad him. CRA. O, and hpe The other party. Who is that? His Brother? What new intelligence ha's he brought him now? CAES. Some cautions from his Wife, how to behaue him. CIC. Place some of them without, and some bring in. Thanke their kinde loues. It is a comfort yet, That all depart not from their Countries cause. CAES. How now, what  this Mter? Consul, Atonius? ANT. I doe not know, aske my Colleague, hee'll tell you. There is some reason in state, that I must yeeld to; And I haue promis'd him: Indeede he has bought it, With ging me the Prouince. CIC. I professe, It grieues me▪ Fathers, that I am compell'd To draw these armes, and aides for your defence; And, more, against a Citizen of Rome, Borne here amongst you, a Patrician, A man, I must confesse, of no meane house, Nor no small vertue, if he had employ'd Those excellent gifts of Fortune, and of Nature, Vnto the good, not ruine of the State. But being bred in's fathers needy fortunes, Bought vp in's isters prostitution, Confirm'd in ciuill slaughter, entring first The Common-wealth, with murder of the gentry; Since, both by study, and custome, conuersant Wth all licetiosnesse: what could be hop'd In such a field of riot, but a course
Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest, I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes, Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine Before they touch'd, at my suspicion. CAES. VVhat are his mischiefs, Consul? you declame Against his manners, and corrupt your owne; " No wise man should, for hate of guilty men, " Loose his owne innocence. CIC. The noble Caesar Speakes Godlike truth. But, when he heares, I can Conuince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs, He might be silent: And not cast away His sentences in vaine, where they scarse looke. Toward his subiect. CAT. Here he comes himselfe. If he be wo thy any good mans voice, That good man sit downe, by him: Cato will not. CATV. If Cato leaue him. I'le not keepe aside. CATI. VVhat face is this, the Senate here puts on, Against me, Fathers! Giue my modesty Leaue, to demand the cause of so much strangenesse. CAES. It is reported here, you are the head To a strange faction, Lucius. CIC. I, and will Be prou'd against him. CAT. Let it be. Why, Consul, If in the Common-wealth, there be two bodies, One leane, weake, rotten, and that hath a head; The other strong, and healthfull, but hath none: If I doe giue it one, doe I offend? Restore your selues, vnto your temper, Fathers; And, without perturbation, heare me speake: Remember who I am, and of what place, VVhat petty fellow this is, that opposes; One, that hath exercis'd his eloquence, Sill to the bane of the Nobility: A boasting, insolent tongue-man. CATO. Peace leud Traitor, Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man And loues his Countrey; would thou didst so, too. CATI. Cato, you are too zealous for him. CATO. No,
Thou art too impudent. CATV. Catiline be silent. CATI. Nay then, I easily feare, my iust defence VVill come too late, to so much preiudice. CAES. Will he it downe? CATI. Yet, let the world forsake me, My innocence must not. CATO. Thou innocent? So are the Furies. CIC. Yes, and Ate, too. Do'st thou not blush, pernicious Catiline? Or, hath the palenesse of thy guilt drunke vp Thy blood, and drawne thy vaines, as drie of that, As is thy heart of truth, thy breast of vertue? Whither at length wilt thou abuse our patience? Still shall thy fury mocke vs? To what licence Dares thy vnbridled boldnesse runne it selfe? Doe all the nightly guards, kept on the Palace, The Cities watches, with the Peoples feares, The concourse of all Good men, this so strong And fortified seate here of the Senate, The prsent lookes vpon thee, strike thee nothing? Do'st thou not feele thy Councels all laid open? And see thy wild Conspiracy bound in VVith each mans knowledge? which of all this Order Canst thou thinke ignorant (if they'll but vtter Their conscience to the right) of what thou didst Last night, what on the former, where thou wet, Whom thou didst call together, what your plots were? O Age, and Manners! This the Consul fees, The Senate vnderstands, yet this man liues▪ Liues? I, and comes here into Councell with vs; Partakes the publique cares: and with his eye Markes, and points out each man of vs to slaughter. And we, good men, doe satisfie the State, If we can shunne but this mans sword, and madnesse. There was that vertue, once, in Rome, when good men Would, with more sharpe coërcion, haue restrain'd A wicked Citizen, then the deadliest Foe. We haue that law still, Catiline, for thee;
An at as graue, as shrpe: The State's not wanting▪ Nor the authority of this Senate; wee, Wee, that are Consuls, onely fayle our selues. This twentie daies, the edge of that decree We haue let dll, and rust; kept it shut vp, As in a sheath, which drawne should take thy head. Yet still thou li'st: and li'st not to lay by Thy wicked confidence, but to confirme it. I could desire, Fathers, to be found Still mercifull, to seeme in these maine perils, Grasping the state, a man remisse, and slacke; But then, I should condemne my selfe of sloth, And trechery. Their Campe's in Italy, Pitch'd in the iawes, here, of Heruria; Their numbers daily increasing, and their Generall Within our walles: nay in our Councell, plotting Howerly some fatall mischefe to the Publique. If, Catiline, I should commaund thee, now, Here, to be taken, kill'd; I make iust doubt, Whether all good men wold not thinke it done Rather too late, then any man too cruell. CATO. Except he were of the same meale, and batch. CIC. But that, which ought to haue bene done long since▪ I will, and (for good reason) yet forbeare. Then will I take thee, when no man is found So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy selfe, But shall professe, 'tis done of neede, and right. While there is one, that dares befend thee, liue; Thou shalt haue leaue; but so, as now thou liu'st: Watch'd at a hand, besieged, and opprest From working least commotion to the State. I haue those eyes, and eares, shall still keepe guard, And spall on thee, as they haue euer done, And thou not feele it. What, thn, canst thou hope? If neither Nght can, with her darknesse, hide Thy wicked meetigs; not a priuate House
Can, in her walles, containe the guiltie whispers Of thy conspiracy: If all breake out, All be discouered, change thy minde at last, And loose thy thoughts of ruine, flame, and slaughter. Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate, That such a day, thy Lictor, Caius Manlius, Would be in armes. Was I deceiued, Catiline, Or in the fact, or in the time? the hower? I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose Was, on the fifth, the Kalends of Nouember, T' haue slaughterd this whole Order: which my caution Made many leaue the Citie. Canft thou here Denie, but this thy blacke designe was hindred, That very day, by mee, thy selfe clos'd in Within my strengths, so that thou could'st not moue Against a publique reed? when thou wert heard To say, vpon the parting of the rest, Thou would'st content thee, with the murder of vs, That did remaine. Had'st thou not hope, beside, By a surprize, by night, to take Praeneste? Where when thou cam'st, did'st thou not finde the place Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches? My Garrisons fortified it. Thou dost nothing, Sergius, Thou canst endeuour nothing, nay not thinke, But I both see, and heare it; and am with thee, By, and before, about, and in thee, too. Call but to minde thy last nights businesse. Come, Ile vse no circumstance: at Lecca's house, The shop, and mint of your conspiracie, Among your Sword-men, where so many associates Both of thy mischiefe, and thy madnesse, met. Dar'st thou denie this? wherefore art thou silent? Speake, and this shall conuince thee: Here they are, I see 'hem, in this Senate, that were with thee. O you immortall Gods! in what clime are wee? What region do we liue in? in what ayre?
VVhat Common-wealth, or State is this we haue? Here, here, amongst vs, our owne number, Fathers, In this most holy Councell of the world, They are, that seeke the spoyle of me, of you, Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow: Follow the Sunne, and find not their ambition. These I behold, being Consull; Nay, I aske Their counsels of the State, as from good Patriots: Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces, I not so much as wound, yet, with my voyce. Thou wast, last night, with Lecca, Catiline, Your shares▪ of Italy, you there diuided; Appointed who, and whither, each should goe; What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen; Your offices set downe; the parts mark'd out, And places of the Citie, for the fire; Thy selfe (thou' affirmd'st) wat readie to depart, Onely, a little let there was, that stay'd thee, That I yet liu'd: Vpon the word, stept forth Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care; Two vndertooke this morning, before day, To kill me in my bed. All this I knew, Your conuent scarce dismiss'd, arm'd all my seruants, Call'd both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients, You sent to visite mee; whose names I told To some there, of good place, before they came. CATO. Yes, I, and Quintus Catulus can affirme it. CAES. Hee's lost, and gone. His spirits haue forsooke him. CIC. If this be so, why, Catiline, dost thou stay? Goe, where thou meanst: The Ports are open; forth. The Campe abroad wants thee, their Chiefe, too long. Lead with thee all thy troupes out. Purge the Citie. Draw drie that noysome, and pernicious sinke, Which left, behind thee, would infect the world. Thou wilt free me of all my feares, at once, To see a wall betweene vs. Dost thou stop
To do that now, commanded; which before, Of thine owne choise, thou'rt prone to? Goe. The Consul Bids thee, an enemy, to depart the Citie. Whither, thou'lt aske? to exile? I not bid Thee that. But aske my counsell, I perswade it. VVhat is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee? Where not a soule, without thine owne foule knot, But feares, and hates thee. What domesticke note Of priuate filthinesse, but is burnt in Into thy life? What close, and secret shame, But is growne one, with thy knowne infamy? What lust was euer absent from thine eyes? What lewd fact from thy hands? what wickednesse From thy whole body? where's that youth drawne in VVithin thy nets, or catch'd vp with thy baytes, Before whose rage, thou hast not borne a sword, And to whose lusts thou hast not 'held a torch? Thy latter Nuptials I let passe in silence; VVhere sinnes incredible, on sinnes, were heapt: Which I not name, lest, in a ciuill State, So monstrous facts should eyther appeare to bee, Or not to be reueng'd. Thy Fortunes, too, I glance not at, which hang but till next Ides. I come to that, which is more knowne, more publick; The life, and safety of vs all, by thee Threatned, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field, VVhen Lepidus, and Tullus were our Consuls, Vpon the day of choyse, arm'd, and with forces, To take their liues, and our chiefe Citizens; When, not thy feare, nor consciēce chang'd thy mind, But the meere fortune of the Common-wealth VVithstood thy actiue malice? Speake but right. How often hast thou made attempt on mee? How many of thy assaults haue I declin'd VVith shifting but my bodie, (as wee'ld say) VVrested thy dagger from thy hand, how ot?
Ho often ah i falne, or slip't by chance? Yet can hy ide not want it: which, how vow'd, Or with what rites, 'tis acred of thee, I know not, That still thou mak'st it a necessitie, To fixe it in the bodie of a Consul. But let me loose this way, and speake to thee, Not as one mou'd with hatred, which I ought, But pitty, of which none is owing thee. CAT. No more then vnto Tantalus, or Tityus. CIC. Thou cam'st, ere while, into this Senate. Who Of such a frequency, so many friends, And kindred thou hast here, saluted thee? VVere not the seates made bare, vpon thy entrance? Rss' not the Consular men? and left their places, So soone as thu sat'st downe? and fled thy side, Like to a plague, or ruine; knowing, how oft They had bene, by thee, mark'd out or the Shambles? How dost thou beare this? Surely, if my Slaues At home fear'd me, with halfe th' affright, and horror, That, ere, thy fellow Citizens do thee, I should soone quit my house, and thinke it need too. Yet thou dar'st ary heere? Go forth, at last; Condemne thy selfe to flight, and solitude. Discharge the Common-wealth, of her deepe feare. Goe; into baishment, if thou wait'st the word. Why do'st thou looke? They all consent vnto it. Do'st thou expect th' authority of their voyces, VVhose silent willes condemne thee? While they sit, They approue it; while they suffer it, they decree it; And while they' are silent to it, they proclaime it. Proue thou there honest, Ie endure the enuie. But there's no thought, thou should'st be euer hee, VVhom eyther shame should call from filthinesse, Terror from danger, or discourse from fury. Goe; I intreat thee: yet, why do I so? VVhen I alreadie know, they'are sent afore,
That tarry for thee'in armes, and do expect thee On the Aurelian way. I know the day Set downe▪ twixt thee, and Manlius; vnto whom The siluer Eagle too is sent, before: VVhich I do hope shall proue, to thee as banefull, As thou conceiu't it to the Common-wealth. But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say, VVhat mean'st thou Marcus Tulls? If thou know'st That Catiline be look'd for, to be Chiefe Of an intestine warre; that e'is the Author Of such a wickednesse; the Caler out Of men of marke in mischief, to an action Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason; VVhy do'st thou send him forth? why let him scape? This is to giue him liberty, and power: Rather, thou should'st lay hold vpon him, send him To deseru'd death, and a iust punishment. To these so holy voyces, thus I answere. If I did thinke it timely, Conscript Fathers, To punish him with death, I would not giue The Fencer vse of one short hower, to breath; But when there are in this graue Order, some, VVho, with soft censures, still doe nource his hopes; Some, that with not beleeuing, haue confirm'd His designes more, and whose authoritie The weaker, as the worst men, too, haue followd: I would now send him, where they all shoud see Cleare, as the light, his heart shine; where no man Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupide, But should cry ot he saw, touch'd, felt, and grasp 't it. Then, when he hath runne out himselfe; led forth His desp'rate partie with him; blowne together Aids of all kinds, both shipwrackd minds & fortunes: Not onely the growne euill, that now is sprung, And sprouted forth, would be pluck'd vp, & weeded; But the stocke, roote, and seed of all the mischiefes,
Choking the Common-wealth. Where, should we take Of such a swarme of traytors, onely him, Our cares, and feares might seeme a while relieu'd, But the maine perill would bide still enclos'd Deepe, in the veines, and bowels of the State. As humane bodies, laboring with feuers, VVhile they are tost with heate, if they do take Cold water, seeme for that short space much eas'd, But afterward, are ten times more afflicted. VVherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew Depart, diuide themselues from good men, gather Their forces to one head; as I said oft, Let 'hem be seuer'd from vs with a wall; Let 'hem leaue off attempts, vpon the Consul, In his owne house; to circle in the Praetor; To girt the Court with weapons; to prepare Fire, and balles, swords, torches, sulphure, brands: In short, let it be writ in each mans forehead What thoughts he beares the Publike. I here promise, Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my selfe, That diligence in vs Consulls, for my honour'd Colleague, abroad, and for my selfe, at home; So great authority in you; so much Vertue, in these, the Gentlemen of Rome; VVhom I could scarce restraine to day, in zeale, From seeking out the Parricide, to slaughter; So much consent in all good men, and minds, As, on the going out of this one Catiline▪ All shall be cleare, made plaine, oppress'd, reueng'd. And, with this omen, go, pernicious plague, Out of the Citie, to the wish'd destruction Of thee, and those, that, to the ruine of her, Haue tane that bloudy, and blacke sacrament. Thou Iupiter, whom we do call the STAYER Both of this Citie, and this Empire, wilt (With the same auspice thou didst raise it first)
Driue from thy Altars, and all other Temples, And Buildings of this City; from our Walles; Liues, states, and fortunes of our Citizens; This fiend, this fury, with his complices. And all the' offence of good men (these knowne traitors Vnto their country, theeues of Italie, Ioyn'd in so damn'd a league of mischiefe) thou Wilt with perpetuall plagues, aliue, and dead, Punish for Rome, and saue her innocent head. CATI. If an Oration, or high language, Fathers, Could make me guilty, here is one, hath done it: H' has stroue to aemulate this mornings thunder, With his prodigious rhetoricke. But I hope, This Senate is more graue, then to giue credit Rashly to all he vomits, 'gainst a man Of your owne Order, a Patrician; And one, whose ancestors haue more deseru'd Of Rome, then this mans eloquence could vtter, Turn'd the best way, as still, it is the worst. CATO. His eloquence hath more deseru'd to day, Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors Did, in their good: And that the State will finde, Which he hath sau'd. CATI. How he? were I that enemy, That he would make me: Il'd not wish the State More wretched, then to neede his preseruation. What doe you make him, Cato, such a Hercules? An Atlas? A poore petty In- mate. CATO. Traitor. CATI. He saue the State? A Burgesse sonne of Arpinum. The Gods would rather twenty Romes should perish, Then haue that contumely stucke vpon 'hem, That he should share with them, in the preseruing A shed, or signe-post. CATO. Peace, thou prodigie. CATI. They would be runne themselues, againe, and lost In the first, rude, and indigested heape; Ere such a wretched name, as Cicero, Should sound with theirs. CATV. Away, thou impudent head.
CATI. Doe you all backe him? are you silent too? Well, I will leaue you Fathers; I will goe. But—my fine dainty speaker.— CIC. What now Fury? Wilt thou assault me here? CHO. Helpe, aide the Consul. CATI. See Fathers, laugh you not? who threatned him? In vaine thou do'st conceiue, ambitious Orator, Hope of so braue a death, as by this hand. CATO. Out, of the Court, with the pernicious traytor. CATI. There is no title, that this flattering Senate, Nor honor, the base multitude can giue thee, Shall make thee worthy Catilines anger. CATO. Stop, Stop that portentous mouth. CATI. Or, when it shall, Ile looke thee dead. CATO. Will none restraine the Monster? CATV. Parricide. QVI. Butcher, Traytor, leaue the Senate. CATI. I' am gone, to banishment, to please you Fathers. Thrust head-long forth? CATO. Stil, dost thou murmure, Monster? CATI. Since, I am thus put out, and made a.— CIC. What? CATV. Not guiltier then thou art. CATI. I will not burne Without my funerall pile. CATO. What sayes the Fiend? CATI. I will haue matter, timber. CATO. Sing out Scrich-owle. CATI. It shall be in CATV. Speake thy imperfect thoughts. CATI. The common fire, rather then mine owne. For fall I will with all, ere fall alone. CRA. H'is lost, there is no hope of him. CAES. Vnlesse He presently take armes; and giue a blow, Before the Consuls forces can be leuie'd. CIC. VVhat is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done? CATV. See, that the Common-wealth receiue no losse. CATO. Commit the care thereof vnto the Consuls. CRA. Tis time. CAES. And need. CIC. Thanks to this frequent Senate. But what decree they, vnto Curius, And Fuluia? CATV. What the Consul shall thinke meete. CIC. Tey mst receiue reward, though't be not knowne; when a State needs ministers, they ha' none. CATO. Yet, Marcus Tullius, doe not I beleeue, Bu Crassus, and this Caesar here ring hollow.
CIC. And would appeare so, if that we durst proue 'hem. CATO. VVhy dare we not? What honest act is that, The Roman Senate should not dare, and doe? CIC. Not an vnprofitable, dangerous act, To stirre too many Serpents vp at once. Caesar, and Crassus, if they be ill men, Are mighty ones; and, we must so prouide, That, while we take one head, from this foule Hydra, There spring not twenty more. CATO. I' proue your Counsell. CIC. They shall be watch'd, and look'd too. Till they doe Declare themselues, I will not put 'hem out By any question. There they stand. Ile make My selfe no enemies, nor the State, no traitors. CATILINE, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, CV∣RIVS, GABINIVS, LONGINVS, STATILIVS. FAlse to our selues? All our designes discouer'd To this State-Cat? CET. I, had I had my way, He' had mew'd in flames, at home, not i' the Senate: I' had sing'd his furres, by this time. CAT. Well, there's, now, No time of calling backe, or standing still. Friends, be your selues; keepe the same Roman hearts, And ready minds, you' had yesternight: Prepare To execute, what we resolu'd. And let not Labor, or danger, or discouery fright you. Ile to the army: you (the while) mature Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides, That you thinke fit, of men of all conditions, Or any fortunes, that may helpe a warre. Ile bleede a life, or winne an Empire for you. VVithin these few dayes, looke to see my ensignes, Here, at the walles: Be you but firme within. Meane time, to draw an enuy on the Consull, And giue a lesse suspicion of our course,
Let it be giuen out, here in the Citty, That I am gone, an innocent man, to exile, Into Massilia, willing to giue way To fortune, and the times; being vnable To stand so great a faction, without troubling The Common-wealth: whose peace I rather seeke, Then all the glory of contention, Or the support of mine owne innocence. Farewell the noble Lentulus, Longinus, Curius, the rest; and thou, my better Genius, The braue Cethegus: when we meete againe, Wee'll sacrifice to Liberty. CET. And Reuenge. That we may praise our hands once. LEN. O you Fates, Giue Fortune now her eyes, to see with whom Shee goes along, that shee may nere forsake him. CVR. He needs not her, nor them. Goe but on, Sergius. " A valiant man is his owne Fate, and Fortune. LON. The Fate, and Fortune of vs all goe with him. GAB. STA. And euer guard him. CAT. I am all your Creature. LEN. Now friends, 'tis left with vs. I haue already Dealt, by Vmbrenus, with the Allobroges, Here resiant in Rome; whose State, I heare, Is discontent with the great vsuries, They are oppress'd with: and haue made complaints Diuers, vnto the Senate, but all vaine. These men, I'haue thought, both for their owne oppressions, As also that, by nature, they'are a people Warlike, and fierce, still watching after change, And now, in present hatred with our State, The fittest, and the asiest to be drawne To our society, and to aide the warre. The rather, for their seate: being next bordrers On Italie: and that they' abound with horse, Of which one want our Campe doth only labor. And I haue found 'hem comming. They will meete Soone at Sempronia's house, where I would pray you
All to be present, to confirme 'hem more. The sight of such spirits hurt not, nor the store. GAB. I will not faile. STA. Nor I. CVR. Nor I. CET. Would I Had some what by my selfe, apart, to doe. I ha' no genius to these many counsels. Let me kill all the Senate, for my share, Ile do it at next sitting. LEN. Worthy Caius, Your presence will adde much. CET. I shall marre more. CICERO. SANGA. ALLOBROGES. THe State's beholden to you, Fabius Sanga, For this great care: And those Allobroges Are more then wretched, if they lend a listning To such perswasion. SAN. They, most worthy Consul, As men employ'd here, from a grieued State, Groaning beneath a multitude of wrongs, And being old, there was small hope of ease To be expected, to their euils, from hence, Were willing, at the first to giue an eare To any thing, that sounded liberty: But since, on better thoughts, and my vrg'd reasons, They' are come about, and wonne, to the true side. The fortune of the Common-wealth hath conquer'd. CIC. What is that same Vmbrenus, was the Agent? SAN. One that hath had negotiation In Gallia oft, and knowne vnto their State. CIC. Are the' Ambassadours come with you? SAN. Yes. CIC. VVell, bring 'hem in, if they be firme, and honest, Neuer had men the meanes so to deserue Of Rome, as they. A happy, wish'd occasion, And thrust into my hands, for the discouery, And manifest conuiction of these traytors. Be thank'd; ô Iupiter. My worthy Lords, Confederates of the Senate, you are welcome. I vnderstand by Quintus Fabius Sanga,
Your carefull Patron here, you haue beene lately Sollicited against the Common-wealth, By one Vmbrenus (take a seate, I pray you) From Publius Lentulus, to be associates In their intended warre. I could aduise, That men, whose fortunes are yet flourishing, And are Romes friends, would not, without a cause, Become her enemies; and mixe themselues And their estates, ith the lost hopes of Catiline, O Lentulus, whose meere despaire doth arme 'hem: That were to hazard certainties, for ayre, And vndergoe all danger, for a voyce. Beleeue me, friends: "  oud tumuts are not laid "With halfe the easinesse▪ that they are rais'd. "All may beginne a warre, but few can end it. The Senate haue decreed, that my Colleague Shall leade their army, agains Catiline, And haue declar'd both him, and Manlius traitors. Metellus Celer hath already giuen Part of their troopes defeate. Honors are promis'd To all, will quit'hem; and rewards propos'd Euen to slaues, that can detect their courses. Here, in the City, I haue by the Praetors, And Tribunes, plac'd my guards, and watches so, That not a foote can treade, a breath can whisper, But I haue knowledge. And be sure, the Senate, And People of Rome, of their accustom'd greatnesse, Will sharply, and seuerely vindicate, Not only any fact, but any practise Or purpose, 'gainst the State. Therefore, my Lords, Consult of your owne waies, and thinke which hand Is best to take. You, now, are present uters For some redresse of wrongs; Ile vndertake Not only that shll be asur'd you, but What grace or priuiledge else, Senate, or People Can cast vpon you, worthy such a seruice,
As you haue now the way, and meanes, to doe 'hem; If but your willes consent, with my designes. ALL. We couet nothing more, most worthy Consul. And how so ere we haue beene tempted lately, To a defection, that not makes vs guilty: We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes, Nor in our willes so lost, as to abandon A friendship, prodigally, of that price, As is the Senate, and the People of Romes, For hopes, that doe praecipitate themselues. CIC. You then are wise, and honest. Doe but this, then: When shall you speake with Lentulus, and the rest? ALL. We are to meete anone, at Brutus house. CIC. Who? Dcius Brutus? He is not in Rome. SAN. O, but his wife Sempronia. CIC. You instruct me, Shee is a Chiefe. Well, faile not you to meete 'hem▪ And to expresse the best affection You can put on, to all that they intend. Like it, applaud it, giue the Common-wealth And Senate, lost to 'hem. Promise any aides By armes, or counsell. What they can desire I would haue you preuent. Only, say this, You' haue had dispatch, in priuate, by the Consull Of your affaires, and for the many feares The State's now in, you are will'd by him, this euening, To depart Rome: which you, by all sought meanes, Will doe, of reason to decline suspicion. Now, for the more authority of the businesse They' haue trusted to you, and to giue it credit With your owne State, at home, you would desire Their letters to your Senate, and your People, Which shewne, you durst engage both life, and honor, The rest should euery way answere their hopes. Those had, pretend sodaine departure you, And, as you giue me notice, at what Port You will goe out, Ile ha' you intercepted,
And all the letters taken with you: So As you shall be redeem'd in all opinions, And they conuicted of their manifest treason. " Ill deedes are well turn'd backe, vpon their Authors: " And 'gainst an Iniurer, the reuenge is iust. This must be done, now. ALL. Chearfully, and firmely. VVe 'are they, would rather hast to vndertake it, Then stay, to say so. CIC. VVith that confidence, goe: Make your selues happy, while you make Rome so. By Sanga, let me haue notice from you. ALL. Yes. SEMPRONIA, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, GABI∣NIVS, STATILIVS, LONGINVS, VOL∣TVRTIVS, ALLOBROGES. WHen come these Creatures, the Ambassadrs? I would faine see 'hem. Are they any Schollers? LEN. I thinke not, Madame. SEM. Ha' they no Greeke? LEN. No surely. SEM. Fie, what doe I here, wayting on 'hem then? If they be nothing but meere States-men. LEN. Yes, Your Ladyship shall obserue their grauity, And their reseruednesse, their many cautions, Fitting their persons. SEM. I doe wonder much, That States, and Common-wealths employ not women, To be Ambassadors, sometimes: we should▪ Doe as good publike seruice, and could make As honorable Spies (for so Thucidides Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, Cethegus? CET. Doe you aske me? Am I your scout, or baud? LEN. O Caius, it is no such businesse. CET. No? VVhat do's a woman at it then? SEM. Good Sir, There are of vs can be as exquisite Traytors, As ere a male-Conspirator of you all. CET. I, at smock-treason, Matron, I beleeue you; And if I were your husband; But when I Trust to your cobweb-bosomes any other
Let me there die a Flie; and feast you, Spider. LEN. You are too sowre, and harsh Cethegus. CET. You Are kinde, and courtly. Il'd be torne in pieces, VVith wilde Hippolytus, nay proue the death, Euery limbe ouer, ere I'ld trust a woman, With wind, could I retaine it. SEM. Sir. They'll be trusted With as good secrets, yet, as you haue any, And carry 'hem too, as close, and as conceald, As you shall for your heart. CET. Ile not contend with you Eyther in tongue, or cariage, good Calipso: LON. Th' Ambasadors are come. CET. Thanks to thee Mercury, That so hast rescu'd mee. LEN. How now, Volturtius? VOL. They doe desire some speech with you, in priuate. LEN, O! tis about the prophecie, belike, And promise of the Sibylls; GAB. it may bee. SEM. Shunne they, to treat with mee, too? GAB. No, good Lady, You may partake: I haue told 'hem, who you are. SEM. I should be loath to be left out, and here too. CET. Can these, or such, be any aydes, to vs? Looke they, as they were built to shake the world, Or be a moment to our enterprise? A thousand, such as they are, could not make One Atome of our soules. They should be men VVorth Heauens feare, that looking vp, but thus, VVould make Ioue stand vpon his guard, and draw Himselfe within his Thonder; which, amaz'd, He should discharge in vaine, and they vnhurt. Or, if they were, like Capaneus, at Thebes, They should hang dead, vpon the highest spires, And aske the second charge, to be throwne downe. VVhy, Lentulus, talke you so long? This time Had bene enough, t'haue scatter'd all the Starres, T'haue quench'd the Sunne, and Moone, and made the World Despaire of day, or any light, but ours. LEN. How doe you like this spirit? In such men, Mankind doth liue. They are such soules, as these,
That moue the world. SEN. I, though he beare me hard, I, yet, must do him right. He is a spirit. Of the right Martian breed. ALL. He is a Mars. VVould we had time to liue here, and admire him. LEN. Well, I doe see you would preuent the Consul. And I commend your care: It was but reason, To aske our Letters, and we had prepar'd them. Goe in, and we will take an oath, and eale 'hem. You shall haue Letters, too, to Catiline, To visite him i'the way, and to confirme The association. This our friend, Volturtius, Shall goe along with you. Tell our great Generall, That we are readie here; that Lucius Bestia The Tribune, is prouided of a speach, To lay the enuie of the warre on Cicero; That all but long for his approach, and person: And then, you are made Freemen, as our selues. CICERO. FLACCVS. POMTINIVS. SANGA. I Cannot feare the warre but to succeede well, Both for the honor of the cause, and worth Of him that doth commaund. For my Colleague, Being so ill affected with the goute, Will not be able to be there in person; And then Petreius, his Lieutenant, must Of neede take charge o'the army: who is much The better souldier, hauing bene a Tribune, Prefect, Lieutenant, Praetor in the warre, These thirtie yeares, so conuersant i' the army, As he knowes all the souldiers, by their names. FLA. They'll fight then, brauely, with him. POM. I, and hee Will lead 'hem on, as brauely. CIC. They'haue a foe Will aske their braueries, whose necessities Will arme him like a fury. But, how euer,
I'le trust it to the mannage, and the fortune Of good Petreius, who's a worthy Patriot. Metellus Celer, with three Legions, too, Will stop their course, for Gallia. How now, Fabius? SAN. The trayne hath taken. You must instantly Dispose your guards vpon the Miluian bridge: For, by that way, they meane to come. CIC. Then, thither Pomtinius, and Flaccus, I must pray you To lead that force you haue; and seise them all: Let not a person scape. Th'Ambassadours Will yeeld themselues. If there be any tumult Ile send you ayde. I, in meane time will call Lentulus to me, Gabinius, and Cethegus, Statilius, Ceparius, and all these By seuerall messengers: who no doubt will come, Without sense, or suspicion. " Prodigall men " Feele not their owne stocke wasting. When I haue 'hem, Ile place those guards, vpon 'hem, that they start not, SAN. But what'll you doe with Sempronia? CIC. " A State " Should not take knowledge eyther of Fooles, or Women. I do not know whether my ioy or care Ought to be greater; that I haue discouer'd So foule a treason: or must vndergoe The enuie of so many great mens fate. But, happen what there can, I will be iust, My fortune may forsake me, not my vertue: That shall goe with me, and before me, still, And glad me, doing well, though I heare ill. PRAETORS, ALLOBROGES, VOL∣TVRTIVS. FLA. Stand, who goes there? ALL. We are th' Allobroges, And friends of Rome. POM. If you be so, then yeeld Your selues vnto the Praetors, who in name Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
Yet, till you cleare you selues, charge you of practise Against the State. VOL. Die friends, and be not taken. FLA. What voyce is that? Downe with 'hem all. ALL. We yeeld. POM. VVhat's he stands out? Kill him there. VOL. Hold, hold, hold. I yeeld vpon conditions. FLA. We giue none To traytors, strike him downe. VOL. My name's Volturtius: I know Pomtinius. POM. But he knowes not you, While you stand out vpon these trayterous termes. VOL. I'le yeeld vpon the safety of my life. POM. If it be forfeyted, we cannot saue it. VOL. Promise to doe your best. I'am not so guilty, As many others, I can name; and will: If you will grant me fauour. POM. All we can Is to deliuer you to the Consul. Take him, And thanke the Gods, that thus haue saued Rome. CHORVS. NOw, do our eares, before our eyes, Like men in mistes, Discouer, who'ld the State surprise, And who resists? And, as these clouds doe yeeld to light, Now, do we see, Our thoughts of things, how they did fight, Which seem'd t'agree? Of what strange pieces are we made, Who nothing know; But, as new Ayres our eares inuade, Still censure so? That now do hope, and now doe feare, And now enuie; And then doe hate, and then loue deare, But know not, why: Or, if we doe, it is so late, As our best moode,
Though true, is then thought out of date, And empty of good. How haue we chang'd, and come about In euery doome, Since wicked Catiline went out, And quitted Rome? One while, we thought him innocent; And, then, w' accus'd The Consul, for his malice spent; And power abus'd. Since, that we heare, he is in Armes, We thinke not so: Yet charge the Consul, with our harmes, That let him goe. So, in our censure of the State, VVe still do wander; And make the carefull Magistrate The marke of slaunder. VVhat age is this, where honest men▪ Plac'd at the helme, A Sea of some foule mouth, or pen, Shall ouerwhelme? And call their diligence, deceipt; Their vertue, vice; Their watchfulnesse, but lying in waite▪ And bloud, the price. O, let vs plucke this euill eede Out of our spirits; And giue, to euery noble deede, The name it merits. Least we seeme falne (if this endures) Into those times, To loue disease: and brooke the cures Worse, then the crimes.
Act. V. PETREIVS. THE ARMY. IT is my fortune, and my glory, Souldiers, This day, to lead you on; the worthy Consul Kept from the honor of it, by disease: And I am proud, to haue so braue a cause To exercise your armes in. We not, now, Fight for how long, how broad, how great, and large Th'extent, and bounds o'th' people of Rome shall bee; But to retaine what our great Ancestors, With all their labours, counsels, arts, and actions, For vs, were purchasing so many yeares. The quarrell is not, now, of fame, of tribute, Or of wrongs, done vnto Confederates, For which, the Army of the people of Rome VVas wont to moue: but for your owne Republique, For the rais'd Temples of th'immortall Gods, For all your Fortunes, Altars, and your Fires, For the deere soules of your lou'd Wiues, and Children, Your Parents tombes, your Rites, Lawes, Liberty, And, briefly, for the safety of the World: Against such men, as onely by their crimes Are knowne; thrust out by riot, want, or rashnesse. One sort, Sylla's old troopes, left here in Fesulae, Who sodainly made rich, in those dire times, Are since, by their vnbounded, vast expence, Growne needie, aud poore, and haue but left t'expect, From Catiline, new Billes, and new Proscriptions. These men (they say) are valiant; yet, I thinke 'hem
Not worth your pause: For either their old vertue Is, in their sloth, and pleasures lost; or, if It tarry with 'hem, so ill match to yours, As they are short in number, or in cause. The second sort are of those (Citty-beasts, Rather then Citizens) who whilst they reach After our fortunes, haue let flie their owne; These, whelm'd in wine, swell'd vp with meates, and weakned With hourely whoredomes, neuer left the side Of Catiline, in Rome; nor, here, are loos'd From his embraces: Such, as (trust me) neuer In riding, or in vsing well their armes, Watching, or other militarie labor, Did exercise their youth; but learn'd to loue, Drinke, dance, and sing, make feasts, and be fine gamsters. And these will wish more hurt to' you, then they bring you. The rest are a mixt kinde, all sorts of furies▪ Adulterers, Dicers, Fencers, Outlawes, Theeues, The Murderers of their Parents, all the sinke, And plague of Italie, met in one torrent, To take, to day, from vs the punishment, Due to their mischiefs, for so many yeares. And who, in such a cause, and 'gainst such fiends, Would not now wish himselfe all arme, and weapon? To cut such poysons from the earth, and let Their blood out, to be drawne away in cloudes, And pour'd, on some inhabitable place, Where the hot Sunne, and Slime breedes nought but Monsters? Chiefly, when this sure ioy shall crowne our side, That the least man, that falles vpon our party This day (as some must giue their happy names To fate, and that eternall memory Of the best death, writ with it, for their Countrey) Shall walke at pleasure, in the tents of rest; And see farre off, beneath him, all their host Tormented after life: and Catiline, there,
VValking a wretched, and lesse Ghost, then he. Ile vrge no more: Moue forward, with your Eagles, And trust the Senates, and Romes cause to Heauen. ARM. To thee, great Father Mars, and greater Ioue. CAESAR, CRASSVS. I Euer look'd for this of Lentulus, When Catiline was gone. CRA. I gaue 'hem lost, Many dayes since. CAES. But, wherefore did you beare Their letter to the Consul, that they sent you, To warne you from the City? CRA. Did I know Whether he made it? It might come from him, For ought I could assure me: if they meant, I should be safe, among so many, they might Haue come, as well as writ. CAES. There is no losse In being secure. I haue, of late, too, ply'd him, Thicke, with intelligences, but they' haue beene Of things he knew before. CRA. A little serues To keepe a man vpright, on these State-bridges, Although the passage were more dangerous. Let vs now take the standing part. CAES. We must, And be as zealous or't, as Cato. Yet I would faine helpe these wretched men. CRA. You cannot▪ Who would saue them, that haue betraid themselues? CICERO, QVINTVS, CATO. I Will not be wrought to it, Brother Quintus. There's no mans priuate enmity shall make Me violate the dignity of another. If there were proofe 'gainst Caesar, or who euer, To speake him guilty, I would so declare him. But Quintus Catulus, and Piso both, Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge, Haue any man accus'd, or named falsly.
QVI. Not falsly, but if any circumstance, By the Allobroges, or from Volturtius, Would carry it. CIC. That shall not be sought by me▪ If it reueale it selfe, I would not spare You, Brother, if it pointed at you, trust me. CATO. Good Marcus Tullius (which is more, then great) Thou had'st thy education, with the Gods. CIC. Send Lentulus, forth, and bring away the rest. This office, I am sorry, Sir, to doe you. THE SENATE. WHat may be happy still, and fortunate, To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers, To breake these letters, and to view them round. If that be not found in them, which I feare, I, yet, intreate, at such a time, as this, My diligence be not contemn'd. Ha' you brought The weapons hither, from Cethegus house? PRAE. They are without. CIC. Be ready, with Volturtins▪ To bring him, when the Senate calls; And see None of the rest, conferre together. Fathers, What doe you reade? Is it yet worth your care, If not your feare, what you finde practis'd there? CAES. It hath a face of horror. CRA. I'am amaz'd. CATO. Looke there. SYL. Gods! Can such men draw common aire? CIC. Although the greatnesse of the mischiefe, Fathers, Hath often made my faith small, in this Senate, Yet, since my casting Catiline out (for now I doe not feare the enuy of the word, Vnlesse the deede be rather to be fear'd, That he went hence aliue; when those I meant Should follow him, did not) I haue spent both daies, And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought: And that I might but take 'hem in that light,
Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes, Your minds, at length, would thinke for your owne safety. And, now, 'tis done. There are their hands, and seales. Their persons, too, are safe, thankes to the Gods. Bring in Volturtius, and the' Allobroges. These be the men, were trusted with their letters. VOL. Fathers, beleeue me, I knew nothing: I Was trauailing for Gallia, and am sorry.— CIC. Quake not Volturtius, speake the truth, and hope Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word. VOL. Then, I knew all. But truely' I was drawne in But tother day. CAES. Say, what thou know'st, and feare not. Thou hast the Senates faith, and Consuls word, To fortifie thee. VOL. I was sent with letters— And had a message too—from Lentulus— To Catiline—that he should vse all aides— Seruants, or others—and come with his army, Assoone, vnto the Citty as he could— For they were ready, and but staid for him— To intercept those, that should flee the fire— These Men, the Allobroges, did heare it too. ALL. Yes Fathers, and they tooke an oath, to vs. Besides their letters, that we should be free; And vrg'd vs, for some present aide of horse. CIC. Nay, here be other testimonies, Fathers, Cethegus Armoury. CRA. What, not all these? CIC. Here's not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer, That we may know the armes to all these weapons. Come, my braue Sword-player, to what actiue vse, Was all this steele prouided? CET. Had you ask'd In Syllas dayes, it had beene to cut throtes; But, now, it was to looke on, only: I lou'd To see good blades, and feele their edge, and points. To put a helme vpon a blocke, and cleaue it, And, now and then, to stabbe an armour through. CIC. Know you that paper? That will stabbe you through.
Is it your hand? Hold, saue the peeces. Traytor, Hath thy guilt wak'd thy fury? CET. I did write, I know not what; nor care not: That Foole Lentulus Did dictate▪ and I tother Foole, did igne it. CIC. Bring in Statilius: Do's he know his hand too? And Lentulus. Reach him that letter. STA. I Confesse it all. CIC. Know you that seale yet, Publius? LEN. Yes, it is mine. CIC. Whose image is that, on it? LEN. My Grandfathers. CIC. What, that renowm'd good man, That did so only' embrace his Countrey', and lou'd His fellow Citizens! Was not his picture, Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact, So foule.— LEN. As what, impetuous Cicero? CIC. As thou art, for I doe not know what's fouler. Looke vpon these. Doe not these faces argue Thy guilt, and impudence? LEN. VVhat are these to me? I know 'hem not. ALL. No Publius? we were with you, At Brutus house. VOL. Last night. LEN. What did you there? VVho sent for you? ALL. Your selfe did. We had letters From you, Cethegus, this Statilius here, Gabinius Cimber, all, but from Longinus, VVho would not write, because he was to come Shortly, in person, after vs (he said) To take the charge o'the horse, which we should leuy. CIC. And he is fled, to Catiline, I heare. LEN. Spies? spies? ALL. You told vs too, o'the Sibylls bookes▪ And how you were to be a King, this yeare, The twentieth, from the burning of the Capitol. That three Cornelij were to raigne, in Rome, Of which you were the last: and prais'd Cethegus, And the great spirits, were with you, in the action. CET. These are your honorable Ambassadors, My Soueraigne Lord. CAT. Peace, that too bold Cethegus. ALL. Besides Gabinius, your Agent, nam'd Autronius, Seruius Sulla, Vargunteius, And diuers others. VOL. I had letters from you,
To Catiline, and a message, which I' haue told Vnto the Senate, truly, word for word: For which, I hope, they will be gracious to mee. I was drawne in, by that same wicked Cimber, And thought no hurt at all. CIC. Volturtius, peace. VVhere is thy visor, or thy voyce, now, Lentulus? Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak'st thou not? Is all so cleare, so plaine, so manifest, That both thy eloquence, and impudence, And thy ill nature, too, haue left thee, at once? Take him aside. There's yet one more. Gabinius, The Enginer of all. Shew him that paper, If he do know it? GAB. I know nothing. CIC. No? GAB. No. Nor I will not know. CAT. Impudent head? Sticke it into his throate; were I the Consul, Il'd make thee eate the mischiefe, thou haft vented. GAB. Is there a Law for't, Cato? CAT. Dost thou aske After a Law, that would'st haue broke all lawes, Of Nature, Manhood, Conscience, and Religion. GAB. Yes, I may aske for't. CAT. No, pernicious Cimber, " Th'inquiring after good, do's not belong " Vnto a wicked person. GAB. I, but Cato Do's nothing, but by law. CRA. Take him aside. There's proofe enough, though he confesse not. GAB. Stay I will confesse. All's true, your spies haue told you. Make much of'hem. CET. Yes, and reward 'hem well, For feare you get no more such, See, they do not Die in a ditch, and stinke, now you ha' done with 'hem; Or beg, o'the bridges, here in Rome, whose Arches Their actiue industrie hath sau'd. CIC. Se, Fathers, VVhat mindes, and spirits these are, that, being conuicted Of such a treason, and by such a cloud Of witnesses, dare yet retaine their boldnesse? What would their rage haue done, if they had conquerd? I thought, when I had thrust out Catiline, Neither the State, nor I, should neede t'haue fear'd Lentulus sleepe here, or Longinus fat,
Or this Cethegus rashnesse; It was he, I only watch'd, while he was in our walles, As one, that had the braine, the hand, the heart. Bnt now, we finde the contrary. Where was there A People grieu'd, or a State discontent, Able to make, or helpe a warre 'gainst Rome, But these, th' Allobroges, and those they found? Whom had not the iust Gods beene pleas'd to make More friends vnto our safety, then their owne, As it then seem'd, neglecting these mens offers, Where had we beene? or where the Common-wealth? When their great Chiefe had beene call'd home; This man, Their absolute King, (whose noble Grandfather, Arm'd in pursute of the seditious Gracchus, Tooke a braue wound, for deare defence of that, Which he would spoile) had gather'd all his aides Of Ruffins, Slaues, and other Slaughter-men; Giuen vs vp for murder, to Cethegus; The' other ranke of Citizens, to Gabinius; The Citty, to be fird by Cassius; And Italie, nay the world, to be laid wast By cursed Catiline, and his complices. Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers, Thinke but with me you saw this glorious Citty, The Light of all the earth, Tower of all Nations, Sodainly falling in one flame. Imagine, You view'd your Countrey buried with the heapes Of slaughter'd Citizens, that had no graue; This Lentulus here, raigning, (as he dreamp't) And those his purple Senate; Catiline come With his fierce army; and the cries of Matrons, The flight of Children, and the rape of Virgins, Shriekes of the liuing, with the dying grones On euery side t' inuade your sense; vntill The blood of Rome, were mixed with her ashes. This was the Spectacle these fiends intended
To please their malice. CET. I, and it would Haue bene a braue one, Consul. But your part Had not then bene so long, as now it is: I should haue quite defeated your Oration; And slit that fine rhetoricall pipe of yours, I' the first Scene. CAT. Insolent Monster! CIC. Fathers, Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed Vnto some safe, but a free custodie, Vntill the Senate can determine farder? SEN. It pleaseth well. CIC. Then, Marcus Crassus, Take you charge of Gabinius: send him home Vnto your house. You Caesar, of Statilius. Cethegus shall be sent to Cornificius; And Lentulus, to Publius Lentulus Spinther, Who now is Aedile. CAT. It were best, the Praetors Caried 'hem to their houses, and deliuered 'hem. CIC. Let it be so. Take 'hem from hence. CAES. But, first, Let Lentulus put off his Praetorship. LEN. I doe resigne it here vnto the Senate. CAES. So, now, there's no offence done to ligion. CAT. Caesar, 'twas piously, and timely vrg'd. CIC. What do you decree to th' Allobroges? That were the lights to this discouery? CRA. A free grant from the State, of all their suites. CAES. And a reward, out of the publicke treasure. CAT. I, and the title of honest men, to crowne 'hem▪ CIC. What to Volturtius? CAES. Life, and fauor's well. VOL. I aske no more. CAT. Yes, yes, some money, thou need'st it. 'Twill keepe thee honest: Want made thee a knaue. SYL. Let Flaccus, and Pomtinius, the Praetors, Haue publicke thankes, and Quintus Fabius Sanga, For their good seruice. CRA. They deserue it all. CAT. But what do we decree vnto the Consul, Whose vertue, counsell, watchfulnesse, and wisedome, Hath free'd the Common-wealth, and without tumult, Slaughter, or bloud, or scarce raysing a force,
Rescu'd vs all out of the iawes of Fate? CRA. We owe our Liues vnto him, and our Fortunes. CAES. Our Wiues, our Children, Parents, and our Gods. SYL. VVe all are saued, by his fortitude. CAT. The Common-wealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland. Hee is the onely Father of his Countrey. CAES. Let there be publike prayer, to all the Gods, Made in that name, for him. CRA. And in these words. For that he hath, by his vigilance, preseru'd Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword, And all her Citizens from massacre. CIC. How are my labours more then paid, graue Fathers, In these great titles, and decreed honors! Such, as to mee, first, of the ciuill robe, Of any man, since Rome was Rome, haue hap'ned; And from this frequent Senate: which more glads mee, That I now see, you' haue sense of your owne safety. If those good daies come no lesse gratefull to vs, Wherein we are preseru'd from some great danger, Then those, wherein w'are borne, and brought, to light, Because the gladnesse of our safety is certaine, But the condition of our birth not so; And that we are sau'd with pleasure, but are borne Without the sense of ioy: why should not, then, This day, to vs, and all posteritie Of ours, be had in equall fame, and honor, VVith that, when Romulus first reard these walles, VVhen so much more is saued, then he built? CAES. It ought. CRA. Let it be added to our Fasti. CIC. VVhat tumult's that? FLA. Here's one Tarquinius taken, Going to Catiline; and sayes he was sent By Marcus Crassus: whom he names, to be Guilty of the conspiracy. CIC. Some lying varlet. Take him away, to prison. CRA. Bring him in, And let me see him. CIC. He is not worth it, Crassus. Keepe him vp close, and hungry, till he tell,
By whose pernicious counsell, he durst slander So great, and good a Citizen. CRA. By yours I feare, 'twill proue. SYL. Some o'the Traytors, sure, To giue their action the more credit, bid him Name you, or any man. CIC. I know my selfe, By all the tracts, and courses of this businesse, Crassus is noble, iust, and loues his Countrey. FLA. Here is a Libell too, accusng Caesar, From Lucius Vectius, and confirm'd by Curius. CIC. Away with all, throw'it out o'the Court. CAES. A tricke on me, too? CIC. It is some mens malice. I said to Curius, I did not beleeue him. CAES. Was not that Curius your spie, that had Reward decreed vnto him, the last Senate, With Fuluia, vpon your priuate motion? CIC. Yes. CAES. But he has not that reward, yet? CIC. No. Let not this trouble you, Caesar, none beleeues it. CAES. It shall not, if that he haue no reward. But if he haue, sure I shall thinke my selfe Very vntimely, and vnsafely hest, Where such, as he is, may haue pay t'accuse me. CIC. You shall haue no wrong done you, noble Caesar, But all contentment. CAES. Consul, I am silent. CATILINE. THE ARMIE. I Neuer yet knew, Souldiers, that, in fight, VVords added vertue vnto valiant men; Or, that a Generals oration made An Army fall, or stand: But how much prowesse Habituall, or naturall each mans breast VVas owner of, so much in act it shew'd. " VVhom neither glory' or danger can excite " Tis vaine t'attempt with speech: For the minds feare " Keepes all braue sounds from entring at that eare. I, yet, would warne you some few things, my Friends,
And giue you reason of my present counsailes. You know, no lesse then I, what state, what point Our affair stand in; And you all haue heard, VVhat a calamitous misery the sloth, And sleepinesse of Lentulus, hath pluck'd Both on himselfe, and vs: How, whilst our aides There, in the Citty look'd for, are defeated, Our entrance into Gallia, too, is stopt. Two Armies waite vs: One from Rome, the other From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are, (Although I most desire it) the great want Of corne, and victuall, forbids longer stay. So that, of neede, we must remoue, but whither The sword must both direct, and cut the passage. I only, therefore, wish you, when you strike, To haue your valours, and your soules, about you; And thinke, you carry in your laboring hands The things, you seeke, glory, and liberty, Your Countrey, which you want now, with the Fates, That are to be instructed, by our swords. If we can giue the blow, all will be safe to'vs. We shall not want prouision, nor supplies. The Colonies, and free Townes will lie open. Where, if we yeeld to feare, expect no place, Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their owne Fortune, And ill vs'd Armes haue left without protection. You might haue liu'd in seruitude, or exile, Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones; But that you thought those thinges vnfit for men. And, in that thought, you then were valiant. For no man euer yet chang'd peace for warre, But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose. There's more necessity, you should be such, In fighting for your selues, then they for others. " Hee's base, that trusts his feete, whose hands are arm'd. Me thinks, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
What we will doe; and all the Heauen 'at leysure For the great Spectacle. Draw, then, your swords: And, if our desteny enuy our vertue The honor of the day, yet let vs care To fell our selues, at such a price, as may Vndoe the world to buy vs: and make Fate, While shee tempts ours, feare her owne estate. THE SENATE. SEN. What meanes this hasty calling of the Senate? SEN. We shall know straight. Waite, till the Consul speakes. POM. Fathers Conscript, bethinke you of your safeties, And what to doe, with these Conspirators; Some of their Clients, their Free'd men, and Slaues 'Ginne to make head: There is one of Lentulus Bauds Runnes vp and downe the shops, through euery street, With money to corrupt, the poore artificers, And needy tradesmen, to their aide. Cethegus Hath sent, too, to his seruants; who are many, Chosen, and exercis'd in bold attemptings, That forthwith they should arme themselues, and proue His rescue: All will be in instant vproare, If you preuent it not, with present counsailes. We haue done what we can, to meete the fury, And will doe more. Be you good to your selues. CIC. What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done? Syllanus, you are Consul next design'd. Your sentence, of these men. SYL. 'Tis short, and this. Since they haue sought to blot the name of Rome, Out of the world; and raze this glorious Empire With her owne hands, and armes, turn'd on her selfe: I thinke it fit they die. And, could my breath Now execute 'hem, they should not enioy An article of time, or eye of light, Longer, to poyson this our common aire.
SEN. I thinke so too. SEN. And I. SEN. And I. SEN. And I. CIC. Your sentence, Caius Caesar. CAES. Conscript Fathers, In great affaires, and doubtfull, it behooues Men, that are ask'd their sentence, to be free From either hate, or loue, anger, or pitty: For, where the least of these doe hinder, there The minde not easily discernes the truth. I speake this to you, in the name of Rome, For whom you stand; and to the present cause: That this foule fact of Lentulus, and the rest, Weigh not more with you, then your dignity; And you be more indulgent to your passion, Then to your honor. If there could be found A paine, or punishment, equall to their crimes, I would deuise, and helpe: But if the greatnesse Of what they ha' done, exceede all mans inuention, I thinke it fit, to stay, where our lawes doe. Poore petty States may alter, vpon humor, Where, if they' offend with anger, few doe know it, Because they are obscure; their Fame, and Fortune Is equall, and the same: But they, that are Head of the world, and liue in that seene height, All Mankinde knowes their actions. So we see The greater fortune hath the lesser licence. They must nor fauor, hate, and least be angry: For what with others is call'd anger, there, Is cruelty, and pride. I know Syllanus, VVho spoke before me, a iust, valiant Man, A louer of the State, and one that would not, In such a businesse, vse or grace, or hatred; I know, too, well his manners, and his modesty: Nor doe I thinke his sentence cruell (for 'Gainst such delinquents, what can be too bloody?) But that it is abhorring from our state; Since to a Citizen of Rome, offending, Our Lawes giue exile, and not death. Why then
Decrees he that? 'Twere vaine to thinke, for feare; When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul, All is made safe, and certaine. Is't for punishment? Why Death's the end of euils, and a rest, Rather then torment: It dissolues all griefes. And beyond that, is neither care, nor ioy. You heare, my sentence would not haue 'hem die. How then? set free, and increase Catilines Armie? So will they, being but banish'd. No, graue Fathers, I iudge 'hem, first, to haue their states confiscate, Then, that their persons remaine prisoners I' the free townes, farre off from Rome, and seuerd': Where they might neither haue relation, Hereafter, to the Senate, or the People. Or, if they had, those townes, then to be mulcted. As enemies to the State, that had their guard. SEN. Tis good, and honourable, Caesar, hath vtterd. CIC. Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes All bent on mee, to note of these two censures Which I encline to. Eyther of them are graue, And answering the dignitie of the speakers, The greatnesse of th'affaire, and both seuere. One vrgeth death: And he may well remember This State hath punish'd wicked Citizens so. The other bonds: and those perpetuall, which He thinkes found out for the more singular plague. Decree which you shall please. You haue a Consul Not readier to obey, then to defend What euer you shall act, for the Republique; And meete with willing shoulders any burden, Or any fortune, with an euen face, Though it were death: which to a valiant man Can neuer happen foule, nor to a Consul Be immature, or to a wise man wretched. SYL. Fathers, I spake, but as I thought: the needes O'th' Common-wealth required. CAT. Excuse it not.
CIC. Cato, speake you your sentence. CAT. This it is. You here dispute, on kinds of punishment, And stand consulting, what you should decree 'Gainst those, of whom, you rather should beware. This mischiefe is not like those common facts, Which, when they are done, the lawes may prosequute. But this, if you prouide not, ere it happen, When it is happen'd, will not waite your iudgment. Good Caius Caesar, here, hath very well, And subtilly discours'd of life, and death, As if he thought those things, a prety fable, That are deliuer'd vs of Hell, and Furies, Or of the diuers way, that ill men goe From good, to filthy, darke, and ougly places. And therefore he would haue these liue; and long too; But farre from Rome, and in the small free Townes, Lest, here, they might haue rescue: As if Men, Fit for such acts, were only in the City, And not throughout all Italie? or that boldnesse Could not doe more, where it found least resistance? Tis a vaine Counsaile, if he thinke them dangerous. Which, if he doe not, but that he alone In so great feare of all men, stand vnfrighted, He gius me cause, and you, more to feare him. I am plaine, Fathers. Here you looke about, One at another, doubting what to doe: VVith faces, as you trusted to the Gods, That still haue sau'd you; and they can do't: But They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers Can draw their aides: but vigilance, counsell, action: VVhich they will be ashamed to forsake▪ Tis sloth they hate, and cowardise. Here you haue The Traytors in your houses, yet you stand Fearing what to doe with 'hem; Let 'hem loose, And send 'hem hence with armes too; that your Mercy
May turne your misery, as soone as't can. O, but, they, are great men, and haue offended But through ambition. We would spare their honor: I, if themselues had spar'd it, or their fame, Or modestie, or eyther God, or Man: Then I would spare 'hem. But, as things now stand, Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit A greater wickednesse, then you would reuenge. If there had bene but time, and place for you, To haue repair'd this fault, you should haue made it; It should haue bene your punishment, to'haue felt Your tardie error: But necessity, Now, bids me say let 'hem not liue an hower, If you meane Rome should liue a day. I haue done. SEN. Cato hath spoken like an Oracle, CRA. Let it be so decreed. SEN. We all were fearefull. SYL. And had bene base, had not his vertue rais'd vs. SEN. Go forth, most worthy Consul, wee'll assist you. CAES. I'am not yet changd in my sentence, Fathers. CAT. No matter. What be those? SER. Letters, for Caesar. CAT. From whom? let'hem be read, in open Senate; Fathers, they come from the Conspirators. I craue to haue 'hem read, for the Republique. CAES. Cato, reade you it. Tis a Loue-letter, From your deare sister, to me: though you hate me. Do not discouer it. CAT. Hold thee dronkard. Consul. Goe forth, and confidently. CAES. You'll repent This rashnesse, Cicero. PRAE. Caesar shall repent it. CIC. Hold friends. PRAE. Hee's scarce a friend vnto the Publicke. CIC. No violence. Caesar be safe. Leade on: Where are the publicke Executioners? Bid 'hem waite on vs. On to Spinthers house. Bring Lentulus forth. Here, you, the sad reuengers Of capitall crimes, against the Publicke, take This man vnto your iustice: strangle him.
LEN. Thou dost well, Consul. Twas a cast at dice In Fortunes hand, not long since, that thy selfe Should'st haue heard these, or other words as fatall. CIC. Leade on to Quintus Cornificius house; Bring forth Cethegus. Take him to the due Death, that he hath deseru'd: and let it bee Said, He was once. CET. A beast, or, what is worse, A slaue, Cethegus. Let that be the name For all that's base hereafter: That would let This worme pronounce on him: and not haue trampled His bodie into—Ha! Art thou not mou'd? CIC. " Iustice is neuer angrie: Take him hence. CET. O the whore Fortune! and her bauds the Fates! That put these trickes on men, which knew the way To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleepe: I shall grow angrie with the Gods, else. CIC. Leade To Caius Caesars, for Statilius. Bring him, and rude Gabinius, out. Here, take 'hem To your cold hands, and let 'hem feele death from you: GAB. I thanke you, you do me a pleasure. STA. And me too. CAT. So, Marcus Tullius, thou maist now stand vp, And call it happie Rome, thou being Consul. Great Parent of thy Countrie, goe, and let The Old men of the Citie, ere they die, Kisse thee; the Matrons dwell about thy necke; The Youths, and Maids lay vp, 'gainst they are old What kind of man thou wert, to tell their Nephewes, When, such a yeare, they reade, within our Fasti, Thy Consulship. Who's this? Petreius? CIC. Welcome, VVelcome renowned Souldier. What's the newes? This face can bring no ill with't, vnto Rome. How do's the worthy Consull, my Colleague? PET. As well as victory can make him, Sir. He greetes the Fathers, and to me hath trusted The sad relation of the Ciuill strife,
For, in such warre, the conquest still is blacke. CIC. Shall we withdraw into the House of Concord? CAT. No, happy Consul, here; let all eares take The benefit of this tale. If he had voice, To spreade vnto the Poles, and strike it through The Center, to the Antipodes; It would aske it. PET. The streights, and needes of Catiline being such, As he must fight, with one of the two Armies, That then had neare enclos'd him; It pleas'd Fate, To make vs th'object of his desperate choise, VVherein the danger almost paiz'd the honor: And as he riss', the day grew blacke with him; And Fate descended nearer to the earth, As if shee meant to hide the name of things Vnde her wings, and make the world her quarry. At this we rous'd, least one small minutes stay Had left it to be' enquir'd, what Rome was. And (as we ought) arm'd in the confidence Of our great cause, in forme of battaile, stood. Whilst Catiline came on, not with the face Of any man, but of a publique ruine: His Count'nance was a ciuill warre it selfe. And all his host had standing in their lookes The palenesse of the death, that was to come. Yet cryed they out like Vultures, and vrg'd on▪ As if they would praecipitate our fates. Nor staid we longer for 'hem; But himselfe Strooke the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life. Which cut, it seem'd a narrow necke of land Had broke betweene two mighty Seas; and either Flow'd into other; for so did the slaughter: And whirl'd about, as when two violent Tides Meete, and not yeeld. The Furies stood, on hilles Circling the place, and trembled to see men Doe more, then they: whilst Piety left the field,
Grieu'd for that side, that, in so bad a cause, They knew not, what a crime their valour was. The Sunne stood still, and was, behinde the cloud The battaile made, seene sweating, to driue vp His frighted Horse, whom still the noise droue backward. And now had fierce Enyo, like a flame, Consum'd all it could reach, and then it selfe; Had not the Fortune of the Common-wealth Come Pallas-like, to euery Roman thought. Which Catiline seeing, and that now his Troopes. Couer'd that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunkes, Ambitious of great fame, to crowne his ill, Collected all his fury, and ranne in (Arm'd with a glory, high as his despaire) Into our battaile, like a Lybian Lion, Vpon his hunters, scornefull of our weapons, Carelesse of wounds, plucking downe liues about him, Till he had circled in himselfe with death: Then fell he too, t'embrace it where it lay. And as, in that rebellion 'gainst the Gods, Minerua holding forth Medusa's head, One of the Gyant Brethren felt himselfe Grow marble at the killing sight, and now, Almost made stone, beganne t'inquire, what flint, What rocke it was, that crept through all his limmes, And, ere he could thinke more, was that he fear'd; So Catiline, at the ight of Rome in vs, Became his Tombe: yet did his looke retaine Some of his fiercenesse, and his hands still mou'd, As if he labor'd, yet, to graspe the State, VVith those rebellious parts. CAT. A braue bad death. Had this beene honest now, and for his Countrey, As 'twas against it, who had ere fallen greater? CIC. Honor'd Petreius, Rome, not I must thanke you. How modestly has he spoken of himselfe!
CAT. He did the more. CIC. Thanks to the'immortall Gods, Romans, I now am paid for all my labors, My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude Your praises, triumphes, honors, and rewards Decreed to me: only the memory Of this glad day, if I may know it liue VVithin your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience, VVhich I must alwaies study before fame. " Though both be good, the latter yet is worst, " And euer is ill got, without the first. The end.
