14944.5 23095838 26218
AN EPISTLE ENT TO DIVERS pistles in England, prouing  Pope to bee the Beast in the  3. of the Reuelations, and to be the man exalted in the Temple of God, as God. Thess. 2.2. Whereby the true Church of God, and the good professi∣on of the Gospell, is know∣en from the euill. y hereby haue beene conuerted of late. by F.K. igence to make thy election sure. . 1. n eternall life, whereunto thou are called. 6. RINTED AT LONDON by Henry Marsh. 158
TO THE MOST Reuerend father in God, Iohn, bishop of London, long health and felicity in Iesus Christ. BEing stirred vp, (most Reuerende father in God) with the sweete exhortation of Paul, who sayth, in spirituall thinges I would not haue you ignoraunt, but couet spirituall giftes, and most chiefely for to prophesie, which doth edefie, exhort and cōfort: I thought it good, seeing the church of God tos∣sed with stormes, through the depe∣nes
of Sathan, who roreth like a de∣uouring Lion, and worketh the spirit of error in mens harts, & so∣weth tares among the wheat of the Lord, to laboure in the vineyard of spirituall vnderstanding, by the goodnes of the vnspotted Lambe, who openeth the booke with the se∣uen seales, wherein the whole state of his Church is reuealed, in what case it shall stand, from his assen∣tion, till his comming in glory. Touching which Reuelations, with all the misteries of the Scripture, I hauing written a booke at large, called the golden closet, and Key that vnlocketh heauenly misteryes,
and another called the glorious gar∣land of mans glorification, thought it good, in the meane time, hauing sent this epistle and others to diuers Papists in England (touching whom a good worke by the grace of God is wrought) to dedicate this same vnder your protection, hopyng that as it hath done good to others by writing, so by Print it may doe much more, if it shall please you of your good fauoure and Heauenly giftes, wherewith you are knowen to bee fruitfull among men, to the glory of God, and consolation of Soules, and to the reward of your Heauenly calling in Iesus Christ:
to accept it. Thus I doe cōmend your Lorship in my daily prayers to the keeping of the Almighty. Your Lordships most humble to commaūd. Francis Kett.
An exposition who is the Beast in the 13. of the Reuel. Iesus speede vs, leade vs, and feede vs. &c. MY desired to the truth of the Gos∣pell. When I con∣sidered how great a wishe Paul doth insinuate towarde hym selfe, as to bee Anathemy touch∣ing his body, in respect to winne his bre∣thren: I am, or else I ought to bee, so much thereby stirred vp, vpon the ten∣dernes of loue, as to offer some porcion to you and others, of that good gift, and tallent, which the Lord hath gieuen me: If by the grace of God, it may please you to accept it sincerely and meekely, that by that meanes the spirite of adoption
standing at the doore of your heart, may enter into your inward man, and worke more redely, that sweete motion in you as not to harden your heart, when tha you heare the voice of Gods holy truth I write not to molest your conscience an minde, but to walke with you in the way of persuasion, trusting by the powred Gods word (which is sharper then a tw edged sword,Heb. 4. and parteth the bone from the marrow, & the spirit from the soule to persuade you, by the intercession o hym, (beyng a true mediator for euer who sitteth in heauen, on the right han of the Father, before whom we must ap¦peare in Iudgement to make an accomp at the great and feareful day of the Lord that you will be so much contented, b the will of God, as to deliberate with be¦ter aduisement, touching that sentence of S. Paul,Philip. 2. who sayth, worke out thy sal∣uation with feare and trembling. And also touching the sentēce of Peter,Pet. 2. which sayth: Vse all diligence to make thy ele∣ction
sure. Wherein we are sufficiently counselled, how much it standeth euery man in hād, to looke to the sauing health of his soule, which is so sweete and preci∣ouse; considering that there is a way to saluation, and a way to perdition.Timoth. 2.2. There∣fore we ought deepely to consider of that sentence of Paul, which sayth, that if a man striue for a maistry, hee is not crow∣ned, except hee striue lawefully. For which cause I am moued in the tender kindnes, which my soule beareth toward all soules, to desire you, in the springling of Christ his bloud, that you will looke so carefully into your selfe, as that you may bee sure (by grace) so to striue and ron, as that you may win the crowne of eternall life.Cor. 1.10. For S. Paul willeth vs to bee most vigilant, when hee sayth, you that seeme to stand take heede you fall not. So that let not presumption or stif∣nes stop your eares from the truth, and cary you away to vnknown ceremonies, but first proceede with sincerity of heae
and pure praiers offred vp to god, intrea∣ting him to geeue you his wisedome, ac∣cording to S. Iames.Iames. 1. If any mā lacke wise∣dome let him aske it of God, and he ge∣ueth it: ask in fayth & wauer not &c. And with this order, in heart examine your selfe, for God knoweth the secrete moti∣ons of all mens heartes, and then pon∣der what I write to you, and I am per∣suaded in my fayth, that you shall pre∣sently feele the spirite of adoption to moue your spirite, and to leade you into all truth; alwayes prouidyng, in the ex∣amining of your owne conscience, a∣gaynst the flesh, the world, and the de∣uill, which striue agaynst man, to holde hym backe in the dungeon of darkenes, by contrary resistance of minde, through the spirite of error, which is busy in all mens thoughtes. Whereupon it standeth you and all vs the more in hand, to looke to the foundation of our Saluation,Cor. 1.3. lest that wee buyld vpon a straunge founda∣tion or else doe buyld timber and strawe
vpon the foundation which the Apostles aue layde, and so vndiscretly ron with Nadab and Abihu,Leu. 10. bringing straunge fire efore the Lord, and so be in daunger of he Lordes consuming fire. Wherefore et me persuade with you, to vse no other yne, then the golden rodde of the Gos∣pell to measure your religion with all, est that you leaning to much to traditi∣ons, doe decline from the measure of the Gospell, when as God sayd streightly to Moses,Heb. 8. (buildyng the tabernacle) see that thou doest all thinges according to the pattern which was geuen thee. And therfore, Christian wisedome doth moue vs in the feare of the Lord, to follow the very patern of the Gospell, if wee minde to walke as children of the day, profes∣sing the good and true profession. In consideration whereof, I hope that you will accept this my wryting as a sweete motion, with examining the deepenes thereof to your consolation, in a confir∣med verity of a better profession then as
yet you holde. And now to proceede the grounde of the matter. Whereas o heauenly Sauiour and high Melch¦dech, being ascended vp to heauen,  vpon his aboundāt loue shew vnto Io how much he did tender his church,  beloued congregation, when as by mi¦stery of reuelation, he did signifie ho and by whome his church and tem should be from time to time, euen to  worldes end, afflicted and troden down It is then that we consider how all thing are written for our learning (accordi to Saint Paule) and that eyther by hist¦ry, precept, doctrine, figure, parable mystery. So that we ought to be caref wise, and vigilant in vnderstanding  reuelations.Reu. 1. For Saint Iohn sayth, th happy is he that keepeth the wordes this profecie. For which cause, I co now to the marke, to shew by euide scripture (by the holy will of God)  is that great Beast in the 13. of the Reuel¦tion,Reu. 13. and who is that sinfull man that ¦teth
in the temple of God, as God: accor∣ding to the Thess. Epist. 2. Cap. 2.Thes. 2.2. and which Citty is the whoare of Babilon with whome the nations of the earth haue committed spirituall fornication,Reu. 18. according to the 18. of the Reuelation. To the confirmation whereof that the truth may bee truly extracted, I wyshe that all mens hearts were opened: Fyrst by prayer, and then to cōsider the deepe∣nes of these reasons which ensue. Of the which, first and principally, I thus de¦clare and proue by introduction,The Turk that the Turke is not that Beast nor sinfull mā, for the Turke hath beene an enemy, from his first vprising, manifested to all Christians, whereby it appeareth playnely, that hee is not the sinfull man exalted in the Temple of God. For S. Paul. sayth that the sinfull man must bee opened at this time,Thess. 2. who cōmeth by the delusion of Sathan: But the Turke hath bene alwayes an open aduersary, & ther∣fore can not bee sayd to be opened. For
what soeuer is manifest, can not be say to be opened; but he which is a close, pri¦uy, secret & coulored aduersary is say to be opened, so that the Turke is not th sinfull man, and Beast named in the 13 of the Reuel. but hee is the very imitate of Antiochus, who did alwayes shew hym selfe an open tyrant to the Israe∣lites.Presbiter Iohn. Next to this, Presbiter Iohn of the South of Affrica, can no way bee say to bee the Beast in the 13. of the Reuela¦tion, or exalted man in the Temple, fo as he doth dwel beyond the middle Sea so he hath little or no conference in reli¦gion with other kingdomes, but is kno¦wen to meddle little with Europe or Asi and besides the state of his Kingdome  such, that neither Asia, Europe, nor East India, do much acquainte them selues  the doinges of Presbiter Iohn, who ha no such seate, nor no such Citty with whom the Nations of the Earth ha committed spirituall fornication, accor∣ding to the 18. of the Reuelatiō. Also tha
Beast and sinfull man, or Whoore of Ba∣bilon,Great Cham. can not bee applyed to great Cham and his Cittyes in the North East of In∣dia, for hee was neuer knowne to passe beyōd his Mountaines, neither any way that the succession of the Monarchy of Babilon did discend into his Coūtrey, or Presbiter Iohns Countrey of the South: and therefore neither of them can bee a∣ny way accounted the Beast in the 13.Reu. 13. of the Reuelation, and sinfull man exal∣ted in the Temple of God as God,Thess. 2.2 or any of their Cittyes to be the Whoore of Ba∣bilon in the 18. of the Reuelation. Next,Reu. 18. it can not bee the Emperours,Emperour. for they were also open persecutors of the truth, and therfore being manifest aduersaries, could not be said (according to S. Paul) to bee opened.Thess. 2.2. Neither is it the high King of Persia, or any temporall King of the Earth. For Christ to discide this whole controuersy, and to make the truth here∣of to bee knowne to his congregation, doth manifest to Iohn by Reuelation, that
hee is a Starre fallen to the Earth, that hath the Keyes of the bottomles pit, ac∣cording to the .9.Reu. 9. of the Reuelation, and that he burneth like a blasing lampe, and not like a pure candell to bee sette vpon a Candelsticke,Reu. 8. according to the .8. of the Reuelation. &c. Whereby it being e∣uidēt, by all the places of the Scriptures, that a Starre doth represent a prelate and spirituall pastoure of the Church, as in Daniel. 12. and Reuelations. 1. And this being apparent, that there is no Pre∣late in the World, that doth so much ex∣alt hym selfe as the Pope doth; there∣fore by true consequence I affirme the Pope to be this Beast in the .13. of the Re∣uelations,Thess. 2.2. the sinfull man in the Thessa. and his seate and Citty the whoore of Ba∣bilon in the .18. of the Reuelations, with whom all nations haue committed spiri∣tuall fornication.Thess. 2.2. And now that the mi∣stery of the Reuelations and the prophe∣sie of Paul, doe agree with the begin∣ning, proceeding, opening, and darke∣ning
of the Popes auctority, and his seat▪ and also that his Citty by succession and inheritaunce triumphant is the onely heyre of the first Babilon, inioying the fourth Monarchy, whereupon, the be∣ginning, proceeding, opening, and dar∣kening, of the seat of the Pope,Reu. 16. aunswe∣ring to the pouring out of the vialles, and to the measuring of the Temple (by Iohn) with his golden rodde,Reu. 11. doe euidently to any spirituall minde, shew it selfe to bee a case most playne, that the Pope is the foresayd Beast: and further to pro∣ceede effectually to proue this matter, that you may bee rooted in the truth, you shall vnderstand,Reu. 6. that first after the as∣cention of Christ into Heauen, that then his Church proceeded pure, his word sin∣cerely preached, by his Apostles, and so proceeded vnder the coloure of a white Horse,Reu. 6. according to the opening of the first seale. After their time it proceeded in the coloure of a red Horse, represen∣ting bloudy persecutions, as in the Em∣perours
dayes, as in the second seale opē∣ning. And after the diuision of time it proceeded in the coloure of a blacke Horse, being contrary to the first white Horse, which was pure religion, for then did arise the ceremonies of the Romise Church, and the exaltation of the Pope and his seate. Whereupon, his vprising being in the fiue hundred yeare after Christ, is aunswering rightly to the thir seale opening of the blacke Horse. &c. And to the mistery of Iohn measuring the Temple,Reu. 11. where he is commaunded to ca out the quire or outward court, which by computation commeth to foure hun¦dred cubites, which represent yeares meaning thereby, that whereas the Gen∣tyles and vnbeleeuing Emperours haue persecuted the Church openly for fow hundred yeares after Christ, that h should not measure that, because it manifest, but measure the Temple and the Aulter, and them that worshipp therein, meaning that secrete treading
downe of the Temple and truth of Gods word, that as the measure of the Temple and Aulter doth contayne a thousand two hundred and threescore Cubites, (which represent yeares) that so long shall the Pope (being the foresayd Beast and sinfull man, euidently shewed and proued) tread downe the verity of Gods truth, which number of yeares doth pricke fast to his ende. And therefore seing that the introduction of the seates of Kingdomes, the euent of the cause, and the mistery of the Reuelations, doth shew the Pope to bee that Beast in the .13.Thess. 2.2. Reu. 11. of the Reuelations, and doth shew his seate to bee of great antiquity, and his conti∣nuance to bee till Christ come in the Cloudes: it is then an heauy and wret∣ched bragge, to boast of his antiquity, or to cleaue to his traditions. For the Re∣uelations doe shewe clearely, that hee,Reu. 16. and his, began with a noisome botch, pro∣ceeded  with bloud, and heate of fire, and  enuy, and hath nowe his feare darkened
by the fift Viall, and shall when ty  cometh of the sixt Viall, shew with w spirite they are sanctified, in that th vncleane spirites like frogges shall p¦ceede out of the mouth of the Beast,Reu. 16.  Dragon, and false Prophet, to gather  Kinges of the Earth to battayle agay the great day of the lord, which is smo fire, and brimstone, euen the spirite error, enuy, and hypocresy: and acc¦ding  to the seauēth Viall, their end sh be with fire, hailstone, and brimstone that the brag of their antiquity, the ¦ginning,Reu. 14. proceeding, and ending, is v¦lamentable. For the Angell sayth, t whosoeuer take the marke of the Bea and will not come away frō that who of Babilon, shall bee punished with f and brimstone. And therefore I grau you that hee hath continued a thousand yeare and odde, and shall continue to  end of the World,Reu. 11. according as the m¦stery of the Reuelations doth playne declare: and I graunt you that hee shall
the end of the World haue the vpper hand of the witnesses of the truth: and I graunt you that the Pope is wounded (according to the 13. of the Reuelation) at this age, and that his wound shall bee healed agayne, but howe, euen by this last loosing of Sathan, who shall in the end of the World bring forth that two horned Beast like a Lambe being that great false Prophete, that shall doe such Miracles that if it were possible the elect should bee deceyued; but alas to theyr great woo. For S. Paul sayth,Reu. 13. because they beleued not the truth, but had plea∣sure in lyes and vnrighteousnesse, there∣fore God hath gieuen them ouer that they might bee dampned, because they receyued not the truth.Thess. 2.2. And that sinfull man that so exalteth hym self in the Tē∣ple of God as God, shal be destroied euen with the very appearaūce of God. Wher∣fore, I am to beseech you, and all of your profession, to way deepely this that I do write in short, which in an other worke
I haue comprehended at large, for it is the very truth of Gods word and his Re¦uelations. Wherein if occasion seru vpon your partes, to haue mee in confe∣rence, I doubt not but that you will yel to the spirit of God, which will worke it you an effectuall worke of grace, touch¦ing which, I pray God that so it may bee. And now touching the supremacy consider that you deceyue not your sel¦ues, for her Maiesty, is an Anoynte Prince,Cron. 2. and hath the Scepter of Iuda i her hand, as well in euery respect as kin Dauid, Salomon, Asa, Ezekiah, and Io¦ah: For did not Salamon a temperol kin build the Tempell? Did not Iosiah an the rest of the good Kinges, correct an order that in their Realme that was t the glory of God, and abolish that whic was to the contrary? The very like pow doth her maiesty take vpon her, as h maiesty may lawfully and truely. An therefore take heede of that coloured ∣sure
of the Popes presumptuous autho∣rity, for it is not of God, but of the Dra∣gon. Thus praying that your heartes may bee opened vnto all truth, I com∣mend you to Mount Sion, there to search with prayer, that you may make your election sure, and become to pro∣fesse a good profession. Fare you well, and Christ feede you, leade you, and speede you. I am yours to doe you good in the behalfe of the Gospell, as to my selfe. Francis Kett. D.
A coppy of a letter sent from a gentleman and his brethren lately conuerted. AS the light is pleasaunt vnto hym that hath  cleare sight, but offensiue to them that are purr blinde, so it may be thought betweene professors of religi¦on, which haue the cleare sight, o which be purre blinde, before the plea∣saunt light of Gods truth. VVherein a partly with your writing, so much mo by your conference, I haue my spiri reuiued to a greater confidence to∣ward your Religion, then heretofor I haue had. And therefore these are  request you, that you will send mee, my brother, a coppy of your golden clo∣set that vnlocketh heauenly misterie and that I may haue your company
Trinity weeke to bee at my house, to conferre both in Diuinity, and also in causes of sicknes; for I am much trou∣bled with the Hipocondriacal passion. And as you haue done mee good, so I will be yours or in no part myne owne, euen till death seperate vs from this VVorld, and conioyne vs agayne, with Christ in glory. Dij
A coppy of an aunswere to the foresaid letter, by the Author. I Reioyse in that you haue graunted in writing, as otherwise by consent in conference, to be so care∣full in making your ele∣ction sure, as not to condemne, nor to contemne the spirituall giftes, which God hath geuen me, and the writinges, admonitions, and instructions, which I haue sent you. For whereas you did not conceiue the mistery of the Reue∣lations, touching the antiquity of the Romish Churche and the Beast in the 13. of the Reuelations, so you did litle regard the differēce of the priesthod of Melchisedech,Heb. 7. which is euerlasting, ac∣cording to endles life. The want of the deepe vnderstanding thereof, did
hold you in error, and doth cause mul∣titudes to ron still after beggerly cere∣monies and Romish traditions. And besides the want of vnderstanding the misteries of the Reuelations, and of Daniel, hath with-holden many in bon∣age of papisme, whereas the truth her of being liuely described (as I trust haue performed it, through the grace of God) will strengthen you in a groū∣ded fayth to renounce the Pope and is traditions. Thus intending to sa∣tisfie you with word of mouth, at he day of your expectation, I will declare to you the deepenes of all the Reuelations, in such ample manner and with such fortitude of reasons (by Godes grace) as that I hope I shall e yours, and you shall bee myne, and e shall be both one in Christ.
A dehortation. ANd now whereas Dan prophesing of th' extre abhomination, saith, th the time shall come th the great Prince, Mich which standeth on the peoples side, sh arise vp: for there shall come a time trouble, such as neuer was, since there ¦gan to be people, vnto the same tyr Which Christ doth also affirme in 24. of Mathew, saying, that then th shall be great tribulation, such as was from the beginning of the World to  time, that except those dayes should  shortened, there should no fleshe bee¦ued, but for the chosen sake those da shall be shortened. Touching the wh Christ declareth the occasion and rea of such tempestuous dayes of daunge that there shall be such false Christes  false prophets, that shall doe such m¦cles and wonders, that if it were poss the very elect should be deceiued. So
it appeareth plainly, that before the end of the world, shall great stormes of trou∣bles vniuersaly happē, answering right∣ly to the 6. of the Reuelation, that when he two Prophets or witnesses of God haue ended their testimony, which is the preaching of his glad tidinges of his testa∣mentes throughout all the world (accor∣ding to the 24. of Mathew, that then the time is come, that the Beast in the 13 of the Reuelations, shall arise to heale his wound by making warre against the gos∣pellers: for by that great meanes of tri∣bulation spoken by Daniel and by our Sauiour Christ shall his wound which he hath receiued by the preachers of the Gospell) be healed vp agayne, and that through the meanes of that two horned Beast like a lambe, whom Sathan will and shal raise vp at this his last loosing before the end of the World, to doe such magi∣all miracles, that if it were possible the lect should be deceiued. For then com∣meth it, that Daniel sayth, hee shall
be grimmer then all his fellowes &c. Fo then is the time come, that he shall mo highly exalt hym selfe in the Temple  God as God, according to the Thess.  and 2. whom the Lord shall destroy wi his owne appearaūce, when he comme in the Cloudes, and this aunswere to th 13. of the Reuelations, that there shall b an Image made vnto the Beast, by t meanes of that two horned Beast like lambe, that is the great false Prophet that shall make fire come downe fro Heauen, in the sight of the Beast and t people, and then shall the dayes bee daungerous and cruell, that whosoeue riche or poore, high or low, that doe  take the marke of the Beast, can not b suffred to liue. By which meanes it is ¦uident, that if the Lord should not sh ten such dayes of tyrany and darken it would goe hard with all flesh, in th they shal be inforced either to hold w the Beast, or else to die for the Gospe So that then is that performed of Dan
that many shall bee purified, clensed, and tried; but the wicked shall not regard it,Daniel. 12. and then happy are they that shall fight the good fight, and so put on the shield of fayth, as to waite vntill a thousand thirty and fife dayes, for the Lord will geue them Eagles winges to flie into the wildernes, there to be fed with his holy word, as Elias was. And now when this tribulation shall begin, shall three foule spirittes like frogges come out of the mouth of the Beast,Reu. 1. the Dragon and false Prophet, being error, enuy, and hipocre∣sie.Reu. 16. Whereby that flowing Euphrates of the preaching of Christes Gospell shall bee dried vp, by the cruell hurly burly of Gog and Magog,Reu. 20. being the two last heads of Esdras Eagle receiued to the end, whō Sathā shall raise vp to compasse the holy entes of the Saincts, and then is that ast abhomination of desolation come to passe, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet: nd this is it, that Paul sayth; in the last ayes shall bee perillous times, men that
shall resist the truth (as Iannes and Iam∣bres) withstoode Moses, and therefore shall preuaile no longer:Math. 10. whereby it is e¦uident that Iacob shalbee turned into E¦sau, in that the fathers shall then deliue their sonnes to death; the brother, th brother; and the children arise against fa¦thers and mothers, and put them to death▪ For then is it that the truth shallbe laid in pryson, equity growne aside, righte∣ousnes stand farre off, conscience falle downe in the myre, pitty shutte out, and loue frosen to dead. Whereupon it stan¦deth euery man in hand to watch and pray, that hee may holdout to the en when hee shall bee crowned with the crowne of life; for the Angell sayth, tha who so euer take the marke of the Bea and commit spirituall fornication wi that Whoore of Babilon, being Rome  succession of the fourth Monarchi, sh be punished with fire and brimston. A therefore seing it is told vs before, in t 21. of the Reuelations, that the Beast
gainst the end of the world, shall haue his woūd healed,Reu. 13. and that his seate being darkened, shall be established againe, by the two horned Beast and false prophet,Antechrist as in the 13. of the Reuelations, and that hee shall ouercome the true professors of Gods word, and reioyse ouer them, as in the 16. of the Reuelations, and that thē in the great security after this reioysing of the victory got ouer the two witnesses of God, the Lord shall come, euen as a thiefe in the night; when they shall say peace and no daunger, then commeth on them sodayne destruction, as traueling vpon a woman with childe, and they shal not escape: Therfore we ought to be carefull to worke out our saluation with feare and trembling, considering what tēpestes doe hang ouer vs. And now con∣sider what a lamentable expectation this is, to looke for change of Religion, and what a woeful wrechednes it is to beleue in the Popes traditions, who is that Beast, that ere the end of the World shall worke
such tyrany and tribulation against the Gospell, as that the people shall bee, by this meanes,Math. 24. in such perplexity, that they can not tell which way to turne them. Wherfore to comprehend in short that which I minde to discourse vnto you at length by worde of mouth, I exhort you to renounce clearely the Pope and all his traditions, and laboure to make your ele∣ction sure, by holding the fayth of the Gospel euen vnto death that your Soules may goe vnto them that are vnder the golden aulter,Reu. 6. who suffred before for the testimony of the truth. Hold fast, for the time is at hand. Yours, in the same pro∣fession of the Gospell, euen till Christ come in his glory, to cloth vs with our hea¦uenly mansion. F. K. Iune 3. 1585. The righteous shalbee had in euerlas∣ting remembraunce, hee will not bee a∣frayd for any euill tidinges, for his heart standeth fast and beleeueth in the Lord. Psal. 112.
The coppy of an Epistle sent to English pilgrems and pa∣pists. 1584. By F. K. I Am moued by the royall law of God, which is to loue our neighbour as our selus, and to doe good to our ene∣mies; to write to intreate you, (my desired to the truth f the Gospell) to heare and reade the wordes f exhortation, vnder your duety in the feare f God, and reuerence to his Gospell, hoping hat the sweete motion, and tendernes of your ules health, will moue you hereūto. Wherin, rst I beseech you to measure the breadth, ength, and deapth of your inward man, and he path of your saluation, by the ballaunce of he pure Scriptures, and not by traditions d decrees, seing that the Scriptures are a∣e to make you wise to saluation,Tim. 2.3. through ith in Christ Iesus. Therefore seing that w is the accepted time, yea now be the dayes  health, in which Christ,Reu. 3. according to Iohn th set the doore of his Gospell open, it is high
time that you wake out of sleepe, and enter with the bridegrome while the doore is op lest you fall into strong delusion, and stum at noone day, and looke for light when  darknes. For which cause, say clearly am your selfes, Vp let vs go to our deare count of England, and walke in the light of  Lord, and become true citizens (with all fa¦full alleigance) to her beloued Maiesty,  so vndoubtedly and sincerely hath linked  scepter to the scepter of Iuda. For if thou d desire Ezechias to raigne ouer Englād  diligently walked in the law of the Lord,2. Cron. 29. ¦ged his Realme of Idolatry, set vp againe  true worship of God, and exhorted all his su¦iects to follow the lawe of the Lord God: t behold blessed ELIZABETH, the ¦noynted of the Lord, abounding in all  giftes of vertue, gouerning her Realme ¦cording to the purity of Gods word and tre▪ And if thou desirest Iosias that most go King,2. Cron. 34. which walked so purely in the waye  the Lord, that he declined neither on the  hand, nor on the right, who when the book
the lawe was deliuered vnto hym, did not on∣y cause the booke to bee red before hym, but e hym selfe red it, and all Idolatyr destroy∣ed, restored the true religion to his Kingdome. Or if thou wouldest haue Iosophat that wal∣ked in the commaundements of the Lord,2. Cron. 27. and oued Gods word so intirely, that he sent his Princes, Leuites, and Priestes, to teach in all partes of Iuda, which had the bookes of Gods lawe with them, and went about in all the Ci∣es of Iuda, and taught the people: then consider in the dexterity of consciēce, our wor∣thy gouernesse Queene ELIZABETH, how that her Maiesty is not inferior to any of them, in amplifying the glory of God, and spreading abroade of his word. For whereas Esdras, red the lawe of the Lord, plainely, and distinctly, to the people, and they gaue ve∣ry earnest and diligent attendance to the hea∣ring of it, so our imperiall Princesse,2. Esl. 8. and ver∣tuous Queene, hath caused the word of God to bee plainely red, and preached through all her Realme, by many a faithfull Esdras, that euery man may plainely heare it, and reade it
them selfes, to their soules consolation. Wh is it then that you seeke for beyond the Sea Hath not God promised that his Gospell sh be preached to all nations, and to euery peop in their proper Landes?Math. 24. What then hast th to doe, being an Israelite, to walke againe  the streates of Egypt, or to wander in th way to Assiria? Behould sayth the Lord, wh hast thou now to doe in the streate of Aegyp to drinke foule water?Ieremy. 2. or what makest thou  the way to Assiria, to drinke water of t floud? Thy owne wickednes shall reproue the and thy turning away, condemne thee. A so ye English pilgrems, what make yee in t streates of Rome, or in the way to Italy?  feare that your owne thoughts condemne y and your turning away, will bring you to he¦uy destruction, vnlesse yee repent. O ther¦fore come away, and turne to the treuth, a be not thereof ashamed, for the Lord kno¦eth your secret thoughts, with whom you m not dissemble and halt betweene two opi¦ons, but bee faithfull vnto your Soueraig Queene, and let King Dauid be your exāp
who would by no meanes lay blouddy handes vpon King Saule his enemy, being the Lords anoynted. Wherefore yee English Romaines, examine your selues, try out the deapth of your conscience, remember the dreadfull day of Iudgement, and be no longer deceyued, for loe how wreched your state is, to flie the light of the Gospell, to seperate your selues from your alleigāce, to hope for a day by mischiefe.Esay. 30. Know yee not, that it is a woe, to forsake the counsell of God, to seeke and sticke to the counsell of men? and knowe yee not that the (Lord sayth) woe bee those shrinken children, which take a web in hand, but not after my will. Then see what web is this of youres, to trust in pardons & indulgences, to commit suppli∣cations to Saintes, to hope to be reskewed out of the paynes of fayned purgatory, by a masse, to buylde true godlines vpon outward cere∣monyes and solemnities, and to hold the word of God in an vnknowne language;Ephes. 5. knowe yee not that Paule sayth, that, whatsoeuer is ma∣nifest, is light? how can you then hold in true conscience that such kind of religion is the
light, when as they are not manifest by the scriptues. Wherefore Paule exhorteth you not to walke in the vanitye of minde,Ephes. 4 blyn∣ded in vnderstanding: and Christ coun∣selleth thee to buy of hm pure gold,Reu. 3. and to a∣noynt thine eyes with eye salue that thou mayst see. How then can the Latyne Seruice be to thee an eye-salue to see the truth of Goddes worde, when as thow canst neyther reade it nor vnderstand it? Is it not an vn∣certayne sounde to an ignorant eare which can cary no truth of edifying, when it is pro∣pounded vnto vs, that all thinges should be done to edifye? Then no doubt but that it is Gods holy will that the scriptures should be in our mother language, as a pretious eye-salu in our house, that we may be established  Gods holy truth, and not be deceaued. Harke therfore deare Countrymen, and be carefully aduised, and learne to be wise to that which is good, and innocent to that is euill, and fa∣uour not the preceptes & ordinaunces of me more then the institutions of God; For sayth Paule, he that studieth to please men, is no
the seruaunt of God:Galath. 1. and the Gospel (sayth he) which I preach, I receaued it not of men. Therefore take heede how yee looke after the traditions of men and follow superstitions, se∣ing the word of your saluation commeth not from men, but from God. And now ye semi∣naryes & Iesuites, you enter into mens hou∣ses like smokie fire-brands, you take in hand to enforce the people after your wayes, that were escaped bondage Doe ye not respect the daunger which is toward them that seeke to deuour soules, & put stumbling blockes, like Balam, before the people? It standeth you vp∣on to examine the scripturs what foundation you doe lay, lest if you recant not, you prooue yourselues the Locustes which come out of the bottomles pitte.Reu. 9. Doe ye still ioyne the or∣der of Aron & the order of Melchisedec ioyntly as in one religion, when Christ hath translated away the priesthoode of Aron with all his ceremonies? then it can not bee that your doctrine & religion can be good, seeing ye mayntayne that which Christ hath aboli∣shed. For which cause I beseech you all to
search the difference of these two Pristhods, and seperate them as they ought to be, and I am assured, that Gods grace will enter into you, to see presently how far you decline from the purity of Christ his Gospell, that you ma be reformed to your soules consolation. Wher¦fore (deare Countrey-men) dearely bough with the bloud of Iesus Christ, I pray to God that such may be the fruites of this our age that the eyes of the blinde may be lightened and the eares of the deafe opened, that in th wildernes Wells may spring,Esay. 35. and dry ground turne to riuers: for a woe is prescribed to the that call darkenes light, and light darkenes and to them that are wise in their owne sigh and thinke themselues to haue vnderstāding For which cause it behoueth vs,Esay. 5. to try out th truth by the fire of Gods holy word, lest tha we facion our selues to be seruauntes of th bond woman,Gal. 4. and not children of the free w man. Wherefore I refer your secret though to the goodnes of God, hoping that you w consider deepely of your religion, and take ¦xample of the children of Israel retorned a¦er
the destruction of Ierusalem into Aegipt, aying thereby what a daungerous thing it is  renounce the truth and cleaue to customs, ntiquities, and the actes of the forefathers, eing not grounded vpon the pure word of God: For they answered Ieremie saying, as for thy words which thow hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lord,Iere. 44. we wil not heare them; but whatsoeuer goeth out of our owne mouth, that wil we doe: we wil offer sacrifice to the Queene of heauen, as our forefathers did: for then we had plenteousnes of victu∣ales, then were we in prosperity, and no harme happened vnto vs: but since we left to offer, many stormes of troubles and euills haue gre∣ued vs: Thē answered Ieremie, saying foras∣much as your sinnes were so greate in such sa∣crifices, the Lord could no longer suffer you, and so this is the cause of your misery, because you forsake the truth. The like wounde hath the Lord geuen to you and your whole king∣dome of Papisty, because of your superstitious offerings to Saints, and pilgrimages, when you say that you had all plenteousnes. But now the
daies are not so agreeable in cheapenes.  therefore beware that you being forewa of the truth of the Gospell, by many a true remie, do not harden your selues, and say, wil doe as our fathers did, we wil pray to S¦tes, and goe on pilgrimage to such a Sain goe offer at such a msse, for then we ha things cheape; lest that you so cutting off truth from you, doe perish with them of ¦gipt. And furthermore, whereas you  sent among vs many of your smal writing gloses, like sugred pills, which hauing an ward feeling of sweetnes, are notwithstā in the full taste thereof as bitter worm in that you turne the word of the Gospell lawe to wormwood, by inducing reasons o the ceremonial lawe of Aron. to prooue  superstition which is abolished by Christ therfore search the scriptures more thē ¦ditions, that you may gyrd your selues with verity, and not hurt by your writings and amples the tender sheepe of Christ. But e deepely into the bottom of your heart, and c¦sider that you ought not to bring straunge
pon the altar, as Abihu & Nadab did: no ore ought yee to make other worship then the ospell doth commaund you, contrary to the hich, your traditions and superstitions bee any; from which wash you and make you leane,Esay. 1. and then your sinnes though they were  redd as skarlet, shall be made whiter then owe. Wherefore measure not the pure reli∣n and truth of the Gospell, by looking to the ife and sin of the people: but try the truth by he very Word it selfe: For wickednes will rowe vp among the true professors, in that athan doth there beare greatest spight, to rawe thē into sinne. Therefore thou people of England, make thee ready to mete thy God, nd let not thy houses be ful of voluptuousnes, nd thy Citties full of wickednes:Ezech. 30. For Eze∣hiel sayth that God wil powre out his indig∣ation vpon sinne. Therefore, O England, uffer not wilfulnes to wax greene, malitious∣es to growe vp, vngodlines to take deepe oote, vnmercifulnes to increase: For sayth God by the Prophet Amos,Amos. 1. For three or foure ickednesses I will not spare Iuda, and Israel,
Damascus and Tyre, Moab and Amm For which cause, hate the euill, and loue  good: and then shall we still inioy the ble dayes of king Asa, who sayde; Because  haue followed the lawes and truth of God hath geuen vs peace round about: And God preserue our blessed Queene long to raigne ouer vs, and send vs peace in Christ. Amen. God saue the Queen
