15107 99842449 7102
A TRVE AND perfecte description of a straunge Monstar borne in the Cit∣ty of Rome in Italy, in the yeare of our saluation. 1585. Vnder which is described both the origi∣nall and triumphant state of the Holy League, and also the sodain and despe∣rate fall thereof in the yeare 1588. With certaine verses exhortatory to the King of Spayn, that hee would withdraw his persecuting hand from the Church of Christ. Wherein are also shewed some of the cruelties exercised vppon our countrey-men and others in the Inquisi∣tion and Gallies of Spaine. LONDON. Printed by Iohn Wolfe for Walter Dight, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1590.
To the courteous Reader. THough moste men may vnderstand my purpose, in the description of this monster without farther decla∣ration, yet the Printer doubting least it might seeme obscure to some not well ac∣quainted heretofore with the occasions, and be∣ginnings of these preset troubles in christendom, at his request I thought good to aduertise thus much. First that the name of the Pope that now last tyrānized was Sixtus Quintus or Sixtus, the fift of that name, who being by his seat An∣tichrist, (as other Popes his Predecessors were before him and by his sex a man) yet I tearme him by the name of strumpet, This prophe∣cy was litte∣rally fulfilled in the time of Pope Ioane, that was a wo¦man and ano∣table harlot. harlot. &c. as the beloued disciple of our Sauiour doth in the Apo∣calips, call that man of Sinne, and agreable to that Scripture I bring the diuell in their confe∣rence, calling him the Queen of new Babilon (the place of his residence.) This Pope to shew him∣selfe a most cruel ennemy to humane race, as most his predecessors haue been, though few in so high degree, being no sooner seated in his bloudy seat, he straight beates his braines, how to set al chri∣stendome together by the eares, partly through the pleasure he taketh in shedding innocēt bloud,
partly to set himselfe the surer in his Antichri∣stian chaire, (now almost rotten) and wholly to extinguish and roote out the glorious and moste comfortable Gospell of our Sauiour, with all the professors thereof, that hee might so bring it to passe, that their might be no memorie remaining of the one nor the other. And because the diuell is alwaies ready at our elbowe to pricke vs for∣ward, as soone as we haue conceiued any euill in our harts, and so much the readier, by how much the conceiued mischief is the greater. So no doubt this Pope, whose conceit being against Christ & his members, I accōpt the chiefest of al sins, what so euer, had no sooner laid the plot of his vnspea∣ble mischief in his hart, but the diuil was as dili∣gēt to vrge him to put it in as spedy practise. And therefore Isay this monster or bloudy league, to be begotten of the diuel vpō the forenamed whor of Rome, as who so loketh wel into the nature of the said Holy league, must needes say with mee, that Hel it self was of coūsail to the establishing thereof. I tearme it vntimely birth, in respect of the strumpets eagernes in bringing it forth, for she brought forth her mishapen creature after her comming to the Popedome, in halfe the time
that women commonly vse to go with child, euen within the compas of four moneths: yet the bug shewed not himselfe in his iollity till the year 88. the cause wherof liudge to be a certain prophesy inuented amongst the Papists, that in the saide yeare of 88. there should be but one king, one pa∣stor and one flocke, the interpretation whereof they apply, the King, to be Phillip of Spayn, the pastor to be the Pope, and the flocke to be al peo∣ple and nations of our Europe, which in that year should all be thrall and slaues to that king & pa∣stor. Yet note by the way, friendly Reader, that this great pastor, that wold haue so great a flock or rather the fleece and fel of them, & that now vanteth to excell all kings, as much as the Sunne excelleth the Moone, was of late a begging gray fryer, The Franciseā Friers when they begge at the dore, they aske it for and in the name of Saint Francis himselfe. going frō dore to dore with a wallet on his backe, begging bread for S. Frauncis, but that begging estate he hath as clean forgotten now, as though his feete now cladde with purple veluet shoes, had neuer gone bare foote. The king of Spayn, so inriched by his west In∣dia Mines & his reuenews so increased through his late vsurping of Portingall, and thereby also the east India, being the chief piller of the Pope∣dome
and without whom it could neuer haue stoode so long, I place him for the monsters right arme, in whome the Pope puts all his confidence, they two hang together as the pennard and inck∣horne, the Pope giues the king many buls, which yeelds great profite to his coffers, therefore the king is his chāpion and generall in al his battails, yet note, those fat buls come not out of the Popes medowes, he giues him but a pig of his owne sow, the Popes gift is but yearly a sheete of paper, but all the profite that comes to the king, comes from his subiects purses, and so drunken is this king becom with the winelees of this harlots goldē cup that he cannot discern it. The late duke of Guise sometime, in respect of his bloudy mind, the fittest man in our Europe, to haue a principall place a∣mongst the Popes own children, he being cōmon∣ly cald the Popes butcher, is plaste as the mon∣sters left arm which arme a long time was great∣ly feared of al men, til it pleased the Lord to sett his church free from so cruel a scourge. I describe the monstar first, as he was in his greatest pride, but after according to his present picture, I des∣cribe him as he lately was. I doubt not but the rest may be well vnderstoode. Farewell. He that wisheth speedy conuertion or hasty confusion to the Monster. I. L.
The description of the Monster. POpe Sixtus, one of the most sham∣lesse strumpets of all her whoorish predecessors, beginning her raigne in the yeare of our saluation 1585, and séeing her dignitie and reue∣newes so farre inferiour to most Popes in time past, In times past the Popes had great fees out of all kingdomes in Europe, and this fran∣ticke Sixtus had nothing but out of Spaine, Italy, and partes of Germany, thē woonder not that he faed like one stark madde. beganne to growe so malancholie, that shee wanted little frō falling into an incurable frenzie: straight she sets all her wits abroach, laying sundry plots for the repayring of the decayed dignitie of the sometime flourish∣ing chayre. The Diuell a diligent attendant on any sexe possessed with like cogitation, appeared vnto her in shape fittest to please the humour of so common a curtizan, and saluting her farre vnlike the churlish courtesie of his infer∣nall Countrey, he gins reuiue her out of the dumpe with these friendly spéeches. How now braue Ladie (quoth he) what, all in your dumpes? Is this a moode beséeming the Quéene of new Babylon? Is this the countenance of her that should make all Nations of the earth drunke in her beautie, and bewitcht by her brauerie? May the Kinges of the earth (whom thou must allure to loue thée) like of a melancholly Ladie? Hath Fortune first called thée from a russet coole to a red hatt, and from that hatte to a tripled Crowne, and shouldest thou not knowe how to vse For∣tune that standes wholy at thy becke? Or haue euer I sayled thée at the pinch, that thou shouldst any thing doubt now of my readinesse at néede? Nay frollike fayre Quéene and plucke vp your spirites: let not this successiue seate fall farther to decay in you, that whylome so flourished by your most famous foregoers: in sharpenesse of wit fewe of them euer came uéere you, and in pollicie who euer was
comparable? They haue by degrées lost of late euery one a share, so that the famous chayre is become to the state as nowe to our gréefes we sée it in: how befitting will it then be for braue Sixtus to imploy her selfe, not onely to recouer that alreadie lost, but also in subduing that which as yet hath little bowed vnder any of their banners. Shall you who by the helpe of that mightie Monarch of Spaine, together with your owne industrie, The King of Spaine hath his voyce in the Popes election, and beareth grea∣test sway of all other voyces. came to this haughtie seate, séeme to want eyther friends or pollicy, not onely to maintain it, but againe to lift it euē to the clouds? Cast off these dumpes (my loue) for shame, and practise without doubting to performe what so euer you enterprise. Doe you forget that it was at first a hundred times more diffi∣cult to establish this chaire, when yet it was not, then it is now to maintaine it, hauing such helpes? Are the coffers so stuft to others, become so bare and emptie to thée? Let par∣dons purchase golde, and sale of Bulles supply that want, rayse the price of thy pardons, and force men vppon payne of fire to take thy Buls, hast thou not asword as well as the keyes of Heauen? If men grow carelesse of thy par∣dons, pardonne them perforce. Be of good cheare braue Quéene and let dispayre be farre from thée, vse my aduise and doubt not all shall be well. Her holinesse starting vppe as from a slumber, and doubting least shee dreampt, that which afterwardes she perceiued more plaine to be the ve∣ry spéeches of her swéete heart in déede: after some louing imbrasinges, she burst foorth into this heauie reply. Mar∣uell not my best beloued, and neuer fayling friend at néede, that you finde me driuen into this present dumpe, out of which your comfortable spéech and presence hath euen now set me frée. Our seate, sometime as you know the onely woonder of the world for brauerie and pompe, hauing euer since the preaching of that accursed Germayne Luther and his schollers daily diminished in dignitie, I find at my first entrie so vnlike to that it hath béene within the compasse of my owne remembrance, that our Monarchie séemes nowe scant a Molehill, to that it was woont to be in the
time of some of our more then happy predecessors, selfe ease so possessing our latter Popes, that euery one hath lost his little, for sturring so little to stoppe the soare at the begin∣ning: and by regarding too too litle the pompe and ease of vs their successor, I finde to my woe, this present seat so weake, that vnlesse I besturre mée better then they haue donne: I sée no remedie but seat and succession will ende both in me. Thus séeing (right trustie friend) this great charge as well for our selfe as our successors, depending wholy vpon our owne shoulders, woonder not to sée me so disquieted at the heart and vexed in mind, till I haue found some way how to repaire this our ouerruinated seat. That which at the first might haue béene stopt with a little and small charge, nowe by running so long vnstayed will cost millions and a whole Ocean of bloud: the effusion of bloud is our least care, but want of those millions stickes in our stomacke. Spaine, the Princes and Senioryes of Italy, the Bishoppricke of Colen, with fewe others remaine firme vnto vs, when as the rest of Europe is eyther fallen quite from vs, or at least so wauering, that in most néede we are likest to be deceiued by thē. If the Emperie should change from the house of Austria (as it is to be feared) and so fall to some of our professed enemies, He meaneth the king of Nauarre, now to the Popes griefe, the French king: whom the League so pursueth: but God is his de∣fence. Here the Pope doubts not in vaine, for since this parlee be∣tweene him and the diuel, the Polāders haue elected the valiant Prince Signis∣mundus, son to the king of Sweden, a Protestant. Here for re∣uerēce I must let passe the filthy railing speeches, that the quondam russer hooded Sixtus vomi∣teth out of his stinking mouth, a∣gainst our Princesse, whome God long preserue in despite of all her foes, for they are such as are not for any good subiect to write, nor for any chri∣stian care to brooke the hearing. The discredi∣ting of the Popes pardōs is no small hinderance to her Holines. what a blow were that to light on our ouerburthened shoulders. France for want of issue, hath for next successor * him that our heart most abhorreth, against whome wée haue sent foorth our curses and Buls, but he estéemes them all as bubbles and spéedes the better by how much the more he hath béene excommunicated and curst. Poland that brooketh no successour by issue, by electi∣on, I feare, may admit some Lutheran, and then all hope of succor from thence were cleane cut off. The Russies and Muscouites, howbeit they maintaine some of our supersti∣tions, yet how slenderly they accompt of vs, it is al too wel knowne, and how soone they will quite reiect vs, who can tell? And in the meane time, what by the farre distance of the way, and by the little respect they haue vnto vs, wée
haue no cause to trust to their aide. England, whom with her Quéene, our predecessors haue so long and déepely cur∣sed, that there hath bin no malediction against her and hirs left vnpronounced, flourisheth nowe more then euer, ney∣ther hath Pius Quintus and Gregorie, both of famous me∣morie, notwitstanding all their costs and charges, bin a∣ble to hatch so many English Seminaries, to infect that Countrie: but those Vniuersities of Cambridge and Ox∣forde, so vnhappily for vs, maintained by that accursed Quéene, haue sent forth such an innumerable rable of mi∣nisters, that not onely our English Seminaries, but all our learned Iesuites of all nations are so put to silence by their preachings and writings, that they haue not a word to say more in my quarrell: well they may brabble, but those bishops and ministers of England so beate them with their answeres, that they are almost beaten dumbe. And yet our English Seminaries haue waded further in our cause then any other Writers heretofore. And as for our pardons they are also growen so farre out of credit by the Writings and Sermons of English and other Ministers, which still teach men where they may haue pardons gra∣tis, and onely for asking, that now there is such running to Christ for Indulgences, and plenarie remission that not one amongst twentie comes to me his vicar. Euery sowter is now growen so malapert, that he presumeth at the first iumpe to rush euen to Christ himselfe, without asking leaue of one or an other Saint in Heauen or Hell. Note that all Saints are not in heauen, for the pope hath canonized such a nūber of traitors, that hell is not vnfurnis shed of saintes such as they be. And this is the good that we get also, in that the Scripture is in so many vulgare tongues, for because Christ saith with∣out exception, Come vnto me all ye that labour and are heauie laden &c. Euery Tinkar that is touched with a li∣tle repentance, now by vnderstanding the Scriptures, ta∣keth it to be spoken also vnto him, and so at the first dash runnes boldely to Christ, without offering one peny vnto me his porter, or to any other of his courte for his admit∣tance. What hope resteth then in my bulles or pardons? Thus leauing to speake of many others that are almost as
sharpe thornes vnto our sides, as the Quéene of England is. By this little I haue saide, I know thou canst come∣cture of the rest, and so well waying the cares that vexe vs, togither with the ticklish state of our tottering chaire, cease to blame me for sitting so malecontent as lately you found me. The Diuell that heard nothing all this while, but that he too well knew before, cuts off this concubines dolefull tale with a louing kisse. Peace, faire Quéene, quoth hée, and adde no further oyle ta my flame, thou renuest my so∣rowes without telling mée any newes: Thou knowest to my power, I haue ayded the Sorcerers, Coniurers, and Inchanters of thy predecessors against our capitall enemie of England all that I might. But he whose name I trem∣ble to rehearse, hath put such a hooke in my nostrelles, that I can goe no further then he lets me loose, it is in his hand to restraine my rage, and to giue me libertie to execute his wrath when he séeth time: but whusht, be still, séeing thy sorcerers by me, nor I by them can do no more then lifteth him that ruleth vs all, we must cast about, and bring the other tacke aboorde, wée must rake all the corners of hell for a new deuice, séeing all our former practises faile vs, we will prouide a remedy for all, and all shall be to our content Lady I warrant thée. With that togither they goe into hir holines priuy chamber, where they laid their heads to∣gither. But what they did, or how they handled the mat∣ter, I know not, but hir holines beganne to looke big, and waxe big, as though the Diuelles and she had made worke for the Beodles of Bridewell, and in lesse space by fiue mo∣neths at least, then ordinary course, hir holines was deliue∣red of hir vntimely birth: yet the childe being aliue, the tender care of the mother so fostred and brought it vp, that insmall time it wared very strong, yea, the monster be∣came so mightie in so little space, that most Kinges of the earth stoode at the gaze, expecting with feare the euent of his power. While the dadde and damme beganne to rub the elbowe for ioy, and their hearts dauncing within them,
saying one to another, This is he shall remedie all, and he shall aduance our seat higher by a degrée then euer it was: the damme sung lullabie, and the dadde rockt the cradle, so long, till neyther Rome, the cradle, nor all Italie could lon∣ger containe him, for the stripling woulde abroad to search out aduentures: And therefore I will first shewe you his shape, as he was in his greatest pride. He had two heads, the one altogither like the sire, and the other like the dāme, which heads spake prowd blasphemies against heauen, and the ruler therof, their lookes loftie, euen like the sonne of pride and sinne, terrible like the séede of Serpents, and fierce like the red dragon. From his right shoulder in steade of an arme, grewe out a mighty Prince with a crowne imperiall on his head, to looke to, full of all pompe and maiestie, séeming at the view by his rich shew to be sole commander of all the golde mines in the world, he had a sword in his hand more braue to looke to, then fearefull by any signe of manly strokes gi∣uen therewith, The king of Spaine his late vsurping of Portingale, possesseth also all such partes of the East India as east belonged to Portingale. the scabbard most richly beset with stone and pearle, as though the East India had lately become his slaue: he cried out in the Spanish tongue, so lowde, that not onely all Europe, but also great parte of Affrica trembled at the prowd noise, El mundo no me basta: which his spéech I take to be thus much in English, The world sufficeth me not. From his left shoulder procéeded also in place of the other arme, a prince to looke on very grimme, and sterne, with a coronet on his head, his armes thorow∣ly imbrued in blood, his sworde died red in the same, as though he had lately come from the slaughter of an infinite number of séely lambes and shéepe: his sparkling eies sée∣med all inraged in ire, his browe frowning nothing to the shewe but gastly death. In fine, he séemed wholie a hel∣lish fury, prowdly roaring out in the French tongue this horrible spéech, En despit du Ciel. which I vnderstande thus in English, In despite of heauen. His body contai∣ned in the place of heart, lyuer, lungs, guttes, gall, and o∣ther entralles, a number of fat friars of all orders, priestes,
monkes and Iesuites, some laying their heads together, as debating matter of great moment, some singing, and o∣thers faring as merry as Crickets, the potte with Ʋinum theologicum, in the meane while hauing little rest, but stil walking from mouth to mouth, and tossed like a tenise bal, from hand to hand, as though they purposely meante to make themselues leane for the kingdome of heauen: there was in fine such a confused noise amongest them, of all the languages in our Europe, that with much adooe I coulde heare distinctly any of their seuerall spéeches, yet listening attentiuely to the English, which by meanes of the multi∣tude of other languages was hardly discerned, I heard one cry flatly, Neuer such cause of ioy. Be like it was some English Iesuite that hoped shortly to become a Cardinall in England. His taile was double like his necke, from which sproong out many madde heads, some séeming noble, many of good birth, but most, the scumme and outcast of the world, ready at an houres warning to serue the Diuell himselfe for mo∣ney: all these well armed, and as it were, ready at a pinch to strike without respect of age or sexe: the Monster séem∣ing not greatlie troubled in drawing them, by meanes of their great willingnes, to followe of their owne accorde: their noise was no lesse confused then that of the belly-gods before mentioned, saue that I heard not a worde of English amongst them, to my remembrance, but I heard an Ita∣lian somewhat louder then the rest, all in a brauerie, and in the hoigh to say, Hor, ò mai, ricco, which I take to be thus much in English, Rich now or neuer. Downe from his bréech on the right side stoode in steade of a legge, a Cardinall, prowde in his gesture, séeming to supporte his share of the great burthen, as though hee had scant sustained a fether, a braue lustie fellowe, princelike in countenance, casting a smirking looke from a wanton rol∣ling eie, as though a window in Rome should scant escape his piercing sight, and in a pleasant vaine I heard hym vtter in Latine, Quis non portabit spe? which I thus con∣strue, Who would not beare on hope? On the other side, in steade of the monsters lefte legge
stood, a no lesse frolike mitred Bishop, fat and better fedde by oddes then the Cardinall, his belly strouting out, as though it contained the better parte of a barrel of Renishe wine, wholy despising the cares of this worlde, as dedica∣ting himselfe altogether to Tempus bonum, yet séeming to hope of farther preferment and ease, I heard him say thus in latine, Fero vt quiescam, meaning this, I beare nowe for after ease. This Monster, in the shape prescribed, beeing then in his ruffe and greatest iollitie, put the worlde in such a maze that it was strange to heare euery seuerall mans opinion, especially when her holines (that disposeth of Baptisme at her pleasure) vouchsafed to baptise her childe with the name of Holy-League: then, how many men, so manie mindes, some sayde they neuer sawe so vgly a shape vnder so reuerent a name, some sayde the name and the person agréed as well as (kill Bull) for a gentle womans little fi∣sting hound, that might be put in her gloue: others thought the better of the beast, for the respect of the name, and ma∣ny were so madde as to thinke ye Monstar with the name, to be both from aboue, so were the multitude bewitched and wise men ledde into error: But all men that lookt nar∣rowly into the proportion and force of euery limme, stoode more affrayde of his might then amazed at his shape: whether he was first to take his progresse, few men knew but euery man feared, for euerie one doubted his owne home: the greatest rumors went, that he would beginne first with France, Flanders, and Englande: yet Affrica doubting least he would take Barbarie in his waye listed not to be vnprouided for his entertaynement, neyther ment Asia to sléepe in securitie: The names of kings of the West India, who at thys present with all their sub∣jectes liue in moste misera∣ble bondage vnder the Spa∣niards, and haue so done a long time, enduring more tormēts then may bee well named, in so muche that they are perswaded, that the Spa∣niardes are a people ascen∣ded out of hel for their sins. a horrible Monster (saye you) so to scare the thrée corners of the worlde: but had America béene also in peace, where to haue viewed him to the full, I doubt not but her prowdest * Cassiques would haue trembled at the sight: & so much the sooner, because the right arme spoke in ye Spanish tongue such terrible things, in which language the West India, (contayned in Ame∣rica)
suffered such proud threates, and therewithall such intollerable tormentes, that the poore Indians thinke ve∣rily that there is no other language vsed in Hell among the diuels. But leauing those miserable Indians in their mi∣serie and perpetuall slauerie, where they are constrayned dayly to heare the thrée throated Cerberus, barking out nothing but horror in the said language. This Monster hath begunne his stately march, and gone quite thorough Fraunce and Flanders, where in Fraunce with his lefte arme he did horrible things, the right arme afflicting Flan∣ders with vnspeakeable miseries, and in the yeare 1588. being then in his full strength, who can declare the haugh∣tie wordes he threw abroade, or describe the greatnesse of his lookes, the sea shooke, the earth trembled, the hugie whales that wonted to sporte vpon the rime of the water, durst not then approch within a hūdred fadom of the same, the heauens were threatned, and the whole earth should be subdued. Then he beginneth with Englande, and goeth rounde about Scotland and Ireland, but Iehouah be pray∣sed, doing so little harme saue to himselfe, that hee was not a little before so admired for his shape, great wordes, and bigge lookes, as nowe generally scorned for so small perfor∣mance, after so many braue brags and threats, the moun∣taines birth prooued so séely a mouse, that all feare was tur∣ned to laughter, and tremblings to shame for so doing. And I that saw the Monster newly crept out of the shell, & also in his greatest pride, had scantly knowne him in the latter end of the yere 1588. (saue by his deformitie) so founde I him dismembred, wounded, and humbled, beholding chil∣dren that earst durst not looke him in the face, presume in sporte to plucke haires from his beard, and to daunce An∣tike on his great toe. No lesse a change, me thought then to sée a mouse presume to take a nappe in a Cattes eare. Then entred I into consideratiō of the power of him that indéede is onely mighty, and cried, saying: To thée O Lorde belongeth all glory, power, and honor, and vnto men, shame and confusion: It is thou that throwest the
proude euen to the dust, exalting the humble and méeke in heart, to thée be all praise for euer. Now therefore hauing described him as I sawe him in his pompe and fury, I thought good to picture him out in such sort as you sée him in the beginning of the booke, being as lately he was séene by many: which may serue to re∣uiue all such dastardes as were earst well néere dead, at the onely hearing of his name, and for the comfort of all such as still trusted in God without wauering, that the great bugge at last would prooue but a very scare Crowe. I passing of late thorough a waste and desart wildernes, voyde of all gréene, and couered only with light sande, still remoouing at the pleasure of the vnconstant winde, by chance casting my eye on one side I behelde (vnlooked for) many people of sundry Nations gathered together, their confused noyse being no lesse strange, then to sée so desert a place so replenished with so many people, and to ridde my selfe of doubt I drewe néere, with desire to be satisfied of a matter so straunge in respect of the place, where soone I beheld lying vnder a great branchles shrubbe, the great Monster before rehearsed, and this great multitude inuy∣roning him round and gazing vpon him with their neuer satisfied eyes: Some that expected he should haue wrought great wonders, stoode pittifully howling ouer him, others that had long feared and somewhat felt the force of his fu∣rie, stoode giuing thankes to the almightie for so gratious a deliuerance: and others not caring which end of the staffe went forwardes, (for there were of all sortes) stoode laughing and grining and making mowes: which sorte would haue béene as readie to runne with the hound, had the hound still continued the chase, on hope to haue pykt the bones and fedde on the reuertion of the pray. This Monsters great heads that earst spake great blasphemies against heauen, lay now yéelding foorth against the same place (and him that ruleth therein) most bitter curses, in the anguish of their distempered braynes, and with déepe and hollowe grones, bewrayed to all men their sorrowes.
His right arme hanging downe the head, his crowne stan∣ding a one side, more after the falling then swearing fashi∣on, with the rich stone and pearle of his scabbard fallen off in many places, and his golden chape quite fallen off and lost, yet there remayned many stones and pearles, with the golden hilt vppon the leaden blade, which blade at the first thrust turned directly to his owne bosome, and being at the first drawen séemed so vnsutable to the rich scabbard that men wondred to sée so braue a shew to couer so weake a weapon: his hautie spéech was altered from El mundo no me basta, to his doubtfull demaund: No aprouechando Tesoro, que hare? Which in effect is thus much (if my treasure auayle me not, what shall I doe?) (as though his infinite treasure wherein he trusted, had quite decea∣ued him): And therewith he set such a sigh, as pearced to the quicke euery entraile & limme of the whole Monster, in such sort as the whole body became so loose with the feare, that it is doubted whether the laske may be stopt till guts and all goe together into the préeuie: but in the meane time there was old stopping of noases, & phogh quoth the beholders, what a stinking Holy-league is this? The left arme, that lately played such Rex in France, beeing the very butcher of this League, vpon the Saintes of God, was now cleane cut from the body, by * one, The last frēch king who per∣ceiuing the purpose of this League, cau∣sed the Duke of Guize to be murthered. who at the first sate as newter till he saw that the Monster in déed pre∣tended in his sayd progresse to bereaue him also of crowne & life: then began Henry of Valoys to besturre him, as one to whom a crowne & life was more déere, then so to léese ei∣ther of thē: and espying his time he layes so about him that eare euer the Monster was ware, he smote the left arme quite off his shoulders, which in ye fall brake his sword, vo∣miting out with his blood, this frantick french Cruelle mort me preuient as much in english as (Cruell death preuents me) meaning (as it séemes) that sodaine death had preuen∣ted his purpose, which reached euen to the kings own life, so that he gréeued more for not effectuating his purpose, then sorrowed for conceiuing so great a sinne in his heart.
The bedye, bowelles, and other inwardes of the monster, I sawe so chaunged from that it was (lately described) that what with their vinum Theologicum and ouer soone excesse in ioy, but especially their suddayne and vnexpected sorrowe, euen when they thought all should haue be'ene according to their longing, the whole sto∣mach of the beast, was so ouercome, that his entrayles fell a sending vpwarde, and his stomach spewing out such blasphemie against Heauen, and such bitter curses against the Church of Christ, that the stintch thereof was, and yet is still ascending into the nostrelles of the Lorde: which stincke, though according to his long pa∣tience he suffer for a season, yet let not his Church dis∣payre, for at length when the stinch is at the greatest, he will so destroy the whole bodie of this monster, that not onely his curssinges and blasphemies shall cease to∣gether with his tyranny and power, but euerie lymme shall suddainely vanish away, as the whole bodie was at the first ouer hastely begotten and hatcht into the worlde: But yet the number of Martyrs appoynted to suffer vnder Antichrist is not full. Well, this late my∣rie bodie was againe of late so out of tune, and in so contrarie a note, that it made all the beholders much to maruaile, for in ste'ede of (Neuer such cause of ioy) (which was the spe'ech in the Monsters prosperitie) I heard playne mumbling amongest them (Neuer in like extremitie.) A soddayne chaunge, but what can not the Lorde bring to passe, howe can he'e turne the ioyes of the wicked into sorrowe, and the crosses of the god∣ly into swe'ete ease: as this is the Lordes dooing, and it is woonderfull in our eyes. His twofolde tayle trayling after and contayning such a number of people of all degre'es and ages, euen from Princes pe'eres, to the most abiectes people: the behol∣ders also perceiued woonderfully altered: the one parte comming from the mothers head, were such as were woonderfully bewitched by the charmes of the great Sor∣ceresse
of Rome, and had quaffed de'epely out of her I∣dolatrous cuppe, whereby some of all sortes became so superstitious, that they followed the League and Popes cause, of me'ere superstition onely: but these the simplest and smallest number: for the greatest number were wholely of the Diuell the Syre, without any religion or deuotion at all, drawen onely by desire of gayne and preferment, crying with the rest, Oh the holy League, the holy League: yet they as carelesse and voyde of ho∣linesse and religion, as hee that neuer knewe the mea∣ning of eyther: euen like the roagues, at the late defa∣cing of Lincolnes Inne, which neyther cared for Pren∣tises, nor had receiued any iniurie at the handes of anie Gentleman of the house, yet gladde of the least oppor∣tunitie to robbe, spoyle and doe any mischiefe what so e∣uer, had no thing in their mouthes, but, Oh the Pren∣tises, the Prentises, downe with the house, kill the ras∣kalles, &c. Such, I say, were the greatest followers of this League, hoping vppon the soddaine of vagabonds, and lubbars, to become Lordes at the first dash, whereof, no doubt, In resect of their wonder∣full mixture, and that with the vildest na∣tions vnder heauen, as with the Ne∣gro, the Iewe & the Moore, in such sort, that scant one among a hun∣dred can proue him selfe free from one of these three sortes of peo∣ple, especially in Granada, Murca, Iaen, Andauzia, &c, they heard large promises made to all the fol∣lowers, which made the Spanish mungrelles, so hastie to cause their Courtizans and Wiues to followe into Fraunce their inuincible Armada, promising against their comming hether to haue prouided for their enter∣taynement, the fayrest houses in London, vaunting be∣fore the victorie, to sell veluets in Cheapeside by the Ra∣pyer, and to measure out broade cloth by the pyke. But at length fayling of their purpose, and a cleane contrarie happe befalling their expectations: I sawe there their heads in ste'ede of helmets couered with coxecombes, and in ste'ede of battleaxes, bables in their handes, so looking heauily one on another, none being able to mocke his fel∣lowe for his long noase: I listning to their chatte, heard an Italian saying softly to himselfe, Cattiuo contare, sen∣al hosto. Which I take to be thus in english (ill recko∣ning
without the hoast. The legges of this vgly shape, were as quite cham∣ged as the rest of the members: the young lustie Cardi∣nall on the one side, with the fatte fedde Bishoppe on she other, that earst vpon hope séemed to daunce vnder the ponderous burthen, were now readie to sinke right downe vnder the same, as not longer able (their hope lost) to support so great a waight: their shoulders were become crooked, and their eyes readie to starte out of their heads, staring as though they had béene sitting thrée dayes and nightes at the Stillyeard close by the Renish wine∣fatte, their legges stoode trembling and quaking at the knées, as though they were euen readie to start one part from the other: and the faynting Cardinall faynting in his spéech, in stéede of his former, vsed these wordes: spem & laborem amitto, which I English thus (I léese both labour and hope). And the fatte mitred Bishoppe, making a mouth like an Oyster cryed out, Malè sit one∣ri. As much to say (the Diuell take burthen and all) It should séeme euerie Cardinall hopes to be Pope, and e∣uerie such Bishoppe a Cardinall at least, iustifying that saying, Nemo sua sorte contentus. Therefore it behoues all Cardinalles and such Bishoppes to laye to their hel∣ping handes in time, eare they with the Popedome come all tumbling downe at once: And so they doe (say our Papistes) and though Pope Sirtus be dead, and so one of the Leagues heades be cut off, yet the Hydra neuer wanteth another to spring vppe in the place: And so it is most true, Pope Sixtus the fift is dead euen in the fifte yeare of his raygue, of whose death there goeth some doubt, some say that her Holinesse was poysoned, others that she dyed euen of very griefe that her mishapen Elfe had no better successe in his enterprise, eyther of these apinions beare shewe of trueth, and it may be thought for most certaine, that one of these two causes was her death: but sure, it is the Lordes dooing howe so euer it be, for he can vse what meane hée thinketh best, when
he thinketh good to remooue so cruell a scourge from his Church, we are not to hope for any much better but a worse can not come out of Hell it selfe. Some say this newe Pope goeth about to bring foorth a newe League, others no, but that he will cure, refresh and patch againe together the olde League: hoping that du Mayne and the Duke de Parma, will supply more amply the place of the olde Leagues lest arme, both together, then the Duke of Guyze did alone: Once, old holde and kéepe there is and they that liue on the spoyle, crye out for a newn League out of hande, or that the olde may be repayred with all expedition: the Cloysterers with the whole rab∣ble of the Romish Clergie doubt greatly least long delaye might bréede great daunger, and therefore these people prick the matter forward with no lesse haste thē their néed requireth spéede: but euery principall member of the olde League, finde themselues at this instant so tyerde, that they desire more a little present rest, then a great hope of much ease hereafter. How so euer the matter falleth out, whether there bee a new League made or the olde renewed, let not the childe of God dispayre or doubt, God is still one and the same: no newe League can be made stronger, neyther the olde be renewed and made of greater force than the former: but could it be made a hundred times stronger, it is all one with God to ouercome with a great or small number the greatest hoast that euer was. Reioyce therefore O Sion for thy Redéemer liueth, and he that kéepeth Israell doeth neyther slumber nor sléepe. Let the vniuersall Church be ioyfull and sing prayses with one consent, for Babell is falling, & the mighty Giant that lately defyed heauen is o∣uerthrowen on earth, his bowe is broken and his speare snapt a sunder, his ioints are become féeble, & the whole bo∣die altogether out of temper: the Prince of glorie hath done it and the Lorde of Hoastes hath heard our prayers: the righteous God hath reuenged our wronges on the prow∣dest of our foes, and declared to all the worlde how déere
the bloud of his Saintes is alwayes in his sight. And as he hath ouerthrowen the first, so let vs not doubt but he will doe the next. Blessed be his name for euer, and let all them that loue the peace of Ierusalem say Amen.
. . . . VVIde ope thine eyes. O mighty king, at lēgth begin to see, How heauens, how earth, do threat reuenge vnto thy realm & thee Take pitty then on thee and thine, while mercy may be found: Before Iehouahs wrathfull face, fall flatte vnto the ground, Repent, returne, confesse and cry, for mercy at his hand. Whose members here on earth by thee, lye scattered on the land. Whose bloud, though scorcht on cruell flame, and shed by dint of sword: Appeareth fresh before his face, that is both King and Lord: Of thee and all the earth besides, for he hath made it all: He doth exalt the meeke in hart, the proud he maketh thrall: His eyes sees all and he doth heare, the poore that are opprest, And eke the bloud that cries reuenge, and cals to be redrest. Iulian the em∣perour who of set purpose did striue a∣gainst Christ, and therefore greuously af∣flicted the Church, at lēgth he find∣ing himself o∣uercome, hee threw dust in∣to the aire, & cryed, calling Christ Gallile∣an, thou Gal∣lilean hast pre∣uailed. If still thou striue with him that stroue, (yet al against the streame) Oercome with him, at length with him, thou also must proclaime. Thou Galilean hast preuailde, for sure he will preuaile, Gainst all that dare resist his power, or least of his assaile. It is not thou, thy nature milde, is turnde to bitter gall. By them that rule (nay ouerrule) thy selfe, thy realme and all, With Pharaos witches they bewitch, thy sences (mighty king) If still thou list to what they say, those witches will thee bring To fall with Pharao and his hoast, who warning none would take. Thy warnings are no lesse then his, God grant they may thee make, Thy heauy hand to draw a backe, from all such silly soules. That fly for feare of Tirants thine and hide themselues in holes. Forst leaue their lands and natiue soile, with infants young & poore, To saue theyr throats & flesh from flame, they leese their goods & store: Retaine remorce (if ought be left) els seeke the same to haue. Relent to shed such store of bloud, which stil reuenge doth craue: It is not thou (as erst I sayd) thy witches worke our woe: Thy Inquisition works thy wracke, and thou wilt finde it soe, They gape for bloud and wait for bloud, (yet all in hope of gaine) The Inquisiti∣on hath the third part of euery man or womās goods whom they condemne, & the king the rest, which makes the king as wil∣ling to suffer it, ast he blou∣dy Inquisitors are ready to comdemn mē, for their pro∣fite, to the fire or llies. Goods to consiscate to theyr vse, their, credite to maintaine. They care not whome they racke or burne, so they may profite haue, So they may liue in wealth and pompe, what skils who go to graue, Or els to gallyes or to fire, their care is none at all. They spare no sex nor age a lot, they nip both great and small. Few nations of our Europe but, within thy Gallies rowes, With store of stripes and iron chaines, of food smal store God knowes, Saue onely bread and water thin, poore soules they haue no more, Within that Hell terestriall, theyr bodies euer sore. With stripes on naked flesh and bone, by tirants wretched hands, Whilst that they row both day and night, fast lockt in iron bands, Whereas the Turke more frendship findes, then christiā poore distrest, Of earthly aid and humane helpe, by torments still opprest. There English men free borne and vnacquainted to be thrall, In time of trade, lees trade and goods, yea liberty and all.
For no cause els but that by chaunce, If an English restament or any booke of praier should be found in a shippe, the whole com∣pany with ship & goods must fall into theyr bloudy hands, as wel as he that is owner of any such booke. It is a wonder to see how without al¦pitty those cowards de∣lite in ormē¦ting pore chri¦stians that lye fast bounde in chayns and howe they brag of theyr manhod in so doyng, as though they were conque∣rors, but were some of them loose, that they so beate they woulde as soone bee bägd as once looke them in the face. some booke there may be found, Abord some ship of holy write, or other doctrine sound. For that offence (if so offence it well may termed bee) Both ship and goods and all the rest, must pay as well as hee. That is the owner of the booke, he may not pay alone. He and his goods may not suffice, their harts more hard then stone, For all must to the holy House, the best must needs be slaues. Their goods all lost and freedome to, were better in their graues, And their thy cruel bloudy roags, that dare not strike a dog, (That goeth loose and standeth free from iron chaine and clog) Lay load vpon our countrey men all naked and in bands, Sometime with ropes that smart full sore, sometime with hazel wāds And then they rule and dominier, like Princes for the time, They iet and looke as big perdy, as Bul beefe in the prime. Triumphing ouer christian flesh, like lion on his pray: Their lust is law and what they do, there's none that saieth nay. Their pizels of their buls doe walke, more worse then cut of sworde, And saunce remorce they still lay on, with many a bitter word. As rascall, dog, and many such, no christian tongue would vtter: Against the image of our God, that may ne moue nor mutter. But heare and beare all what doth fall, from tirants tongue & arme. If any speake, they soone prouide, to stop his speech a charme. They hale his tongue out of his mouth, and take a clouen sticke. Twixt which they binde the tender tongue, (a cruell hellish tricke) For so they make him row and hale, enduring thirst and paine, In torments drawing forth his lise, that dead would be ful faine. The moisture of his mouth in ropes, hangs downe on fainting brest, His son-tand hide not free the while, but still with strokes opprest. His sweat and tears stil trickling downe, with drops of bloud among, Doth seeme to plead forpitty and, release of open wrong, But no release nor yet remorce, but rather bitter skornes, Poore soules they sinde in steede of ease, nought els but pricking thorns Then at the length when as thee see, the silly soule to sinke: And faint in thirst and sorrow such, as greeueth me to thinke. They eftsoones free his fettered tongue, so swollen with the paine: That scarce the mouth with much a doe, receaues the same againe. This is the food, this is the fare, and lodging like the rest Or foode and raiment haue our men, that are to Gallies prest. The Holy house (vnholy rather) a house of vgly sinne, The Gallies next, both earthly Hels, to such as enter in, I thinke their peeres or els their likes, are no where to be found, VVithin our Europe (well I know) nor searce aboue the ground. Nor yet in Hell, because that there, the wicked men alone, And such ne feare ne know the Lorde, in torments make their mone, But in those Spanish Hels the good, and bad endure like woe, Homicides, roges, theeues and Turkes, with good are plagued so:
There good and bad do sinart alike, small choise is made of either, They lay on still on euery side, and strike they care not whether. And in the holy house the good, are still tormented more. Then Sodomits, or he that hath, three wiues at once in store, They preferre Sodomites & dogs before vs, such is the charity of the holliest place in all Spayne, as themselues say, what then te charity of al the rest of Spain may be  refer me to your iudge∣ment. For these are things that do belong, to Iudgement of that place. As well as our religion (though not in such disgrace) For why, the filthy Sodomite, and vildest wretch that is. Before vs far they do prefer, and yet more worse then this. They terme vs dogs, yea them prefer, before the best of vs, Few men would thinke (who know it not) that we are vsed thus. But thus and worse, yea far more worse, then I can write or say. They vs torment with torments such, as doth vs dayly slay. The feare and griefe of which doth make, full many a man confesse, The word or deede he neuer did, or hardly thought much lesse, But once confesse, they haue their wils, and may do what they please, Our sobs, their smiles, our grief their gain, our torments are their ease These things agree not with thy kinde, (O king) they are to base. For son of mightie Charles that, did last possesse thy place, He wold not so haue gotten golde, nor made of bloud a gaine. Nor rakte vp treasure to himselfe, so much to good mens paine. He would haue suffered such abuse, if he had liued long Nor yet permitted Baals priests; to do such open wrong, He would haue warred on the Turks; and made the More to bow: And not imbroode in christian blood his hands, as thou doest now: what erst was won perforce from Turke, again thou hast it lost. That which Charles and others won & kept in Bar∣bary from the Turke, thys king hath lost through the great desire he hath to make wars in chri∣stendome. Still warring where thou shouldest aide, and that with inickle cost. And sith that God hath seated thee, to weare his crown in Spaine. To yeelde accompt to God of this, thou surely shalt be faine. For what thy tirants do, thou doest, sith thou doest giue them leaue, And if thou looke not well in time, they also will bereaue, Thee of thy earthly crowne and rule, for that they bring in hate. To all the world both thee and thine, with all thy roiall state. For all who erst haue wronged beene, & such whose friends had wrōg. Do call reuenge and threat reuenge, with hope ere it be long. (If thou do not relent in time) for to performe it so, That thou with them and they with thee, will find it to your woe. Tis vaine to trust too much in golde, or Indias siluer mines, Or els to friends that are but friends, so long as Fortune shines. And seemes to lull thee in her lap, but bend shee once her brow. Thy friends are gone ere thou beware, or scarsely knowest how, For friendship forst doth wauer still, and waiteth but a time, For to reuolt, though biding yet, till things grow more in prime. All are not friends that are thy thrall, perforce gainst right and will. VVhat shew soeuer they do make, their hate remaineth still. And still doe hope but for a day, to set their shoulders free. From seruile yoke and tirants fell, appointed so by thee.
To rule and raigne and bear a sway, to murther and to sposle, Such as are vnder thy hard hand, in any forraine soile: Sure God the righter of all wronges, doth limit time and age. How long all tirants shall remaine, and rule in bloudy rage, VVhich time and age no man shall passe, no, not a moment small. But at the time that God appoints, King Charles the last of: that name, that consen∣ed to the mas¦sacre, died bleeding at the nose, eyes, mouth, and al other vents in the body. The last king, and brother to Charles, being young, was by the Guises pro∣eurement, a chiefe actor in the massas cre, with D. of Guises, was the first that altered his na ture to make him take ple∣sare in the ef∣fusion of bloud, and therefore by the iust indge ment of God he caused the Guise to be murthered, so so daynly, that he had no time to repēt. perforce they perish all. Let Charles of France, be in thy minde, who did but yeelde consent Vnto that slaughter in his Realme, whereof he did repent, Yet by his death the Lord would shew, his wrath in some degree. His vents all bleeding till his corps, of life and bloud was free. But the cheefe authors of the fact, though yet they liued long, In time receaude their due desert, and recompence of wrong. First, Guyes that great bloud thirsty beast, and auctor of that ill: Which neuer seemde to be suffisde, or haue of bloud his fill. The Lord appointed at the length, when now his sin was ripe, And growen vp vnto the full,, that he should haue his stripe, By his appointment, whome he taught and first inuerd to bloud, He of himselfe not being so, his nature was more good, For by the Guyse he was induste, to do what so he did, And was partaker of his sinne, that els would not haue slidde. Therefore the Lord appointed so, within his secret deeme, That he alone should be the man, to send him to his toome. Without regard of friendship past, the Guyse doth seeke his death, The king it knowes which to pruent, he stops the Guyses breath, So makes him wallow in his geare, that erst had shed so much Of other mens without remorce, and now his death is such. Euen like the man that taught his crow, to eat and pull out eyes, Of Lambes and other simple beasts, her huuger to suffice, The Crow inured still thereto, ere that the man it wiste, Shee pluckt an eie out of his head, while sitting on his fifte. Such are the iudgements of our God, and so he brings about, The scholler in such vgly sinne, doth roote the maister out. But Iustice yet not fully done, though king repent the deede, The Lord will surely be reuengde, and make all such to bleede, As shed the bloud of Innocents, and do his saints such harme. His power is naught at all abridgd, ne shortened is his arme, And who hath he resernde in store to touch the Lords annoine: Noate. To dare lay hands vppon the king, to ioypard such a ioynt. Euen they aduanced by him most, and whom he loued best, And of all the other hypocrites, prefer before the rest, The Iacobins, euen those the Lord appointed for the fact, To lay their hands vppon the king, The Iacobins are an order of vers, whom the king moste preserred. they did that bloudy act. O depth vnsercht and secrets such, as neuer may be knowen, By humane wit, till thou (O Lord) vouchsafe to haue it showen, In time, decreede by thy selfe, then all the world shall see. Thy holy Iudgements what they are, and what thy counsails bee.
But what, shall that vngrations house, that durst to be so bold, To lay their hands vpon their King, escape so vncontrold? No sure, I know they all shall rue, that vile and cursed deed, Ere it be long, as they deserue, I hope to see them speed: As of the rest none haue escapte, that were the chiefe of al, In the massacre done in France, vpon both great and smal: So sure the rods that whipped them, at length must into sire, They were but great Iehouahs whips, I meane the cursed frire With all his crue that did consent, vnto King Henries death, Agreeing so amongst themselues, as beasts deuoyd of faith. Bethinke thee well (O King) of this, and trie where thou be cleere, And innocent of such offence, as is rehearsed heere. Flying fame doth say, if she say true, that Orange Prince was slaine By thee alone, sith thou alone, didst promise largely gaine, To him that should commit the fact, which, gaine did bring to passe: A Spaniard tooke the same in hand, most like a wilfull Asse, And did performe it villanously, who after had his hire, Not of thy gold, but cruell death, as iustice did require. Fame saith more, that thou art stainde, in death of proper sonne: Thinke sure to yeelde accompt of all, what euer thou hast done: For many things are bruted more, which I dare not reporte, The Lord doth knowe them euery one, both where, and in what sorte, And where thou shouldest aide such kings, whose subiects do rebell, How thou it dost, this Realme and France, may witnes very well: Whose subiects neuer woulde haue sturde, but by thy prosserd aide, Of men and money in their need, which makes them not afraide Of God, nor Prince, nor of the Law, that bids vs all obay Our Prince appointed by the Lord, the scepter for to sway, But daily rise, and doe rebell, and all on hope of thee, Against their Prince protect by God, that doth thy shifting see, And will reward thee for the same, be sure, some way or other, What is deferd, is not forgote, nor yet forgiuen neither. What doest thou else, in doing thus, then teach thy subiects plaine. How to rebell against thy selfe, and driue thee out of Spaine. What measure that thou meat, saith Christ, look for the same again: It doth but blot thy fame, O King, and bring thy name in hate: Both thou and thine are nowe abhorde, in euery ciuill state, Saue mongst the Papists of this Realme, and rebels vp in France, They onely loue thee for thy golde, on hope thou wilt aduance, And them preferre to high estate, when thou hast conquerd all: They knowe thy purpose and thy drift, and so obey thy call. But if thou still proceede in that, wherein thou art begunne, And go on still to weaue the webbe, that hypocrites hauespunne. Then marke the end, nay feare the end, yea feare thy finall fall, Not onely vnto thee and thine, but to thy Realines and all. Thy wealth doth make thee cleane forget, both God, & what thou art.
As did that mighty Babell king, till that he felt the smarte, Of feeding in the fields with beasts, and felt the clowdy raine Distill, vpon his vnclad backe, with other bitter paine: Then in his griefe he knew the Lord, that would not in his wealth So sure thy gold doth blind thine eies, from seeking of thy health At his good hands that giues thee gold, and makes thee so abound In treasure, more then any prince, that liueth on the ground: But to an other vse then yet, thou doest the same bestow, He giues thee golde that erst was hid within the earth below: For thou employest it to molest, none but the Christian poore: While crauing truce with cruel Turk, to scourge our Chr. ye more, Thou leav'st the Turk to liue at ease, & laugh at christian harms, While he fits frce, poore Europe is, by thee al vp in armes: By thee (O King) and by the Pope, that man and childe of sin, Which addeth oyle vnto the flame, yea poureth store therein: Nay, he is all in all we knowe, and makes thee but his meane, To mowe and cut the haruest downe, that he againe may gleane, And gather all the croppe himselfe, and laugh thee but to scorne, When thou hast spent thy wealth & sweat, and he possest the corne. Looke well in time, for this is true, withdraw thy hand abacke Before it be too late, and so, thou wholy go to wracke: For Europe longer will not beare the loade thou layest on, Nor yet abide such torments as, thou layest thy thralles vpon. All christian princes smell thy drifts, and see thy haught aspire, Thy *vbi{que} These are the vaine and prowd posies of the king of Spaine. regnabo and the rest, thou prowdly doest require, Thy *non sufficit orbis, which bewrays whereto thy hart is bente when notwithstanding at the length, thy feeble corps once pent And close shut vp in compas of six foote, or thereabout, That little straight must thee suffice, saus any sally out, Till when the trumpet shrill thee warne, with euery other wight, To rise, to go, to giue accompt, before that Iudges sight, Which onely iudgeth iustly still, and will reward eachone According to his faith and fruits: for Christ is Iudge alone, That knows the secrets of al harts, The fruites of faith are the good workes which pro∣ceede from saith. & what our works haue beene, Then good, shall good reward receiue, and wicked suffer teene. Gold then and drosse of like accompt, then scepter beareth sway No more then Shepheards crabtree crooke, in that great dreadful day, Thy India mines, wherewith (as now) thou vnderminest all, And dayly dost subuert the state, of christian Kings withall, Will be of none effect (as then) where Iudge is vncorrupt, And that he should not iustly iudge, who dares him interrupt: There is no power but onely his, all flesh shall quaking stand, Then King and beggar both alike, The Licences that the pope felles to finne,  not the fits to his chests, for there is no sin so hainous but eyther a man may be a licence to commit it, or a pardon for the same after it is commit∣ted: and it is not to be dou∣ted but that the king of Spaine payde well for his licence, for his last ince∣stuous mar∣riage. Not onely his friendes de∣cay, but his wealth wastes like buttar a∣gainst the sun, by paying pensions to traitors, and buying that for money of corrupt cap∣taines which he dares not attempt to winne by va∣lour and man∣hoode, for his conquests consist more in coyne then in steele: and parte of his Fleete that were wont to go home safe∣ly, fall nowe and then ey∣ther to the bottome, or into their hands that spend it as me rily as he would em∣ploy it mer∣rily. must holde vp guiltie hand. Then Pope that pardons others now, and licence selles to sin, Shall pardon seeke, but none shall finde, nor be admitted in The golden gates of Sion sweet, whereof to haue the keies
The caytife brags and boasts abroad, as lord of land and seas To haue supreame authoutie, of heauen gates and hell, And whom he lists in either place, to put for aye to dwell. O beast, aie kicking gainst the pricke, how long wilt thou prouoke Our good long-patient righteous God, that iustly might thee choke, And stop thy most blasphemous throat, with vengeance in his ire, yet still forbeares and lets thee liue, to worke thy whole desire, Vpon his church and saints on earth, till that thy time be full: And then his wrath, yea all at once, shall light vpon thy scull. Then shall those kings and mighty men, whom thou bewitchest so, Prouoking them to be thy whippes, aye working Christians woe: Euen they shall hate thee in extreame, whom now they loue so much, And eate thy flesh (thou filthy whoore) their hatred will be such: And all the nations of the earth, shall wonder at thy fall, And at the mighty Citty who so swayeth ouer all: For both at once, both it and thou, shall quite be ouerthrowen, In that same houre, which to the Lord, as yet is onely knowen: Then shall the church of Christ reioyce, and crie with perfect ioy, The City and hir Queene are fallen, that wrought vs such annoy, Yea sure the time is hard at hand, one king alone remains For to vpholde thy waining state, vnto his cost and paines: And he was neuer seene so weake, his friends still sliding backe, Maintaine him well, for he once gone, then comes thy totall wracke, Who knowes howe soone he may be gone? or whether that the Lord Vouchsafe him mercy at the length, and so of selfe accorde Reiect thee quite, and hate thee more, then euer lou'd before: The Lord, be sure (if so he please) can do a great deale more. Thy kingdome whilom seated was, on many more then hee, When greatest part of Christendome, paid tribute vnto thee, Now Spaine alone is all thy prop, forsakde of other Kings, And he alone doth grone to beare, himselfe such heauy things, As made so many stoupe before, must needs now make him bend, As weary to support thy waight, or longer thee defend, The time, no doubt, draws on apace, that all thy pomp must end. Meane while bethinke thee (king of Spaine) & shake thy burden off, Ere vnder loade thou lie adowne, and so remaine a scoffe To all the world, because forwarnde, thou hast vin sundry times, Both of the burden and the man, wyth all his filthy crimes. Thou art not wiser then the rest, of all our Europe kings, That so do hate the shamelesse whore, that naught but horror brings To all the earth as well is seene, by bloud so dayly shead, And by the wars which for his sake, ore Christendome is spread. If thou continue him to aide, with him thou needs must fall: For prince and people that him serue, with him must perish all: Els should the Scripture be vntrue, which neuer man shall proue, For heauen and earth shal passe away, with starres and things aboue,
But not a lot or any word of Scripture, shall so passe, But still remaine in perfect force, as strong as euer it was. God graunt thee grace as he hath done, already to the rest, Of Europe Kings that now do liue, by great Iehouah blest: Who blesse thee too, and turne thy heart, that thou maist make vp one And so be numbred with the best, and leaue the Pope alone: Whose portion shall be with the dogges, and hypocrites without, That haue their pleasures in this world, and liue sans feare & doubt. Blesse still, good Lord, our Queene, & Realme, & grant thy seruant long Ore vs to raigne within this Realme, protect hir from all wrong, Of Pope and other bloodie foes, that seeke hir bloud to spill: Confound them all that so conspire, and barre them of their will. Forget not *Henry sore opprest, The French King. by subiects fell vnkinde: Euen as thou hast annointed him, so haue him still in minde: The great fat bulles of Basan still, do compasse him about: They neuer cease him to pursue, and all to roote him out, From thence, where thou hast placed him, a King by thee to raigne: Subdue their rage, and let him rule, to their despite and paine: Let neuer flesh presume to striue, against thy mightie will: But let them fall amidst their pride, and be confounded still: Least fleshe in pride do boast abroad, and say, who is the Lord, Who is the God on whom they rest? wher is his mighty sword? That sometimes slew, such as withstood, king Dauid and the rest, Of Israels kings. So let them die, that hate, whom thou hast blest. Thou hast good Lord appointed him, in Fraunce to rule by thee. Let noue resist thy will good God, and from thy wrath go free, Let Parina with his Spanish rout, that so the king molest. Feele all thy heauy wrath on him, with his and all the rest. That so rebell against their king, let none escape thy hand. But let them be before the winde, as chaff vppon the lanb. And let the king rule still in peace, in spite of whom sayes nay. Lord heare thy Church in time of neede, turne not thy face away. FINIS.
