1522A 20181335 23716
A petition directed to her most excellent Maiestie, wherein is deliuered 1 A meane howe to compound the ciuill dis∣sention in the church of England. 2 A proofe that they who write for Reformati∣on, do not offend against the stat. of 23. Eliz. c. 2. and therefore till matters be compoun∣ded, deserue more fauour. Open thy mouth for the dumbe in the causes of the children appointed to death, PROV. 31. 8. I beleeued and therefore haue I answered, For SIONS sake I will not ceasse, and for IERVSALEMS sake I will not holde my tong, ESA. 62. 1. Herevnto is annexed: Some opinions of such as sue for Reformation: By vvhich is made appeare hovve vniustlie they are slaundered by the Bishops, &c. pag, 53. Together vvith the Authours Epistle to the Reader, pag. 58. Also: Certeyne Articles wherein is discouered the negligence of the Bishoppes, their Officialls, Fauourers and Follovvers, in performance of sundrie Ecclesiasticall Statutes Lawes and Ordinances Royall and Episcopall, published for the gouernement of the Church of England, pag. 60. Lastlie: Certeyne Questions or Interrogatories dravven by a fauourer of Reformation, vvhich he desireth to be resolued by the Prelates, pag. 74.
To the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, Elizab. by the grace of God, Queene of Englande, France, and Ireland, supreme go∣uernesse in all causes and ouer all persons within her Maiesties Realmes and Dominions. CRauing vppon my knees pardon for my boldnes, I beseech your most excellēt maiesty, to heare me a little. All your Highnes subiects that loue the re∣ligion, honour your maiesty, and desire the good of the Realme, doe hartily bewaile the bitter contentiō about the questions of reforming the Church. Many seeke to increase this contention. Some labour to appease it: but this will neuer bee till the trueth in these mat∣ters be assured in the hearts of both parties. I doe not nowe write eyther to pull downe Bishoprickes, or erect presbiteries. With whom the trueth is, I will not de∣termine. For I knowe not. What seemeth most probable and true to me that I knowe. Howe trueth should come to light, that is the question. Writing of bookes in such manner as is nowe vsed, is end∣lesse: wearinesse to the fleshe: matter of further contention, by reason of impertinent and personall discourses. The troubles of Churches, and enmitie of Princes, wil not admit a generall Councell. A free Nationall or Prouinciall Councell at home, were much to be wished, so that the Bb. and their followers did not ouerrule the rest. For it is against religion, law and reason, that the same men should be both iudges and parties. Or if this be not thought so conuenient, There is a way deuised and much commended by lear∣ned men, as a notable meane to compounde controuersies, namely priuate conferences by aduised writing, not extem∣porall speaking, the question agreed of. The arguments, th answeres, replies, and reioinders set downe, till both parties had fully said, all by-matters laid aside. In fine the whole to be published, that your maiesty, the honourable Councel∣lours and Parliament may iudge thereof, that those thinges
which on eyther part are founde faultie, may be redressed. That all thinges be not so cleare with the Bb. but that fur∣ther conference, triall, and reformation is requisite, appea∣reth. 1 By the lawes established, which expect a better and fur∣ther reformation in Church-causes. 2 By the writings of our Diuines in the common cause against the papistes. 3 By the confession of the Bb. them selues, and such a write in their defence. 4 By their suspicious and doubtfull handling of the mat∣ters in question. 5 By the testimony of learned men, and christian Chur∣ches who seeme to speake against the gouernment by Bb. and for the gouernement by assisting Elders. 1 The lawes expect a further reformation of the Church. Your Maiesties most noble Father vnderstanding that the lawes Ecclesiasticall of this lande were corrupt, prouided by 25. H. 8. ca. 19. Parliament, that 32. persons should peruse and correct them: gathering into one booke those that were good, which by his Royall assent should haue the strength of lawe, E . ca 11. . all o∣ther Ecclesiasticall lawes to be abandoned out of this Church for euer. Maister D. Cranmer and other reuerend men were delega∣ted to this purpose. They collected into one booke many good thinges (as they thought) touchingpag. 29. Aduouson of benefi∣ces, pag. 80. Excommunication for small matters,pag. 57. Residence of Vniuersitie men vpon their benefices,pag. 20. Mariages without consent of parentes, pag. 22. Nursing of children by their owne mother,pag. 27. Diuorces for infirmitie of body,pag. 31. Pluralities,pag. 43. Broken Musicke in Cathedrall Churches, pag. 47. Deacons, The solemnitie ofpag. 81. Excōmunication, and absoution with the assent of the people, and many other things which are directly contrary to the practise and orders of the moderne Bishops. But this booke wanteth the Kinges confirmation, and the lawes Ecclesiasticall remaine in the same corruption as your Maiesties Father left them, notwithstanding the labours of those Reuerend personages and the act of Parliament, which was1. Eli. 2. c. . reuiued and confirmed in the beginning of your High∣nes most happy reigne.
2 Also in the booke of common prayer, which was sette 5 & 6.  forth by your Maiesties brother, &1. Eliz. c. 2. accepted by your high∣nes, there is prescribed a Commination to bee vsed at a certaine time in the yeare: not to continue euer, but till an order of Dis∣cipline practised in she primitiue Church bee restored, which were greatly to bee wished, as the authours of that booke doe saie. Yet this Commination stādeth, and the Discipline there men∣tioned, is yet wanting. 3 The booke of ordering MinistersBke of or∣dering Mini∣sters. confirmed by lawe, presumeth that euery Minister should be a Preacher. For at the Ordination, the Bishop sayeth: Take thou authority to preach the word of God. Yet where the Bb. ordeine one Minister that can preach, they make twenty that can not. 4 astly, it is enacted, That all ornaments of the Church and Ministers thereof (such as are Surples, Coapes, &c.) shall be retained and be in vse as was appointed by King Edward the 6. not for vnchangeable continuaunce, but vntill other order were ta∣ken by your Maiestie, and your Highnes Ecclesiasticall Commissi∣oners. 2 The Defenders of our common cause expect a further Reformation. Those thinges (in effect) be acknowledged by some of our chiefe defendours of religion against the papistes. For vvhen they obiect That we are glad to borrowe their ceremonies, & to haue an apish imitation of their Mase booke, answere is returned, That diuers abuses in Ceremonies and Discipline were tollerated among vs, our Church therein yeelding to the infirmitie of the weaker sorte, which were to be altered, when people grewe to ryper knowledge. 3 The Defenders of the state of Bb. expect further Reformation. 1 Al the Bishops in theirCaon. dis. pag 0. Canons do confesse, that Non-residencie is a filthie thing, odous to men, & pernicious to the church, yet what is more common? 2 By the lawes of England, in the ordination of Bb.The Bb sould aswell vse pa∣storall staue. the Archbishop should lay the Bible vpon the Bishops neck that is to be ordeined, and put a pastorall staffe into his hande. If
the Archbishops did not esteeme these as vaine ceremonies, they would vrge them with as great vehemency vpon Bb. as they doe Surplesses vpon ministers. 3 My L. of pag. 679. Canterb: in his booke against Maister Cartw. sayeth, That Chauncellours who are not Ministers, should not excommunicate. The authours of the Remonstrance, and Disputat. Mat. . pag. 83. Matthewe Stcliffes bookes, defenders of the Hierarchie by writing thinke it a most vnmeete thing, that such as bee no ministers of the worde, should meddle with the keies of the Church, yet the contrary is daily vsed. 4 The Bishop of LondonAdmoni ag.  pag. 53 1. eds. confesseth, That he made his Porter minister, and the other Bb. doe acknowledge,Ibid pa. 99. That manie lewde and vnlearned ministers haue beene made of late in En∣glande, which they will not seeme to defende. Besides they say,Ibi pa. 139. Wee haue yet but a tollerable manner of reformation: all which doe e∣uince a further reformation. 5 D. Cosins, one of the high Commissioners writeth, That the punishment of Adulterie is to milde.Puniment of Adulerie. 6 A learned man and friend of the Bb. noteth as abuses, Their vrging of Subscription, Their oth ex officio, Their excom∣munication for trifles, and easie silencing of ministers. 4 The suspicious and doubtfull handling of the controuersed matters, imployeth some neede of reformation and conference. 1 My L. of Cant. speaking of the maine controuersie tou∣ching gouernement By Seni. or Elders, sayeth, That hee knoweth that the primitiue Church had in euery Church certaine Seniors, to whome the gouernement of the Congregation was com∣mitted. In a booke against the Marprelate subscribed (as I haue heard) by the Archb. of Cant. the Bb. of Winch. Linc. & London, it is affirmed, that the gouernement by Elders was v∣sed vnder the Lawe, andIbid p. 135. practised vnder the Gospell by the A∣postles, though not fit for our times. But repenting this plaine confession, they haue caused certaine wordes importing the contrarie, to be printed vpon a shred of paper, which paper was pasted in all the bookes of the first impression, to couer & conceale their former assertion. 2 The Remonstrance comming after, holdeth, there vvas neuer any gouernement by Elders in the Church, but yeel∣deth,
that if the. pag. 166. Eldership begun in the Lawe and continued in the Gospell, that then it shoulde stande to the worldes ende. For somuchpag. 9. as is prescribed in the new lawe, no prescription ought to bee made a∣gainst it. Vpon which crosse assertions laide one vppon another, the aduerse partie may presse out the conclusion of all the con∣trouersie. If the Eldership begun in the Lawe,. and continued in the Gospell, then no prescription may be made against it, but it shoulde stande for euer. So saith the Remonst. But the Eldership begun in the Law and continued in the Gospell. So say the Bb. Therefore no prescription may be made against the Elder∣ship, but it shoulde stande for euer. 3 But one Matthewe Sutcliffe comming after these, con∣trolleth both: for he protesteth there was neuer anie gouern∣ment by Elders vnder the Gospell, or if there were, yet the gouernement vsed by the Apost, is changeable, not of ne∣cessitie to bee continued. Not content herein to make the rent of our Church deeper then euer it was, hee hath openlie in latine defaced forreine Churches (of whom D. Whitgift and other haue alwayes written honorably) that wee might not onely be at warre within our selues, but with straungers also. Whereby it is likely there will arise as daungerous trou∣ble to the Churches about Discipline, as hath growen by the question of Consubstantiation, to the great offence of the common aduersarie, and generall disquiet of all Christen∣dome. Touching the state of Bb. diuers who nowe most egerly defende▪ when they were nearest to God, that is, in miserie & anguishe of soule, did speake against it: but afterwarde incli∣ning to the worlde, with their conditions they altered their o∣pinions. 1 Maister Elmar, nowe Bishop of London, writeth thus, Christ sayeth Luc. 1. 2. Who made me a Iudge betweene you? As though hee woulde saie, It belongeth not to my office to determine matters of pollicie and inheritance, that belongeth to the ciuill Ma∣gistrate. If hee had thought it had beene within the compasse of his function, why and with what conscience refused bee to set them at one, who were at strife, and to put that out of doubt, which was in sute? If hee might doe it and woulde not, hee lacked charitie and
did not his duetie. If it belonged not to him, howe belonged it to a∣nie of his Disciples or successours? Had not bee as large a commis∣son as he gaue? Or coulde bee giue that he had not? But hee know∣ing his office as the Prophete Esay had foretolde, to preach the , and woulde doe nothing without warrant. And therefore be∣ing asked if hee were a King, answered siplie and by a plaine ne∣gatiue, My kigdome is not of this worlde. If his kingdome were not here, neither the ordering of pollicies, &c. Yea when they woulde haue taken him vp to haue made him a King, as one that refused that belonged not to him, hee conueyed him-selfe from amonge them. If Imperiall iurisdiction belonged to him, why refused hee his cal∣ling? If it did not, where had Paul or any other, anie authoritie to meddle with that which hee refused? Seeing hee sayeth: As my Father sent mee, so sende I you. In another place, Christ knowinge the bondes of his calling, woulde not medle with externe pollicie, &c. Diuines methinkes by this example shoulde not giue them-selues too much the bridle, and too large a scope to meddle too farre with mat∣ters of pollicie. If these two offices, I meane ecclesiasticall and ci∣uill bee so umbled in both functions, there can bee no quiet or well or∣dered common wealth. And againe, Princes of the Nations doe heare rule like Lords, it shall not bee so with you. It falleth not into an Apostles or Church-mans office to meddle with such matters. For none going to warre, intangleth him selfe with the affaires of this life: it is enough for them to waite vpon one office, to attende as sole priestes, not as errant Baylliffes. And elswhere: Come off yee Bishops, away with your superfluities, yeelde vp your thousandes, bee content with hundreds, as they bee in other reformed Churches, where there be as great learned men as you are. Let your portion bee priestlike and not Princelike. Let the Queene haue the rest of your temporalities, to mainetaine warres, and to builde schooles throughout the Realme, that euerie parishe Church may haue his Preacher, euery Citie hir Superintendent to liue not pompeouslie. Which will neuer bee, vnless your landes bee dispersed and bestowed vpon manie, which nowe feede and fat but one. Remember that A∣bnelech, when Dauid in his banishment woulde haue dined with him kept such hospitalitie,1. Sam. 21. that hee had no breade to giue him, but the Shewbead. Where was all his superfluitie to keepe your pre∣tended hospitalitie? For that is the cause that you alleadge you must haue thousandes, as though you were commanded to keepe hospitali∣tie rather with a thousande, then with an hundred. This booke was written in defence of the lawefull regi∣ment
of women, but now the authour laboureth to suppresse this booke, tenderinge more the state of the b. then the Queenes Crowne. 2 Maister Bullingham before hee was Bishop,. being arri∣ued at Embden, after many stormes, wrote vnto a godly man in this manner: Would God, Master Bull, that all the Prelates in Englande had beene with mee when wee fell to cutting off Cables, re∣ding at anchor in the raging seas, There woulde haue beene tea∣ring of square cappes, renting of Rochets, defyig of Bshoprickes, despising of pompe, promising a newe life, cring for mercy. O what a tragedie woulde there haue beene! VVell, well, though nowe they walke dre shoode in their pallaces, there is a God that will trie them and all his people by fire or by water, vnlesse wee hartilie repent. Grace to repent▪ graunt vs, O Lorde, without delae, Amen, Amen. 3 D. Bridges before he intangled himselfe with the Disci∣plinarie controuersies,D. Bridges . writing against the papists, vseth these woordes: Christ hath put such a barre betweene Bb. and Princes, that his spirituall Bb. cannot haue earthly kingdomes. And againe, where the papists helde that the Pope was not properlie but vnproperly a orde: to take awaye this, he addeth: Christ sim∣ply debarreth all his spirituall Ministers from ruling of temporall kingdomes. Christ hath both properly and vnproperly debarred them. Vos autem non sic, You shall not doe so. These wordes strike deade Maister Sanders. Further, whereas the papists ac∣count Aerius and al Protestants heretikes,D▪ Bridges  because they holde that by Gods booke A Bishop and a Priest are all one,Of the Princ. Supre: pag 359. D. Brid∣ges doeth therein iustifie Aerius and the Protestantes out of Hierome, Peter Lambarde, Durand, and the Institution of Collen. But sithens that time, writing in defence of Bishops, he main∣teyneth theirDefence of gouernment pag. 48. &c. Lordshippe, andbid▪ pag. 281. 372. accounteth his brethren Aerian heretikes. This doublinge by such as defende the Hierachie, must needes cast great doubtes in the heartes of all men. 5 Testimonies of learned men, imply some further Reformation. These followers of Reformation giue greater colour to their cause by the testimonie of auncient and late writers, whom they pretend to speake against the manner of our go∣uernement by Bishops, and for the gouernement of their El∣ders.
1 Against the authoritie and practise of our Bb. they al∣leadge the Canons of the Apostles, the Councels of Car∣thge, Calcedone, Constans, Turon and Macra, the testi∣monie of Cypran, Tertullian, Augustine, Hierome, Am∣brose, Chrysostome, Gregorie, Hillarie, Synesius, Nazianzene, Origene, and Bernard. 2 Touching late reformed Churches, they mainteyne, that there is no protestant Church in all Hungarie, Poleland, Denmark, Friselande, Swevelnd, Heluetia, Saxony, Auspurg, of in anie part of Germanie in France, Scotlande, the lowe Coun∣tries, or in any nation truely prosessing the Gospell in all the world, that doth either by their doctrine or practise, attribute so much authority, ciuill and ecclesiasticall in sole excōmuni∣cation and ordination of Priestes, as is now vsed and challen∣ged by English Bishops. 3 Among late writers they drawe to this purpose Lu∣ther, Melancon, Bucer, Martyr, Calu, Beza, Bul∣linger, Zanchius, Daneus, Erastus, Gualter, Munster, and many other. 4 Lastly, out of our owne English Writers they fetch mat∣ter against the Bb. 1 Harding woulde proue by the example of Moses, who exercised both a Priestes and Princes office, that the Pope may vse ecclesiasticall and ciuill authoritie. Master Iewell answereth thus▪ Christ him selfe sayeth to the Pope and to all other Priestes and Bb▪ The kings of the nations rule ouer them, and they that are great exercise authoritie ouer the people, but it shall not be so among you. Hee addeth the saying of Cyprian, Christ by seuerall dueties and distinct honours, both set a diffe∣rence betweene the offices of both powers. Also he vrgeth an effe∣ctuall speach of Bernard to the Pope, That hee cannot be both a successour of the Apostles and a Lord. For doubtles hee was forbidden the one of them, Yet our Bb. be both. 2 Mai. Nowell Deane of Paules saieth, that Christ refused pompe, riches and dominions, when the Deuill offered them. Hee denyed his kingdome to bee of this worlde, and forbad his true Dis∣ciples the possession of such riches▪ and vvorldelie dominions, as the
Pope nowe clymeth. In another place,Ibid pa. 4. Christ forbad his Mi∣nisters all Dominion and worldly gouernement, Mat. 20. And a¦gaine, Ibid. pag. 57. S. Peter forbiddeth Ministers to exercise Dominion or Lordship ouer their flockes. 3 D. Bilson Warden of Winch. hath thus writen: Christ expresly forbiddeth his Apostles to be rulers of Nacions. The Kinges of the nations rule ouer their people, &c. with you it shall not bee so. In which wordes Christ doeth not traduce the power of Princes as vn∣iust, but distinguisheth the calling of the Apostles from the manner of regiment which God hath allowed the Magistrate. Christ saieth not, Princes are tyrants, you shall deale more courteouslie, but he sai∣eth, Princes be Rulers by Gods ordinaunce, you shall not be so, &c. Then he proueth, that Katakyrieuein is not meant of Tyran∣nical, but of Rule with authority, and shutteth vp his argument in this sorte: Therefore the conclusion is ineuitable, That Princes may lawfullie compell and punish their subiectes, bu Bishops may not. This manner of reasoning against the papistes hath incensed men vehemently against L. Bb. If these reasons be not good, Maister Iewell, Maister Nowell, and D. Bilson haue much to aunswere. 5 On the other side, these whoe pursuers of Reformation haue had great inducementes to enforce the Idership. 1 That there was a gouernement by Elders assisting the ministerie in the primitiue Church, is collected obscurely out of Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine. More clearely out of Ambrose, Hierome, Possidonius, Socrates, and the Ca∣non lawe. 2 The Diuines of later time (almost) generally doe gather the Eldership out of the Script▪ namely, Zuinglius, Mar∣tyr, Aretius, Calu, Illiricus, Hemings, Hiperius, Iunius, Bucer, Beza, Piscator, Oleuian, Bulliger▪ Sze∣gedinus, Musculus, Heshusius, Robert Stephen, Daneus, an Italian, Bertrand de Lques, Bastingius, Morneus, Sa∣dell, Nowell, Fulk, Whitakers, Snecanus, Vsinus, and
Table of all. Trelcaius. Lastly the Churches in the lowe Countries, France, eluetia, and Scotlande doe consent herein. 3 That the same gouernement by Elders should continue vnder the Christian magistrates, is agreed by Iohn Alasco, Venhouius, Microus, Zuinglius, Oecolampidius, Zuichius, Capito, Miconius, Farell, Viret, Melancthon, Bucer, Cal∣uin, Martyr, Iunius, Beza, Zanchius, Daneus, Vr∣sins, Bullinger, Stephen, Caluetus, Collodanius, Tremulius, Pinaldus, Tauergius, Perottus, Chaussaeus, Bertrandus, Carpen∣terius, De Plure, Perilius, Henricus Srranus, Cals, Pous, Glartius, Iacomotus, Dupleus, Szegedinus, Hshsius, De Lo∣ques, Bastinguius, Pollanus, Snecanus, Fulke, Rainolds, and others most rare politikes of this time, especially Euseb. Cosmopolitan▪ and Bodin, Bodin hauing discoursed vppon the rising, falling, conuersion, and translation of the principall Empires, Kingdomes, states and common wealthes in the worlde, at length descendeth to the stte of Geneua, & giueth a very honourable testimony of the great profit asing by the Discipline and Eldershippe to that common wealth▪ is wordes be these: But this is to be commended in Geneua, If there bee any thing in the worlde worthy commendation, vvhch also maketh the common wealth to flour she though not in riches and largenesse of dominion, yes surely in vertue and Godlinesse. I meane the Disci∣pline of the Ministers (or Elders) vvhich is as excellent and hea∣uenlie a vvaie as can bee deuised to represse the faultes of men, and such enormities as can not bee redressed by anie humane Lawes and iudgementes. Yt this censure is according to the rule by Christ pre∣scribed. Namely, at the first secretlie and friendlie, afterwarde somewhat more roundelie and sharpely. Then if the partie doe not relent, hee is interdicted solemnely and seriously from the participa∣tion of the heauenlie misteries. If this doth no good, then the Ma∣gistrate punisheth. Whereupon it falleth out that such thinges as are not punishable any where by Lawe, are without anie stirre or tu∣mult reformed there by those Censors (or Elders) who bee greatlie reuerenced among the people, by reason of their vertue. Therefore
it is, that no whoores, no drunkardes, no dincing, no begging, no idle persons are to bee founde in that cittie. The more popishe and corrupt that this Bodin is, the more auaileable and lesse parti∣all is his testimony in this matter. I would to God we might see the like effect in any City or Towne in England, wrought by the gouernement of . Bb. 4 This gouernement by Elders is commended to bee vsed in all Churches for euer by the Churches in France, the Lowe Countries, in Helueta, in their latter confession whereunto subscribed the Churches of Tigure, Bene, Scaphusia, Saint Galls, Rhetia, Myllaine, Bienna, Geneua, Sauoy, Polo∣nia, Hungary and Scotlande. Wherein be thousandes and ten thousandes of the most excellent Diuines vpon earth. 5 Lastly, this gouernement by Elders oyned to the mini∣sters, hath beene vsed (as I haue heard reported) vnder the Emperour in Bohemia, the Turke, and Bassaes in Hungarie, the Papistes in France, the Protestant magistrates in Scotland, Sax∣onie, Countie Palatine of Rhene, Heluetia, Sauoy, France, The lowe Countries, Scotlande, and many places in Germanie. Though some Churches and learned men doe not like of ex∣communication (in which matter they condemne our state) yet I protest in the presence of mighty God, that in all the course of my studie, touching these controuersies, I haue not (to my remembraunce) founde, reade, or hearde of any pro∣testant Church, or learned man in the worlde, who misliketh that certaine Elders, or graue personages should iointly go∣uerne the Church with the ministers, but onely wee of En∣gland. Wherein we at vnwares doe impeach the Parliament and hir maiesty of indiscretion, which haue thought most meete to giue the chiefe managing of the Church not into the handes of one Bishoppe, but of many ecclesiastical Com∣missioners, vvhereof some bee ministers, and some lay men, therein resembling an ecclesiasticall Eldership. The Bishops wishe that the ecclesiasticall Commission were more com∣mon. And I thinke if it were settled in 500. places more then it is, and should gouerne by the worde of God and lawes of this Realme, that there would arise more profit thereby to Religi∣on, then yet hath beene founde by the Bb. To drawe towardes a conclusion of this matter, It may be that they who haue attained to as sounde knowledge in all pointes of doctrine as any since the Apostles time, should mi∣stake
in Discipline. It may be that they whom the spirite of wisedome hath guided in expounding the scriptures shoulde be alwaies forsaken of that spirite, vvhen they came to ex∣pounde or speake o a text concerning discipline. It may bee that all these lightes of the world which aowe there was a gouernement by Elders in the primitiue and best Church did and doe grope in drkenesse, and that the authours of the Remonstrance and Matthewe Sutcliffes treatises haue founde out the trueth, but vntill they haue approued themselues as profitable to the Church as the fourmer vvriters haue done, men (not partiall) will still make scruples in these matters. Againe, it maie be that the exercise of this gouernement is a matter of confusion, discord, dishonour to the magistrate, puritanisme, rebellion, a mprince, a arlawe, a marstte, and mar-all, but it is vnlikely that it should be admitted vnder so many Princes Christin and infidels, papists and proestants, and commended by such pearelesse Diuines if it deserued a∣ny such taxation. It is frō my pupose in this place to dispute which gouerne∣ment is better or worse, or whether these authorities and testi∣monies (which I call God to witnes, I take to be according to the allegation be agreeable to the trueth or otherwise: onely I trust I haue sufficiently prooued mine intention, namely, that, Seeing the lawes established expect a further and better refor∣mation, Seeing the writigs of our Diuines in the common cause a∣gainst the Papistes, Seeing the confession of the Bishps & their fauou∣rers, Seeing their doubtfull & suspicious handling of these contouer∣sies, and Seeing the testimonies of Councells, Fathers, late writers, and Churches imply so much. I conclude, that things go not so cleare for the Bb. but that further reformation, conference, or triall is expedient. Till which Reformation, tryall and conference be achie∣ued, all that bee not blinde in effection doe wie that these followers of Reformation may receiue more curteous vsage then yet appeareth. For (most gracious Souere▪ they bee your maiesties subiectes aswell as the Bb. They be proesors of your owne religion aswell as the Bb. They be mbasadors of Christ Iesus aswell (if not more in regarde of their painful∣nesse) then the Bishops. If you will not heare them▪ whom can they fly vnto? If you will not pity their manifolde mi∣series
and molestations, then they are destitute of humane comforte. They deserue fauour. They haue brought many to the knowledge of God, who otherwise shoulde haue remai∣ned captiues vnder Sathan and traytours to your Highnes. They are vnreproueable before all men, sae in this question of Reformation. Wherein if they offende (as it maie bee they doe, for the best men bee lyable to errour:) surelie it is to bee thought they fall of ignorance. 1 The writings of the Bb. them selues. 2 The disputations of our Diuines against the papistes▪ published and printed by authoritie. 3 The testi∣monie of the principall Diuines in Europe. 4 The vntoward ruling of the Bb. 5 And the apparant vtilitie by gouerning Elders, doe lye as offensiue stumbling blockes in their way. To the ende that these men may haue more mercifull ac∣ceptation, and may not be subiect and lie open to the bloudie desires of their aduersaries, whereof (no doubt) some bee hol∣lowe harted papistes, and some without God in this worlde, who neither regarde Religion, Prince, Bishop or Countrie, but with their own ease and aduantage, I haue (vnder the fa∣uour of better iudgement) taken in hande to pleade, not for any landes or tenementes, but for the liues of your Maiesties most loyall subiectes and Gods faithfull seruauntes (for God may haue great interest in them, though they erre in Disci∣pline) whom some do drawe within the statute of Newes, be∣cause they doe write for Reformation. The wordes of the sta∣tute Be these: If anie shall aduisedly and with a malicious intent deuise, vvrite, &c. anie manner of booke, writing, &c. containing false, seditious, and slaunderous matter to the diffamation of the Queenes Maiestie (that nowe is) or to the incouraging, stirring, or mouing of rebellion, or insurrection within this Realme, hee shall suffer and forfait as a fe∣ln. From this law it is thus reasoned. VVhosoeuer write bookes to the diffamation of her Maiestie, and to raise rebellion, doe offende against this Statute, and are felons. They that write for Reformation, make bookes to diffame the Queene, and raise rebellion. Therefore the writers for Reformation offende against this sta∣tute, and are felons. They proue the first parte of the Minor in this mner: They that diffame the Bb. who bee members of hr Maie∣sties
body politike, and vphelde by hir lawes, doe diffame the Queene. They that write for Reformation diffame the Bb. &c. Touching the second point in the Minor, the followers of the Bishops would proue that the seekers of Reformation doe write to stirre and moue Rebellion. First by argument drawn from the generall scope of their writings. Secondly, by parti∣cular supposed mutinous and rebellius sentences scattered in the bookes written in defence of Reformation. Their generall argument is to this effect: They that write to worke discontentment in the mindes of the sub∣iects against the gouernement receiued, doe write to mooue a rebellion. For Discontentment is the mother of Rebellion. The Seek of Reformation write to worke a discontentment in the mindes of the subiectes against the gouernment receiued: Therefore they write to moue a Rebellion. The supposed mutinous speaches which they gather out of the bookes which speake for Reformation, are these: D. Banc.Ser pag. 83. sayeth, that Martin threatneth Fists. Others obiect a place in Martin Senior, where hee mentio∣neth a hundred thousande handes, and saith, That these so ma∣nie togither, would strke a great stroke. D. Cosins citeth one Fran. Iunius, pag. 28. who holdeth, That people may resist the Princes that hinder the Presbyteries. And that in the seconde Admonition, pag. 29. it is sayd, That many thousandes in Englande desire that platforme, and that greate troubles wil come of it, if they be withstoode in their deuises, &c. If I were perswaded that any seeker of Reformatiō did in∣tende either to diffame hir Maiestie, or to raise rebellion, I am so farre from approuing his fact or writing in his defence, that I adiudge him rather to be punished as a traytor then a felon. But because I assure my selfe that they bee guiltlesse of these crimes, in tender regarde of innocencie, and of hir Maiesties most godly lawes, which ought not to bee peruerted, I haue at tempted to aunswere the quarelles of their aduersaries in this behalfe: Saluo semper meliore iudicio: Which clause I will haue to runne and reache from the beginninge to the midsts, from the midsts to the end of all this treatise. For answere to the first point in the argument, I doe make good that Admit the Seek of Reformation doe diffame the Bb. who bee
members of her Maiesties bodie politike and vphelde by hir lawes, yet they doe not diffame the Queene, as this statute intendeth. In my vnderstanding, there be two generall Bodies politike in this lande. The one, the Bodie politike of the Realme, the o∣ther, The Bodie politike of hir Maiestie. The bodie politike of the Realme, is, All the people in the common wealth, contra∣cted and distinguished into the Three states of the Parliament. The first is the Queenes Maiestie, The second, The Lordes, The thirde The Commons. The Bb. be not one of the Three states, though Matthewe SutcliffeThe Bb. be not one of the thre states. shoulde affirme it twenty times, vnlesse he will turne out either the Queene, the Lords, or the Commons, and assigne their place to the Bishops. Al∣though the Bb. since the time of H. 11. Haue beene present in the Kings Courtes, with other Barons, till the matter came to the losse of limme or life (for at such time by the lawes they are to auoyde the place) And although they are de facto intituled as Authours of our Statutes, yet I holde that this is onelie of grace and fa∣uour, and de iure or by necessarie right. For our Princes (as was conuenient) at the assembly of their Parliamentes haue vsed to call the Bb. so long as they vvere taken for godly and learned, into their consultations that did concerne the state of the Church: but yet they haue not so inthralled them∣selues to the aduise and assent of Bb. as if no statute might be of force without them (as the Bishops doe nowe to boldelie insinuate.) For many lawes haue bin made and do yet stande in force, the Bb. being absent, or vtterly refusing to assent vn∣to them, as is expresly proued and shewed out of the statutes and Parliament rolles by Maister Iewell, MaisterDorm. Rep. pag. . Nwell, Mai∣ster Act. and Mn pag 21. Fox, Maister Bilson, and Maister Lambert, a learned la∣wier of Lincolns Inne. Wherefore seeing the Bb. according to their dignities bee none of the three states of the Parlia∣ment, or of the Bodie politike of the Realme, (no otherwise then common subiects be, in which respect they are not diffamed) it can not be taken that in this sence they bee members of hir Maiesties Body politike, and therefore the diffaming of them doeth no more touch the Queene, then the diffamation of a common subiect, whic fault is otherwise preuented then by the punishment due to felons. The general Bodie politike of hir Maiestie, is, as I conceiue, all the Officers and Magistrates of this lande, who deriue all their authoritie either mediatelie or immediatelie from the
Queene. In which regarde the Bb. be members of hir bodie poli∣tike, drawing from hir Highnes their ciuill authoritie and lord∣ship. For their ecclesiasticall authoritie hath beneD With pag. 309.  heretofore deduced from hir Maiestie: but I see that of late they begin to claime it from God as the Queene doeth hir Crowne. But howsoeuer the Bishops claime their worldly state or spiritual primacie, the Seek▪ of Reformation doe mainteine, that their iurisdiction is contrary to the worde of God. Not condem∣ning externall honor (which is good and godly in it selfe but misliking that it should be accepted by such persons as are dis∣abled and made vncapable there of by the Scripture. Thus much for better vnderstanding of this question. To proceed. 1 There must diuers things concurre to make bookes fe∣lonious by this statute. First, they must be written Aduisely against the Queene, that is, of purpose, wittingly, not of simplici∣tie or ignorance. Ignorantia fact excusat: Ignorance of the fact ex∣cuseth the fault. And therefore as the Prell▪ dealt miiouslie with Richard Carmicheill in Scotland, in compelling him to burne his bill because in his dreame hee did crie out, The Di∣uell take away the Priestes, for they are a greedy packe▪ so if any man in his sleepe or at vnwares shal cast forth diamatory wordes against the Queene, he is not within this statute. Secondly, the booke must be writen of malicious intent, and as the preamble of the statute is, by one ill affected to hir Maiestie, and therefore if a man vse such a speach as Burder the Marchant did, when he saide, He would make his sonne the heire of the crowne, meaning his house at the signe of the Crowne, not intending any hurt to the King or Crowne of Englande, he could not without great iniustice be drawne within this or the like statute. Thirdlie, the wordes must conteine false and seditious matter, & therefore if a man shoulde haue saide, that the King William Rufus did wickedly, who to get mony of the Iewes, caused some cōuer∣ted to Christianity, to returne to Iudaisme (the fact beeing trew and words not seditious) he could not iustly be punished by this or any like statute. The Seekers of Reformation hue not,The Seekers of  neither doe write Aduisedlie to diffame the Queene▪ for they name not hir Ma∣iestie to any dihonor in any of their bookes. If the contrary can be proued, Currat lex: let the offender be punished as he deserueth. They onely seeke to haue (as they thinke) the corruption of the te redressed, as he Prophetes & the holy
men of God haue done heretofore, without tending anie dishonour to good Princes, such as her Maiestys. The Seek of Reformation write against ignoraunt and vnlearned mini∣sters: so the Prophet Esae liuing vnder the godly king, did call the priestes that wanted knowledge.Esa. 6. 10. Dumbe dogges, such as can not barke.Vnpraching ministers. The Seekers of Reformation write against such as be careles and negligent in feeding the soules that de∣pende vpon them▪ that take the fleece & turne ouer the care of the flocke to other: so Esae reprooueth the priestes of his timeEsai. 56. 10. That lye and sleepe, and delight in sleping. Priestes. And another Prophet taxeth them that did not. 44. 8. Keepe the ordinaunces of holy thinges them selues, but set other to take charge of the sanctua∣rie. The Seekers of Reformation doe cry out against plurifi∣ed persons, that can not be content with a competent liuing, but insatiablie by dispensations and qualifications doe ioine benefice to benefice, and charge to charge, rather to enriche them selues then benefite the Church: against such men did Esaie complaine, calling themEsa. 56. 11. Greedie dogges, that can neuer haue inough: euerie one of them looking to his owne waie and to his owne aduantage. The Seekers of Reformation write against the ciuill authority and rule of Ministers: So Ieremy in the dayes of Iosiah, a vertuous Prince condemned Priestes, For bearing rule. The Seekers of Reformation write to haue the Church throughly purged of all remnants of popery & ido∣latry: So the spirit of God did note as a fault euen vnder most excellent Kings,1 King. 15. 14 That the he places remained vnremoued. All these and many other witnesses of the trueth did speake and write against the state of the Church in Iudah, and were not (I trust) aduised defamers of the Princes vnder whome these corruptions had gotten strength. In like maner the writinges of the Seek▪ of Reformation, against such thinges as they ve∣rilie beleeue to be enormious corruptions, can not iustly bee deemed, aduisedly and of purpose diffamaorie to hir Highnesse. When persecution was most furious in Englande, they that wrote most vehemently against the Bishops & their procee∣dings, contenanced by lawe, were neuer accounted aduised diffamers of the Prince: for then they should haue bene repu∣ted and punished as traytours or rebells, rther then as sisma¦tikes and heretikes. Neither hath their bene in all the thirtie yeares of her Maiesties most flourishing raigne (till within 2. or 3. yeares last part) any such conclusion euer made, though
the same lawes (in substance) haue bene in force and occasion giuen of great extremity. I am perswaded that vpon hearing the matter debated by learned I awiers on the part of the de∣fendantes (as lawe and reason would, in this matter of diffi∣culty that toucheth life) that our reuerende Iudges would at the first make a quaere, whether the aduised diamation of the Bb. were an aduised diffamation of the Queene. Therefore it may well come vnder the title of Newes, that the Seekers of Reformation should resolue in a point of lawe wherein the best lawiers may stand in doubt. f my father were a ▪ Bishop or a Noresident, and  would write against the state of the Bb. or Nonresidence, to make men conformable to the lawe of God, it were adsurde to affirme that I did write of purpose and aduisedly to diffame my Father. So in our case mutatis mutandis,The Seekers of  &c. Neither doe the Seekers of Reformat▪ write against the iu∣risdiction of Bb. of any hatred, or Malice to the Queene. For whosoeuer were King or Queene of England (though it were Dauid him selfe) they would vvrite to the same effect▪ that they doe nowe. It is not like that they malice her Maiesty: for (sauing the matters in varince) no man can charge them with any shewe of disloyall behauiour. They are instant for hir Maiesty in prayer, both publike and priuate. They detract no duety, no imposition, no taxe or subsidie, as becommeth duetifull and louing subiests. It was neuer heard that any one no not one of them, did euer attempt any hurt to hir Royall person Search the Rolls, looke the Recordes, it will appeare that some o them (whom England while England indureth, shall still with thankfulnes remember) haue hazarded them∣selues asmuch for her Maiesties safety and Englands good, as any subiect what soeuer. When the Spaniards intended an in∣uasion, the establishment of a forraine potentate in the Sea Royall, and the conuersion of this lande into Aeldama, a fielde of bloude, the Ministers that seeke Reformation gaue great assurance of their affection and loyalty to the Queenes maiesty and the seate, They were importunate with the Lord by priuate and publike prayer & fasting for the safety of her Royal person, before the Bishops or their followers were seen to goe about any such matter. And being▪ interdicted by the Bishops (such was their zeale to the state) they still continued as they had begun: some of them (weake in body, though
strong in spirite) preaching three or foure times a day, manie daies togither, as London can witnese: incouraging the peo∣ple to fight for the Gospell and for their soueraigne: still cal∣ling for repentaunce, that God might bee mercifull to vs, our Prince and Countrie. Also when the expedition was made into Portugall, they renewed these exercises a fortnight or 3. weekes before the Bishops sent to their fauorers any precepts or instructions to doe the like. Is it likely that these men doe malice her Maiesty? Surely they malice hir as Esay, Ieremy, & other prophets did malice Ezechiah, Iosiah, and other godly Kings of Iudah, when they reproued the abuses of the Church vnder them, seeking that they might flourish in al honour by the due obseruation of the lawe of God, adding vertue to ver¦tue, and reformation to reformations, till Iudah and Ierusalem were clearely purged. Is this malice to Princes? No. They that hide frō princes the deformity of a state, crying peace, peace, where no peace is, they be the most malicious and pestilent e∣nemies of the state. The men that call for Reformation,Color of can  may pretend cause or coulour of cause both in matters of doctrine & fact, why they may hate the Bishops, which in no sorte may be applyed to hir Maiesty. The Bishops impugne that which heretofore they haue deliuered as the trueth of God, as I haue shewed,Admoni. aga M. M. 183. They con∣fesse there be infinite corruptions in the Church, which yet they will not reforme, nor sffer other to sue for amendment or reformation thereof. They confesse that by Gods word a D  Priest and Bishop are all one,A Priest and Bish by Gods . yet pag. 281.  pag 18. Admonit. agai. M. M. pag. 44, they and their followers make it heresie so to beleeue, building vpon Epiphanius, who also erroniously in theCont. Haeres. lib. 3. . 75. same place calleth the Bishops, and all them heretikes, that denie prayer for the dead. Which deter∣mination of heresie vpon one mans worde, as it is pag. 668. 748.  Whiak Con. Du. pag. 447.  Tim. 5. Harding Def.  pag. 20. Staleton, Bridg. of Princ. Supr. pag. 359. , against the lawes of this Realme, so it wrappeth in heresie both theIn 1. Tim 3. 2. 1. Tim. 5. 17. 1. Tim 3. 1. Sy∣riake Interpreter,What the law  See the stat. vvho vseth one worde Kashisha, both for Priest and Bishop. And also Chrysostome, Ambrose, Theo∣doree,
Hierome, Occumenius, Iidore, The Canon Lawe, (in force in Englande) which sayeth, That the primitie Church had no other sacred orders, but Deaconship and Priesthood. Also, Wicklef, Marsils of Pada, Luther, Caluin, Mus∣culus, Hofman, Sadel, Mornce, Marlorate, , Whi∣takers, Fulke, Iewell, Bullinger, The Waldenses, Alley B∣shop of Excester, Lambert, Beza, Daneus, The Magde∣burgenses, Knitsius, Melathon, Szegedinus, Many Chri∣stian Churches, and all Protestants that haue writen of this matter, who teach expresly, that by the trueth of Gods word Bishops and Priestes bee all one and of like authority, & ther∣fore are condemned by Bellarmine, Turrian, Dure, Spence, Harding, The Rhemistes, Stapleton, Sanders, Bristowe▪ and other papistes, to bee Aertan heretikes: euen as the b. doe account (for the same cause) all the maintemers of Re∣formation. The enemies to Reformation doe esteeme it an absurde and monstrous thing to holde, That a Pastour and Teacher differ in office,Pastor and Teacher  though the Syriake interpreter doe distinguishe them aswell as Apostle and Euangeist, vith de∣ragnavath vith demalphane, which Guido translateth Ephes. 4. 11. Some Pastours, and some Teachers. And although Mus∣culus Hperius, Caluin, Martyr, Kemts, Bez, Sa∣deel, Danus, Szegedinus, Hemingius, Bucer, Bertrand de Loques, Villiers, Iunius, and tn Protestante Churches, (as Maister Rogers confesseth) doe account of them as distinct callings. The Bishops doe affirme, that by the common ex∣position of all writers Christ by katakyrieuin Matth. 20. 25. doeth onely prohibite in the ministerie tyranncall, not lawfull Lordly rule, yet of all these writers they can onely name threc or foure, whereas the Seekers of Reformation may produce Luther, Zuinglus, Melancton, Caluin, Bullinger, He∣mingius, Illiricus, Gualter, Nowell, Iewell, Sadl, Be∣za, Munster, Bridges against the papistes, Bilson, Brough∣ton,
Rainolds, Withers, Whitakers, Sncanus, Szegedinus, Fulke, Erastus, and the Churches of Bohema, who say, that Christ speaketh there of lawfull Lordely rule, for bidding his Apostles and Ministers of the Gospell to vse the same. The , and their friendes adiudge it a popedome and tyranny to excommunicate Princes, although themselues do excom∣municate inferiour Magistrates (whom the Scripture doth ho∣nour with the hie title of Gods, aswell as the most glorious Emperour) and although both Bucer, Caluin, Sncanus, De Loques, Beza, Daneus, Zanchius, Nowell, Poinet Bi∣shop of Winchester, Iewell, Bson, and Bridges, do by their do∣ctrine in priuiledged bookes approue the same. The Bb. charge the Seek▪ of Reformation, flatlie and full to a∣gree with the papistes in the article of the Princes Supremacie in mat∣ters Ecclesiasticall, yet the Seek. of Reformation differ frō them in these substantiall pointes following: 1 They giue the Prince authoritie ouer all persons eccle∣siasticall whatsoeuer: the papistes exempte their cleargie. 2 They holde that a Prince may depose a priest as Salomon did Abiathar, and accordingly they obey being silenced: the papistes deme it. 3 They affirme that if Priests do make wicked decrees, that the Prince may enforce them to better: the papistes denie it. 4 They say that Princes may and ought to make lawes for the Church, but with the aduise of godly Pastoures: the papistes denie it. 5 They hold that if the Pastours be vnlearned and vngodly, the Prince may of himselfe without their assent or aduise make orders and lawes for ecclesiasticall matters: the papistes doe vtterlie denie. Lastly, they will subscribe in this point to the Articles of Re∣ligion established by lawe, to the Apologie to the Church of England, to the writers of M. Iewell, M. Nowell, M. Horn, Maister Whitakers, Maister Bson, Master Rainoldes, M. Fulke, (for I protest I haue sought, but found nothing in these mens writinges touching this matter, that dissenteth from the opi∣nions of them that sue for Reformat.) Besides they take the othe of the Supremacie as hir Maiestie and the Parliament
doeth expound it. Whereupon by expresse allowance of law they are in that respect hir Maiesties good and obedient sub∣iectes, and they that inforce more vpon them in this point of the Magistrates authoritie then that othe vvith the Queenes exposition therof comprehendeth, are vpon hir Maiesties roy all woorde, and enact of lawe Malicious persons. Furthermore the Bb. saye, That the generall opinion of the best writers is a∣gainst the gouernement by Elders: vvhere as they can name onely foure, whereof Caluin and Beza are two, who nowe bee made as partiall as Maister Cartwright, and yet the Seek▪ of Reform▪ for one writer against the gouernement by Elders, may name 3000. with it. Not one Protestant out of Englande misliketh it.See afore. Some of the Bb. doe confesse the gouernemente by Eld. was vsed in the Apostolike Church, yet they call it a pope∣dome and tyrannie, and preferre an inuention of man before it. The Seekers of Reformation finde them selues grieued with many matters of fact to which hir Maiestie is not priuy nor party. They thinke it harde that any subiect should deuiseSee  pag 33. arti∣cles and subscriptions, and publish them in their owne names vpon great paines and penalties to be yeelded vnto, contrary to the lawes and liberties of Englande. It is thought strange, that the Bb. should preciseli inforce the statut,The law and Subscption   no M∣ster ought to vse anie other open prayers then bee set forth in the communion booke, and extort a promise and subscription, to vse the forme in the saide booke prescribed and no othe, and yet iome Ministers when the Spaniardes were vpon the Seas, to vse in publike assemblies, newe prayers, which the Bb. them∣selues had contriued. The Bishops care for the Church is commendable: but not the contradiction. They see not why the Bb. should driue them to weare a Surplisse, and yet them∣selues neglect the vse of Pastorall staues, seeing the lawes tie the Bishops to the one▪ aswell as the Ministers to the other. They holde it scarce agreeable to lawe, that Maister Cawdrie offending in the first degree against the statute that authori∣zeth the Communion booke, should be punished as an often∣dour in the second degree, and that by an ecclesiastical court, albeit by lawe he should haue bene conuicted thereof according to the common lawes by the verdict of twele men, &c. They com∣plaine, that the Ecclesiasticall Commissioners hauing onely
to deale in causes which by ecclesiastcall power maie bee correc∣ted, doe conuent before them the publishers and writers of bookes for Reformation, which are supposed to be felonious, & therefore punishable by temporall ustices. They thinke it harde that in cases repleuisble by lawe they may not be ba∣led by sufficient suertie. They thinke they haue iniurie when they are cited by Bb. to make othes and recognisances in causes not testamentarie or matrimoniall. They take it grieuou∣sly, that they are compelled to take infinite and generall othes to aunswere to intrapping interrogatories (as was practi∣sed by the cruell Bb. in Heny the fourths time and that in mat∣ters notorious,Oth ex  where neyther sufficient proofe nor witnesse is wanting. They pretende many other grieuances, as to bee inprisoned, suspended, degraded and depred without due cause and course of lawe, the subiects thereby being left de∣stitute of heauenly teaching, and committed to ignort or carelesse prelats, who suffereth the athest, the papist and trai∣tour to pray vpon them. Lastly, they greatly complaine that the Bb. shoulde bee so vnnaturall as to seeke the life of a right godly and faithfull Preacher of the Gospell, I meane Maister Vdall, to whom life was offred if he woulde but take his oth that hee did not make a booke whereof he was supposed to be authour. A rare example that a man shoulde bee knowen standing at a barre, shackled in bolts (but quaere quo iure) and coupled with a murtherer, whose conscience was thought so faithfull and sound by the Iudge himselfe; that he woulde not swere falsely to gaine his life. Hir most excellent Maiestie is free and cleare from all this dealing. Shee doeth not oppugne the knowen trueth. Shee thinketh the present reformatiō to be sufficient. Shee weigh∣eth not heresie by the drowsie dreame of one Doctour. Shee doeth not ioine with the papists in concluding all protestants to be heretikes. Shee doeth not account that straunge and monstrous, that the most auncient and best interpreters doe agree vpon. Shee braggeth not of all, when shee hath fewe or none. Shee freeth not hir selfe from lawfull censures. Shee calleth the Seekers of Reformation that yeelde to the oth of the Supremacie, as shee expoundeth it, Hr good and obedient subiectes, and adiudgeth their aduersaries Maliciou persons. Shee doeth not reuile the Apostolike gouernement. Shee doth not authorize the Bishops to contradict the lawes, their
owne articles & proceedings, to incrouch vpon the temporal Courts, to call men before them where their Courtes cannot holde plea, and to vexe them without mercy or iustice. To be short, shee hath not sought the life of a Minister of the Gos∣pell,1 Sam. 25. 33. but like Abigail blessed of the Lorde God of Israell, hath kept the handes of the executioner from shedding innocente bloude. The Bishops perswade hir Hignes (for who woulde not be∣leeue the Graue fathers of the lande knowing nothing to the cō∣trary) that matters of the Church goe very well. But if it shall ap∣peare to hir Maiestie to be otherwise, shee will of hir gracious disposition make speede to a better reformation. Wherefore, seeing they that write for Reformation haue cause or may pretend cause or colour of cause to beare hatred to the Bishops, which can not any way be applied to hir Ma∣iesty, it followeth that the hatred or malice (if you will haue it) proceeding from these causes, can not fall vpon hir Maie∣stie: for the offences bring hatred and malice to the person, & men be maliced & hated not for sinnes of ignorance or good meaning, but of knowledge and wilfulnesse. Furthermore, the Seekers of Reformation can not haue a∣ny Malicious intent in writing for the Discipline. They offer their liues to proue the trueth, necessitie & vtilitie thereof. Though a papists cause be nought, yet his intent may be good. And why should not we presume so much for a good christian as for a popish traitour and impious idolater? Lastly, they, doe not write False and slaunderous things, (the worde seditious belongeth to the accusation of Rebellion) for that doeth not yet appeare. The last replies are not yet an∣swered. Many things still obiected which were long agoe con∣futed. The followers of Reformation lacke libertie to aun∣swere in their owne cause. If they speake, they be silenced: if they write, they wante PRINTERS. They bee shut vp in close prisons, their handes (as it were) bounde, & then buffe∣ted. They are blindfolded, and then must reed, who did smite them.Luk 22. 64. Vnlesse the Iustices and lurours can disproue all that hath bene written, and confounde the most profound Clarks in the world, whom the Bishops aduersaries haue shewed to stande for this reformation, they cannot iustly sentence their writings to be false and slaunderous. The certificat of the Bb. in this case is traersable, and not to be admitted, They stande at the barre as parties.
It is worse then heathenish to beleeue Scipio Africanus, who conquered the thirde parte of the worlde, vvhen hee speaketh in his owne cause. If our sauiour Christ should beare witnesse of him, selfe, his witnesse were not fitte, though it must needesIo. 8. 14. be true. In Parliaments that concerned the Bb. as parties, they haue bene excluded. But the law and state of England (you will say) accoūt these things False.Obiection. So the lawes of other nations account them true.Answere. In mat∣ters of God (as is the gouernement of the Church) the lawes of God ought to determine trueth and falhood. They only should informe the conscience of Iudges. There is not alia veritas Theologica, alia Philosophica: one trueth in Diuinitie, an∣other in Philosophie or humanity. That distinction is false and contradictory. God is one, his worde one, his worke one, his trueth one. We may aswell say, There be two Sunnes, as two Truethes respectiuely in one thing. The worde of God, not lawe of man, is the touchstone of this trueth. Iusticec 7. H 4. 41. Gascoine being demaunded of King Henrie the 4. what he would doe, if a man guiltles in his owne knowledge, vvere founde guil∣ty of murther by verdict afore him, made this aunswere, (al∣though the verdict was as good in lawe as any lawe) That hee would respite iudgement, and craue the Kings pardon for the partie conuicted. With which answere the King was well pleased. Whereby we learne, that our owne knowledge and the lawe of God assured in our conscience, ought rather to guide our iudgement, then the verdict of law, or testimonie of men. Seeing then that the seekers of Reformat▪ haue not writen neither doe write Aduisedly, Maliciously, or Falslie, muchlesse both Aduisedlie, Maliciouslie, and Falslie, to diffame her Maiesty, (for the wordes be in the copulatiue) I conclude in this gene∣rally negatiuely to the aduersaries argument, though I should admit it to be true, yet considering these things doe not cō∣curre in writing of bookes for Reformation, that they bee not within compasse of this statute. 2 This statute is not meant of her maiesties lawes,The statute mean of hr Maiesties na∣turall person. her po¦litike members or state of Bb. but only of her Highnes Royall person, as appeareth by wordes and drift thereof. It is taken almost verbatim from an act made by King Philip & Queene Marie,1 & 2. Ph. & Ma▪ c▪ . which throughout still aimeth at their owne per∣sons. Of whom (the statute saieth but could not meane of
their members politike or lawes) Wee are forbidden (by Gods lawe) so much as to thinke ill, much lesse to speake ill. This act determined with Queene Maries life. In this statute of 23. the preamble importeth that it vvas made to suppresse such per∣sons as were ill affected to her maiestie. The body of the lawe ben∣deth against them onely that slaunder the Queenes most excel∣lent Maiestie that nowe is. By the last prouiso in it, this acte hath no longer continuaunce▪ then during the naturall life of hir Ma∣iestie that nowe is. The state of Bb. (vnles God shorten it) and the politike members and lawes (if speciall prouisoes doe not choake them) are to continue euer. Wherefore this statute be∣ing meant of her Maiesties naturall person, which is subiect to mortality aswell as other, and not of her body politike which liueth euer, they that diffame the members of the body poli∣tike, can not be truely saide to diffame the Queene as this sta∣tute doeth intende. 3 By the wordes of this statute. If any offend in vvriting bookes to the diffamation of the Queene, (the same offence not beeing made treason by any other statute) such diffamation shalbe deemed felonie. By the wordes Other statute, is meant (among the rest) a lawe made 13. Eliz. c. 1. Whereby it is enacted, that whoso∣euer shall publshe that her Highnes is an heretike, schismatike, tyrāt, &c. shalbe punished as a traytor. By comparing these statutes which haue apparant relation the one to the other, it should seeme that by the one, namely that of 23. her maiesties ho∣nour is protected from peite slaunders, such as in temperan∣cy, vncleanenesse, and such like, and by the other, grand slan∣ders are preuented, as heresie, schisme, tyranny, and such like. The one adiudged felony, the other treason. Out of which statutes I reason thus: If the Seekers of Reformation diffaming her maiesties lawes and members politike doe diffame the Queene and are there fore felons by the statute of 23. Eliz. then they that in a high∣er degree diffame the lawes and body politike, doe diffame her Highnes, and are traytours by the statute of 13. Eli. But the papistes diffaming her maiesties lawes in making the articles of Religion established by13. Eli. c. 12. law, flat heresies, and accounting of the Bishops as hereticall, schismatical, and vsur∣ping, doe diffame the lawes and members politike of the Queene in a higher degree then the Seekers of Reformation, yet were neuer taken and punished as traytours for diffaming
the Queene, though they haue by monstrous conspiracies & horrible practises giuen cause of extreame rigour. Therefore the seekers of reforma. diffaming the Queenes lawes and body politike, doe not diffame the Queene, nor are felons by the statute of 23. Elizab. 4 Euery penall lawe concerning life, is to be expounded strictlyPenal law expounded strictly. according to the literall and grammaticall sence, not by inference or equity, as appeareth by these examples. There is a3. Eliz. c. 1. statute that whosoeuer doeth call her Maiestie here∣tike, bee traytours (as I noted before) The papistes call all Pro∣testants in generall Heretikes, yet they be not for such spee∣ches drawne within the statute, though they doe inclusiuely call the Queene heretike. Moreouer,1. . 6. c. 12. None that feloniously steale horses shall haue their cleargie.Penal laws not expounded by equiy or ineren. Accessories to stealers of horses be stealers of horses, both by the lawe of God (before whome euery sinner is a principall) and by the lawe of this lande. For if they cannot reade, they shall suffer as felons. Yet1 Ma. . pag. 9. accesso∣ries to stealing of horses, shall haue their cleargie, though in na∣ture there is the greatest proximity, and in argument the most equall inference and easie slide from the generall  the spe∣ciall, that can be imagined. Lastlie (because I will not insist in a matter so common) the same statute of stealing of horses affordeth the like learning. Therein it is saide, that No stealer of horses (in the plural number) shall haue his cleargie. Which number is often in common speach, and in penall lawes tou∣ching landes & goods, taken Synecdochechios for the singulare. Yet King Edwardes Iudges pursuing the precise letter of the statut, were so scrupulous for the life of a man, that they durst not deny the benefite of the Cleargie to him that had stolne one horse. Whereupon the wise of Englande (whome we are more to regarde then anyPlod Ce∣ment. 467. one man) made a newe I awe, That whosoeuer stole any horse▪ should not be admitted to his cleargie. These Iudges that would not wrest a law one heare breadth against a horse stealer, would haue bene as fauourable to ho∣nest Christians. But some thinke that we haue cheuerel lawes that may be recked & stretched at mens pleasure, wheras pe∣nall lawes that touch mans life, haue beene alwaies expoun∣ded in a most strict sence. This statute of 23. is a penall lawe, concerning the body & life of man. The expresse syllables and wordes directed onely against them that diffame her Maiestie that nowe is. There is
not one pricke pointing at the Queenes lawes or state of Bb. Therefore it is to be taken strictly of the Queene, against whom the Seekers of Reformation haue not writen, and by consequent haue not infringed this statute. 5 Her maiesty is a body politike, and hath members poli∣tike in fiction onely and in politicall imagination: not in truth and verity.The Queene a bo politice in fiction only. In like imagination the lawe sayeth, shee cannot doe wronge, shee is alwaies of perfect age, shee is not subiect to any passion, shee can not bee imprisoned, sicke or due. Thinges in themselues vntrue. Therefore he that diffameth her members politike, doeth diffame her maiesty only in fiction, that is in plaine en∣glish, not at all. 6 If they that write against the state of Bb. diffame her ma∣iesty that vpholdeth it.The  cōsequence filons, &c. Then doe they that call the gouerne∣ment by Elders, antichristian, a popedome, &c. diffame the Queene also. For hir maiesty hath authorized, or at the least o∣penly and notoriously tollerated the gouernement by Elders in forraine Churches that haue fled for succour into Her Do∣minions, and haue bene admitted to vse the gouernement by Elders, euen as our fugitiues in Queene Maries time founde like liberty and fauour in strange nations. 7 If they that diffame the Queenes members politike dif∣fame the Queene,No treason to kill Bb. then they that take awaye the life of her members politike, commit treason against the Queene. The same reason (caeteris paribus) maketh the same lawe. But eue∣ry puisne knoweth it is no treason to kill the Bb. though it bee worthily treason to attempt any hurt to her Highnesse. Therefore the diffamation of the Bb. is no diffamation of the Queene. 8 All men be lyers.The Queen & laws  Churches, Vniuersal Councells, Par∣liamentes, and lawes of all nations doe controll one another. Therefore it is no diffamation to her Maiesty, if men ascribe errour in some of their lawes, seeing it is incident to all men to erre in some thinges. Though Princes be calledPs. 82. 6. 7. 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6. Gods, yet as they die, so doe they erre like other men. Homines sunt mendaces & non angels: Men be lyers, they bee not Angels, sayeth 34. H 8. Dr. pag. 54. Iustice Shelley. 9 If you doe offer violence to the most base subiect in this Realme,To kill a sub∣iect tocheth the Queenes crowne ore then to rite against Bb. you doe periudice theForme of indements, Smith de rp▪ Agl. Crowne and dignitie of our So∣ueraine Lady the Queene: yet if you difame them, it is no dif∣famation of the Queene: the murthering of them is onelie
felony, though by estimation of lawe, their life doeth more neerely touch the Crowne, then can be shewed for the state of Bishops. 10 If the diffaming of the Bishops and Queene be al one,The law ten∣dreth  of Princes more then sub∣iectes. punishable by one lawe and one penaltie, then the lawes de∣fende the name and credite of a subiect with as great care as the name of the Queene. Which were absurde in the law, and a presūptuous challenge in any subiect, that doeth not repre∣sent the person of the Queene. 11 If the writers against the gouernement of Bishops doe maliciouslie diffame the Princes that bear it vp, then do they ma∣litiously diffame the Dukes of Saxonie,The Princes that maintein the  not defd. and Hie Almaine, that mainteine the state of Bishops, as ourAdoit▪ against M. M pag. 74. Prelates say. But it were madnes to say, that they write aduisedly & ma∣liciously to diffame these Christian Germaine Princes, who neuer harmed them, much lesse our Soueraine Ladie the Queene, by whom they haue receyued incomparable bene∣fites, and who hath bee more beneficiall to the church then anie Prince or Pontate in all the worlde. 12 They that write to diffame the Queene,No man hath suffred for r∣ligion in Eng. shoulde die as felons by this statute. None that writeth against the gouernement of Bishops, ought to dye as a felon. For they can make that but an errour in Religion at the worst: for writing is not materiall to make an error or not an error.Papists die  treason not  religion. The papists (sayeth D. Bilson)Epist. to the Read before hs booke. bee not executed for making the Pope chiefe pastor ouer their soules, or for giuing him an Episcopall authoritte ouer all the vvhole Church, though that bee also a frantike heresie: but for giuing him an exter∣nall dominion ouer this Realme and Prince, This is it that the Execution of Iustice doeth dely respect, vvhich is farre frō anie matter of faith and religion. Thus you see hee mainteineth that the papists haue not nor doe not suster for religion or here∣sie, but onely for treason. The ChristianCd de . & Mam. Emperours Gra∣tian, Theodosius, &c. neuer punished heretikes with death, but onelie blasphemers and idolaters. They that holde errors shoulde not bee killed, but corrected, sayethEpist. 127. Augustine. And in another placeCont. Cres. . l. 3. 10. It neuer pleased any good man in the Catholike Church, that heretikes (much lesse such as erre in externall matters) should be put to death. Thus it hath bene reasoned by our Di∣uines against the but chries of the papistes. It is also helde in a booke published by authoritie (to which D. Bilson had re∣ference)
and translated into many languages, that neuer anie papist did suffer death for his religiō, since hir Highnes raigne. Which thing the Papists in Wisbich castell can also witnesse. Seeing then our state and Diuines haue sought to remoue from them the suspition of executing any papists for their re∣ligion, (though they defende infinite heresies) much lesse should the Seekers of Reformation suffer death for their re∣ligion. If the papistes ought to be executed, but of auour and grace are spared, much more curtesie shoulde bee shewed to Seekers of Reformation, whose offences both to God, the Prince and Realme, are nothing matchable with the detesta∣ble heresies and practises of the traiterous papistes. Verely all the Protestants in the world would wonder to hear that a∣mong Protestantes vnder a Protestant Prince & gouernmēt, any Protestant should haue his bloud shed for maintaining a doctrine of the Protestants, imbraced by Christian Churches, and confederate Princes round about. 13 If the writers against Bishops do offend against this sta∣tute,Speakers against the Lawes. then the Speakers and Reporters against Bishops and the publishers or deliuerers from hande to hande of these book s or any popishe bookes against the receiued doctrine of Eng∣lande, be likewise within this statute. The Speakers and Re∣porters must either loose their eares, or redeeme them with two hundred poundes, or two hundred markes. The publish∣ers are adiudged and deemed felons. But it were ridiculous to aime, that the law had any such intent. For thē there should be more eareles people in Englande, then in al Christendome besides, and many thousandes of the Bishops friendes shoulde be in case of elons. Which woulde comfort the writers, when they sawe like iustice done to Speakers, Reporters, and publi∣shers. For the Poet truely sayeth: Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. It cheereth vp a wofull heart, When company doe beare a parte. Seeing then that the Speakers, Reporters, and publishers of such matters against Bishops, are not within this statute, nei∣ther be the writers. 14 That is onelyCom pa. 467 & 487. lawe which the lawe-makers intende. The Law-makers did not intende by this statute protect the Hierarchie.That is law  For there was no bill preerred in the Parlia∣ment at that time to this purpose: but rather for the ouer∣throwe
of the Hierarchie. As many yet aliue can witnes, who would with great vehemencie haue spoken against that mat∣ter for their owne and their friendes safety. When Maister Stubs of Lincolns Inne had written against the mariage intended by Monsieur,. the Daulphine of France, to∣wardes hir Maiestie, to the ende that men should bee terrified from writing dishonorably of hir Highnes, this statute made that offence felonie, which by former statutes was onely the losse of the right hande. Which proueth that the aw-makers prouided for hir Maiestie,The Parlia∣ment rather frnd  enimie to Refat. not for the Hierarchie. The Parlia∣ment hath bene more ready for Reformation then against it, as appeared most euidently the last Parliament, when the bill against Nonresidencie passed the lower house,A bill against Nonresidence passed the lo∣wer house. and had like to haue also passed the higher house, by the right honorable the Lord Treasurer his meanes, and other right noble Lordes who spake for it, had not the Bishops laboured against it. 15 Some of the lawes be faultie, euen in Church matters, as our Prell. (not popish) will acknowledge, reporte, and write if neede be. There was a5. H  c. 19. . Eliz c. 2. lawe made by King Henrie the 8. and confirmed by hir Maiestie, That such Canons, Constituti∣ons, &c. which bee not contrariant to the lawes, statutes, & customes of this Realme, nor preiudiciall to the Kinges prerogatiue, shalbee executed as before the making of that act. Amonge which Ca∣nons, &c. there be many vnlawful & foolish thinges, though neither against the lawes, customes, or kings prerogatiue, yet repugnant to the Lawe of God. As namely,This is con∣trary to th Scripture, Mar: 10: 1.  Hooper vpon the 7  That women maie not sue their husbandes for adulterie: that24. 9. 1. c. vlt Heretikes after their death shoulde be excommunicate: that there is such affinitee be∣tweene the Godfather and the childe, for whom he promiseth in bap∣tisme, that it hindereth mariage: that a man maie not fast vpon Thursday, That all Clearkes shoulde absteine from flesh 7. whole weekes before Easter. Infinite corruptions bee in these Canons, yet in force and good in lawe. I suppose that our Bb. coulde be content that this statute of 25. were corrected. Sure I am, the Bishops in King Edwarde the 6. dayes, did see manie things out of order in the Canon lawes, or else they woulde not haue a wholeReform. . Eccles. booke for Reformation of them, which booke can haue no intertainement in our time. But seeing the Bb. will not deny but that some abuses be established for lawe, lette them beare with others that espie greater faultes then those bee.
16. Lastly, many haue writen both against the state of the Church and common wealth as it was & is fenced by law who were neuer accounted diffamers of our Princes. Some write againstSmith de rep. Ag. b. 2. c. 7. b 3 c. 3. Babing. vp. com. p. 260. Triall by battell. Some againstRder M. complo the Parl. Forfai∣ture of Traytours landes, The returne of writtes in one terme: the lingring of men in prison before they come to tryall: the priuiledges of Parliament men: the pardoning of murtherers, pluralitie of farmes, &c. Some againstForsc. de laud Ll. Ag. c. 2. Racking. Some againstDoct. &. stud. b. 1. feined re∣coueries to defeat them in remainder, or reuersion vpon estates taill. Some against buying and selling of Wardes, and such like. Against the gouernement of the Church in England, ma∣nie subiectes haue written, neuer deemed diffamers of the King, as In Edwarde the thirdes reigne did Wicleve arise, one of whose articles was this, That Popes, Cardinalls, Bishops, or o∣ther Priests, maie not ciuiliter dominari absque mortali peccato, may not rule like ciuill Lordes, without deadlie sinne. Also hee taught, That no Prelate ought to haue any prison to punish offendors. And that no King should impose vppon any Bishop or Curate any se∣cular matter,. for then both the King and the Clearke should be prodi∣tor Iesu Christi, a betrayer of Christ Iess: although the Archbi∣shop of Cant. and the Bishop of London did put Wicleue to si∣lence for this doctrine (as their successours do at this day) yet they did not call him a diffamer of the king. WilliamSwindby. Swinderby, a professour of the Gospell vnder Rich. the seconde, helde, That the more Lordship a Priest hath, the nee∣rer he is to Antichrist. Also, that The Priestes of the old lawe were for bidden Lordship, and that Christ himselfe refused and forbad his Priests Lordships, saying: Reges Gentium, &c▪ The Kings of the Heathen beare rule, &c. but you shall not doe so. Piers PlowmanPiers Plo. likewise wrote against the state of Bishops, and prophecied their fall in these wordes: If Knighthood and Kinwite and Comone by conscienc Together loue Lelly, leueth it well ye Bishops The Lordship of Landes for euer shall ye lese, And liue as Leuitici as our Lord ye teacheth Deut. 8. Numb. 5. per primitias & decimas, &c. Geffry Chaucer also in Henry the fourthes time wrote effe∣ctually against the state of the Bb. in this maner: The Emperour yafe the Pope sometime
So hi Lordship him about, That at the last the silly Kime The proude Pope put him out: So of this Realme is doubt. But Lords beware and them defende, But nowe these folke beene wondrous stoute The King and Lords nowe this amend. Moses lawe forbade it tho That Priestes should no Lordships weld. Christes Gospell biddeth also That they should no Lordships held: Ne Christes Apostles were neuer so bold No such Lordships to hm imbrace But smeren her sheepe and keepe her folde, God amende hem for his grace. Thus wrote this famous Poet against the English Bishops, and yet was neuer accounted diffamer of the King, though the Bb. in his time did holde their Lordships of the King as they doe now in Englande. Sir Geffrey Chaucer his workes were in K. Henry the eight his daies authorized to be Printed by34▪ & 35. H. 8. c. 1. act of Parliament, to which that glorious king would ne∣uer haue condescended, if hee had thought that the diffama∣tion of the Bishops had beene a diffamation of him selfe. In King Henry the eights time, the renowmed professor of the Gospell Maister Tindall did write,Tindal workes. p.  24. That it was a shame of all shames, and a monstrous thing, that Bishops should deale in ci∣uill causes. And againe,pag. 140. What names haue they? My Lorde Bb. My Lord Archbishop, If it please your Lordship, if it please your Grace. D. Barnes, a right learned man at the same time did write,Barnes against Tin. workes, pag. 210. That he would neuer beleeue nor could euer beleeue, That one man may by the lawe of God be Bishop of two or three citties, or of a whole Country, for that is contrarie to the doctrine of S. Paul, &c. Maister Hooper in the daies of Edward the sixt did effectu∣ally write,Vpon the  p. 78. against the English Bish.M. Hooper the Martyr a∣gainst ciuil offices in Bb. For the space (saieth he) of 400. yeares after Christ, the Bish. applyed all their witte onelie to their owne vocation, but our Bish. haue so much witte, that they can rule and serue (they say) in both states, in the Church and also in the ciuile policie: when one of them is more then anie man is able to satisfie, let him doe alwaies his best diligence. If hee be so necessa∣rie
for the Court that in ciull causes hee can not bee spared, let him, vse that vocation and spare the other. It is not possible hee should doe both well. It is a great ouersight in Princes thus to charge them with two burthens. If this excellent and right famous man were now aliue and should say thus much, hee might peraduen∣ture (if some had their will) be martyred once againe. Hee addeth further, That the primitiue Church had no such Bb. as we. They had such Bishops as did preach many godly Sermons in lesse time then our Bb. horses bee a bridling. Their house was the schoole and treasure house of Gods Ministers. If it bee so nowe, let euery man iudge. The Magistrates that suffer the abu of these goods, bee culable of the fault. If the fourth part of the Bishoprck remained to the Bishop, it were sufficient, The third part to schoole∣maisters. The second to the poore and souldiers were better bestowed. If any be offended with me for this my saying, hee loueth not his owne health nor Gods lawes nor mns. Out of which I am alwaies rea∣die to prooue the thing I haue saide to be true. Further, I speake of loue not hatred. This was writen by this noble Matyr against the protestant Bb. vnder king Edward the sixt. In these words he doeth not obscurely reproue the King and all Princes that mainteine the state of Bb. yet neither the Bb. nor Iudges in King Edwards time did adiudge this holy man to be a diffamer of princes. His bookes touching this maer, haue bene publike∣ly printed and solde, and euen nowe are to be solde vnder hir maiestie. Father Latimer another man of God and holy martyr was a Bishop in King Henry the eight his time, but heAct and Mn▪ pa. 1643. gaue o∣uer his Bishoprike (as also Shaxton▪ Bishop of Salisburie did at the same time) being diuested of his Bishoplike habite, he skipped for oy, (as maister Foxe reporteth) feeling his shoul∣ders so light, and being discharged (as he said) of so heauie a bur∣then. Thus he speaketh of the Bishops in King Edwarde the sixts dayes, in his sermon of the ploughe,Sermon printed 1584 pag. 11. . Ye that be Prelats, looke well to your office, for right Prelace is busie labouring and not Lording. Thus much I say, that since Lording and Loitering hath come vppe, preaching hath come downe, contrarie to the Apostles times. They preached and Lorded not: And nowe they Lorde and preache not. They that bee Lordes will ill to ploughe. It is no meete office for them.pag. 12. If the ploughmen that nowe be, vvere made Lordes, they would cleane giue ouer ploughing and fall to Lording out right▪ and let the ploughe stande. By the loytering and lording of
Prelates, preaching and ploughing is cleane gone. They are occu∣pied some in the Kinges matters, some are Embassadours, some of the priuie Councell, some to furnishe the Court, some are Lordes of the Parliament, some are Presidentes and Controllers of Mines. Well, Well, is this their duetie? is this their office? If the Apostles might not leaue preaching to be Deacons, shall one leaue it for min∣ting? pag. 13. a. Heare my country Englande, as Paul sad in his first Epi∣stle to the Corinths 6. chap. Is there vtterly among you no wise man to be arbitratours in matters of iudgement? What none that can chuse between brother and brother? &c. Ad eru∣bescentiam vestram dic, I speake to your shame. So Englande I speake to thy shame, Is there neuer a Noble man to bee a Lord Pre∣iaent, but it must bee a Prelate? Is there neuer a wise man in the Realme to bee a controller of the Mne? I speake it to your shame. I speake it to your shame. If there bee neer a wise man, make a Waterbearer, a Tiker, a Cobler, a Slaue, a Pag controller of the Minte. Make a meane Gentleman, a Grome, a Yeoman, make a poore begger Lorde President. This I speake not that I would haue it so, but to your shame, if there bee neuer a gentleman meete nor a∣ble to bee Lorde President. It is a slader to the Noble men, as though they lacked wisedome and learning to bee able for such office, or else vvere men of no conscience, or else vvere not meete for such offices. A Prelate hath a charge and a cure otherwise, and therefore hee cannot bee both a Lorde President, and discharge his duetie too. For a Presidentship requireth a vvhole man, and a Bi∣shop can not be two man. Let the Priest preache, and let the Nobl man handle temporall matters. Then he proceedeth and tel∣leth who is the most diligent Bb. in all England, euen the Di∣uell, who is alwaies in his Cure and Dioces, keeping alwaiespag. 14. . Residence.pag 24. He is no vnpreaching prelate, Hee is no lordly loyerer from his cure, but a busie ploughman: Therefore yee vnpreaching prelates, learne of the Diuell to bee diligent in dooing of your office. Learne of the Diuell if you will not learne of God, nor good men. For shame learne of the Diuell. Ad erubescentiam vestram dico, I speake it to your shame. And in apag 61. b. Sermon before the King: Though I say that I vvould wishe moe L. Presidents, I meane not that I vvould haue Prelates Lorde Presidentes. The office of a Pre∣sident ship is a ciuill office, and it cannot bee that one man should dis∣charge both offices well. Thus Puritan-like wrote Father Lati∣mer, the famous martyr, yet he vvas neuer esteemed a trou∣bler of the state, a Marprince, and a diffamer of the King▪
though in deede he was a Mar-bishop and Mar-prelate. His Sermons containing this matter, are publikelie to bee solde with authoritie, testified in these wordes: seene and allowed ac∣cording to the order of the Queenes innctions. And Mathewa Sutcliffe saieth, That bookes which passe with this approbatiō, doe conteine nothing contrary to the State of this Realme. Therefore it were straunge that the Seekers of Reformation should suffer as felons, for writing against the ciuill offices of Bishops against their authority in the Parliamnt, in the coun∣cell, and such like ciuill places, seeing writings to that effect be seene solde and allowed as not preiudicall to our estate, nei∣ther diffamatorie to her maiesty. Maister Nowell in his Catechisme, fully grounded on Gods worde, and receyued and allowed by the church of En∣gland (as the Bishops say) andBb. . commaunded to be learned of ministers, & taught of all schoolemaisters, doeth write thus of the Eldership: If the Church were well ordered, there should be in it a gouernement by chosen Elders or ecclesiasticall Magistrates such as was in the primitiue Church. Shall men suffer as felons for such things as are fully grounden on Gods worde, and re∣ceyued, allowed, and cōmaunded to be taught in the church and schooles of Englande? The Lord forbid. Doctor Rai∣nolds the iewell of Englande, publike professor of Diuinitie in Oxforde, at the appointement and charges of the right ver∣tuous and noble Earle of Essex, did alleadge in open sermon at Oxforde, this testimony of Maister Nowell, to proue that men by authoritie might speake in defence of gouernement by Elders. To be short, I haue shewed that my L. of Canterburie, and the other Bb. That D. Cons and the aduertiser, doe in wri∣ting reproue many things coūtenanced by law, as excommu∣nication by lay Chauncellours, Nonresidence, Ignoraunt ministers, the milde punishment of Adultery, Subscription, and such like, and yet these men be not deemed, indited, conuict or attaint as diffamers of her maiesty, and felons by this statute. Such be our times, that Iisdem de causis alij plectantur, alij ne appellentur quidem. Thus much may serue touching the accusation of diffa∣ming of our Soueraine Ladie the Queenes most excellēt ma∣iesty. Now it remaineth to consider how iustly the writers for Reformation be charged with rebellion.
VVHereas the aduersaries to Reformation do take as a principle, that whosoeuer writeth to worke a disctentment in the mindes of the subiectes, doe intende a rebellion That is a most vntrewe assertion, and sophisti∣cal paralogisme. For although Rebellion doth grow of Discontentement, yet all discontente∣ment doth not bring forth rebellion: or if the writinge against the state of Bishops shoulde moue some men to discontentment, who be∣ing discontented should stirre vp rebelliō, yet it doeth not followe that the writers against the Bb. were rebels, as this stat. doeth intende. For the writers must write Aduisedlie and of purpose to stirre rebellion. So that if a man write in humble, loyall and duetiful manner, hauing no purpose and intent to worke rebel∣lion, though rebellion should here of insue, yet could not such a writer without great iniustice be drawn within this statute. For he can not be a felon that hath not a felonious intent and purpose. Christ by his preaching had wrought suchIo. 18. 10. a dislike of the Priests and their proceedinges in the mindes of his Disciples, that one of thē in defence of his Maister did strike of the eare of Marchus, a seruant of purseuant of the high priestes: yet the Priestes did not charge Christ
with this outrage of his Disciple. For albeit Christ did speake against the Rulers & Priests in his time, drawing after him many dislikers of that present state, yet Christ neuer meant to woorke in mens mindes a discontentement which should bring forth mutinies or rebelli∣on, but amendement and reformation. In like manner these Seek. of Reformation haue descried manie supposed abuses in the church gouuernement: they beare vs in hande that there is another forme of Ruling the church more agreeable to the Scriptures then this which we haue receyued. They write to lay open the faultes of the one, the necessitie and profit of the other, that the one beeing re∣moued by lawful authoitie, the other by like authoritie might be entertained. For considering that hir Maiestie and Lordes without the Commons,2. H: 7. 18 7 H 7. 15.  & 4 Pr. & Mar  4. 32. H. 6. 18. can not by the order of our state reforme the a∣buses & imperfections of the laws, it is requisite that the Com∣mons of this land should be acquainted with the wants both of the Church and common wealth. For euery man and wo∣man of this Realme is partie and priuie to all Actes of Parlia∣ment. Their assent is needefull to the making of euery lawe. In their name, and as the deputies the Knightes & Burgesses are present, and haue voices in the Parliament. Nowe, howe shoulde the commons, their Knightes and Bur∣gesses conceyue what is amise in the Lawes and state, but by publike writings for that purpose? That hauing deepelie weighed and pondered what and how thinges should be re∣formed, they might be able in time of Parliament, after the
lawfull and laudable custome of this Realme, to take order for them according to knowledge. A few daies or weekes are are not sufficient throughly to examine what may bee said, & what should be done in these matters. Wherefore if these Seekers of Reformation should by pu∣blike writinge in duetifull and Christian sorte communicate to hir Maiestie, the Lordes and commons of this Realme the enormities of the state, to the ende that they in their Parlia∣mentes should reforme the same, though some of the Com∣mons should take occasion herevpon desperately and vndu∣tifullie to rebell, yet the Seekers of Reformation coulde not iustly be condemned as aduised and malitious mouers of rebellion. Much lesse can their writinges, which haue as yet neuer ef∣fected nor affected rebellion, be deemed rebellions. Their writing for Reformation doeth rather prooue that they bee not rebells. For if they purposed a rebellion, they would ra∣ther tumultuouslie rise vp, and reforme thinges them selues then write bookes to moue the Queenes Maiestie, the ords and Commons in their Parliaments, to lay their handes to re∣formation. They that be not blinded with malice, do see wel that the Ministers who seeke Reformation,The seek of Reformations dtest rebellion doe preache true obedi∣ence to the Magistrates, with greater zeale and sincerity then any Bishop in this lande. It is not oriously knowen, that they teach as an article of their faith, That no subiect or seruaunt ought to rebell against his Prince or Maisters, though hee bee cruell and frowarde, but rather shoulde meekely suffer op∣pression and violence at their handes. They teach that the lawes must either be performed by obeying them, or else the punishment, for not yeelding vnto thē patiently suffered and vndertaken. Therefore, howsoeuer they write to bring a discontent∣ment into mens mindes, yet they would not haue the subiect to intrude vpon the Magistrates office, much lesse to rebell a∣gainst his Soueraine. Furthermore, if all they that write to bring the people to a∣discontentement, and dislike of the authorized gouuerne∣ment, doe write of purpose to moue rebellion, then doe the lawes, the Bishops, and whole state of Englande intende a re∣bellion. I proued that both the lawes & Bishops of this lande doe expect a further reformation, which can not be accom∣plished,
vnlesse hir Maiestie, the Ll. and commons be drawen to a discontentement and disike of the present state. For a∣mendement and redresse can neuer follow, but where discon∣tentement goeth before. ikewise it is prooued that the Church of Englande hath seene allowed, and suffered to be printed and publikely solde Latimer Sermons. diuerse bookes which doe speake most effectualli against the state of orde Bishops. I shewed thatChaucer ookes. bookes wherin the Lordship of Bb. hath bene cōdemned, haue bene allowed by expresse act of Parliament▪ I shewed also, that the gouerne∣ment by Elders is approued inM Noels . books which are commended by the Bb. to be fully grounded vpon Gods worde, which are commanded to be taught & learned throughout this Realme. If it be rebellion to worke a dislike & discontentement in the state of Lord Bb.No rellio to mke  dis¦like the Lord∣ship of Bb. If it bee rebellion to commende the refor∣med gouernement by Elders, then doth the state of England intende a rebellion against hir Maiestie. But God forbid that we should thinke so dishonorably or disoyally of our Chri∣stian State, though it hath wrought in mens mindes a dislike of the present Church-gouernement. If then this argument be vaine & friuolous against the state, why is it not so against the members and partes of the state? I might adde here that all Pinters who sell popish bookes and all others, who publish or deliuer from hande to hande any popihe or other booke that crosseth the present gou∣uernement were felons by this statute, if this argument might haue place. I might also giue a caueat to Maister Do∣ctor Percie, that he doe not proceede in perfecting the booke which Crammer, Cox, Haddon, and others beganne, touchinge reformation of the lawes ecclesiasticall, least peraduenture he should draw the people to be discontented with the lawes in force, and by that meanes incurre the penaltie of this sta∣tute I might also shew that they who hauing receyued greate benefites of hir Maiestie, doe contrarie to the trust reposed in them, maineteyne, preferre, and aduance notoriously sus∣pected papistes, hollow-harted traitours, and close enemies to hir Highnes, hir Crowne and Dignitie, opposing themsel∣ues against they knowe not what I might, I saye, shewe that those men doe prouoke a discontentement in hir Maiesties subiects, but I will not stande her cupon. For whatsoeuer dis∣contentement is raised in men, I knowe none that are falne
into such madnes, as to endeuour a rebelli. Neither can I conceyue cause of such feare, vnles we doubt that the popish orte being incouraged by the aduancement of their friends, the disgrace of their greatest enimies, the passing by of them, & pursuing of others should increase in number, (as they doe, without question, mightily) and then returne to their auncit rebellions ad diuelish practices. Thus much may suffice to be spoken to the generall argu∣ment vsed by the Bb. & their solicitours, to proue the writings for Reformatiō to be rebellious. Their reason is so sencelesse, that I maruell how it can proceede from men of wisedome. I am ashamed to bestowe more labour vpon it. The seconde accusation of writing to moue rebellion,The write for Reform▪ doe not in  rbelli. con∣cerneth particular speaches scattered here and there in some bookes, which I would willingly deale vvithall, sauing that I haue resolued to open my mouth in the cause of the innocēt, and to speake in their behalfe that are vnworthily (in mine o∣pinion) adiudged to death. Which trauell I would take aswell for the Bish. as for the Seekers of Reformation, if they should come into the like perill. There neuer yet hapned any rebellion vnder her Maiesty, by the instigatiō of them that wite in the cause of reforming the Church-gouernemet. But if any should write to the in∣tent to strre rebellion or insurrection (though no insurrection or rebellion thereupon ensue yet) they be felons by this statute. Now whether the authors aboue named haue writen to that intent, that commeth next to be discussed. We ought not to bring newe sences vnto wordes, but take that sence onely which the authour bringeth. To take the wordes without the sence, is to catch at the shadowe & leaue the body. Where wordes haue diuers sences, some good and some ill, by the rule of loue (vnlese vehement presumption doe force the contrary) we ought to take the better, & leaue the worse, especially in criminall and capitall causes: Because the Gods of the earth, I meane the Magistrates, ought after the example of the God of heauen, incline rather to mercie then iustice. Which is the reason that by the laweSmper in ff De Reg . 14. H 8 14. Fz: Maron. Sect. 8 The interpre∣tation most beneficiall for the defendant should bee accepted. For it is better to spare the guiltie, then take away the innocent, because2. Sam. 14. Bloud being spilt vpon the grounde like water, can not bee
gathered vp againe:14. Ra.  Reg. Iu. but a guilty person spared at one time, may be requited at another. Wherefore it is needeful, that uidences in cases of bloud should haue Claritatem probatio∣nis in quadam excellentia, A clearenes of proofe in an excellent brightnesse. If there be no euidence of trueth to induce vs to interprete the woordes vrged by aduersaries to Reformatiō of anie rebellious intendement, then it will appeare, that the writers for Discipline bee not iustly dravven within this statute. That which D. Bancroft alleadgeth of Martine, threatning of fistes, cannot in any equitie be drawen tor bellion. In first Epist. pag. 2. say∣ing. That D. Brdges (for writing against the Reformat.) woulde shortlie the haue twentie fistes about his eares more then his owne, hee meaneth nothing else, but that manie would exercise their handes in writing against D. Bridges, vvhich hath prooued true. Thus he explaneth him selfe in his seconde booke: the wordes in our vsuall phrase importing such a matter. To vn∣derstande this, as if Martin did incite to insurrection or rebellion, is altogither without reason. Here is neither argument ex∣hortation, or denunciation, that implieth any motion to re∣bellion. Matin could not be so md, as to imagine that such a light speach as this, were sufficient to drawe men to seditiō: especially such men as holde for an article of religion, that it is altogither vnlawefull for any subiect to resist his lawefull Prince, that holdeth of no creature but the God of heauen. If Martin had beene an Acheist, or Papist. who by their religion may Rebell against lawfull & soueraine Princes, thē there might be some colour of this accusation, especially if insteed of twen∣ty fists, Martin had saideAdmoni. . M M. pag. 65. twentie Halberds as the Bb. of Lōdon doeth comment vppon him. Though twentie Halber de, much lesse twentie fistes coulde doe little to the raising of rebellion within Englande. Doubtles Martin doeth abhorre such hor∣rible purposes: or if he cary any such minde, hanging is too good for him. Whereas Martin Senior speaketh of an hundred thousand handes and of striking, his wordes bee carried (as I am per∣swaded) altogether from his sence and meaning. In that place he exhorteth the Lords,Reproofe of Mart. Iior. Gentlemen, and people of England to become ioint-suiters by one supplication to her maiestie, that in euery parishe there may be a preacher so neare as may be: that vnlawfull callings may be remooued, and Christes
officers restored to the Church: that there might bee a quiet meeting for the debating of the controuersies, or that men might be suffered to sue the Prelates at the Kinges bench, in cases where they abuse the subiectes against the lawes of ∣gland. He addeth, that there might be procured an hundred thousande handes to this supplication of knowen men in this lande all her Maiesties most loyall and trustie louing subiectes, that these togither vvoulde strike a great stroke, especiallie in so reasona∣ble and iust a sute. These are his words. For opening of which I propounde this question, whether any man doeth knowe the meaning of these wordes better then the authour him∣selfe, which no man will affirme, as I thinke. Then looke fur∣ther vppon the wordes that follow. He falleth into a discourse of the Bishoppes English (as he tearmeth it) showing that they peruert by sinister exposition the ordinary proprietie of our English phrase, vvhereof he giueth diuerse examples, and at length commeth to this, That if a man should aske the Bb. vvhat it were in their language, to preferre such dutiful su∣plication as before hee had mentioned, to her maiesty, that they vvould make aunswere, that to deale in such a suite, were to rebell, to pull the Crowne off her Highnes head, to make a faction, to vvrest the scepter out of her Maiesties hande, and to shake off all authoritie. A wonderfull thing (sayeth he) it is, that hum∣blie and duetifullie to entreate, should in the English tongue signifie by vnbrideled force vnduetifullie to compell: and that to seeke the remoouing of vnlawefull callinges out of the Church, should bee to threaten that the lawefull Magistrate shoulde bee thrust out of the common vvealth. Thus farre writeth this Martin, explaning fullie that though it was like the Bb. woulde peruert and mi∣conster his wordes, as if he meant to moue rebellion, that yet notwithstanding he went about no other thing but to incline the magistrate by his owne authority to reforme all matters that were amisse. That an hundred thousand hands would strike a great stroke in this suite, hath no other sence then this, that if her maiesty should vnderstand, that an hundred thou∣sand of her most louing and loyall subiectes should subscribe to such a petition, it would greatly mooue her Highnes to ac∣cept the same. This phrase is vsuall and knovven to an En∣glish man. For we vse to saye, the cause hath receyued a great blowe, or a great stroke. So D. Bridges writing against Lordship of Bb. sayeth, that vos autem non sic, striketh dead, that is vtter∣lie
ouerthroweth Lordly authortie in the Ministers. A man by wresting of such speaches as this, might make the best sub∣iect in this Realme, a very traytor, if his writing and speaking were well obserued. But let traitours be traitours, and rebels be rebells, and suffer as is due to traytours or rebells. God for∣bid that a Tropologicall or Metaphoricall speach without in∣tendement of anie harme, should come within the compasse of treason or rebellion. Touching the wordes of Franc. Iunius,Franc. Iun writeth no treason. we desire D. Consins to take a little paines in shewing which Franc. Iunius he mea∣neth. If he vnderstand Fraciscus Iunius the famous learned man, who with Tremellius translated, and of late hath review∣ed the Bible, who hath also writen a whole booke in defence of the Eldership and Discipline, he doeth that worthie man exceeding wrong. It can not be proued that euer he wrote a∣ny such thing. But if he meane one who calleth him selfe Stephen Iunius, in aVind  booke against tyrants (whom peraduen∣ture it pleased D. Cosins of purpose to call Franc. Iunius, that men might suppose a louer of the Eldership, to be a fauourer of treason) I aunswere that this Stephen Iunius doth not men∣tion the Praesbyteries in all his booke. And whether he doth approue any such Eldership, it doeth not appeare: or if hee helde anie such frensie as D. Cossins fasteneth vppon him, the Seek. of Reform▪ doe disclaime him. That many thousandes in Englande Desire the Discipline is true. and the number doeth increase daily. That great trou∣ble would come of it if it were not admitted, hath appeared. For we see howe schismatikes doe trouble the Church, and what endles writing is on both sides, and all touching this Disci∣pline that yet wanteth. But what is here that carieth the coun∣tenance of any sedition or rebellion, vnlesse D. Cosins thin∣keth there can bee no trouble but in rebellious and warlike order? D.Bnc. ▪ pag. 74. Bancroft, not finding pregnent matter for his purpose at home to giue shewe that the Seekers of Reformation bee rebellious, he maketh roade into Scotlande, challenging those Churches (as his friendes the Papistes had done be∣fore) That the Scottishe Ministers who fauour Discipline,Th Scotish Ministers not . haue abused their King, preaching factions and seditious doctrine, trea∣ding vpon his scepter, imitating the papall iurisdiction, labouring to establishe an ecclesiasticall tyrannie of an infinite iurisdiction,
putting the King in daunger of his life:D Banc al seh the  of Scotland. whereupon the King ouer∣threwe their presbytertes, and restored the Bishops to their places. And galloping on the way in this order, he making in effect that right noble & Christian King (hir Maiesties most neere friende and knisman) a lat hypocrite, grounding himselfe vppon a booke counterfait by the gracelesse Archbishop of St Andrewes in the Kings name. Wherevnto the King neuer assented, as the Ministers can shewe by his Royall letters yet reserued in Edinborowe: the wicked Prelate since that time hauing sought to be reconciled to the Ministers whome hee slaundered. Which thing you may the rather beleeue, if you consider that the King hath taken so good liking of the Mi∣nisters & the Presbyteries, that he hath made publike pro∣testation to mainteine the fame while he liueth, And to sub∣iect the Nobilitie therevnto. Likewise when the King reade D. Banc. booke, and came to the pag 75. where the Doctor chargeth him to be an hypocrite or dissembler, The King vp∣pon the margent of the booke did write these wordes:The King of Scotland re¦prouth D. Bancr. My speking, vvriting and actions were and are euer one vvtthout dissem∣bling or bearing vp at any time what euer I thought. Ergo, Castes the libell ne quid asperius, that is, Therefore the Doctor sayeth vn∣truely, that I vse no rougher wordes. Signed thus, I. R. that is, Iacobus Rex, Iames the King. The same DoctorSer▪ pa 78 & 79. bringeth in some forraine authoures whom he saieth were fauoures of Discipline, yet brochers of rebellious and straunge propositions. These authours did write either against such as they accounted vsurpers or Prin∣ces by election & popishe tyrants such as hated our religion: they did not write aginst any protestant Prince, neither in defence of the Disciplice, but rather of the doctrine which is nowe mainteined in Englande. As D▪ Bancroft doth alleadge these authours to proue the Discipline to bee trayterous and rebellious: so the papistes do alleadge the same mē to proue that the doctrine of the Protestantes is seditious. The allega∣tion doeth holde against both alike. Our Religion doeth not depende vpon the opinions of one or two men. Where one fauourer of the Eldership hath written trayterously, I coulde produce fiue hundred, who were mainteiners of the Hierar∣chie and ranke traytors.All traytour to the Quene haue fauored the  Our English Bish. haue resisted, re∣belled, and deposed many kings of England. They haue most sawcilie abused the Nobilitie, as might bee shewed. I heare of
none that either attempted or effected treason or rebellion a∣gainst hir Maiesty but papists, & all such do approue the prin∣ciplity and iurisdiction of L1. Bb. Thus farre haue  proued (as I hope sufficientlie) that it is not lawfull or agreeable to the trewe intent of this staute to iudge these writers for Reformation as diffamers of hir Ma∣iestie, or rebels, and therefore that they ought not suffer as felons▪ Some haue helde, that though it be not consonant to the lawes of England, that the Bishops should presse the othe ex officio, as they vse to doe, yet that it is expedient they shoulde continue their proceedings, as they haue begunne; if any in the same conceite should holde, that albeit it is not lawfull to execute the Seekers of Reformation as felons, that yet it is Ex¦pedient, I answere, that if such law be admitted, it will be the most daungerous & perillous practise that euer was receiued within this Realme of Englande. For neither the Prince, the Councellours, the Magistrates, Bishops, Iudges, or best sub∣iectes can liue in security. If men may violate law and iustice vpon a colour or pretence of Expediencie: what endlesse mis∣chiees may insue vnto the common wealth? What kinde of president would this be to al succeding ages? To what purpose haue our auncestours prouided that there shoulde bee euery yeare or oftner a Parliament to supply the defectes of law, if vppon a surmise of experiencie men might goe beyond the listes and limites of lawe? If the reuerende Iudges of the lande who ought to preserue the integrity, and honour of the lawe shoulde admit any such learning, besides that it would ouer∣throw both the common and statute law, it would indaunger the keeping of their oth, & giue their goods, landes and liues to the Princes pleasure. Some will expect that I shoude answere the charge against the writer of the Demonstration (if one man made both the Epistle and the booke which I haue not as yet hearde to bee proued) but seeing he is conuicted by the verdict of 12. men,The euidence brought for the booke: hee con∣uicted for the Episte. the proceeding against him notoriouslie knowen,The Almond for the Parrot . the accu∣sation and woordes wherevpon hee was conuicted in euerie mans mouth: I leaue it to the iudgement of the great day, when the Iudge & all Iudges shalbe iudged before the Iudge of heauen and earth, who will rewarde euery man according to that which he hath done, good or ill.Psal. 116. 15. Precious in the eies of the Lorde is the death of his Saintes.ob. 16. 18. O earth thou canst not
couer bloude! It still cryeth in the eares of the Lord for venge∣ance, saying,Reuel. 6. 10. How long Lorde holy and true, doest not thou Iudge and auenge our bloude on them that dwell on the earth! Surelie, he that preserueth the haires of the head, and putteth the teares of his seruantes into a bottel, will much more preserue in his bottel the drops of the bloude that fall from the bodies of his saintes. Therefore be warned, bee wise, and take heede what you doe, ye Iudges of the earth: It is one thing to deale with a theefe and murtherer, another thing to iudge a Minister & preacher of the Gospell of Christ your redeemer, and that in matters of religion, wherein (God knoweth) you haue small vnderstanding. Thus haue I runne ouer the obiections made to proue the writers of Reform▪ & against the Hierarchie, to bee diffamers of hir Maiestie and rebelles. I will proceede a little further to shew that if men would be curious in their writings that deale for the Bb.The Bb and then  the Queene. and if their wordes were a little inforced as they might be (by M. Dolion or some such factor for the Bish) I feare they might incurre the daunger of this tatute as easily as others. The Bb. in their booke doe write, That it is not lawfull to bestowe such liuings vpon late men as are appointed by  to Preachers of the worde. Though this might stande good, and yet ouerthrowe many of our Bb. states & honors who preach not the word, yet this doeth reproch hir Maiestie, who doeth imploy some of the b. liuings otentimes) to better vses then Bb doe bestowe them. M. VVicleve, that famous protestant taught another lesson, And who will not thinke the su∣perfluitie of a Bb. liuing better bestowed vppon such a man as Sir Frauncis Walsingham, that right honorable Councelor and benefactor of the Church and Countrie, then vppon any Bb. that referreth al abondance to the aduancement of his house and posteritie? D. Brages mainteineth in writing, That a Priest maie haue a moderate Lordely iurisdiction ouer all the Lordes allotment and . Which implieth and externall ordely iurisdiction ouer hir Maiestie vles he will say, That she is none of Gods heritage, both which might be made a daungerous doctrine.
D. Bancroft writeth, That her Miestie is a Pty pope, and ascribeth to hir all the iurisdiction that the Pope euer had by vsurpation. M. Iewell saieth, Apol p. 70. 4. That the popish Prelates gaue K. Henr the 8. the strange and vnvsed ule of head of the Church, to bring him into the slander and taske of the worlde. And the Par∣liament for auoyding scandale, changed the title of Supreme heade, to Suprem: Gouernour. If Maist. Iewell misliked that th Queene should be called Supreme heade, what would he haue thought of Pety pope? or howe can the Parliament beare this? Do not the Protestantes detest in the pap. their woman pope? The Archb. of Canterb. would bee displeased (and I can not blame him) if a man should call him Pope. Notwithstanding the Pope saide of one of his predecessors, pag. 188. Co Baronense.  Includamus hunc in orbe nostro tanquam  orbis Papam: Let vs include this Aselme in our woorlde as Pope of another worlde, meaning great Britaine, called by the auncient writers a world by it selfe, yet it is thought nothing to call hir Maiestie a Pey pope. Doctor Whitakers sayeth, That the Name, authoritie, and person of the Pope, all Protestantes doe abhorre and accurse to the Prince of darknesse whence it came. The pa: 298. 299.  Princ l. 5.▪ 17. & 18. papistes doe slaunder hir Ma∣iestie to be a Pope or Pety pope: but M. Nowell telleth the papistes, and D. Bancroft also, That wee doe not teach that the Princes be either Popes or Pety popes. The papistes also doe abuse hir Highnes, as D. Bancroft doeth, saying: That vve take the Supremacie from the Pope, and giue it to the Prince. But Do∣ctor Rainolds aunswereth, That the Supremacie which vvee take from the Pope, vve giue to no mortali creature, Prince or other. But D. Banc. who thinketh himselfe a great Clerke, as if he were a deeper Diuine then either M. Nowell or M. Rainolds (whom he vseth to call a Precfian) maketh hir Maiestie a Petie pope, & assigneth hir not some of the Popes power, but ALL honors, dig∣nities, preeminences, iurisdctions priuileges, authorities, profites and commodities, which by vsurpation did at anie time appertae vnto the Pope. If a man can diffame by foolishe flatterie, then D. Bancs the most notorious diamer of hir Maiestie in al Eng∣land. Neither lawe, reason, religion, or good manners doeth warant this. God forbid that like extremity were extended for these faultes, as hath bin vsed against the Seek. of Reformat. I doe not recount them for that purpose, but onely that the Bb. and their friendes, seeing their owne case (if hir Maiestie vvere
not mercifull) may deale more curteously with their bre∣thren. Conclusion. Considering the doubtfulnes of these controuersies, I trust your Maiesty will take some good order for the peaceable de¦bating & compounding of them. In the meane time we hope that these things which are here writen, being well weighed, your gratious and tender heart will neuer suffer one drop of bloud to fall to ground for these causes of Reform▪ till it eui∣dently appeare where the fault lyeth. This is the intent of this humble petition, made onely for the peace of this Church & quiet of the Realme. Which two things it behooueth all Christian subiectes to aduaunce for¦ward with their whole endeuour. The God almighty, who to the great wonder of the world, hath most miraculousie defended and deliuered you from all the cursed enterprises against your Realme and person, preserue your Maiestie many yeares in health, honour, pro∣sperity, and victory to his glory, the good of his Church, the reliefe of his Saints, to the ioy of Englande, and all Na∣tions that professe the trueth, AMEN good Lord, and cursed be he from heauen, that sayeth not from the heart, AMEN, AMEN.
To the ende that it may appeare howe vn∣iustlie the Seekers of Reformation are slaun∣dered by the Bishoppes and others, I thought good briese and truely to deliuer the opinions of such as sue for Reformation, which I haue ga∣thered out of their bookes, and seene in their practise, and heard in conference which I haue had with them. 1 THEY openly professe and acknowledge that they be sinfull men, subiect to infirmity as well as others. They doe not call or account them selues Cathar or , and therefore if Augustine say true, that Cathar sunt qi e∣ipsos isto nomine quafi propter munditi, suberbissime at que oi∣osissimè nominant: They bee Puritanes, That in conceipt of their owne puritie, do most proudly and odiously call them selues by that name, then vvithout question they be no Puritanes, vnles in that sence that all the Apostles (saue Iudas) and all other true Christians are called  or Puritanes in the Scrip∣tures. 2 They doe absolutely yeelde and subscribe to all the ar∣ticles of Christian fthChristia faith. and doctrine professed in the Church of Englande,Church of England. according as they bee inioyned by the lawes of the lande: and therefore they doe not offende against the Statute made in the thirteenth yeare of her Highnes raigne, and withall haue open iniurie in being called schismatikes. 3 They doe vnfeinedly giue to her maiesty all that pow∣er, soueratie, and authoritie whatsoeuer is recognised to
be in her Highnes, by the othe of the Supremacies, as her ma∣iesty : and the Parliament haue expounded  and thereore they be not Traytours by the statutes of  or quinto of her Maiesty. 4 They professe all submission reuerence and obedience to the right Honourable the Lordes of the priuy Councell, the Iudges, and all other ciuill Magistrates of this state, ho∣nouring them as Lieutenants of God and her Maiesty: and therefore they be not Anababtists, who would abandon the authority of Magistrates and distinctions of states among Christians. And although they beleeue that it is not agreea∣ble to the doctrine and example of Christ and his Apostles, that Bb. and Preachers should accept temporall Lordship, and ciuill authority, yet they honour that authoritie which is deriued to them from her Maiestie, in regard whereof they submit them selues to be conuented, imprisoned fined, &c. by them: much lesse will they vvith force and armes resist or rebell against her Maiesties most lawfull authority, ey∣ther in her selfe, or being deputed to others who are not dis∣abled by Gods worde to vse it: and therefore they bee not within the statute of vice imo tertio of Raising rebellion against her Highness. 5 They hold it lawfull and necessarie, before Magistrates to take an oth being called thereunto, so that the oth (being a matter highly concerning the worship of God) be guided and taken as the Scriptures allowe, that is, not in vaine, where a matter may bee otherwise proued by sufficient euidence or witnesse: nor yet rashly, as swearing to answere they know not to what, or before the Articles which they must answere vpō their oth, be made knowen vnto them. 6 They seeke not to pull downe the Courts of Iustice, as the high Court of Parliamēt, the Starchamber, the Kings bench, the Chanceri, or any of the rest, but they desire they may stande as they doe, sauing that Bb. & Ecclesiasticall persons should be shut out from them, & set to preach the gospell, & follow their owne vocation, not being charged with other of∣fices, vnles they were sometimes called in weighty difficult causes, to giue counsell & aduise what may or should be done by the word of God. 7 They denie not but that matters of Testamentes and
Mariages may bee determined by Ciuilians in their Courtes (if it seeme not good to the Parliament to transferre these things to the temporall Lawiers) alwaies prouided, that their Courtes may be made meere tēporall, not intermedling wi the Church Censures: prouided likewise that the Bb. or o∣ther Ministers haue no dealing therin: prouided also that cau∣ses may be iudged there, not by popes lawes, but by the word of God, the laudable Customes, Statutes, Iniunctions Syno∣dall, and Prouinciall Constitutions accepted in this Realme, a greable to the word of God, and established by hir Maiesties authoritie and act of Parliament. 8 They teach, that neyther the Ministerie nor people of this Realme ought to make any general Reformation,General Refomation by the  neither with force and armes, or otherwise of their owne authoritie, change any lawes made or established for religion by authori∣tie of Parliament: but they holde that the generall reformati∣on doeth belong to the Magistrate, as Gods Lieuetenant, to deale in: and that for them selues they may and oughte in dutifull and christian forte both preache, write, and sue to the Magistrates for redresse of enormities, and also practise the or dinances of Christ which he hath commanded his Church to keepe to the ende of the world: and therefore they haue not incurred the dangers of lawes made against Riots, Routes, or vnlawfull Assemblies. 9 They detest all such as aduisedly, falsly, or maliciousie slaunder or disame her most excellent Maiestie: and therfore they be not felons by the statut prouided against spreaders of Newes or false rumours. 10 They doe maineteyne, that (according to the appro∣ued doctrine of Englande) Emperours, or any Christian ma∣gistrats whatsoeuer, being members of the Church of Christ, ought to submit themselues to excommunication, or other ec¦clesiastical censures, being duely, orderly, vpon iust occasion, according to the commaundements of Christ, executed. 11 That a Magistrate standing excommunicated, ought to be obeyed and honoured in all respectes of subiection, for custome,Ex com. Princ. eb yed. subsidie, loue, or any other imposition or seruice whatsoeuer of body, goods and landes, as if hee were not ex∣communicated. And therefore they abhorre the Antichri∣stian and most pestiferous doctrine of the popish orte, that
giueth liberty to the subiect to withholde his seruices and du∣ties from the Magistrate, so long as he standeth excommuni∣cate. 12 Their suite to her Miesty and this honorable state is, that it may be permitted and enacted by law, that the church of Christ may bee ruled by such lawes, orders, and officers, as Christ himselfe hath expressed in his word. 13 That euery Congregation professing the faith and o∣bedience of Christ might haue one or two sufficient Teachers faithfully labouring in the word of God & doctrine: so main∣teyned as they might keepe hospitalitie: not hindred or in∣tangled with ciuill offices, wherby their flocke should be neg∣lected. 14 That euery such Congregation might haue assistant to their teachings Elders,Elders. some of the fittest, best, & most god∣ly of the church, who should ioin the Teachers with the eccle∣siasticall ruling and gouerning of the Church according to the worde of God. 15 They would not haue these me any whitt to encroch vpon the Maiesties authoritie, to punishe anie man external∣lie, with any pecuniary or corporal penaltie: but that they also be subiect to the higher powers: & keepe thēselues within the compasse of their calling for the seruice of the Church, as Christ hath appointed. 16 That in euery such Congregation there might bee. some appointed of the most honest and sufficient men to ga∣ther for the poore, to keepe the Church treasurie, for the vses of that Church, and to the relife of the poore among them, & other neighbour churches. 17 That also there might bee appointed some graue and olde Helpers or Widowes,. qualified as the Apostle com∣maundeth, 1. Timoth. 5. 5. 9. 10. to thend the sicke, a∣ged, friendlesse, and needy of the Church: and (as they coulde) other neighboures, or wayfaringe men, that people might not languishe or dye in our streetes and high wayes, for want of reliefe, as is most pitifully to beholde in manie places. 18 That all these shoulde bee chosen and ordeyned in such manner and by such persons as the woorde of GOD,Election and  of the practise of the best primitiue and od erne Churches do∣eth warrant.
19 That if any dissention growe or cause of bee giuen in any particular Church by the Minister or Of∣ficers, the partie grieued might appeale to a particular Sy∣node,▪ from the particular Synode to a Prouinciall Synode, from a Prouinciall Synode to a nationall Synode. Which Synodes should bee appointed at sett times: The more par∣ticular the Synode is, the more often the Synode for the time to bee moderated by some fitt man chaungeably by e∣lection, that might write, speake and praye in behalfe and at the direction of the rest. Or the patie grieued might appeale from the particular Congegration or Synode, im∣mediatlie or at the firste instaunce to the Magistrate, vvho oughte to punishe both the Ministers and other ecclesiastical officers, if they abuse their places and authoritie, not vsing them according to the direction and warrant of the worde of God. 20 They doe not meane that there shoulde bee appoin∣ted presently and out of hande these Officers aoresaide in euery of our Churches, as they now stande (for there do lacke Ministers, and people fitt for these purposes) but they humbly desire that such people as be alreadie capable hereof, and wil∣ling to liue as becommeth the Churches of Christ, might, as they are commaunded by Christ, so also bee permitted by the Magistrate thus to ioyne and walke togither according to the worde of God▪ that it might be enacted and required also by publike authoritie of the Magistat, that all they should ex¦ecute their offices, and liue in such orte, manner and as Christ hath giuen direction to his Church in his vvill and Testament a that withall good ordr might bee taken for trayning vppe of youth for the ministerie of the Church: and thus at length, by the blessing of GOD, all her Maie∣sties subiectes, vvhich will walke as the Churches of Christ, might be furnished, guyded, and gouerned in manner afore∣saide: and so  in all christian and duetifull obedince to God and her Maiestie. 21 They doe professe and protest, that they can and will auowe this Reformatiō, which they desire to be most agreea∣ble to the Scriptures, to haue the testimony of the best and most learned men that haue bin since the Apostles, that it is not preiudiciall to hir Maiestie, to the Lawes, to the state, but
profitable euery way, and commaunded by Christ to bee his Church vnto the ende of the worlde, both vnder Heathē Magistrates: as they make challenge to proue all the learned men in the worlde, that are contrary , if they may be heard. This is the summe of their professed opinions, and of the Reformation desired, as I doubte not but they will testifie if they bee called in question to acknowledge the same. They that condemne them vppon their aduersaries reportes (who in∣tollerablie doe slaunder them in manie thinges, and are altogither partiall in their ovvne cause) doe shewe them selues to bee men of smal dis∣cretion or Christian charity. To the godlie Reader. MAruell not, good Reader, that ī doe not affixe my name to this my Treatise. It is not knowen who was the vriter of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, and of diuerse other monu∣mentes of hlie Scripture, neyther of sundry bookes published hereto∣fore, & of latter daes in defence of the doctrine and gouernement of our Church in England. If a truth, & nothing but the truth be deliue∣red, it skilleth not whether the professor therof be knowen or not. Wher∣fore I doe iustlie cōdēne the vaine cu iositie of some vndisreet persons, vvho beeing placed in noe degree of authoritie, are not content to enie the fruites of other mens labours with thankesgiuing, but doe continuallie exercise and trouble them selues in calculating and di∣uining vvho bee most likelie to bee the authours and procurers of their good. If they had anie consideration of the  of the time vvherein an indifferent vvell vviller maie scarcely bee hearde to speake the trueth, or if they vveighed the greuous molestati∣ons to others, and vnprofitable pleasure that maie hereby ensue vnto them selues, they woulde bridle these vnrulie longing affe∣ctions, least that they preuayling against them in needelesse tri∣fles, doe at length gtte ground vppon them in greater matters. Rahab hath procured to hir selfe a memorable commendation for
hiding Gods seruauntes when their aduersaries and her Maisters, sought to apprehende them. If the holy man that wrote to the He∣brewes thought it most cōuenient in godly policy to keep his name vn∣knowen, assuredly they should haue beene deemed curious and idle brai∣ned, that would eyther haue beene inquisitie to know the same, or ha∣uing knowledge thereof, would foolishlie haue blabbed it abroad to o∣thers. Which thinges I speake rather in behalfe of others, than in feare of axie danger that might growe vnto my selfe by this enterprise. For first, that which I haue writen, cannot I trust, offende anie reasonable and not partiallie affected person: or if it doe, the vprightnesse of mine owne conscience, and loyaltie both to this Church and commonwealth, will (I hope) inable me to sustaine and edure with cheerefulnesse, all the malice and displeasure of anie enemie to a godlie peace. Secondlie, I doe not desire at any mans hands the fauour of concealement in this a∣ction. For although I haue attempted and published this my trauell without making my selfe knowen to any creature, yet when my appa∣rance shall be found more profitable to the Church then my conceale∣ment, I will come forth and iustifie my words in such maner and forme as I haue writen. In the meane time I wish euery true harted Chri∣stian, To pray for the peace of Ierusalem, that nowe at length her Maiestie (of God will) rather then any other Prince succeeding, may haue the honor in reconciling the two twinnes that striue togither is the body of our Church, to the great perill and danger of the whole. Nubecula est, cit transibit.
Certaine Articles vvherein is discouered the negligence of the Bb. their officialles, fa∣uourers and followers in perfourmaunce of sundry Eccle∣siasticall Statutes, Lawes, and Ordinaunces Royall and E∣piscopall published for the gouernement of the Church of England. Out of the Statutes. 1 BY the statute of 25. H. 8. cap. 15. It is accoūted by the Parliament against equity and due order of iustice,Orex Offico. to bring any man in dunger of his life, name, goods, or landes, by any intrapping interrogatories, or by any other meane, then witnesse, verdict, confession or presentment. Yet the Bishops doe examine the Queenes subiectes vpon intrap∣ping interrogatories vvithout verdict, vvitnesse, confession or presentment, to the daunger of then liues, names, landes and goods: for making, printing, or dispersing, of seditious bookes and sundry other grieuous crimes, vpon vaine surmi∣ses, or secret suggestions of lewde persons, who dare not auow their accusations in the face of the Defendants. Whereby the subiects be intollerably molested, without remedy or costs & dāmages awarded for their vexations, & molestatiōs wrong∣fully susteined. 2 All men are baylable that are not prohibited by law to be bayled,Bayle. 2 West. ca. 14. yet the Bb. deny bayle to some that ought not to be imprisoned, much lesse be vnbayleable by a∣ny lawe. 3 No officiall or other officer should take any more then three pence for the seale of a cita∣tion,Seale of citatious. else they forfayte dou∣ble costes and dammages to the partie grieued, 23. H. 8. ca. 9. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. yet they vsually take more vnder colour of sig∣ning or subscrbing a citation, which is a thing in lawe materi∣all, Iermes in lawe. Tit. Faits. 4 No forreine Constitutions, whether they be the Popes or Emperours lawes,Popes lawes. haue any force in our state. Onely such Synodall and Prouinciall Ordinances as haue beene made within this Realme, are confirmed for lawe, 25. H. 8. cap. 19. yet the Bishops in their Consistories doe put in practise the
Romish and imperiall constitutions, not contenting them∣selues with the Statutes, Iniunctions, and other Ecclesiastical ordinances of this Realme. 5 Such Canons and Constitutions onely as be not repug∣nant to the lawes, statutes & customes of this Realme, ought to be put in practise, 25. H. 8. cap. 19. But the Bishops giue sen¦tence in infinite matters, which would be otherwise ruled by the common lawes. 6 The law accompteth them Ministers who are made after anie other order then is prescribed in the lawes of En∣glande,Ministers of reformed Churches. so that they will subscribe to the Articles of saith and doctrine, 13. Eliz. cap. 12. yet the Bishops haue reckoned such men as haue bene ordeined ministers in reformed, chur∣ches, to be lay men, though they esteeme a popish priest a suf∣ficient minister. 7 The lawe requireth a subscription to the Articles of re∣ligion onely,Subscription. that concerne the confession of true faith and doctrine of Sacramentes, 13. Eliz. cap. 12. The Bishops vrge a subscription to the bookes of Homilies, and diuers ceremo∣niall and transitorie matters, neither concerning faith nor Sacrament. 8 If the Bishops publishe any Canons or orders to be pra∣ctised without the Royall assent of her Maiestie,The Queene assent to Bb. Articles. they should be fined and imprisoned, 25. H. 8. cap. 19. Notwithstanding this statute, they publish Subscriptions in their prouinces, and Articles in their Diocesses without any assent of hir highnes. 9 By the Statute 23 Eliz. cap. 1. the Ordinarie of his Mi∣nisters should not take any thing for allowing or licensing a Schoolemaister to teach. And neither the statute nor any in∣iunction or lawe requireth a subscription by Schoolemaisters yet it is famouslie knowen, that they extort of Schoolmaisters for licences to teach, of some 7 shillings, of some tenne shill▪ of some a marke, according to his state that admitteth them, whether he be Archb. Bishop, Chauncelour or officiall. The Iustices of peace ought to cause this grosse and palpable ex∣tortion to be inquired of at their Sessions. The inforcing of subscription vpon Schoolmaisters is vpon like warrant of law and iustice. 10 By the great Charter cōfirmed by many Kings of En∣gland in parliamentes,Imprisoned without ▪ and by the auncient Bb. by their Ex∣commengments, None should bee imprisoned but by the lawefull
iudgementes of this Peeres, or by the lawe of the lande, Mag. Chart. Cap. 29. The Bishops will punishe men for not swearing vain∣ly, and Women for not being Churched, &c. without triall or shewing authority of law to warrant their proceedings, to the great periudice of the auncient and lawfull libertie of English subiects. Out of the Common lawes. 11 By common law a man shall not be examined vpon his othe in matters that sound to his reproch. For no man is boūd to accuse him selfe,Oth ex officio. Crompt. 182. yet Bishops would examine men vpon their othes in case of felonie, as for writing & pub∣lishing of seditious bookes. 12 No man should be cited to a spirituall court, to depose there in any matter as witnesse: for this is extortion and tort to the party, Fitz. Iust. of peace, pag. 172. b. Crompt. 219. this is not remembred of our spirituall Doctours. 13 No Bishop ought to appoint a man to appeare before him to take an oth ex officio,Ex offico. sauing in matters of mariage and Willes. And the cause of the appearance must be expressed particularly in the citatiō, otherwise it is against law, as Iustice Fitzherbert saieth, Nat, bre. pag. 41. yet the Bb. boldly presume against this lawe. Out of the booke of common prayer, authorised by act of Parliament. 14 It appeareth by the Kalender which assigneth 4. chap∣ters to be read euery day through the yeare. Also by the pre∣face and order of reading the Psalmes, that the morning and euening prayerMorning and Euning prayer. should be read euery daie through the yeare, either publikelie or priuately, except great busines hinder: yet they be onely read vpon Sundaies, Holidaies, Wednes∣daies and Frydaies,Toll the ell. and Saintes Fues. 15 ThePreface to the Commn∣on booke. Curate must toll a bell to seruice, that is, he must eyther doe it himselfe, or appoint another: yet this is deputed to the Sexten or Clarke, who is founde by the Parish, and not by the Curate. 16 TheRubricke  Monīg praier at the commu∣nion and Com∣mnation. people are to answere the Priest to say,. AMEN, and such like: yet this is permitted to the Clearke alone in
most places, who after the popish order must supply the room of the vnlearned and say Amen, as the papists doe abuse the . scriptue to that purpose. 17 Where there is singing, there the LessonsSing Lessons should be sung in a laine tune, & likewise the Gospll and Epistle: yet I haue not knowen this vsed in Cathedrall Churches. 18 The names of Communicantes before they receiue should be signified to the Curae, yet this is not regarded in most places. 19 The Curat (be he neuer so base) shoulde not suffer notorious ill liuers, such as haue wronged y by woorde or deede,Notorious of∣fenders suspen¦ded from the Lords Supper. Open  of sinne. neither men out of charitie (by they Earles, Counseilloures or others) to bee partakers of the Communion, till they have declared them selues openlie to be repentant and reclaimed: yet notorious lewde persons be admitted, and men of state (without excep∣tion) are not hindred, nor anie open consession of sinne is vsed by any offendour, but whom the Officiall appointeth, though the authours and confirmers of the cōmunion booke doe generally wish it. 20 The Minister should vse the ornamentes appointed by King Edward,The Clarke Surplesse. yet not he alone, but the Clearke also doeth vse a surplice in many churches. 21 InRubriche next after the communion. Cathedral & Collegi. Churches, the Communion should be ministred euery Sundy at the least. This is not practised.Communion in Cathedrall Churches. ThePag. 5. Aduertisement appointeth the first Sunday in euerie mo∣neth. But the BishopsD. Bridg. pag. 33. Articles tie Ministers to vse the forme prescribed in the communion booke and no other. 22 The Godfathers and Godmothers areExhort after pub. baptisme. commanded that they 1. shall call the children for whome they promise,Godfathers & Godmothers duetie. to heare sermons. 2. They must prouide that they bee taught to learne all thinges necessarie for Christians. 3. That they bee vertuouslie brought vp. Which thinges al Godfathers and Godmothers might bee inorced to doe (for the lawe will not commaunde a thing without allowing a meane to ffect) yet the Bishops doe neuerinforce this by ecclesiasticall censures, thoughe in∣finite children doe, for want of this helpe, perishe in igno∣rance. 23 bishops are commaunded to confirme children: yet diuers Bb. doe not vse it,Confirmation of children. albeit by lawe, noe man shoulde re∣ceyue the Communion till hee were first confirmed. A good plea for papistes to refuse the communion, this confirma∣tion
would cause children to learne the principles of Religiō for none should be confirmed till he could say the Lords prai∣er, Ten commandements, and the short cacechisme. 24 Curates of euery Parishe ought vppon sundaies and hlidaies halfe an howre before euen-songe openlie instruct and examine chil∣den, seruauntes, and prentices in the Catechisme. A profitable worke seldome or neuer vsed by the Bishops followers. By thePag 14 and 16. booke of Canons the Curate may examine any of what age or degree soeuer, be they olde or younge, noble or vnnoble. The Bishops account it tyranny in some Ministers to expect or exact this thing. 25 None must be admitted to the Communion that can not say the Catechisme. Therefore urates should examine Communicantes, and seclude them that be found wanting in knowledge: but this is not regarded. 26 Banes should be asked three seuerall Sundyes in the open Church: yet Bihops dispence with asking banes Non ob∣stants this booke confirmed by Parliamēt, as if a Bishop might dispence with penall Satutes. Out of the booke of ordring Deacons, &c. 27 The partie presented to the Bb. should weare A plain Albe (by the booke of ordering Ministers, confirmed by8 Eliz c: Par∣liment) yet this garment in not vsed. 28 The Deacon by part of his office ought to searche for the sicke, poore & impotent of the , and intimate their estates to the Curate, &c. But nowe the office of a Deacon is accoun∣ted meere spirituall. 29 The Deacon must read the Gospell in the day of his Ordination, putting on a Tunicle: but his vesture is scarcely knowen at this day. 30 The Bish. must tell the Minister at his Ordination, That if his Church or anie member thereof, doe take anie hurte by his negligence, that a horrible punishment vvill ensue to him. Hee chargeth him, neuer to cease his labour, care and diligence till hee haue done vvhat lyeth in him according to his duetie, to bringe all that are committed to his charge, that there bee no error in Religion or viciousnes in life left in them: yet it is manifest, that the Bb. Priestes, and Chaplens, are most negligent in their charge, turning ouer their trauell to other, vvhich they are charged
here to performe in their owne peron. 31 The booke would haue them to giue themselues wholy to the ministeriall vocation asmuch as lieth in them, to apply themselus to that one thing, to drawe all their care & studies that waie & to that ende: yet they attende eiuill offices and worldly affaires imper∣nent to the charge here giuen to them. 32 The Bish. chargeth, and the Priest promiseth to Mi∣nster the discipline of Christ,Christ Dis∣cipline. as the Lorde hath commaunded, And as this Realme hath  the same according to Gods com∣maundements, not otherwise. For the worde And noteth two di∣stinct thinges in that clause, where all Ministers are authori∣zed to excommunicate as well as b. (for the Lorde hath com∣maunded this Discipline of Excom. to all Ministers alike) also they may admonish and suspene from the Lordes supper (for this Realme hath receyued these cenures, and giuen them to euerie Minister according to Gods commaundement in that behalfe) yet the Bishops doe retaine the power of Excom¦muni in their owne handes assigninge it to such as please thē most. 33 The Bish. likewise chargeth and the priest promi∣seth to vse not onely publik but also priuate admonition and exhortations both to the sicke and to the whole within his cure: yet their Chapleins and Doctors accompte their duetie dis∣charged if some time they preach publikelie, and neuer con∣ferre priutely with their flocke in pointes of religion. For Christ, say they, knewe not the persons and faces of his flocke neitheir is this expected of his Ministers, both which bee vn∣true. 34 The booke at the ordination of euery Minister direc∣teth the Bish. to say to the Minister, Take thou authoritie to preache the vvorde of God,Ministers preachers. and to Minister the holy Sacramentes in this Church. In which wordes wee obserue, 1. That the booke and Parliament which confirmed it▪ doe intende that euerie Minister should be a Preacher. This also may be proued by many other circumstances in this booke. 2 A full licence & authoritie is giuen to euerie Minister to preach,Licences to preac. therefore he may alwayes, after this authoritie giuen, aswell preache as minister the Sacramentes, without a licence: neither is it ma∣teriall that theArt: 8. Iniunctions orIniunct. pag. 4. Aduertisements do will that a Minister shoulde haue a licence to preache, for this booke of Ordering Ministers beeing authorized, 8. Eliz. cap. 1. and 13.
Eliz. cap. 12. In the Articles of Religion, Artic. 36. doeth countermunde the Iniunctions and Aduertisementes that went before. 3. No Minister hath authoritie to preach out of any booke but Gods worde. 4. The Ministers and Deacons should bee ordeined in the Congregation to which they are presented: not in the Bishops Chappell, else the book would not say, Take authoritie to preach in this Congregation. For it can not be imgined that all the Priestes which a Bishop maketh haue authoritie to preach or exercise their office in the Bish.Where Priests should e . Chappell when they list. Yet notwithstanding the authority of this booke, the Bb. admit ministers who be no Preachers, whereas this book and their owne authoritie by Lawe (Ar∣tic.Bb. neede not . Cler. cap. 13. might aunswere any Quare impedit, if they would refuse a Clearke for non abilitie of preaching. Also, notwithstanding this booke, to get mony (for if that bee not their purpose, let them doe it gratis, but then they would not stick at it) they compell men, beeing ordered after this book, to take new licences to preach, not beeing contented when they shewe them their letters of orders, which the Bishops at their pleasure vpon a supposed misdemeanor doe vse to take from them, Furthermore, sundrie of the Prelates doe preache and take their texts out of the Apocripha, wherein they goe beyonde their commission, vnlesse the Apocripha be a parte of the scripture, as one of the Bishops doeth intitle it. Lastly, notwithstanding the intent of this booke, they ordeine Mi∣nisters at large in nubibus, without a cure, they neuer ordeyne them in the Congregration to which they are presented▪ that the people of the Church (who are likelie to be most inquisi∣tiue into his conuersation that halbe their Pastor) might ex∣cept against them, for the Bb. willeth the people present to speake if they knew any impediment or crime in the person presented that may hinder him from the ministery. Which (by all likelihoode) can not be meant of a people of a staunge parish, nor of the Bishops family, vnlesse the Bish. fa∣mely be like the knights of the post in Westminster, who know al men, their conditions, lands, and estates, though they neuer saw or heard of them before. 35 All the Bishops that be present at the consecration of Bishops should we areBeford.  pag. 65. Coapes and Surplesses, hauing their Pa∣storll Staues in their handes: they retene the Surplesse, sel∣dome the Coapes, but they neuer vse their Pastorall Staues.
Out of the Queenes Iniunctions. 36 By the Queenes Iniunctions (which should be execu∣ted in all her Highnes Realmes and Dominions) all ecclesia∣sicall persons haug cure of soules, ought to preach in their church,12. or. 16 Sir∣mons jearely in all Chur∣ches. and  other cure they haue one simon euery moneth. And in their. owne person they should preach once euery quarter, or else read an Homely: so that in euery parish England, Ire∣land & Wales, there should haue bin twelue sermos preached euery yeare, either by the Minister or his deputy (as it is ex∣pounded) and the minister in proper person should haue prea¦ched foure sermons or read foure Homilies euery yeare since her Maiesty began hir raigne: yet there bee many hundred churches within theese Dominions, especially in Wales, Ire∣lande, the Northen & Western partes, that haue scarcely had twelue sermons in twelue yeares: and there be many persons that cry formality, that come not twise in a yeare at their charge to benefite the people by any duty. 38. Erasmus ParaphrasesErasmus p∣raphras. should bee had in all Churches, yet the Bishops wilbe more carefull to enquire if euery parish haue a suplesse rather then to enjoyne any booke learning. 38 Ecclesiastical persons should not play. at dice, cardes,Dice, Card. tables, or any other vnlawful game, but vse some other honest exercise, asB. of canon pag. 13. shooting: but the Bb. chaplens and followers,Shooting. that pretend most obedience to the Queenes lawes, doe more of∣fende in these matters then any other Ministers. 39Artic. . All Nonresidents which may dispende aboue twentie pound yearly, ought to distribute the 40. part of their liuing to the poore of the parish:Nonresident beneuolence. but this is lightly regarded of the most, as I suppose. 40Artic. 12. Whosoeuer, Parson, Vicar, &c. may dispend in ec∣clesiasticall promotions aboue 100. pounde yearely, should giue for euery 100. pound, three pounds six sillings and viij pence yearely to so many poore schollers in the Vniuersitie or Grammer schooles,A charge laid vpon  Places as he hath hundred poundes, that ha∣uing profited in learning, they might bee made partners of their Patrons cure, and otherwise be imployed for the good of the common wealth. The Bishops doe not inioyne their Chapleins, their Deanes and Doctours to subscribe to this ar∣ticle, though if this one article had beene obserued by our formall Prelates (who be accompted the onely obedient sub∣iectes) as it should haue bene▪ and yet bee if our Bishops and
regarde the Queenes orders, there would haue growed and hereafter growe more profite hereby to the Church & state, vnder hir Maiesty, then hath ensued by all episcopall subscri∣ption for these hūdred yeares. Marke Bish. it is your fault that learning decayeth, and that there wanteth a continuall sup∣ply of learned Ministers. If this Article had bene performed, there might haue bene relieued yearely, euer since her Ma∣iest. came to the Crown aboue 1000. poore schollers, who for want of maintenance, haue applyed her time & trauell to o∣ther matters▪ Blush at your negligence herein. 41 The QueenesArt. 14. Iniunctions ought to be read in the Churches openlie once euery quarter. But this were no wise∣dome: for then the people would expect many things at the Bishops and their Pestes handes that are not conuenient to be knowen of the common sort. 42 The holidaies should be spent in hearing Gods word, in priuate and publike prayers, in reconciliation of enemies, receyuing the Sacramentes and visiting the poore, vsing all so∣bernes and godly conuersation, yet the Bb. themselues and their Priests (who should be ensamples to the flocke) bestow these daies prophanely at bowles, hearing Commedies and Trage∣dies, &c. Which be farre from the dueties both here & in the scriptures commaunded. 43 AllArtic▪ 23 and 35. superstitious, pictures, paintings in walles and glasse windowes should be abolished out of Churches and houses: yet ma∣ny Church-windowes bee full of such pictures, and (as I heare) the Bb. be not without such paintings in their Cham∣bers. 44 TheArtic. 29. Wiues of Ministers and Deacons should be al∣lowed by the ordinarie and two Iustices of peace. Many fore∣ward Chapleins regard not this. 45 AllArtic: 30. Cleargie people should weare their habits sqare cappes, &c. and noAduer. p▪ 9. hattes in iourneying: yet there bee a num∣ber of the Bishops Priestes that breake this order as well as the Ministers that seeke reformation. 46 TheArt. 39. Iniunctions allow a man to be absent from com∣mon prayer at his owne parish Church, and to resort to ano∣ther in the same Towne, to heare a sermon: yet the Bishops and their Oicilles punishemen in such cases, vnlesse they will giue them a Marke, or such like see, for a licence of ab∣sence.
47 WhereArt: 9. Musicke is vsed in churches,Curiorig. it should bee in such a distinct & modest song, that the same might be plain∣lie vnderstood, as if it were read without singing. But the cu∣riosity of Cathedrall churches doth disdaine this simplicity. 48 None of the QueenesArt: 50. subiects should call one ano∣ther Heretike, Schismatike, or vse any such like word of reproch yet the Bb.Names of . their libellers, and slatterers, call her Maiesties subiectes (and that fallie)Scismatikes, heretikes▪ puritans, and such like, as appeareth by their pamphlettes and cholericke brables. 49 Whensoeuer theArtic: 52. name of IESVS is pronounced in Sermon, Lesson, or otherwise, all men should vncouer their heads, and make a legge:Names of Iesus. yet the Bish. and their Chaplens seldome vse this, vnlesse it be at reading of the Gospell, as if the Gospell were more holy then the rest of the scripture, es∣pecilly they forget it when lustely and brauely they sweare by Iesus. 50 The. Queene accounteth and calleth them hir good and lawfull subiects, that acknowledge her Maiesty to be the sole supreme gouernour ouer all the subiects in her Domini∣ons But the Bb. accompt some such men papistes & traitors. 51 TheThe conclu∣sion of te  offendours against the Iniunctions are to be pu∣nished by depriuation, suspension, excommunication, &c. by the ordinaries.Violater of the Queenes Iniunction. The Iustices of peace are to assist them: yet howe many of the Bb. ministers haue beene depriued, &c. for not causing twelue sermons to bee preached euery yeare in their parish? For playing at Cardes, Dice, &c? For not distributing the 40. part of their liuing to the poore? For not allowing fiue markes to a poore scholler? For not reading the Iniunctions, for mispending the Sabboth? For not wearing square cappes? For calling their brethren puritans? &c. For not kneeling when they sweare by Iesus? And for terming her Maiesties good and obedient subiectes, papistes and traytours? These Iniunctions and ordinances appointed by the Queene, are forgotten: But the Bish. be carefull enough to vrge subscripti∣ons, othes ex offiio, and such like vnprofitable and Apocryphall stratagemes, their owne deuises. Out of the Bishops aduertisements. 52 By theAduer: p. 4. aduertisements, a Minister should pay for the
wax,Licences to . perchment, & writing of a licence to preach onely foure pence: how this is obserued, I referre my sele to the lcenti∣as and licentious preachers of our tune: but of such men com∣monly no licence is required. 53 NoAduers p. 4. man should be absent from his cure, but in res∣pect of Sicknes▪ seruice, or studie at the Vniuersities: yet it is know∣en, that many be absent, hauing no such respectes to dwe them away. 54 All ecclesiasticallAduer p. 1 persons should weare in iourneing cloaks with sleeues:Cloak. yet many great patrons of formality doe not vse them. Out of the Bishops Canons. 55 By the booke of Canons agreed by all the Cleargy of the prouince of Canterb.Boke of Ca. p. 4. The housholde seruaunts of . should be of good life, of sound religion,Bb. seruantes. orderly & modestly apparelled: yet many instances may be giuen to the cōtrarie. 56Booe of Can pag. 5. None must be made minister that hath bin brought vp in husbandrie or some other base and handie craft labour,Base fellows  minister. nor any but such as haue a title whereby they may liue if they become blinde, and fall into any languishing or continuall sicknes: yet the Bishops make their blinde porters, and such other worne and forlorne seruitors, ministers, hauing no title but the ministerie to relie vpon. 57 The Bb. shouldBooke of Can pa. 5. not graunt to any the next or 3. ad∣uowsonAduosons of any prebende or benefice, for (they say) those ad∣uousons are farre from good doing and christian charitie: yet presentations and aduousons to churches before they bee voyed, be notoriously and vsually graunted by the Bb. 58 ThereBooke of Can pag. 6. should be in Cathedrall Churches, in Preben∣daies and Deanes families, the booke of Martyrs,Booke of Mar: that all commers in might reade it, yet the most doe want it, as I am perswaded. 59 EueryBooe of Can. pag 1. Chauncelor▪ Commissarie and Officiall should be learned in the Ecclesiasticall and ciuill lawes: yet many mi∣nisters vtterly ignorant in those faculties doe beare such of∣fices.Chancell clui¦lians. 60 AllBooke of Can. pag 16. vnpreaching Prelates should teach children to write, to knowe their duetie to God and others: yet the parishio∣ners are burdened to finde schoolmaisters for theese matters. 61Boke of Can: pag. 19. Churchwardens should be chosen by the minister &
people,Election by the peop. they should admonish and warne anie (noble or vnnoble) that offende others by adulterie, drunkennesse, much swearing, ba∣drie, vsurie, and other wickednesse in life. And if they will not heare the Churchwardens, the Church-wardens should shew the fault to the Parson or Curat (be he neuer so base) who should more sharplie and vheentlie reproue them. And if they conti∣nue still, they shoul driue them from the communion till they bee re∣fomed. This profitable order of discipline is altogither negle∣cted both it & election of Church-officers by the people,Disciplin▪ are reputed dungerous, seditious, and scismaticall in those that seeke to haue thē established soundly practised and prosecu∣ted with effect. 62 The whole cleargy of that Prouince do agree,Nonresidence. thatBooke of Ca. pa. 25. Nonresidence is a thing in it selfe to be abhorred and odious to the po¦ple, & pernicious to the Church of God: yet they retine nonresi∣dent Chaplens about them daily, countenancing such men most, oppugning in Parliament the Nobility and commonal∣ty that speake against it. 63 No mnIbidem. should haue aboue 2. Benefices at once, not distant a sunder aboue 26. myles: yet many haue 3. or 4. scatte∣tered one from another 100. myles. 64 Al men should eschewe the company of an Excom: person, he shoul be esteemed an heathen and publican: yet our olie Preae (such is their learning euen in the common articles of our religion) doe call our Excommunication a ciuil discommuning, and make no scruple to company with such persons. I doubte if the matter were well examined, the most of the Bish. them selues haue bin excommunicate ipso facto, and still continue in that state for the breach of the statute of Magnacharta, and in∣finite Prouinciall and Nationall constitutions. Wherevpon they are disabled to sue any actions, and are to be esteemed as heathen and publicanes.. It were endlesse to reccount all the cases vvherin the Bb. their Officers, their Chaplens and hang-bies doe ofende a∣gainst our Synodall and Prouinciall constitutions, agaynst their owne bookes and Articles, publhed in their Synodes and Cōuocations. It woulde make a large volume to remem∣ber wherein they proceede and giue sentence in their courtes
contrarie to the Statues and common lavvs of this Realme: Thus much is sufficient to set the Gentlemen studentes of Englandge a worke, to searche more narrowelie into these thinges then they haue done, that they maie by their panes in studie, redeeme hir Maiesties lawes from the captiuitie, wherein they are deeed by the Cleargie. By these Ati∣cles it appeareth, that our Bishops doe not of conscience to God, and honour to hir Maiestie, exclaime against the Seeke▪ of Reformation, for not yeelding in all thinges to hir n∣ctions, lawes, and other proceedings. For if they did bona fi∣de & ex animo in deed honour hir Maiestie, and seeke the ad∣uauncement of the Gospell of Christ Iesus, they woulde be more carefull and sedulous to see the profitable and necessa∣rie ecclesiasticall lawes put in execution, rather then to in∣force such as be lesse profitable & needfull. For wether is it more requisite to the glorie of God and good of hir Maie∣stie and this Realme, that Ministers shoulde Catechise their Parihe, that they should debarre notorious offendours from the Communion, That Sabboth dayes shoulde be kept holy, That Church Wardens and Ministers should admonihe p∣uatelie all (euen the most Noble) to leaue their faultes, The Nonresidentes and fat beneficed persons, shoulde relieue the poore at home, & studious scollers abroade, That there should be twelue sermons yerelie in euerie parish through Englande, Wales and Ireland, That no Aduowsons should be graunted, That the pernicious and detestable sinne of Nonresidence and Pluralities shoulde bee reformed, and such good orders practi∣sed. Is it not more requisite, I se, that these thinges should be looked vnto, rather then the wearing of a surplesse (Ma∣rying with a ring? Christening with a crosse. Subscription to an Article, and such like? Yet it is apparaunt to all men, that Bishops, their Officialles, Deacons, Doctoures, and Fa∣uoures are more curious in vrging and vsing the latter then the former: yet both haue like authoritie from hir Maiestie and them selues. I suppose the Bishops and their followers would be as vnwilling to execute the Queenes lawes and In∣iunctions, as any fauourers of reformation, if they were vr∣ged there vnto in earnest. It is certaine, that the Bb. can tol∣lerate the neglect of all these and innumerable other dueties in one of their flatterers, whereas if a mn bee but suspected to mislike in hearte the Lordlie gouenement of Bishops, hee
shlbe sure to haue all extremitie shewed against him if hee oende but in the least ceremonie. Yea greater seueritie shall be vsed for neglect of the least and most improfitable obser∣uation, then for neglect of the most necesarie and important. O Englande, Englande, howe long wilt thou bee missed by those carnall wordlinges that haue their speciall care to ad∣nance and inriche them selues and their posterity, rather then to obey thy lawes or the lawes of thy God, bee they neuer so holy, so necessarie and godlie! Who hath bewitched thee, that thou canst not see that they bee more rebellious, more shismaticall, more disloyall and disobedient subiectes, vvho acknowledge thy lawes to bee good and godly, but doe des∣pise them, euen the greatest of them, then they that yeelding to the greatest matters, doe of conscience refuse such thinges as be least profitable and expedient in any Church. O that hir Maesty would appoint faithfull, trewe, christian and nglish-harted men indeede to examine these thinges: to call the Bb. their Chaplens, and Officers to account in these matters, shee shoulde finde that they be of the most vnduetiful subiects in all the lande, and they that be now least regarded, would bee founde the most trustie, most godly and obedient of all other. My wordes will proue true in the daies of triall, when these things shall be regarded and rewarded with indifferency, and then (Bishoppes) assure your selues that the day of your deso∣lation is at hande. Howe long O Lord holie and trewe! Reuel. 6. 10. Come Lord Iesus, come quickelie, 22. 21.
Certaine Questions or Interrogatories, draw∣en by a fauourer of Reformation, out of the former treatises and other writinges con∣cerning Reformation, wherein hee desireth to be resolued by the Prelates which the Printer hath thought good here to annexe. QVaee, whether the right honorable and chiee ustice of England Sir Christopher Wra Knight did not at th' exa∣mintion of H. Barrowe in the Bish of Londons pallace, af∣firme that men should incurre no penaltie for opinions which they helde doubtinglie. And whether a man may not with∣out breach of lawe Diuine or Humane, for his further satis∣faction make quaerees and doubtes in speciall causes, shewing withall the reason of his doubting: affirming nothinge per∣emptorily or positiuely, but submitting him selfe to sounde resolution. If that be graunted, why may not I be a Put-case, & say as followeth: 2 Quaere, whether the forme of praiers, administration of the Sacramentes, attire of Ministers, and other Church-cere∣monies in Englande, doe more agree to the Apostolical & primitiue order, or to the vse of the Romih Church. And whether popish orders be more seemely & conuenient, then the Apostolike. 3 Quaere, whether our rites and ceremonies taken from the papistes, doe not giue them offence and harden them in their sinne, seeing Harding doeth gather thereby, that Pope∣rie is not so ill as it is commonlie reputed. And Bristowe saith, That our religion and Communion were nothing worth, vnlesse we borrowed from them & their Masse-booke: & whether al indifferent things that giue ofence vnto the weake, ought not by1 Cor. 8. 1 Paules do∣ctrine, be remoued from the church. 4 Quaere, whether the square Cppe, Surplesse, and other monumentes of popery and idolatry condemned in generall by the QueenesArt. 23. Iniunctions, Bishops Articles, and pu∣blike doctrine of Englande, and other Christian Churches, misliked and wished to be abolished by Bullger, Alaso, Bucer, B. Pkington, and Bale, derided by Bucer and
Maister ox, refused to be worne by Peter Martyr, Bu∣cer, Hoper, Rogers, Humfrey, Philpot, Bradfort Haddon, & Saunders, (as I haue credibly hearde) whether the Surplesse called by Martyr, monstrous apparell, by Caluin, Player∣like apparell and vaine visardes, by Bez, Insignes of the Baalt∣ticall Priesthoode, by B. Rley, foolish and abhominable, too fond for a vice in a play, by D. alor, apish toyes, and toyishe trum∣perie, by D. Poinet, a Porters weed at Billingsgate, by the Bee∣hiue of the Romish Church, a smocke and long shirt, by Bale, pretie toyes, by Becon, Histonicall, seecall, and hick-scor∣nelike apprell. Whether I say this apparell thus accounted of by lerned men (the best iudges of decencie) be decent & comely for a preacher of the Gospell, and whether things vn∣comely should not by Paules doctrine, be abndoned the Church? 5 Quaere, If Maiors, Iustices, Stageplayers and others,Subscripi. may not aswell be inforced to subscribe to the Biops three arti∣cles by the at. of 1. liz. cap. 1. as Ministers, seeing the stat. (vrged by D. Bridges to that purpose) doethreach to them aswell as Ministers. 6 Quaere, If the Bb. that appoint other prayers to be vsed in the Church besides the prayers in the Communion booke doe not oende against their owne articles and the statute of 1. Eli. c. 1. which inioin that Ministers should vse the forme of publike prayer presribed in that books and no other, Itē, whether the Bb. thus oending against the stat. ought not to deale more mercifully with the ministers who haue offended in like quality. 7 Quaere, whether the Marcionites did well, who (as Chriso∣stome vpon the words, what doe they that are baptized for the dead reporteth) when any of their Catechumeni or nouices in religi∣on did die, had wont to hide one vnder the bed where the dead man was laide, and did aske the dead if he would be bap∣tised▪ in whose name the partie vnder the bed did aunswere, That is my desire: whereupon the liue man was baptised for the dead.Questions to infants. And whether the questions and answeres at the bapti∣zing of Inants in the commnion booke bee not of like na∣ture. When the Minister saith to the childe (as fit to conceiue as a dead man Wilt thou be baptised in this faith? and the godfa∣thers make answere, That is my desire. 8 Quaere, Whether a man may with safe conscience sub∣sribe
that the booke of cōmon prayer conteyneth nothing contrarie to the Scriptures,Psalmes in the  whereas the translation of the Psalmes therein comprised in addition, substraction and al∣teration dissereth from the trueth of the Hebrewe in 200. places at the least. 9 Quaere, Whether it be agreable to the word of God, law of England, and practise of any well gouerned Church, to pu∣nih that which is taken for slaundering, ribaudry & villanie, with returne of libells, ribudie and villanie. And whether Almond for the Parret, Martins Moethes minde &c. doe not as∣much offend that way, as Martin Marprelate, or if they ofend at all, why are they suffered, not punished? 10 Quaere of Matthew Sutcliffe (who is alwaies caping at M. Cartw. purchase) why M. Cartw may no sell the landes which he had by discent from his father, and buye other with the money, aswell as some of the Bishops, who by bberie, si∣mony, extortion, racking of rent, wasing of woods, and such like stratagemes, wax rich and purchase great Lordships for their posterity. 11 Quaere, If the Bish. that affirme it is lawfull to giue li∣uings appointed for ministers to lay men, or D. Bridges air∣ming that a priest may bee Lord ouer her Maiestie, or Doct. Bancroft that calleth hir Highnes a pety Pope, doe not dis∣fame and dishonour her Maiesty, and are thereore selons. 12 Quaere,Supremacy. If the Prelates who say that the ote of the Supremacie importeth that hir Maiesty may deuise vvhat Church-gouernement she pleaseth, be not in the worde of a Prince and by award of lawe Malicious persons, seeing there∣in they ascribe more to hir Highnes then the Oth of Sprema∣cie with the exposition thereof importeth. And whether the Seek. of Reormation yeelding to the ohe with the expositi∣on, be not hir Highnes good and obedient subiectes. 13 Quaere, Why the Archbishops of Cant. should not rather be called Popes then Primates of all England, seeing that a Car∣dinal gaue them the name of Primates, & a Pope did assigne them the name of Popes. 14 Quaere, If Wicleue, Luther, Calum, Latimer, Tindall,  and other were nowe aliue, and should speake against the Lordship of Bish. as they doe in their writings, to which prison the Bishops would sende them, whether to the Fleete, Clinke, Marshalsie, or gate house. Whether bookes seene,
allowed, & publikelie solde by authoritie, doe containe mat∣ters of felony, and difamatory to the Queene. 15 Quaere, wherein the papists haue deserued so wel that mainteaning errours,Papistes fa∣uoured. hereies, and blasphennes, accounting in generall our doctrine, our Bishops an Magistrates, hereticall and impious, should finde more grace then Seekers of Refor∣mation, and why they hould not be condemned as felons for their abhominable doctrine. 16 Quaere, If the Bb. proceeding against men Perordinem inquisitonisInquisition. (as Do. Cosins said at the examination of Maister Cartur.) doe not therein imitate the papall order vsed by the Bb. in time of cuelty and blindnes. 17 Quaere,Oth in open . If Christ were before the Bishops, & were de∣maundedI.  18. 19 20, 21 of them concerning his doctrine, and should an∣swere, I spake openly, &c. why aske ye me? aske them that heard mee what I said vnto them: beholde they know what I said, whether ma∣king this answere, he should be cōmitted as Maist. Bambridge and Maist. Iohnson were in Cambridge, and as many other god∣ly Ministers be ordinarily vpon like occasion. 18 Quaere,General othe If by the Iudiciall lawes, by the course in the Chancerie, or Starchamber any man be forced to sweare before he knowe the cause (at least in generall) whereunto he is to take his oth. 19 Quaere,Confimation of children. whether by the lawes of Englande, euery Bish. is not bound to cōfirme children, as well as Ministers to mary with a ring, & whether popish young men not yet confirmed by any Bishop, may not without daunger of awe reuse the Communion, seeing by the booke of Common prayer, nne must receyue the Lords supper, till he be confirmed. 20 Quaere, whether an ecclesiasticall Iudge may punish Bri∣sone the ppist for writing that our Communion booke is an apishe imitation of the Masse booke, seeing the statute giueth onely that authority to Iustices of peace. Item▪ whether Bri∣stowe deprauing the Communion booke, may bee depriued of all his spirituall promotions for the first offence against the sta∣tute, seeing the statute appointeth, That he who the second the Communion booke, beeing conuicted thereof by verdict, &c. shlbe depriued of his spirituall promotions. Item, whether the lawe doeth not fauour the puritane asmuch as the ppist. 21 Quaere, whether Adultery is to be punished by the Or∣dinarie,
seeing the punishment thereof (without any sauing to the spirituall Court) is giuen by statute to the Iusices of peace. And whether a man may be punished by two corporal or pecumarie puniments in two seuerall Courtes for one & the same cause. 22 Quaere, If any Ordinary haue contriued, promulged & publihed Aticles in his owne name without asent of her ma iesty vnder seale, and inforced hir Highnes subiectes to sub∣scribe vnto the same: And for not subscibing, haue suspended or depriued them. And whether an ordinary thus doing, may not be25 Hen 8.  imprisoned & fined at the Queenes pleasure. 23 Quaere, whether an Ordinarie may cite a man to ap∣peare before him in his Court to depose as awitesse, seeing Iu∣stice Fitzherbert sayeth, That it is extortion and vviong to the partie. And how many of the Bishops be extortioners in that behalfe? 24 Quaere, whether a man shalbe examined by othe of anie thing that soundeth to his reproch, seeing that Nullus ten sep∣sum perdere: and vvhether scisme and heresie be not matters that sound to a mans reproch. 25 Quaere, If an Odinarie or an ecclesiasticall Iudge, ci∣ting men ex officio to sweare to accuse them selues in causes neither matrimoniall nor Testamentarie, vvhether a Prohibition will ly against them or not. Item, whether the ordinary & his officers ought not to surcease this maner of proceeding vntill the controuersie moued, and now depending thereupon in the Starre Chamber by meanes of the opinion of some of the reuerēd Iudges, and of the right worshipful and famous Lawi∣er Maister Cooke, be determined. Item let it be inquired, if (notwithstanding the displeasure of the Prelattes) the graue and learned Iudges of this noble realme, priuately debating these matters, vvhether among them the maior sanior{que} pars pollo kagathoi, did not condemne the practises of the Pre∣lates, as repugnant to lawe. 26 Quaere, if these Iudges that haue onely commission to deale in causes which by Ecclesiasticall authoriie may bee or∣dred, may cite men ex officio, to take an othe before them, to accuse them selues, in matter neither Testaentarie nor Ma∣trimoniall. Item, vvhether such ecclesiasticall Iudges may by vertue of the sttute whereupon their commission is groun∣ded, commit the Queenes naturall subiestes to prison, espe∣ally
for refusing to take the oth ex officio, beeing ministred in causes neither Matrimoniall or Testamentarie. tem, whether they ought to commit any of the Queenes subiectes to prison when he tendreth sufficient baile or ertie, especiallie in cases where baile and mainprise is not taken away by anie sta∣tute. Item, whether if any in such case be committed the Writt D homine replegiand doeth not ly. Item, what satisfa∣ction D. Cosins, D. Bancroft, D. Stanop, and others hauing onely commission in matters to be ordered by Ecclesiasticall power, ought to make hir Maiesty free and louinge subiectes, who haue ex officio bene cited by them to take an othe in cases neither Matrimoniall nor Testamentarie, and refusing to take that othe haue bene committed by great multitudes to prison without baile or mainprise in cases not debarred from baile by any sta¦tute. Item, whether may they keepe such persons by them committed in prison monethes and yeares, without calling them to aunswere, or accusing them of any crime. Item whe∣ther for this dealing they doe not deserue to smell of the like punishment themselues. 27 Quaere, whether any Ecclesiasticall Iudge hath con∣uented, examined and committed any for matters felonious touching the Queenes Crowne & dignitie, & whether these practises do not instanter, instantius, instantissime craue the16. R 2. c. 5. Pr∣munire. 28 Quaere,Imprison a man  of lawe. Whether Sir Iohn Markham chiefe Iustice of Englande,1 H. 7. 4. b. per . did not tell King Edwarde the 4. that hee might not arrest any man for suspicion of treason or felonie (as any of his subiects might) because that if he did any man wronge, the party might haue no actiō against him. And if the King by imprisoning a man may do him wrong, much more may any subiect: and therefore good remedy may be had against him for so doing. 29 Quaere,Blaspey. Whether it be not lesse danger to blaspheme the blessed Name of the great God, then to speake against a L. Bishop. Item, whether oe inisters haue bene depri∣ued within these seauen yeares for ceremonies of men, then for drunkenesse, whoredome, and other breaches of the lawe of God. 30 Quaere,Pastora Staues. Why the Ministers may not refuse to weare a Surplese, as a Bishop to vse a Pastoral staff, seeing the lawes in∣force them both alike.
31 Quaere, whether the Seek of Reformation bee not in∣daungered of their life, and withhelde from their liberty on lie for their religion and conscience in matters of Discipline proessed by forraine Christian Churches, yea and authori∣zed in Englande, seeing notwithstanding all  of dffa∣ming hir Maiesty or raing Rebellion, their life and libertie is daiely offered to them by the Bishops, if they will renounce and recant their opinions. And whether  the popishe pesecuting  b in nglande at any time heretofore executed any man that agreed with them in their fith and , onely because he differed from them in matters of externall forme, ceremonie, or circumstance, as our b. doe attempte by all indeuur. 32 Quaere, whether he that publisheth bookes with long premeditation & fore-consideration doeth publish the same with a Malicious intent, seeing fewe men deale in any action of importance, but with great deliberation, though it falleth out often, that they labour against the trueth, and yet are not adiudged Malicious persons. And if a Councelour or Seieant doeth often by long aduise argue against the trueth, and yet without Malice, howe doeth a prepensed and long intended purpose proue a Malice in the Authour of Demonstration or any other writer. 33 Quaere, whether the Bishops and their Officialles doe not oftentimes in their Courts, sentence, iudge, and rule cau∣es contrarie to the customarie and common lawes of Eng∣lande aswell as against the Statutes in matters of Diffamati∣on, Testaments, & such like. And whether a Prohibito shoulde not proceed against them, if they determine any case against the common lawes, customes, and statutes of this Realme, se∣ing the statute of 25. H. 8. cap. 19 doth establish such spirituall lawes onely as are not repugnant to the Lawes,Canon and . Customes, and Statutes of Englande. 34 Quaere, By what authoritie the Bishops do practise & put in execution the Popish and Ciuill Lawes in their Courtes, seeing the statute of 1, Eliz, cap. 1. doeth banishe out of this Realme all forreine authoritie. And seeing the statutes of 25. H. 8. cap. 19. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. doe onely respect and authorize the Canons, Constitutions, &c. Prouinciall and Synodall, vvhich haue bene made heretofore within this Realme of Englande. And whether the Bb. for doing thus be not in the Premunire
or at least imprisonable and finable at hir Maiesties pleasure. 35 Quaere, Whether they incroache more vppon the ciuill Magistrate that in their Courtes deale with Willes, Tithes, Mariages, &c. That excommunicate for mony, hat disa∣ble men by their excommunications to sue any accusati∣ons in their owne right, That make dispensations to their Soueraine vnder their hande and seale, That be Barons of the Realme, ustices of peace, And punish by fine, impri∣sonment, losse of limme and , as the Bishops doe, or they that onely admonishe, suspende and excommunicate, and proceede no whit at all any further, as the Eldershp doth & would doe. 36 Quaere, if Moses vnder the lawe, and Timothie and o∣thers vnder the Gospell needed to haue a forme of gouuer∣ning the Church prescribed to them by the Lorde, whether it be likely that the Lorde woulde commit the Church to M. Whitgift, M. Cooper, M. Bancroft, and others to frame a gouern∣ment for it at their pleasures. 37 Quaere, if Iohn a Stile should graunt there vvas a gou∣uernement by Elders in the primitiue. Apostolicall and best Church, and should call the same gouernement a popedomeThe Apostol∣call gouerne¦tment called a Popedome. and tyrany, whether this did not ranckly smell of detestable atheisme. 38 Quaere, whether the Churches in Scotlande, France, the lowe Countries, Hungarie, Polelande, Bohemi, Saxone, Hel∣ueta▪ And the County Palatine of Rhene, and vvhether Zum∣glus, Occolampadus, Melancthon, Bucer, Caluin, Zanchius, Martyr, and infinite other, the most excellent Diuines in all the worlde, commending the continuance of the Eldership, be all Anabaptistes, Puritanes, rebells, traytours, mare-states, mar-lawes, mar-princes, and mar-alls: and Doctor Bancrofte, Matthewe Sutcliffe, &c. the onely good subiectes in all the worlde. 38 Quaere, whether the Kinges of France and Scotlade, the Princes of Condy and Orange, the Duke of Saxonie, the Coun∣tie Palatine of Rhene, the States of the lowe Countries, manie o∣ther Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Earles, Barons, and other Christian and noble Potentates, who haue maineteyned, fa∣uoured & preferred the Ministers that stande for Reformatiō. And whether here in England the Right honorable Sir Ni∣cholas
Bacon, L. Keeper, the Earles of Bedforde, Warwicke, and Leicester, Sir Frauncis Walsingham, Sir Water Mildmay, Sir A∣mias Paulet, & other right noble Lords, Councellours, Coun∣tees and Countesses would haue coūtenanced and protected the Ministers that seeke Reformation, if they had perceiued them to be enemies to the Queene ad state, worse then pa∣pistes and miscreantes: And whether our Prelates be more trustie to hir Maiesty, and prouident to auoide daunger, then those excellent personages were. 40 Quaere, whether a Minister ought not to admonish the mightiest Prince of his duty, refuse to administer the Sacra∣ment vnto him, if he be a notorious offendour and pronoūce him to be no member of Christ in the Communion of Saints, if he continue obstinate in open crimes. And whether vnder the LawePsal. 51. 7. Dauid and other Princes were not subiect to cere∣moniall expiations, and the spirituall power of Priestes and Prophets. And whether Lb. 5. cap. 18. Ambrose did well in vsing like autho¦rity towardes an Emperour. And lastly, whether Zanchius, Cal∣uin, Bucer, Nowell, Iewell, Bilson, and Bridges, approuing the like, be traytours, popes and tyrants. 41 Quaere, why there may not be vnder a Christian Ma∣gistrate, Pastours, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and widowes: aswell as Parsons, Lectures, or Schoolemaisters, Church Wardens, Chaun∣cellours, Collectours for the poore, and Hospitall Women, seeing these doe and may execute in authority and power the whol forme of Church-gouernement desired, though their practise thereof is infinitely corrupted against the Canons of the A∣postles, to the daunger of the Church, and dishonour of the Realme. 42 Quaere, whether the Ecclesiastical High CommissionThe high com∣mision like  Eldership. be not in effect an Eldership, wherein some gouerne with mini∣sters, who by profession are temporall Lawiers, Ciuillians, meere lay men. And whether their gouernement consisting of spirituall and temporall persons, be a Medley, a Linsie woolsie Discipline, as the Remonstrāce calleth the Eldership which is now desired. 43 Quaere, If the sole gouernement of a Bishop in a Dio∣ces bee sufficient and most agreeable to Gods worde, why is there an Ecclesiasticall Commission standing of many per∣sons ciuill and Ecclesiasticall, or if an Ecclesiasticall Commis∣sion
be needefull in a Realme, who in a prouince, if in a Pro∣uince why not in a Dioces, if in a Dioces, why not in a Dean∣rie, if in a Dearie, why not in a Parishe? Lasty, why might there not without absurditie and breach of true vniformitie be planted in some places already capable,Eldership  some places, though not  all. a Consistory or com∣mission of Elders, though the like cannot presently be accom∣plihed in all, seeing there be newe ecclesiasticall Commissi∣ons erected, Deanes and Chapters, Broken musicke and Or∣ganes in some places, not in other. Hearken you Sages and Iudges of the lawe, it is expected at your hands, that you see Euen Iustice done to all her Highnes subiectes, rich and poore, without regard to any person, papist, Prote¦stant, puritane, or other. If you suffer her maiesties subiected that sue for iustice to be cited, punished, imprisoned, vexed and mo∣lested against lawe, by any Prelate or eccle¦siasticall iudge whatsoeuer, doe incurre the breach of your oath, & are in her maiesties mercy for your bodies, landes and goods. Pereat mundus & fiat Iustitia.
