1655 S112243 99847501 12538
A Godly Psalme, of Marye Queene, which brought vs comfort al, Through God, whom wee of dewtye prayse, that giues her foes a fal. By Rychard Beeard. Anno domini. 1553. ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleetestrete, at the sygne of the Fau∣con against saint Donstons Church by Wylliam Griffith: and are to be solde at his shoppe a lytle aboue the Conduit.
Medius, Al England now bee glad at ones wt one heart mynde, and voyce: for now haue wee the greatest cause to syng & eke reioyce to syng & eke reioyce. Contratenor. Al England now bee glad at ones, with one heart mynde & voice: For now haue wee ye grea∣test cause the greatest cause to syng and eke reioyce.
Tenor. Al England now bee glad at ones, with one heart mynde and voice: for now haue wee the greatest cause the greatest cause to syng and eke reioyce to syng & eke reioyce. Bassus. Al England now bee glad at ones wt one heart mynde & voyce: for now haue wee the greatest cause the greatest cause to syng and eke reioyce to syng and eke reioyce.
1 AL England now bee glad at ones, With one heart mynde and voyce: For now haue wee ye grea∣test cause To sing and eke reioyce. 2 For God hath brought his seruaunts trew From troubles sore and great, Put downe the proude, & hathe the meeke In theyr iust places set. 3 ¶ The Lord hathe turnd his wrath and ire, From vs, out of hys mynde: Beeholding vs with countenaunce Moast louing sweete and kynde. 4 ☞ That God which might haue rightwisely, Destroyde vs euery one, Hathe shewd him self moast mercyful, To healp vs al alone. 5 ☞ He hathe regarded equitie, Treuth, iustice, law, and right: And ouerthrowne and vanquisshed The wrongful dealers might. 6 ¶ Wee looked al for pestilence And vengeaunce at his hand, And eke innumerable plagues
To come vpon the land: 7 ¶ But nowe hathe hee sent downe his grace And mercy from aboue, And shewed vs vndoubtedly A token of his loue. 8 ¶ Wee haue ful iustly looked heeare For death and ruines rife. And now doo wee beehold and trust A good and ioyful lyfe. 9 ¶ Yea, wee that weare moast sorowful, Without a spreet or heart: Within a quarter of an houre Did quicken and reuert. 10 ¶ Wee which weare brought by serui∣tude, Vntrewth and wronge tobey: Do trewth and iustice execute, And put that wrong away. 11 ¶ Wee for our owne great variaunce Did forayne straungers feare, Lest they throughe oure discension heare Might rule among vs beare: 12 ¶ But now wee shal with vnytie Bee able to withstand, And vanquish al our enemies, And driue such from oure land.
13 ¶ Oure kyngdome which deuyded so Could neuer long abyde: shall now in vnitie bee kept, And treason bee espide. 14 ¶ And wee that onely looked for Gods vengeaunce to vs bent: Haue now his greatest benefyte Whiche hee to vs hathe sent. 15 ¶ Hee doothe beehold vs meryli, And wil continew styl, Yf wee as seruauntes to his trewth, Obey vnto his wyl. 16 ¶ Hee saw that wickednesse arose, And bare his trewth despite: And now wil hee out of the land Destroy the workers quite. 17 ¶ When tyme that none durst speake for trewth, Then hee him selfe, so good Hathe stepped foorth, and opend al, Tauenge the gyltlesse bloude. 18 ¶ He setteth and establyssheth His seruauntes in their right: And ouerthrowes the wicked sort, For al theyr strength and might. 19 ¶ It is not armoure, harneyse bright,
Nor any weapon strong, The strength that to the handes of men, Or hoorses dothe belong: 02 ¶ Nor any power on the earth That can preuayle or stand, But onely God the Lord him self Wil haue the vpperhand. 21 ¶ What can a fortresse, castel strong, Or bulwarke els preuayle: Against the Lorde that maketh al? In neede theese thinges wyl fayle. 22 ¶ The lord beeholdes the hearts and myndes Of godly men ful playne, Whiche onely seeke that ryghtwysenesse And equitie may raygne. 23 ¶ How wondersly doothe God with vs His people England deale? Suche ioy as wee scarce looked for Among vs to reueale. 24 ¶ Hee healps ye captiues out of prison, Breakes the walles of stone: And riddes his chosen from the death, And peryls euery one. 25 Oure comfort is come neare, and eke Oure prayer heard, I trust:
Of God which in the heauen dwelles, And fyghteth for the iust. 26 ¶ For hee hathe set and stablysshed, Oure worthy soueraygne: And oure liege Lady, Marie Queene, On vs by trewth to raygne. 27 ¶ Hee hathe vs sent a comforter, To bee oure healp and guyde: With pitie and with vertues al Endewd on euery syde. 28 ¶ The lawful, iust, and rightuouse, Of England, head, and Queene: To bee the true enheritoure, As hathe her brother beene. 29 Not clayming by collusion, Nor cloking it by sleyght: But by her byrth, descending from Her godly father streight. 30 ¶ She beeing eldest sister right Vnto oure soueraigne Lord, Kynge Edward late the syxt by name, Whose strength was gods trew word. 31 For which moast godly impe & bud Of Iessees stocke and roote, Thoughe wee haue almoost cause to sighe,
And sorow bee oure boote: Yet are wee comforted agayne, Lyft vp, and eke erect: ycause the Lord hathe placed thus His chosen and elect. ¶ Whiche beeing oure moast godly Queene, That seekes our preseruaciō: No doubt wil strongly buyld vpon Her brothers good fondacion. 34 ¶ The ground worke hee hathe layde him selfe, And shee is left a lon, To buyld the house, and fortresse vp Of trew religion. 35 ¶ O England now continew styl, In myrth and ioy therfore: For God wyl strengthen day by day Your gladnesse more and more. 36 Our soueraygne & rightioyse Queene Wyl vyce and syn depresse: Wyl cheafly loue the churche of God, And punysh wickednesse. 37 The Lord almighty graunte that shee May prospere to succeede: To haue on vs moast quiet raygne, And healp her in her neede.
38 The Lorde destroy her enemyes, And make her foes bewrayde: To bee soone catched in the snare, That they for her haue layde. 39 Defend her, Lord, and eke al those, That beare to her good heart: And graunte that from thy holy word, She neuer swarue ne start. 40 Then doubtlesse al, bothe old & yong Shal prayse thy name for euer: And sing in Psalmes to thee on earth, Which doost forsake vs neuer. 41 Lord saue our Queene moast graci∣ouse From euel and from feare: The Lady eke Elizabeth, Her godly sister deare. 42 Lord God preserue the noble men, From daungers il and crime: And send vs peace and quietnesse, In this same later tyme. 43 Al glory bee to God therfore, The father and the sone: And also to the holy ghost, In deitye but one. 44 As it hathe been from al beginninges
Vnto this beefore: As now it is, and from this tyme, Shalbee for euermore. ¶ A godly Psalme in meetre by. T.B. Psal. 145. 1 O Prayse the Lord (my soule and spreete) So wyl I whyle I liue, Yea, sure as long as I remayne, I wil him prayses giue. 2 Which healpeth them vnto their right, That byde and suffre wrong, That feedeth eke the hongry men, And those that thirsted long. 3 The Lord from prison loseth men, And giues the blynde their syght The Lord doothe healp them vp that fal, And loueth wel the right. 4 He cares for straungers, widowes hee Defendes and fatherlesse: And ouerturnes the wayes of al That worke vngodlynesse. Psal. 146. 5 The Lord settes vp and lifteth those That meeke in heart are founde: And bringeth downe thungodly men
From highe vnto the grounde. 6 The legges of men delite him not, Nor any horses strength But those that feare him, and doo trust To haue his grace at length. Psal. 148. 7 O prayse the Lord yee kinges & people Dwelling on the earth: Yee Princes and yee iudges al, Reioyce at ones for myrth. 8 Yong men and maydes, you aged men, And children beeing yong, Exalt his name, and also let His praises bee your song. FINIS. By Thomas Bownell.
