18507.75 S103390 99839145 3544
The fourth of September. NEWES FROM SVNDRY PLACES, BOTH FORRAINE AND DOMESTIQVE. From Venice, Rome, Spaine, France, Naples, the Palatinate, and the Low-Countries. A RELATION OF COVNT MANSFEILDS PRO∣gresse, (his battaile with Gonsalo in his passage) till his arriuall at Breda, with the Duke of Brunswicke his valiant pursuit of Gon∣salo, (being wounded) and the slaughter of 500. of his men, and the taking of certaine Waggons, and Gonsaloes owne Coach. Whereunto is added, A TRVE AND CERTAINE REPORT, OF THE LAMENTABLE SHIPWRACKE which hapned at Plimoth in Deuonshire, on Mun∣day the 19th. of August last past, with other great harme done elsewhere, by light∣ning and thunder on the same day. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Signe of the Pyde Bull, at Saint Austins Gate. 1622.
FROM VENICE THE thirtieth of July, 1622. THey write from Millane that the Spa∣nish soldiers from diuers places of that State, were commanded to meet at a certaine rendeuou's, whereupon many of them were in∣stantly charged to march towards Bormio, to oppose themselues against the Grisons, a troupe of them being seene at Chiavenna intending to take a Spanish Post, but he was succoured by a 150 Musketteeres, of the company of Captaine Iohn Ser∣belliona, which skirmishing with the Grisons aforesaid, slue 14 of them and lost but fiue of their owne. They had newes that the Grisons hauing inuaded the higher Aguedina, many of them had besieged the Fort of Sancta Maria, and the rest making their ex∣cursions vpon the Frontiers of the Countie of Tyroll, droue great store of cattell from thence, into their owne territories. And that there were daily held priuate consultati∣ons, touching the departure of the Duke of Feria, (Gouernour of Millane) towards Veltolina: as like∣wise
that his Excellencie hauing notice that from the said Veltolinat were fled and yet daily did fly about 60 soldiers at a time, and that (as they say) both for want of victuals and pay, he had giuen notice by a Proclamation that both Spaniards and Italians that here before abandoned the seruice of the king of Spaine, vnder whatsoeuer pretext or colour, should haue their pardon, returning into the same within the space of the next ensuing 15 daies after the Proclama∣tion. And those that came not in at the prefixed time, shall be banished and condemned to be hanged, and euery officer as well of lustice as Warre shall be authorised both to take and to kill them, not exemp∣ting them that were fled themselues, and afterwards reconciled. That the Count di Monterei being there arriued, was royally lodged and entertained, at the charges of the said Gouernor: And going to view the Castle, the Ordnance was at his approach brauely dischar∣ged: As soone as he shall haue visited all the princi∣pall places of this city, he intends to goe on with his iourney for Spaine. That the Grisons went from Towne to Towne, to confirme their new established vnion at Coyra. And that vpon the confines of the Canton of SinZ, the Catholike Suissers which haue beset the passages to stop the troupes of their Enemies, had incountred one another, so that many of both sides were slaine. By particular Letters from Veltolina, we vnder∣stand that the 26. of Iuly 30 companies of Grisons and Swissers, arriued in the territory of Chiavenna,
and assaulting suddenly the Fort raised by the Spani∣ards (about a league distant from the Towne afore∣said) after they had killed seuen sentinels of the Spa∣nish Garison before they were aware of them, they tooke it presently, and hauing put in the same 2000 men for Garrison, they sate downe before Chiavenna and gaue two assaults to the towne, but were repul∣sed, seeing that a little before their comming, 9. com∣panies of foot, and 3 troupes of horse were receiued in the towne. And that vpon the same day arriued at Bormio, 130 Mule asses with Matches and Gun∣powder, which were sent from Millane for the seruice of the king of Spaine. As likewise that sixe Citi∣zens of Berganio were taken prisoners in the Veltolina, intending to buy wine. From Lyons we heare, that the French King had sent Monsieur de Clandibront towards Piemonte, to perswade the Duke of Sauoy (as they said) to de∣sist of his designe and enterprise vpon Momferat. From Genua is aduised, that the said Common∣wealth hauing promised vnto the Catholike King 4. Gallies (to assist his other in the safe keeping of the coastes of Spaine) tooke order to send them thi∣ther. From Vienna they write that the Diet at Odenburgh in Hungary, went well on in the behalfe of the Em∣peror. But that there was a rumor that Bethlem Gabor leauied new forces, none knowing there to what purpose. The Marquesse Gonzaga is not dead as we were informed lately, but in good health and well disposed.
From Prague. FRom Norinberg we heare, that through the Bi∣shopricke of Bambergh, and the Marquisat of An∣spach were passed 6000 Cossacks, 1000 Hungarians, 1000 of the Regiment of the late deceased Dampiere, as many of the Walstaynish Regiment, 1000 Saxons, and 1000 of the Holstaynish Regiment, being all on horse, and sent to the Palatinate. From Rome the 23. of July. LAst Sunday went the Pope to the Church of Saint Paulino, neere vnto the barefooted and reformed Carmeliton Fathers, and said there a still or silent Masse, in the presence of twenty Cardinals, besides two Ambassadors, one of the Emperors, and the o∣ther of the States of Venice, and afterwards they sung Te Deum Laudamus, to giue his sacred maiestie thanks for the victory obtained by the Bauarian Campe, and their Catholike league against the Bishop of Al∣berstadt. The Signior Rinaldo Ariosti who attended the Car∣dinall Goradino in his Chamber, is made by the Car∣dinall Lodovisio, great Master of his horse, in the place of Signior Philippo Malucci, who was returned into his owne Countrey.
Signiar Anastasio Chianderoti of Terni is made a Collonell at Ferara, where hee was Generall before, which place was now taken from him. The Prince of Saint Gregory, extraordinary Ambassador of the Duke of Parma, had wed∣nesday last audience by the Pope, and tooke his leaue to returne to his owne Principality and Lands, and from thence to the Duke dome of Parma. The Bishop of Monte Marana in the king∣dome of Naples who was come here to be ex∣amined and questioned, is lately deceased. Thursday last about the euening arriued here the Auditor of Monsieur Donabeto, Vice legat of that State, but we can not learne the occa∣sion which moued him to the same: And it is related that at his departure the Marquesse of Maletefia (Generall of the Campe) was very sicke. There was of late a dissention risen betwixt the Vice-roy of Naples, and the Prior Aldobran∣dino, Generall of the Gallies of the Pope, which hapned by a fray or tumult, betwixt the Spa∣nish watch, and some of his, who seeing that one of the Galleys was taken prisoner; they re∣scued
him againe. Whereupon the Counsell of state being called, it was presently ordered, that as many as could be gotten of them should be clapt vp. And hapning afterwards that a Captaine and thirty six soldiers, were taken and put in the prison within the Castle, three Sicilians had the Stroppa de Corda, and were condemned for ten yeeres vpon the Galleys, but were presently within the space of few daies dismis'd with the rest by a warrant of the Vice-roy, and went to their Galleys, sayling soone after their relaxation to Messina. But there was a Post dispatch'd from hence, with a commission to cause them to returne in∣stantly to Civita Vecchia: Seeing they were infor∣med here, that this yeere the Turkish Galleys of Biserta were not able to set forth, all their slaues and great store of their soldiers being dead, whole Barbarie being likewise mightily inuaded with the plague: And seeing the Turks were not to bring any Nauy this yeere at Sea, it should not bee necessary to send any from Sicilia. Here is arriued the Persian Ambassador com∣ming lately from Spaine.
The Copy of a Letter from Brussels, dated the 23 of Aug. concerning the Progresse and Resolution of Count Mansfield, since his being in Lorraine. With his last Conflict and Victory with Gonsalo, the 19. of Aug. in Brabant. SIr, I know you cannot be ignorant of the various reports spred abroad (throughout all these parts of Christendome) of Count Mansfields being for these two monthes past: Some affirming that hee is very weake; others, that he is very strong: some, that hee should be entertained by the French King, and that he should be falne off from the Duke of Brunswicke, vpon a breach betwixt them; and that there should be a mutiny in their Army, whereupon they should bee vtterly dispersed. Count Mansfield being passed through Loraine, (where he payed for what he tooke, and commanded his Souldiers to forbeare doing any wrong, or taking any thing from any of the Duke of Loraines Subiects; notwithstanding, at a place or two his Souldiers of∣fered some violence.) ariuing in Champaigne, made his Randeuow vpon the Frontier thereof, almost for this two monthes. In the meane time the French King made great preparation, as fearing lest he should in∣uade
his Countrey: but vpon triall he found him to come not as an enemy, but as one who intended to doe him seruice, and did thereupon giue command to Duke Deniuers to treate with the said C. Mansfield vpon certaine Articles or propositions, namely, on the Kings behalfe: Deniuers propounded vnto him both honors and profits, as that he would make him a Mar∣shall of France, and a Generall of certain forces which he would send for the recouery of the Valtoline; that he would giue him 200000. Crownes in hand, and 20000. Crownes per annum. Mansfield on the other side was to bring to the Kings seruice of his Army 6000. foot, and 2000. Horse, which should presently receiue pay of his Maiesty. But Mansfield hauing a farther reach (as by the sequell appeares) intends no∣thing else by the said treaty, but to get himselfe more aduantage, and to preuent suspition in the matters which he directly intended, namely, for the ioyning with the Hollanders: For being at a towne called Mo∣soon, on the Frontiers of France, hee gaue out of pur∣pose that Brunswicke and he were fallen out, and that he was fallen from the said Duke of Brunswicke: and had secured himselfe in the strong Towne of Mosoon, and would ioyne with the French King; by which policy, the way to Brabant was the more secure, and his enemy Gonsalo made the lesse haste after him: For this treaty of his with the French King, did so amaze his enemies that they knew no other but that hee would haue concluded with him, on the contrary you shall vnderstand, about the 16 day of this month, in the night (hauing before selected out 6000. of his best horse, whereof 2. thousand are Carabins or light
horse, and 3000. speciall footmen: which said foote he likewise prouided horse for the most part of them) marched away from Mosoon vnexpected, towards Mouns in Henalt, where he ariued the 18 of this month near the Riuer of the Mozel with the D. of Brunswick, leauing behind 8000. foot, and 1000. horse, with all his Canon, and the most part of their baggage to the command of the Duke of Bulloin, and those of the religion. On the way before they came to Mouns, they burnt and pillaged diuers villages, and sacked two rich Monasteries in the Archdutches dominions. From Brussels. IT is likewise aduertised by other Letters on Satur∣day last, that they were come to a Castle called Montemaria on the borders of Brabant, and that com∣ming through Henalt the people of the Country made all the powers they could on the suddaine to resist them; those which resisted him were by the Mansfiel∣dians put to the sword, a great number of them, and the rest forced to flie for their liues. That Cordua with 8000. foot and 2000. horse, most being Spaniards and Italians doe follow them, but are not within two daies iourney of them: Besides, they cannot march halfe so farre in a day as Mansfield doth with his horse, being quit of his Canon and Baggage. Gonsalo had thought to haue way-laid his passage through Henalt, by ioyning his ten thousand old Souldiers which those of the Country, had not Mansfield dealt the more politiquely in the businesse; as by this following Letter may appeare.
The Letter. DEare and much respected friend, all the Newes that I haue to send you, is this, That Count Mansfield is come downe in∣to Brabant, and burneth and spoyleth the coun∣trie, marching his Army which consisteth of 6000. horse, and 3000. Musquiters on horse∣backe, for the speedy dispatching of his busi∣nesse. The manner of his fight is thus; The tenth man of the Musquiteers, holding the horse of the rest, the rest set themselues in battaile: the 6000 horsemen first giues the assault, and the footmen powder vpon them with their Mus∣quiteers, whilst the horsemen wheele about and come in againe: and then if there be need, the Musquiteers returne againe for their suc∣cour: if otherwise the busines bee dispatched, they all on horse backe get them gone with the
prey that they deuoure and spoyle, no army of foot being able to doe any thing against them: and Spinola with all his horse being not able to make such an army. Brunswicke comes slowly forward with a great army; Mansfield hauing made way in re∣mouing the Obstacles for his safe passage: they are within 6. Leagues of Brussels. Hee that reported this, sayth he saw Mans∣field with his own eyes, being a Gentleman that came from the Palatinat.
A LAMENTABLE RE∣lation of a great and fearefull storme and Tempest, of Winde, Thunder and Lightning, Which happened in Deuon and Somerset∣shire on Sunday and Munday the 18. and 19. day of August last. TO collect out of Stories the many and wonderfull iudgements of God from time to time shewed and executed vpon the sonnes of men, is a labour be∣yond my purpose at this time to vndertake, and there∣fore I will onely relate vnto you a story of a late won∣derfull and lamentable accident, which happened in Deuonshire, and there in chiefly of a shipwracke in Cat∣water rode by Plimouth, on Sunday night and Mun∣day morning the 18. and 19. of August last. There be∣ing floting in the Rode of Catwater diuers ships, some newly ariued, others bound out for seuerall places; among the rest, two Merchants ships hired by Moun∣seur Sabesa to transport certaine men for Rochell, both which ships being preparing, and partly proui∣ded of their men, the one was cast away with other ships and barkes riding in the said Rode aforesaid: The other onely buldge. But before this storme arose, I will not omit to set downe a strange accident which happened in one of the ships, there being in her both Mariners and Souldiers. About some three dayes before the storme, one man in her seeming to be fran∣ticke
or sicke of some violent disease, required leaue to goe a shore, for his time was come and hee must away. The Captaine notwithstanding would not suf∣fer him; insomuch that the fellow said, If they would not let him goe it would bee the worse for them all; for, said he, doe you not see two deuils yonder, and pointed with his finger; nay, said he, there will come three more anon. They notwithstanding caused him to be bound and put in the strongest hold of the ship, vnder hatches, the hatches being close kept downe: but about the euening when they were at prayers, hee came vp and walked on the hatches a while, whereat they were much amazed, till on a suddaine he leaped ouer board, and after him seemed to leape a thing like a great mastiffe dog; whereupon did arise such a tem∣pestuous storme of wind, thunder, and lightning, that the ship wherein this miserable wretch was, left her anckers, and was split on the Rockes, and all her men except about 8. were cast away; some of them being cast vp vpon the rockes, and a proper Gentleman a∣mongst the rest, was for certaine dayes standing vp∣right betwixt two rockes, as though he were aliue, and impossible to be got out vnlesse the rockes bee beaten away. In the said rode were likewise cast away seuen other Ships & Barks, one wherof was driuen with the violence of the storme, vpon the top of a hie rock, not much impaired, so strangely that it is thought a thing impossible it should come there, and is as impossible to be gotten off againe without spoyling, beeing dri∣uen so farre from the water: In this storme is repor∣ted to bee lost out of these 8. ships 300. men, besides the Ships and goods. At the same time in diuers other
places besides, were many ships cast away, so that it is thought the losse by shipwracke in the west parts of England is 40. or 50000. pounds. Now concerning the hurt done by land, by thun∣der and lightning the same time through Deuonshire and Summersetshire; in many places whole fields of Corne blasted, stackes of Corne blasted and scorched, nay the violence of the winde and thunder was such, that is scatttered and dispersed the Corne as if it had beene sowne againe, and as if God would not suffer vs to reape the fruits of the earth, but would scatter it againe, nay out of the eares, as if the flayle had beene vpon it. Let vs compare the mildew and blasting sent vpon our fields in generall, in the prime of our hope, before our haruest, and now in haruest (vpon that litle remainder) with this sudden judgement of winde and lightning, and consider whether we haue not cause to repent and to feare lest God may punish vs in greater measure hereafter. From the Hage the 18. of August. That his Excellency the Prince of Orange hath prepared Stables and all other proui∣sion for 8000. horse at Breda, against the com∣ming of Brunswicke and Mansfield, and hath ap∣pointed his brother Count Henry 6000. chosen foote, and 1500. speciall horse, to make al speed
by marching Night and Day till he meete and bee ioyned with the Duke of Brvnswicke and Count Mansfield, the better to encounter with Spinola or Gonzales forces. It is certaine that Mansfield, Brunswicke, and Gon∣zalo haue met, but none as yet can truly report any particulars, whether hath had the greater losse, but howsoeuer Mansfield is Ioyned with the Prince of Orange at Breda. That Heidelbergh, Mainbeim, and Franckendale, in regard of the Country being wasted, & through feare of want of Victuals within the Townes and doubting least the Enemy Monsieur Tilly (who lyes neare them with 20000. men besides 4000. Cossackes, Polackes, and Hungarian Horsemen) should besiege them againe, are forced to turne out of their Townes all superfluous people aswell In∣habitants as others, and to leaue them to the mer∣cifull hand of their gracious God, without whose miraculous preseruation they are like to perish for want of sustenance, this is all the comfort that we at this present can affoord them, nor any other as∣surance haue wee that our selues in short time shall not follow them. Leopoldus the 12. of this Month, with an Army 12000. besieged Germishem or Germstadt, wherein were 500. Dutch and 200. Switzers, being the last
Towne (except the 3. former) which hath stood out vntaken, and hauing taken the same put them all to the Sword. The Duke of Saxon hearing of some stirre ari∣sing in Sitesia and some part of Bohemia, in the ab∣sence of the Emperour, is gone vp with Forces to preuent all danger that may happen in those partes, before the returne of his Maiesty from Vienna, hee hath likewise caused 4. pieces of Cannon to be sent from Prague for the besieging of Glats, which yet holdes out for the King of Bohemia. From Vienna. That the Emperour is vpon his returne from Hungary, where hee hath receiued reasonable good content. In the meane time Bethlem Gabor and the Lord Budiany are leauying of great Forces, and as some think it is by reason of the stirre of the Turks in nether Hungary, others thinke their forces are pre∣paring to ioyne and to assist the Marquis Iagersdorp and the Count of Thorne, and to giue the Emperour his welcome home at his returne to Silesia and Morauia. From Rome. That Sir Robert Sherley hath beene sent from the Emperour of Persia to diuers Princes, and that hee is arriued heere from Spaine, and from hence hee is to go to the Princes of Jtaly, and so to the Emperor,
for soliciting them to a common League and com∣bination against the New Turke, to ioyne their powers together for the Inuading his Dominions, now at this time hauing so faire an occasion, there being a great Diuision now amongst them. From Venice. That there are certaine Viceer Bashawes reuol∣ted, and come away as farre as Adrianople, with a great number of Ships and Gallyes towards the Blacke Sea, where they are to ioyne with certaine Cossackes and other to make a head of Rebellion against the now present Emperour of the Turkes. It is likewise written, that the great Aga Gouer∣nour of the Saraglio, hath plotted to take away the liues of Osmands two Brethren, the one being a Youth of a 11. yeares olde, the other of 12. but the Mother of them hauing intelligence of it, caused them to be conueyed away, by which meanes she preuented the Conspiracy, and caused the said Aga with diuers Confederates, to be taken & Executed. There ceaseth not daily to be fallings out amongst the Janizaries and other, which the Musti seeketh by all meanes to appease. The new Emperour the better to establish himselfe, hath made choyse of the Bashaw of Cayro to bee his chiefe Viceer Ba∣shaw, vnto whom he hath giuen his Sister in Mari∣age,
being a very discreet experienced man, and on who is like to settle Peace and quiet in the Citty of of Constantinople, if not in all Turky besides. From Genoway the 15. of August. The King of Spaine hath taken vp the 15. of this Month, 300000. Crownes more, and caused it to be sent to Antwerpe for the payment of Spinola his Souldiers. Those of Genoway haue likewise granted to lend the King of Spaine 4. Gallyes furnished vn∣der the Commaund of Prince Doria, with other Gallyes from the Pope and the Duke of Florence, with those of Malta for the assisting of him against the Pirates of Argier, who are said to bee Ioyned with the Hollander, and haue made a great Nauy, wherewith they haue inuaded some part of the King of Spaines Territories, ouer against the Coast of Barbary, rather then the Iland of Mamora, as was formerly suspected. From France. His Maiesty hauing (himselfe in person) taken the Towne of Louening in Lanquedocke, betwixt Ca∣stres and Mountaubon, The chiefe Citizens comming foorth of the Towne and meeting the King with the Keyes of the Gates in their hands, being vpon tearmes of Composition, did for their resistance cause them to bee Hanged, and likewise caused a great number of the Towne to bee put to the
Sword, vpon the yeelding vp of the same. Likewise it is said, that hee hath taken in the Towne of Semers, a Towne of great consequence to those of the Religion, since he hath made Duke Dediguires Generall of his Army, and Gouernor of Dolphin, who before was but Lieutenant, and in his place is his Sonne in Law Monsieur Criki made Lieutenant of Dolphini, who is now gone to be∣siege Mompelier with 20. pieces of Cannon. The said Dediguiers treating with Duke de Ro∣ban, offered him very Honourable conditions, if hee will lay downe his Armes and come vnto his Maiesty, who as yet bides constant and his Army encreaseth daily, and that he prepares for the remo∣uing of the Siege. It is certainely written from France, that Monsi∣eur Chatilion is reuolted to the Kings side, being be∣fore Commander of a Towne called Egremorts be∣longing to Protestants, which hee hath deliue∣red vp, and whereupou he is made one of the Mar∣shals of France, and is at this present in the Kings Army with Dedigueirs, at the siege of Mompelier, or rather of Castres, being hard by Mompelier, & more easie to be taken. From Rochell the 8. of August. A French Marchant arriuing heere in London on Saturday last, reporteth as followeth: That when
hee came from thence it was the 18. of this instant Month, hee left in the Citty of Rochell 5000. braue Souldiers of seuerall Nations, besides the Inhabi∣tants and those Souldiers of the Citty, viz. of Eng∣lish, Scots, Dutch and French, ouer whom Monsi∣eur de Fauours is Commander, a man of great Expe∣rience and Valour, in the former Kings warres, who doth daily salley out of the Town both with horse and foote, defeating the aduerse part, and bringing in Cattle and other prouision daily. The Count of Soysons being Commander of the Kings Army, hath built a Fort and mounted a piece of Cannon thereupon, whereby he hath annoyed some of the highest built houses in the Towne, but through often shooting off, 4. or 5. of the said Can∣nons are become vnseruiceable, being broken. The Towne on the other side haue done the Kings Army greater hurt, and haue themselues ta∣ken and made vnseruiceable diuers of the Kings Cannon, and haue poysoned all the Fountaines round about the Citty neere the Army, whereby the Souldiers of Count de Soysons dye daily, but they haue (in regard of the respect and Honor they beare him) aduertised the said Count thereof, that be may the better auoyde the same. The same Marchant reports what hee likewise saw? comming from Rochell in the said Riuer were
16. Ships (accustomed to goe to New found Land) prepared and furnished ready for Warliike seruice, and were appointed to goe and encounter with the King his Gallyes wheresoeuer they shall meete, and sayling further some 10. Leagues from Rochell neere the Ile de Deu, came by the Kings Fleete con∣sisting of 46. Sayle of Ships, besides 13. expected from St. Malloes, with 10. Gallyes of Burwayes, all which Ships makes 59. Sayle, the 10. Gallyes being appointed to meete with the 16. Fisher Ships, as a∣foresaid, The Rochell Fleete at the same time being but 40. Ships ioyned, but expected 20. more houre∣ly from the Ile of Rees to come to them, and being within 8. Leagues of the Kings Fleete, since which time there is newes come to my Lord the French Ambassadour, that within 4. dayes after this Mar∣chant passed by them, the two Fleetes met and had a cruell Fight, but the particulars where of and who had the better are not yet knowne, for within 3. dayes after, the Secretary of State at Paris had no∣tice of the same, but could not vnderstand the par∣ticulars, nor who had the better of it.
The Coppy of a Letter from Breda. Count Mansfield hauing intelligence of Don Cordua's Approach, sent certaine Troopes to possesse some pas∣sage to hinder his March, but these loosing the direct way were defeated and put to flight by the Forces of the Bi∣shop of Liege, whereupon Count Mansfield resolued to∣solued to march with his whole Army to the aforesaid passage, being there arriued, the Enemy appeared in sight, presently Count Mansfield burned his Baggage and pre∣pared to the Battaile, which continued long and furious, in the end Don Coraua was forced to retire, & in the retreat the Duke of Brunswicke was shot and hurt, whereat being inraged the more in regard hee was wounded in the Ene∣mies retreat, he disarmed himselfe and shifted his Beuer, thus onely with his Hat and Cassocke hee made choise of some Regiments, and with them resolutely assayled the retiring Enemy, slew 500. of their men, and seazed vpon sundry Waggons richly laden, and also tooke Don Cor∣dua's owne Coach, wherein the Duke made to the Hage in Triumph. It is also certified from a Commaunder in Borgen, that Count Mansfield hauing surprised two pieces of Cannon of the Enemies, he afterwards tooke a Coach of Don Cor∣dua's wherein was a good quantity of pieces of Siluer of value 5. shillings Sterling, wherewith Count Mansfield in a Brauado charged their owne Ordinance, and slew many of them with their owne Coyne. FINIS.
