19824 99849820 14991
THE GLASSE OF TIME, IN THE two first Ages. Diuinely handled, By Thomas Peyton, of Lin∣colnes Inne, Gent. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be had at Laurence Chapmans shop ouer-against Staple Inne. 1620.
TO THE ILLVS∣TRIOVS PRINCE Charles, Prince of Wales. MOst hopefull Prince, Europaes richest Iem, Successor to these famous westerne Iles, Chast Oliue Branch, descended of that Stem, Whose, what he hath, all on thy fortune smiles: Inheritor to such a Potent King▪ As no Age yet, his Like could euer bring. Braue Pearle of men, within whose louely Face, The sacred Muses learned Arts combine, And all Heauens gifts from great Apollos Race, Apparant seeme within thy Browes to shine, Thy Fathers Doran, kingly workes of State, This more then needs, as borne but out of date. Yet Royall Prince, let but thine eyes behold, This lofty Subiect in these Rurall Rimes, T'will more encourage then Earths purest gold, To make my Muse to all succeeding times, Blaze forth thy parts and high deserued Fame, That thy rare worth may all the World inflame.
As in a Garden of sweete fragrant flowers, Where each man takes what to his mind seemes best, Then sits him downe within their pleasant Bowers, Peruseth all, and for a Time doth Rest, Contented, Ioy'd (Admiring) to haue found; So great a change, in one small piece of Ground. So deerest Prince, within thy Fathers workes, What Poesies sweete, Graue sentences diuine, Sad morrall matter in each Subiect lurkes? To draw thy youth to trace him line by line, Whilst this may chance to recreate thy mind, As glimmering Luna in Sols absence shin'd. Persist go on, and as thy Vertues won, The Loyall Loue of euery faithfull heart, So to the end, thy course (directly) run, And winged Fame shall from thee neuer start, But scale the Cloudes and mount the lofty Skyes, To sound thy worth as farre as India lyes. Your Highnesse in all humblenesse, Thomas Peyton.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, FRANCIS Lord Verulam, Lord Chancelor of England. MOst Honor'd Lord, within whose reuerend face, Truth, Mercy, Iustice, Loue and all combine, Heauens deerest Daughters of Iehouahs Race, Seeme all at full within thy Browes to shine, The King himselefe (T'immortalize thy fame) Hath in thy Name Foretiped out the same. Great Verulam, my Soule hath much admirde, Thy Courtly carriage in each comely part, Worth, Merrit, Grace, when what the land desirde, Is powr'd vpon thee as thy iust desart, Graue liberall mind contending with the rest, To seate them all in thy Iuditious brest. Thrice noble Lord, how dost thou prize of gold, Wealth, Treasures Mony and such Earthly cash? For none of them thou hast thy Iustice sold, But held them all as base (infected) trash To snare, allure, out from a dunghill wrought, The seared conscience of each muddy thought.
Weigh but my cause, referre me not to those, That from the first were partiall in my right, Ah this is more then once thine Honour knowes, Thou seest mine owne hath now vndone me quight, Whilst by a trick they got me in their paw, Against the Order of thy Court and Law. If I were such as some would haue thee thinke, I meane my Foes which vtterly defame, Mine Innocence and all together linke To wound my state, and blemish much my name: Yet Iustice wils, what in their hands hath laine, Thus to my losse should be restord againe. Ah, deerest Lord, hold but the Scales vpright, Let Court nor fauour ouersway my cause, To presse me more then is beyond my might, Is but their Reach to crosse thy former Lawes, Let me have Peace, or that which is mine owne, And thy iust worth shall o're the World be blowne. Your Lordships in all humblenesse, Thomas Peyton.
TO THE READER, The Title described. VNto the Wise, Religious, Learned, Graue, Iudicious Reader, out this Worke I send, The tender sighted that small knowledge haue, Can litle loose, but much their weaknesse mend: And generous spirits which from heauen are sent, May Solace here, and finde all true content. A Paradise (presented) to ech eye, Within the Vinnet of the Title page, Where Iustice, Mercie, Nature, Loue, do lye, Beforeth' Almightie in the first found Age. Time stands betwixt, and Truth his daughter beares His traine behind, a world of Aged yeares. Fierce Nemesis she mounts (within the Ayre) On Pegasus, that winged Horse of Fame, And by her side a Sword all naked bare, Graue Iustice sits, a (sable) lowring Dame, Vnder her feete the worlds most spatious Globe, And weighs mens Actions in a scarlet Robe. This may denote the goodly glorious worth, The pretious Value, Maiestie and Grace, Of all the Sisters (Glory of this Earth) Gods deerest daughters in their seuerall place,
Aboue the world, heauens crowne their browes adorne, To shew (at full) how they do (bribing) scorne. Peruse it well for in the same may lurke, More (obscure) matter in a deeper sence, To set the best and learned wits on worke, Then hath as yet in many Ages since, Within so small a little Ʋolumne beene, Or on the sudden can be found and seene, Ʋrania (deere) attired in her silke, To draw thee on with more attentiue heede, The weaker sort she sometime feedes with milke, All guiltie mens damn'd vices vp to weede: Th'enuious Momes that her chaste Muse doth tuch, She hopes to mend, but cares not for them much. Thine to his power, Tho. Peyton.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Beati Pacifici.
THE GLASSE OF TIME, IN THE FIRST AGE. The Argument. The Author first, doth Gods assistance craue, Throughout the worke that he his helpe may haue; The sacred Sabbaoth, Sathans enuious gall, The Woman fram'd, and Mans most dismall fall; The Tree of Life protected from the Brute, The Tree of Knowledge with her fatall Fruit: For feare the World should finally be ended, Gods deerest Daughters downe in hast descended, The flaming Sword the Tree of Life which garded, The Cherubins vpon the walls that warded. The Land of Eden is discrib'd at large, Heauens iudgement iust to all men's future charge. SInce true examples in Gods holy Booke, Are found of those that in it loue to looke, Of men whose Image, portraiture and soule, Haue beene transform'd to monstrous shapes and foule.
According as their liues haue pleasing beene,Gen. 19, 26 To him whose sight their secret thoughts hath seene, And as his goodnesse sacred is that some,Dan. 4. 30 Should be examples for these times to come: His Church to comfort, Pagans to appall, To teach to vs what did to them befall; Within the stories of the new and old,Rom. 15 4 Of many more then can by me be told. And since that Ouid in a pleasing verse, Doth pretty Tales and Metaphors rehearse, Of men to birds, and then againe to beasts, To make you parly at your welcome feasts: Whose fabled fictions warbled in that age, The infancy and sacred pupill-age Of the Religion which we heare maintaine, Vnder our Soueraignes thrice most happy raigne; May seeme from Moses and the rest diuine, In's Metaphors to trace them line by line; In some I meane, and not in all his worke, For pleasant folly couch't, therein may lurke, Yet the allusion, and the meaning sure, May reference haue vnto the Scripture pure, And though it shines as Tytans westerne rayes, By some 'tis held but wanton in our dayes. But most of all the ripenesse of these times, The heauenly works vp to the clouds that climes: The enuious eye which ouerlookes our deeds, When each mans taste on sundry dishes feedes:
The snarling cur at euery thing that bites: The slandring Mome which no good worke endites: The monster curst with his vile forked tongue, That from Hels vault vp to the earth first sprung, With Hidra heads, and Ianus double face, To fawne before, then wound to our disgrace: Hath made my Muse vnwilling heere to sing, As loath her selfe vpon the stage to bring To each mans view, and her owne painefull toyle, But that the sight may many vices spoyle. When sin we see vnmasked brought to light, And damn'd offences naked to our sight: Like lezabel that did the Clouds aspire,1. Kin. 4. 18, 19 Chap. 19. 2 Cha. 21. 10, 23 In rusling silks and glorious braue atire, Vnder a holy outward forme and rite, Gods chosen flock are fleec't and murthered quite, But once vnmask't, the Minions of her court Hurle heri'th durt, pash out her braines in sport: And as a foule mishapen painted monster,2. Kin 9. 30, 33 35, 37. Conceit of her as all the world doth conster: Then is she seene disrob'd, disrank't of all, The map of folly in her sudden fall, Her cup with poyson, damned Enuy fills, Her cursed eyes haue seene those seuen built hills, Where all the Saints, Apostles, Martyrs stood, With crimson colours all imbru'd in bloud. O glorious God inspiror of my Muse, Grant that thy Word my soule may dayly vse, And that what learning painefully it got, Still from the truth may neuer swerue a iot.
That in her spring, beginning, and her bud, May sing thy glory to the Churches good, And in foule folly none asleepe I rock, Nor giue offence to any of thy flock: But that my speech as generall to all, May like a Sermon in the Pulpit fall: And not to wade in curious questions deepe, But feede thy flock, and edifie thy sheepe, That none at all may haue a iust excuse, By such examples as I shall produce- And all that see their faults, their liues may mend, That to thy glory I this Worke may end. Then shall the world with admiration see, Her face vnmask't to all eternitee; The famous actions heeretofore lay dead, Shall then be rouz'd out from obliuions bed. And all the noblest kingdoms euer knowne, Will be reuiu'd, within my verse be showne, Their manners, customes, nature and their state, Their end, beginning, fortune and their fate, From Adam first throughout in euery age, Shall heere be mustred on this publike Stage, In Rurall Robes to giue the earth content, How heeretofore the ages past weee spent. O that my Muse might once but rest in peace, Then would she sing diuinely, neuer cease, But worke out Truth within her holy Rimes, Glyding along descending to our times, And deare Vrania Soueraigne of my verse, Should heere the glory of this world rehearse,
Vnfoulding still to Gods immortall glory, The heauenly sweetenesse of a sacred story. What may we thinke of all the iudgements iust, Of great Iehouah buried in the dust; Beside all those in holy Scriptures pend, Which humane wit as yet could neuer mend, Nor all the Rabbies in their learned fame; Could euer tell how to correct the same: Shall we go on, and still be bold to thinke, Hee'le punish them, and on vs alwayes winke; For some of them the earth it selfe did gape, How can we know that we are sure to scape, The Angels which against the Lord did swell, He quite casheer'd, and cast them downe to hell: Where being bound eternally in chaines, They feele the torments of ten thousand paines, Farre more then can expressed be in inke, And all the world, and sinfull man can thinke. Adam what made thee, wilfully at first, To leaue thy of-spring, to this day accurst; So wicked, foule, and ouer growne with Sinne; And in thy person all of it beginne? That hadst thou stood in Innocenie fram'd, Death, Sin, and Hell, the world and all thou hadst tam'd. Then hadst thou beene a Monarch from thy birth; Gods onely Darling both in heauen and earth: The world and all at thy command to bend, And all heauens creatures on thee t'attend. The sweetest life that euer man could liue; What couldst thou aske but God to thee did giue? Protected kept thee like a faithfull Warden, As thy companion in that pleasant Garden▪
No canckred mallice once thy heart did moue: Free-will thou hadst endude from him aboue: What couldst thou wish, all worlds content and more? The best Diuine that ere the Earth yet bore, Gods onely Sonne, the Prince of Peace except, For thy sad fall how oft mine eyes haue wept. Alas weakeman, hadst thou in honour stood How heauenly blest, thrice happy beene thy blood? And all thy aged issue to this day Had liu'd secure, as in the Month of May. What need had we, that any should haue dy'd Vpon the Crosse, our sinfull soules reuiu'd? And that Messias, God himselfe the Son, Should here descend to put our nature on, To liue deiected, poore, contemn'd, forlorn'd, Derided, beate, tost vpside downe and scorn'd. And more, to beare for this thy wofull fall, Then euer man which liu'd vpon this ball. Curst be that Diuell that first thy sence bely'd; If thou hadst liu'd, then we had neuer dy'd. Oh God! to purchase with that bloody cost, Our soules redeem'd when they were fully lost. Here is a loue which farre surmounts the skies, My sences rapts, and dazles both mine eyes. But tell me Adam, what might be the cause That thou shouldst breake thy holy Makers lawes. When of a thousand which might make vs weepe, In all the world thou hadst but one to keepe, And that but light? Alas couldst thou not see, But touch and taste that one forbidden tree,
Which in the midst of all the garden grew, An ill knowne tree to make thy ofspring rew? What pleasant tast or relish had the same? How were thy senses dim'd and much to blame, That had the Garden sole at thy command, And all the fruits within thy sight to stand: Farre better, pure, more daintier euery way, Then such an Apple painted like a gay: Fit for a woman, or some lickorish foole, A silly child, or one that goes to schoole. Thy wilfull, foule, absurd, and grosse abuse, Against thy God, admits no iust excuse, Tis not the losse of one poore Apple mist, That thou didst grapple in thy sinfull fist, Could be the cause his anger to procure, Fierce heauy wrath eternall to endure. It was not that he did so much respect, But thy foule error, wilfull, bad neglect: Contempt of Him, rebellion, treason, pride; And all the sinnes within the world beside, That linked were within thy fault at first, Chain'd to thy Act, and in thy folly nurst. What may we thinke of that ambitious Pope, Which dar'd to scoffe vnder heauens glorious Cope, Against that God, that in his sacred frowne Turns vp his heeles, and hurles his pride soone downe? When hauing mist a simple childish toy, A Peacocke bird which seem'd his onely ioy. Distempered much began in heate to chide, That few men could his holy presence bide. And afterward asham'd of what was past, To shew his choller not long time did last;
Excusde himselfe, that he might angry be, As well for that, as was the Trinitie. When discontented for an Apple lost, Both Eue and Adam to their paine and cost, From Paradise were thrust quite out and beaten, And much disgrac't for one poore Apple eaten. Now tell me Rome, that thinkst thy selfe the minion, Christs onely Vicar in thine owne opinion? And shouldst his sheepe still to this day haue fed: Where was thy Church when Iulius was thy head? Thy Papacy I may not here dispute, As yet my tongue must of that thing be mute. And backe to Adam whence I last digrest, Too fortunate my Muse had beene and blest, Had it but sung thy first estate and all, And neuer knowne the horror of thy fall. A greater loue on man was neuer showne, Nor on the earth as yet was euer knowne, Then all the world to be at thy command, Still to this day to serue thy turne and stand: All that againe, for this he did require, To keepe the Garden that was his desire. At other times to his immortall fame, That thou shouldst praise his glorious holy Name. Here was thy calling (Adam) naught; beside, His owne example must thy actions guide. Sixe dayes to worke, to till that holy ground; And in the seuenth, thy Makers prayses sound. For as at first, thou wast a body framde; So time and place himselfe he hath ordainde,
Design'd, appointed for his seruice pure, Not for a day, but euer to endure. By this thou know'st that he thy person blest, To giue thee then his holy sacred Rest, And sanctifie the Sabaoth to thy good; Aye to be kept in all thy future blood. Those that refuse to keepe his Sabaoth holy, Gods owne example may conuince of folly. But soft, I heare some Laodicean make,Reu. 3. sinon in∣uenter of the horse of Troy. Euen Sinon like, the ground of all to shake. To stay my pen with such a question strange, As first from Rome, now ore the world doth range. How God could Rest, which neuer wrought as yet, For he that workes, his labour must be great To frame a matter of so huge a worth, As is the Fabrike of the spatious Earth, The Sea and Heauens, the Firmaments and all, Which euer yet within thy sight could fall. Oh righteous God that sinfull man should make, Within his mouth thy holy word to take: And by the same thy sacred actions taxe, To wring them now like to a Nose of Waxe.simile. Too make a doubt and question of that Rest, Which to the world for euer thou hast blest. Tis true, I know when God first fram'd the world, The waters all within their limits curl'd, The firmaments and euery liuing thing, Out from the dust he then did Adam bring: Made him a man, a demi-God in byrth, Plac't him his Vice-roy here vpon the earth.
And by his power all sacred and diuine, So fram'd the world as if he had wrought by line, Set all in order working in their time, Like to the wheeles within a clocke or chime, To serue the turne of Adam and his race, And all these made but full in sixe dayes space. Then did he rest and sate him downe to view, And to the heauens vp againe he flew: And from the worke which by his word he wrought, In sixe dayes space, and seeing none▪ was nought, But from creating any further matter, He onely ceast, and least the same might scatter, And so returne to what it was at first, His prouidence his works hath euer nurst: Aye by his power, his wisedome, and his might, The heauens and earth are gouerned aright. He worketh still preseruing what was made, Far more then can by any man be sayd: His armes supporting all this weighty ball, Else would the same dissolue againe and fall. O God, thy Rest hath euer bin admired, Seene of thy Saints, and of my soule desired! The Pagan people to this day that slept In ignorance, haue yet a Sabaoth kept.Exod. 16. 23. 26. Num. 15. 32. Eze. 20. 13. 20. 24. The Iew at first with Manna wondrous fed, His Sabaoth kept by thy example led: Though now in error great he snores and sleeps, The Saterday his Sabaoth still he keepes. No Christian state is so vnciuill rude, But keeps thy Rest as thou hast him endude:
With grace and goodnesse from the Prince of peace, The Sunday he from all worlds works doth cease, Lead thereunto by that all rising Son, On Easter day, that rose againe and won The eternall crowne in Paradise first lost, A bloody prize to his great paine and cost. Besides the examples of thy deerest Saints, Thine institution and the holy plaints, Of all th' Apostles, famous men and Martyrs, In all the world within her vtmost quarters: Which euer vsde to preach thy word and pray, And sanctifie the sacred Sabaoth day. The Ethiopian, least he should offend To breake thy Rest in superstition pend, The Saterday and Sunday both he keeps, And in those dayes he often prayes and weeps, That thou wouldst pardon all his former sins, There is his Rest, his happinesse begins: In childish toyes, in gaming, sports and playes, He spends small time but keeps his Sabaoths dayes. Their royall Queene which came so many miles, (With cunning questions, witty speeches, wiles)1. Kin. 10. 1. to the 11. 2. Chr. 9. 1. To tempt, to heare and see the courtly guise, The wit and words of Solomon the wise, May rise in iudgement at that dradfull hower, When Christ may also on our faces lower, That more respect our pleasures worke and play, Then him to serue vpon his sacred day. What shall we thinke when Christ the Lord of life,Luk. 11. 31. Which shed his bloud to end our mortall strife?
Shall speake these words out of his holy lips, And not a word as yet that euer slips: But still hath beene most weighty powerfull round, One iot thereof hath neuer fell to th'ground. When he himselfe shall thus picke out their Prince, To warne vs all our follyes to conuince, May we not thinke aswell he meant her land, Now at this day as it is knowne to stand, Shall like wise rise at his last trumpe and call, To staine our liues and shame our actions all. Father of Lights, which dwellest in a Light, That farre exceeds our Owely bleared sight: What will become of all our learned wit, When Iesus Christ at thy right hand shall sit,
To make our peace and step twixt thee and vs, And we in Vice to run our course on thus, To anger thee so good and iust a God, Not once afrayd of thy reuenging Rod: But in the day that thou didst early rise, Of death and hell to get th'immortall prize, In which we were partakers of thy blood And body both vnto our soueraigne good. And when we should repent vs of our sins, By true contrition, which thy mercy wins: Engrafted made the members of that head, Whose precious bloud our soules but then hath fed, Relieue the poore, examine well our fall, In meditation spend the day and all, And when we should thy sacred prayses sing, To make thy people all the while to ring, Whilst we at Bowles shall sometimes curse and fret, And all for threepence which we cannot get, And shall maintaine our sinfull deedes in Churches, And run our selues to gather vp the Lurches: Those that behold vs with repentant eyes, We call them fooles and Puritants precise; And when the best our companie do shun, Home to their house we send for them and run. Pardon vs Lord, forgiue our great misdeedes, Cull out thy Wheate, and pluck out all the weedes, Which wrong thy people by their ill example, The truth neglectin vgly vice to trample: Though our Religion we may seeme to halue, Like to the Iewes which made the golden calue:simile. Exod. 32. 4. 5, 6, 10. In Aarons time, and on their holy day, Did eate and drinke, and rose againe to play,
If these men by their rude vnciuill sport, Thy Maiesty did anger in such sort, That had not Moses knowing of their fall, In zeale besought them they had perish't all, His great desire thy fury could not stay, But that three thousand fell within one day, Their guerdon iust no liuing man can tell, But very like they had gone downe to hell, All quick aliue amongst the damned bad, The punishment which after Korah had,Num. 16. 32. We see (alas) both grace and goodnesse lurkes,scal. & li. 5. Within the hearts of fierce and crewell Turkes, Of Sarazens and Pagan people rude, Which with thy truth were neuer yet indude, Before such time as their seducer nurst, By Sergius helpe most dangerously at first, A banefull poyson to infect their bloud, O'reflowes the earth much like to Noahs floud: Yet these alone by thy example led, Or by the light of Nature in them bred, Haue euer kept the Fryday in that worth, Long time before the most vntimely birth, Of Mahomet that Antechrist indeede, Who found it so and left it to their seede. Besides a world of other people more, That heere I could produce in ample store, Which euer kept a holy resting day, Abstayning then from all rude workes and play, The Indian people haue a rest alow'd,Ind. Hist. gasp. Balb. guin. dis.  d. cot. And those of Iaua that to Idols bowd, The Negro black and rich Peguan left, Haue each of them a seuerall Sabaoth kept,
The sacred Sibils, with their frantike mother, Haue still prefer'd one day before another. We haue great God that which these neuer knew, Thine owne example and the scriptures true, Thy all diuine and holy morrall law,Ex. 20. 8, 9. 10 Cha. 31. 14, 15 Cha. 34. 1. 21. Which these as yet haue neuer heard or saw, Ingrost in Sinah writ twice by thy hand, To shew the same for euermore should stand▪ Both in the Law and in the Gospells light, To come to Church and praise thy name aright, Els how should we thy glorious worth extoll, But like to Swine liue all at home and loll: And neuer thinke how thou at first didst take, A little earth and so our bodyes make, Our soules infuse in Paradise vs plaste Till for our sins we soone from thence were cast, 'Gau'st vs this world Christ Iesus sent besides, Which wrought our life out from his bleeding sides. But soft I heere that some vpon this clause, Haue ventur'd farre to abbrogate the lawes, The holy rest a Iewish Sabaoth call, Haue vs liue free, tide to no law at all: But then (alas) what would become of vs, That sift Gods actions, tempt his highnesse thus, Of all the lawes that to the Iewes he gaue, But ten of them in all the world we haue, And those reduc'st for feare they may be lost, May be compil'd but into two at most: These farre more weighty ponderous then the rest, Were by his glorious sacred mouth exprest, And Christ himselfe that death and hell did tame, Hath not abolish't but confirm'd the same;
Else what meant he when oftentimes he said, The heauens and earth, the sea and all shall fade, Before such time that Gods eternall Word, One iot or tittle shall thereof be stird, Did this his coming breede a doubt and flaw, Still to destroy, and not fullfill the law? Haue not the Prophets told long since before, Of this our Sabaoth which we now adore? Tis true that some euen in our christian Law, Which haue the arts and learned Muses saw, Yet haue alledg'd as their assertion, Vpon this place anticipation, Affirming Moses when those words were writ, In Genesis and still are extant yet,Gen. 2. 3. Then knew the rest and Sabaoth of the Iewes, But this to me seemes rather vncouth newes: For can we thinke that Moses did intend, When first of all that Genesis was pend, These should forgoe and be incerted best, As an introduction to the Sabaoths rest, That the command cannot be firme and strong, Vnlesse these words did guide it all along, Vpon this place still trained vp and nurst, As grounding it on Gods example first. What can they say to all the ancient men, The Patriarkes and holy fathers then, Before the law which liued long and blest, Yet euer kept a sacred seemely rest, To serue their God to giue him thanks and pray, That late preseru'd them from that lowring day,
In which the world and all therein was found, Besides the Arke were washt away and droun'd. And to the Iewes that were with Manna fed, Ouer the mountaines forty yeeres were led: Which in the Arabian vasty desarts weare, Tipe of our Church that God himselfe did reare, Out of affliction, hunger, heate and cold, O're hils and dales and highest mountaines rold, Vntill at length with wandring hither, thither, Like sheepe dispearst fould all at last together. When oft they murmur'd, much repin'd and grieu'd, Vntill their God their bodies had releeu'd, By sending Quailes more thick then any haile, Vpon their fields quite ouer hill and dale: And showring downe a pearely dew at neede, In shew much like to Coriander seede, Sixe dayes together did this Manna fall, And in the seauenth was sent them none at all: But in the day before the Sabaoths Rest, Full twice so much as other dayes at least, They gathred vp, and till the morrow kept, In which they eat, and prayd to God (and wept) To pardon those which on that sacred day Durst seeke the fields to finde the same and play. But yet admit the holy Law be past, And that in Christ the same away be washt: Yet the Apostles instituted sure, A sacred day, a holy Rest and pure: The Church of God they planted well and watred, And but the day they onely chang'd and altred,
In which the flocke they traind along and fed them, As God aboue in's holy Spirit led them. And euer since the Christians kept that day, To heare the word, to come to Church and pray: For God is good, and wilbe mockt of none, His glorious face the Saints behold alone. Paul the Apostle that was after cald, When Iesus Christ was in th' heauens instald:1. Cor. 16. 13. Heb. 4. 9. Both with the word and holy Spirit annointed, The Christian Sabaoth in Gods Church appointed: To meete together, heare his voyce diuine, The Scriptures search, to trace them line by line; To preach and pray, to lay vp for the poore, For all the Saints to open wide the doore. That sweete Disciple whom the Lord of lifeIoh. 21. 7. 20. 33. More dearely loued, then any faithfull wife (Which euer yet vpon the earth was bred) Could seeme to shew vnto her spouse and head. The last of all more louing then the rest, Which lean'd at suppervpon Christ his brest, And stayd behind his holy Church to guide: His fellowes thought he should haue neuer dide. When by Domitians spightfull cruell word,Vit. Sanct. Ore all the world hot persecution stir'd: Though often times before he had scap'd the pawes, Of barbarous Tyrants, and their cursed Lawes. Liu'd still secure, as not afraid of fire, Sword, famine, murder, in their diuellish ire. Yet at the length, at his most damn'd command, Againe he's caught, subiected to their hand;
And in a Tun of hot and scalding Oyle, He hurles his body ore the fire to boyle. But seeing that could do no good at all, Worse then a Diuell, most treacherously doth fall To stratagems, inhumane actions vile, To banish him in Pathmos wandring Ile, Mongst sauage beasts which lurke in euery bowre, With open mouth his body to deuoure. Where solitary in that vnked place, Christ Iesus shewd his glorious burnisht face,Reu. 1. 9. 10. 11. 13. 14. Whose feete like Brasse, and eyes as flames of fire; Rauisht Iohns spirit, made his soule admire To see the Lord, which for our sins late dy'd. His Christian Sabaoth from the Iewes diuide, By that all powerfull sharpe two edged sword, His glorious holy milde Maiesticke word: His owne example to th' Apostles all, That on this day was euer seene to call, To come amongst them, and to shew his face, To distribute his goodnes and his grace. This great Apostle to heauens potent Prince, The Lords day he hath cald it euer since. Tis writ i' th' Hebrews if the law be ceast, That to Gods people there remaines a Rest,Heb. 4 9. From sin to cease his holy name to praise, Together flocke, our meditations raise Aboue the clouds, to that commanding king, Which out of darknes did our sences bring. Disperst the Truth, and by his sacred might Plac'd all our thoughts w'thin the Gospels light.
O let it neuer sinke within my brest, That to Gods people should remaine no Rest: But toyle and trauell painfull worke alway, And Hoddy Loddy, Topsie Turuy play. Tis true they say, that Constantine the Great, First Emperour of all the Christian Seate: A learned, wise, religious Councell cald,First Nicene Counsell. Himselfe amongst them in his Robes instald, An Order set, abuses foule corrected: Reform'd the Church which Arrians infected, Establisht Peace, ador'd the Royall Law; Made Penalties to keepe them more in awe.Iam. 2. 8. And by his power as head of all the Earth, Christs gouernment was now but in her birth: According to the word and Scriptures pure, Confirm'd our Sabaoth euer to endure. In euery Age since first the world was made, God shew'd his iudgements on those men which wade Beyond the Truth, prophanely still deuise To breake his Rest, and publish wicked lies. As for example, though I could produce A multitude, that none might plead excuse (Before his Iustice) at that dreadfull barre, For leading others in a maze so farre. And yet of them, but three in all Ile cite, As fitting to the times wherein I write: To shew how God hath euer hated, curst, The very place that Sabaoth breakers nurst. The ancient Iewes which in Arabia walkedExod. 13. 16. Before the Law, when God with Moses talked,
And bad him warne the people all, that none Should dare to gather (euery one alone) More then a Omer of that blessed food Which fell from heauen vnto their soueraigne good. And in the day before the Sabaoths rest, Two Omers full (as is before exprest) Should then be gathered, rosted, bak'd and sod, But in the rest minde nothing else but God. How hath that food releeu'd the lingring mind, Of those his people, whom true loue did bind In awfull feare, diuinely wondrous fed, And onely in the light of nature led? Those which abusde his sacred Rest and grace, How did it then infect the aire and place With putrifaction, loathsome, deadly, ranke, In noy some manner ore the earth it stanke, Vntill such time that God aboue did please, To cleare the aire and send them better ease: Causde all that was so lewd prophanely got, To wast, dissolue, consume away and rot. The next example, of his iudgements great, Was in those daies that Babylon did beate The chosen people, and the holy Nation,Ier. 17: 21. to the last. With such a scourge, as since the worlds foundation, Was neuer heard as yet in any land; To feele the weight of his most heauy hand: For prophanation of his sacred Day, In carrying burdens, toyling worke, and play In reuell rout, and such phantasticke sport; Eu'n from the greater to the meaner sort. All run from Church to damn'd offences foule, Neglecting still the danger of their soule.
But God aboue although he often mand, Their chosen Hoast by his victorious hand, Brought them from Aegypt through the red seas waue▪ When mighty Neptune fomes aloft and raues: And in despight of enuious Fortunes fate, Great powerfull riuals and their deadly hate, Led them at length with al their ventrous hoast, And plast their feete vpon the promist coast. Yet for their foule abusing of his rest, In all those things which are aboue exprest, He sends the Plague, pale Famine, Sword and Fire,Ier. 52. 67 Fowre furious foes to execute his Ire, Raz'd downe their walls their temple desolated, Their City sack't and Land depopulated: That for the space of threescore yeeres and ten, It lay vntild, and had her rest as then. O holy God, was euer thing more plaine Then these thy iudgements on thy flock againe,2. Chr. 36. 21 Vpon thy land? what stony heart but feares, To giue them now a Sabbaoth iust of yeares, For all their foule abuses, wicked, lewd, As in my worke shall more at large be shew'd. The third example of his wrathfull frowne, Was lately shew'd vpon Geneua towne: The Imperiall goodly Christian City chast,R▪ Iohnson Within the Duke of Sauoyes country plast, Whose people wise, religious, sober, true, Not giuen to wine with drunken Bacchus crue: Nor to those foule abuses which abounds, Within our land, and ore the earth now sounds; But euer beene of ciuill chast behauiour▪ Neate in attire, and of a comely fauour:
Soe decent in the actions which they wrought, That euery man which saw their citty thought, Ierusalem before it was abated, Had beene deuinely to that place translated. And yet these men which haue the rest outstript, In one thing still themselues haue ouerslipt, Vpon Gods rest, his sacred Sabbaoth Day, To shoote in Guns about the fields and play; Vntill a custome in a lawfull pleasure, Vpon that day grew far beyond all measure: So that their Churchmen, reuerent Preachers graue, Let them alone carelesse their soules to saue. But God aboue to shew his anger iust, Vpon these people for their lawlesse lust, In violating of his sacred rest, A fury sent their country to moiest: Fierce horrid warre now thunders on their land, The Pope, the Spaniard, and the French King stand, All link't alike, to vndermine her wall, Expecting thus a conquest by her fall. Alas (Geneua) how art thou beset, With three such foes as in Europa yèt, Were neuer knowne so strongly to combine, To sack a towne, extracted from their line? What can thy shooting in those Guns auaile, If God for sakes thee, how thy foes preuaile? Weakens thy strength, abateth much thy store, Mewes vp thy Campe, and makes thee extreame poore, Ransackes thy Country all thy land belurches, And brings thee now to be relieu'd in Churches.
These eyes of ours haue seene the worst and best, And iudgement past for breaking of his rest. That Antechrist which in the scriptures pure, Is propheci'd to come amongst vs sure, Began to shew his cursed face on earth, Sixe hundred yeeres after the glorious birth, Of that sweete Babe the Man, God, Christ and King, Which came on earth, our soules to Heauen to bring, By the Alcoran on his Sabbaoth day: Discardeth quite all gaming, sports and play, Denounceth Iudgement on the heads of all; Which on that day in those offences fall: And brands the Diuell an actor in all games, Voyd of Religion yet such sports he blames, As good for litle but to sweare, and cup, Fit Instruments to bring new quarrels vp. The parrable of Christ vpon the earth, Is of such weight, and glorious heauenly worth,Mat▪ 13▪ 3. to 44. Which by the sea to multitudes he spake, What liuing man but at the same must wake, To see how God like to a husbandman, Works vp his ground as well as e're he can, Winnowes the seede, and sifteth euery graine, In hope at haruest by the same to gaine, But that the Diuelli'th instant followes hard, Whose cursed seede the goodly field hath mard; Throwes round about as much as in him dares, In euery place to sowe his wicked tares. How can we thinke to scape Gods Iudgementiust, Fond men (alas) that are but earthly dust:
Weake silly wormes when he shall on vs lowre, Then are we but a Winters withered flowre, That such conceits within our hearts should lurke, To tempt his loue, examine thus his worke, And what himselfe from heauen aboue hath taught, To sleight it ore, and hold it idle naught. Although most true in Paradise at first, His owne example hath the Sabaoth nurst, The Patriarcks and all the holy men, Before the law obseru'd their Restas then: And his command to keepe vs more from sinning, Hath a Memento in the first beginning, The heathen men euen from the worst to best, In euery age still kept a seemely Rest, And all the Saints, Apostles, men, and Martyrs, Throughout the world, in all her vtmost quarters, The generall counsells, learned fathers graue, Those God aboue elected hath to saue, The greatest Kings, and noblest personages, Throughout the world, in all her former ages, The fearefull iudgements, on that holy Land, Which he did plant against all foes to stand, The Lord of life, Christ Iesus on the earth, (Then all before we prize him better worth,) Ordain'd himselfe our Rest vpon this day, To come to Church, to heare the Word and pray, Yet we contemne and not respect the least, But others leade to breake the Sabaoths rest. Grant heauenly God that euer more my heart, May vpright be, and from thee neuer start, But that my soule the purest of my thought, May be with loue, like to an Anuill wrought,
To make a conscience of thy sacred day, To reade thy word, within the Church to pray, That all my life vntill my glasse be run: Be not offensiue to thy deerest Son, Which sits triumphant farre aboue the skies, Grant that I may behold him with mine eyes, And when I shall appeare before thy face, Then may I find thy mercy goodnes, grace, And not thy Iustice for offenses past, But let thy Loue be euer on me cast: Euen in the day that some men dreame of least, Place him betwixr vs, giue my soule her Rest. And yet great God, thou hast not so restraind Our liberty, but that thou hast ordaind,1▪ Cor. 10. 31. 1. Pet▪ 4. 11. At vacant times from serious meditations, To ease our selues in honest recreations, Such that all others to no vice allure, Nor in our minds shall adde a thought impure: But that our sports, our actions, and our playes, May prayse thy name the Rest of all our dayes. The Puritant, he is againe as nice As these vnciuill in their clamorous vice,1. Cor. 6. 12. 2. Cor. 3. 13. 17 Gal. 3. 11. Gal. 2. 14. 16. 17. That all the weeke with superstition fed, To good conceits of others scarce are led: Adopted sons, elected brethren wise, To thinke all damn'd beside their sect precise: Pure hypocrite vnder a formall cloke, That on Gods Rest must draw the Iewish yoke, And walke to Church as if his steps he told, To make no fire but sup his broath vp cold: And many things which if I here should tell: I might too long vpon the matter dwell.
But whither is my Muse transported now, Beyond her compasse farre away▪ and how Comes it to passe that she hath rambled thus About the earth these questions to discusse, In euery Age her sacred holy Rimes, To walke along descending to our times, And taxe the world of vnbeseeming playes, To reprehend the abuses of these dayes. And all this while is Adam still alone In Paradise, and company hath none, Vnlesse somtimes God comes himselfe, and sallies? Before his eyes within those pleasant Allies.Simile. Then is he glad, his heart doth leape for ioy, He runs and skips much like a little boy That goes to schoole, al weary at his booke, Is glad to peeke in euery bush and looke (With those his fellowes) for some bird or nest, Their company his mind still pleaseth best. So art thou Adam when thou art all alone, Then dost thou grieue, complaine, and make thy mone Vnto the Earth, the Aire, the Winds and trees, But God aboue thy present want that sees, Comes downe himselfe to giue thee all content, One of thy ribs out of thy body rent, And made a creature of such wondrous fame, That heauen and earth haue since admird the same. To be thy sollace in his absence pure, And glad thy heart, binding thy loue more sure, To him at first without thine owne direction, Gaue thee a Phenix of such rare perfection.Simile. So sweete an eye, and pretty pleasing looke, Like Adamant and glittring sugred hooke.
She drawes thy loue to mind her speeches more, Then God himselfe that gaue thee her in store. Now art thou compleat (Adam) all beside May not compare to this thy louely bride, Whose radiant tresse in siluer rayes to waue, Before thy face so sweet a choyce to haue, Of so diuine and admirable mould, More daintier farre then is the purest gold, And all the Iewels on the earth are borne, With those rich treasures which this world adorne. Though God at first this earth for thee hath made, The creatures all at thy command to trade: The Sunne and Moone ordaind to be thy light, The Stars and all vnto their vtmost might, The world it selfe and Paradise the place, Where still his loue hath euer giuen thee grace: Yet all of them compar'd in euery part, Cannot content and satisfie thy heart, Vntill thy God euen with his sacred Rest, Had giuen thee this to make thee perfect blest. For presuppose as then thou stoodst before, Though all the world thou hadst in ample store, Plenty of wealth and gold at thy command, And all the creatures in the earth to stand, Before thy face subiected to thy will, And thou the Lord of Paradise yet still. No man besides which dare oppose thy power, Hem'd in with Angels in that sacred tower, And God himselfe within that holy place, Vnmaskt his browes to shew his glorious face:
Yet at the best that euer wit can scan, Thou leadst thy life but like a single man. But now thy God hath perfect made thy state, Linck't thee in marriage with so choyce a mate, Himselfe the Priest which brought her to thy hand, And knit the knot that euer more must stand, Ring'd her with vertue, glorious beauty chaste, Vpon thy selfe and no man else to waste, Made her the Tipe our sences all to rouse, Of Christ himselfe, and of the Church his Spouse: And charg'd the Angels for thy fence and guard, Of nothing now, but one thing thou art bard. As the two lights within the Firmament,simile. So hath thy God his glory to thee lent, Compoz'd thy body exquisite and rare, That all his works cannot to thee compare, Like his owne Image, drawne thy shape diuine, With curious Pencill shadowed forth thy line: Within thy Nosthrils blowne his holy breath, Impal'd thy head with that inspiring wreath, Which binds thy front, and eleuates thine eyes, To mount his throne aboue the lofty skyes, Summons his Angels in their winged order, About thy browes to be a sacred border: Giues them in charge to honour this his frame, All to admire, and wonder at the same. But Lucifer that soard aboue the skye, And thought himselfe to equall God on high, Enuies thy fortune, and thy glorious birth,Wis. 2. 24. In being fram'd but of the basest earth,
Himselfe compacted of pesteferous fire, Assumes a Snake to execute his ire, Windes him within that winding crawling beast, And enters first whereas thy strength was least. Damn'd wicked Diuell what made thee thus to spight, Our grandame Eue and holy Adams Right, What hurt haue they or either of them said, That thou a trap and secret snare hast laid? To bane their youth and vndermine their wall, To gaine a curse vpon their wofull fall: Thy false proceedings in thy actions best, How doth the world thy cunning sleights detest? Which since that time in many ages past, In euery corner of the earth are cast, How hast thou mallist one that hurt thee not? When all thy enuy vpon Iob was shot, Transforming thus thy cursed scourge and rod,Iob. 16. Into the shape iust of the child of God. At other times thy nimblenesse and slight,Ephe. 2. 2. Rom. 12. 7. 9. Aboue the clouds will be an Angell bright, And through the aire close in a fiery Waggon, Thoul't sometimes mount as monstrous as a Dragon, And when thou list thou any shape canst take, Euen from an Angell to an vgly Snake. The fowre maine wheeles on which thy cart doth moue, Are Rauin, Lust, and want of grace and loue, The sable horses which thy charriot led, Haue beene at Rome or else neere Tiber bred, For first Ambition with a lofty pace, Then cursed Enuy with a pale leane face,
And Cruelty that tramples best in bloud, The next is Guile which neuer yet did good, Appostacy that will his faith renounce, A stony heart by all of these will bounce, The Coachmen which do driue them with their rod, Are treason oft and want of feare of God. In these and such like shapes thou lyest in waight,Mat. 4. 1 to the 12. To gull the world as with a poysoned baight, That being tane mans vitall life straight baines, Infects his bloud, and runs through all his vaines, And as thou art, dost cozen lye and lurch, Transform'd sometimes into a man i'th Church,Mar. 8. 33. Vnder that holy habit, maske, and guise, Thou setst abroach thy cancred venom'd lyes. And thus thou camstvnto our grandame Eue,Gen. 3. 1. And as a Diuell into her thoughts dost diue, Seeming a Serpent crawling on thy brest, Much like a simple foule mishapen beast,simile.
Iust in the midst of all the garden faire, Thou singlest forth, the happy blessed paire. And watching Time, when Adam stept aside, Euen but a little from his louely Bride, To pluck perhaps a Nut vpon the Trees, Or get a combe amongst the hony Bees: Or some such thing to giue his welcome Spouse, Euen iust to Eue thou dostthy body rouse, And questions with her, of much idle prattle, As women they delight to talke and tattle, What they may not, and what it is they eate, And what is best, within that pleasing seate, What Tree it is that was to them forbidden, They dare not eate, for feare they may be chidden. Then Eue againe, which thought no hurt at all, Or once suspect the venome of thy gall, As a kind woman full of pleasing loue, Told thee indeede that God in heauen aboue, Had licenst them to eate of euery Tree, Beast fish and foule, with all that they can see, Within the compasse of the spacious aire, And that were liuing in the garden faire: Only the tree that was before their eyes, They might not touch and taste in any wise, For in the day that they thereof should eate, Their God in Heauen would both their bodies beate, Plague them with paine, and punishment extreame, Subiect to Sicknesse, Choller, Pangs, and Phleame, Casheire them both out of that louely place, To dye a deathin miserable case. But thou againe that euer didst deuise, In nothing else but execrable lies,
Straight told the woman that they need not feare, To eate the fruite that pleasant tree did beare: For in the day that they should thereof eate, The Gods themselues they would indeed defeate. Attaine much knowledge, farre aboue mans reach, And all the Gods in many things would teach. To thinke of death they need not feare at all, For why, their eyes should opened be withall: The goodly fruite would breed this wondrous ods, Neuer to die, but euer liue as Gods. O cursed, damned, execrable Diuell, Delighting best in that thing which is euill! What made thee now thy banefull speech to blow, Out of that canckred venom'd mouth below? Thus to entice by thy allurements working, Within so slie an vgly creature lurking. That Eue must reach, and in her hand to grapple So faire a fatall curst bewitching Apple: And not content herselfe thereof to eate, But reacht another as a daintie meate; And in her sweet delightfull louely hands, Runs to her Lord, where all alone he stands Plaining and grieuing that he her had mist, Takes her in's armes, and both together kist. Then she began (in smiling wanton sort) To shew that Apple, which before in sport She late had taken from that fatall tree, The better now to make her eyes to see▪ And in the hands of her beloued Lord▪ The same she put, according to her word, And milde perswasions, gentle speeches plaine, In hope much knowledge by the same to gaine.
The gawdy lookes and curious pleasing sight, She takes the same and so of it doth bite. Oh curst, oh cruell, wofull, fearefull deed, What hast thou done now Adam to thy seed? Baind all thy of-spring in thy folly nurst, And left them all still to this day accurst. What canst thou be euen at thy very best, But little better then the vilest beast? How is thy sight (which thought to pierce the skies) Dazl'd and dimd oft times in both thine eyes, Before thou canst to fiftie yeares attaine, Diseases, Rhumes, do in the same remaine? Out of thy head such slimy stuffe doth fall, That oftentimes thou canst not see at all. What hath thy knowledge purchast to thy race? Thy nakednesse thou feest before thy face. The thorny Brambles all thy skin beschratches, Now thou canst tell to make a woman breaches. How hath the fruite yet to this day amaz'd The wandring minds of curious men that gaz'd, So farre aboue the top of that same tree, That still the wood for trees they cannot see? In euery corner of this spatious ball, To name the tree that thus made Adam fall. Alas, weakeman; what can it do thee good To know the tree that thus hath baind thy blood? What can the sight of that all dismall fruite, But discontent, and make thee much more bruite? Thou feest the world in wandring strange opinions, And euery land within her owne dominions,
Still to this day maintaining errours plaine, To tell the fruite that thus themselues did baine. The Iewes this day, that Cabalists are cald,Rich Epit. de Talmud. The highest Rabbies in their art instald: They still affirme, and for a truth do tell, That Adams sinne (when first from God he fell) Was nothing but the sweet delicious wine, Extracted from the sprawling crawling Vine, That all Eues faults and foule offensiue skapes, Was nothing but the wringing forth of grapes: Within her hand vnto her husband deere, That supt it vp in stead of wholesome beere, The which no sooner had the braines assaild, But that his wit and memory both faild: His senses drown'd with such a sottish feast, God comes himselfe and finds him like a beast. The Sarazens, and all the Turkes this day,Bosk▪ ara coeli▪ lib. 5. c. 4. & Alcarn. From Mahomet in euery age do say, The fruite that Eue and Adam both did eate, Was but an Eare of perfect Indian Wheate, Which Adam pluckt and rubd it in his hand, Smiling on Euah that hard by did stand. Two graines whereof he did vnto her giue, Eate two himselfe to make him euer liue. And that remaind which was but one in all, Away he tooke out of the garden wall, And farre in India where he rambled long, The desert fields and sauage beasts among: This as the cause (mayn obiect) of his shame, He hid i'th'ground, and that brought forth the same.
The Southerne people, and the Indian Bold, Do still affirme and oftentimes haue told, That neere to Indus and braue Ganges streame, Which yeeld all sorts of excellent fish and breame: Is to be seene a gallant tree this day, Vnder whose shade a thousand men may play. The fruite thereof not very pleasant pure, But as it is, it will long time endure, Much like to Oliues both in shape and taste: The Indian birds this famous figge doth waste, That on this tree doth grow the very meate, And onely foode which Eue and Adam eate. The antient Iew and Arabian borne, They still do thinke that Adam well might scorne To taste the fruite that growes on Ganges shore, The which but late I told you of before, And that more like and probable it is: If that their iudgements do not erre amis, The dainty tree that in their country growes, And twice a yeare his pleasant fruite that showes, Yeelding a fragrant and a louely sent, If but the same be either crusht or rent: A Cucumber much like it is in shew, Of pleasing tast, and sweet delightfull hew. If with a knife the fruite in two you reaue, A perfect crosse you shall therein perceaue: The spatious leaues are full a fadome long▪ In breadth three spans, that I may do it wrong, If in this place their errour I should blame, But much admire and wonder at the same, By which the Christians in those parts that dwell, Perswaded are, and for a truth it tell:
That this indeed was that delitious fruite Which Eue brought Adam: whose inticing suite, The Opall colour and perfumed sent, Made him do that which all of vs repent. And other countryes in their rouing sits, Their lofty, prowd, and high aspiring wits, Haue labourd much vpon this point to write, To shew the fruite that Adam ill did bite. As though themselues in Paradise had beene, And at the first the very tree had seene, That bare this cursed euer dismall fruite, Which make our soules still to this day to ruite: Let them seeke still to find the same and mone, Ile sit me downe and let them all alone. And yet the place I must not thus forget, Wherein at first our parents both were set: Whose glorious worth and euer during fame,Gen. 28. These rurall lines can but obscure the same. Oh Paradise, where is thy louely seate? Whilome so famous, wondrous, rich, and neate; That all the stately buildings, curious things, And goodly prospects, of the greatest kings: The pompe and pleasures various decking rare, In all the world cannot to thee compare. The Lords of these haue still in euery age, As carryed in their holy furious rage, Aduentured forth with admiration, grace, But to behold thy ancient sacred face, And none of them as yet haue euer found, Or came in sight of thy most heauenly ground: Which farre in Eden in the orient lies, Vnfit for man to see with sinfull eyes.
Some men there be which are perswaded plaine,Papistes Bellermine: and others. That reall place doth to this day remaine: Where holy Enoch, deare Elias pure, And Iohn the Saint, shall till doomes day endure, In far more pleasures then can be exprest, Their bodies liuing with their soules at rest, Transported safe within that sacred wall, But in what climate of this spacious Ball, The same should be, far in the aire haue gaz'd, Their learning, knowledge, wits, and all amaz'd, The goodly Region in the Sirian land,Esay. 7 3. Iulian Tzet ad uo pag. 100 Hiercom. in Eze. lib. 8 Is thought the place wherein the same did stand, Where rich Damascus at this day is built, And Habels bloud by Caine was after spilt: The wondrous beauty of whose fruitfull ground, The great content which some therein haue found, The sweete encrease of that delightfull soile, Yeelding a world with little care and toile, The dammaske Roses, and the fragrant flowers, The louely fields, and pleasant arbour'd bowers, And euery thing that in aboundance breede, Haue made some thinke this was the place indeede, Where God at first did on the earth abide, With holy Adam and his louely Bride. And some there be that in the Orient waded,Barbasa▪ Which to this day are certainely perswaded, The goodly land that farre in India lies, Whose rich renowne through all the world now flyes, Vnder the Line and famous Zeilan call'd, On euery side with mighty Neptune wal'd, May be the place where first our Parents stai'd, The earth it selfe with all heauens gifts arai'd.
Besides the treasures of that pleasant land,Linschotten An Corsali▪ The fruitfull regions in the same which stand, The goodly riuers and braue mounting hills, Sweete temperate aire on euery side that fills, The downy plaines with such a fragrant smell, As winged fame vnto our eares doth tell: The spicy Trees, and braue delightfull flowers, The dainty walkes, and guilt aspiring towers, And all things else that man can well desire, Or discontent of nature may require: Long life of dayes, plenty of cates and cheere, All which she powers as on her daling deere, Within her lap hath plaste a wonder strange, For euery man which to that place shall range; Perswading all that euer saw the same, That Eue and Adam forth from thence first came. Iust the midst of this delicious land, Within the center of the same doth stand A lofty mount, whose top doth pierce the skies, And round about on euery side there lies The goodliest plaine which euer man beheld▪ That foure foote deepe with water fresh is fild, And eighteene miles in bredth the same is ouer,Simile. Much like the Sea, from Calis strand to Douer. Vpon the top of this admired hill,Maffrus. lib. 5. Stands yet a Table fixed firmely still, Of sollid stone that long time there hath beene, In which the forme of Adams foote is seene, The Mores beleeuing, that that stamp and print Was first by him indented on the flint, The mount it selfe Piramid like is built; Vpon whose top are stately buildings guilt:
Plenty of wealth, of rarest iewels store, The height thereof full twenty miles and more, The people all on euery side which dwell, Haue still affirm'd, and for a truth doe tell, That this indeede was Paradise at first, Whose fatall fruit made all of vs accurst. And to this day hath superstition led,Vertoman▪ lib. 3. Chap. 4 A world of Pilgrims, with blind errour fed, By Mahomet, that antechristian beast, Which Paradise plaste in the radiant east, Whose fond conceits of this religious place, Made some men come three thousand miles apace: With great deuotion, extreme labour, paine, To wash their sins within this miry plaine, Thinking the water in this vally lies, Distil'd at first from Eue and Adams eyes; When great with griefe, and far surcharg'd with teares, They shed so much as all the ground heere beares: In woe bewayling of their wilfull sins, The ioyfull end where true content begins. From sin first wash't, then vp the hill they clime, With labours great, in prayers spend their time, And sacrifize to Mauors God their fill, Which plaste their feete vpon this holy hill, Though their mistakings may be wail'd and blam'd, Yet Adams hill, the lofty mount is nam'd. And that which better may confirme their hope, That this indeede vnder heauens starry cope, Of all the earth may be the likeliest place, Where Adam first receiu'd his great disgrace:
Not farre from hence is seene a flaming hill, Of euery man cald Balananus still, Which sends forth smoake and hideous brands of fire, Threatning the clowds and elements to tire: Much like the sword the tree of life did guard, As if with heauen the earth and all it ward. This makes them thinke confirmes their fancies more Then all the rest I told you of before. But if in India on this famous mount, Adam at first receiued his sacred count, And so from thence his fruitfull spawne at last, Vpon the face of all the earth are cast. What may we thinke of that renowned hill, Whose matchlesse fame full all the world doth fill: Within the midst of Ethiopia fram'd, In Africa and Amara still man'd, Where all the Gods may sit them downe and dine, Iust in the East, and vnderneath the line. Pomona, Ceres, Ʋenus, Iuno, chast, And all the rest their eyes haue euer cast Vpon this place so beautifull and neate, Of all the earth to make it still their seate: A christall riuer downe to Nilus purl'd, Wonder of Nature, Glory of this world. Deere Amara, thy amorous name doth cite My lowly pen thy lofty prayse to write. If all the world and all therein were mine, All were to weake to match themselues with thine. In all the earth, and all the rest to loose, Thy seat to loue instead of all Ide choose. There are the Temples couered all with guilt, The Pallaces, and glorious buildings built,
A Library so famous rich and round, As that the like on earth was neuer found. There are the Muses and the learned Nymphes, The royall issue, and the best borne Imppes: The seed of kings vpon thy body nurst, The Preet himselfe kept long within the first. Admired mount, how hast thou in all ages Beene still renownde for rarest personages, Thy treasures rich beyond compare that lyes, Within thy wals may dazle both mine eyes. Two famous Queenes in Maiesty and grace, With Lawrell boughs haue much adornd thy face, As if themselues with Nature did combine, To wreath thy browes with sacred worke diuine. The first of those was faire Magueda cald, Braue gallant Queene within thy towre instald:1. King. 10. to 11. That let the rest and wenther selfe to see,2. Chro. 9. 1. If Salomon could well compare with thee. But when she saw, and glutted had her eye, With sight of that which farre and wide did flye: Alone she leaues his glorious Temple guilt, His stately Court, and all that ere he built. His pleasant land, and curious deckings fine, As all not worth for to compare with thine. And so returnes within short space againe, Within thy wals a royall Queene to raigne: Gods true Religion in those dayes profest, Away she brought and plac't it in thy brest. The other Queene that hath adornd thy browes, With Lawrell crowne of sacred Christian bowes,Act, 8. 27.
Was Candace great Empresse of such fame, As Enuy still cannot obscure her name, When Indica her loyall Eunuch went To Iewry land vpon Ambassage sent: Homewards returning on his weary way, In Pilgrymage straight forced was to stay By God himselfe, which by the faithfull bide, And Philip sent to be his onely guide. O matchlesse Queene, braue pearle of women kind, Renowned fame shall thy chast temples bind, Which by thy meanes as old Records yet sayth, Conuerted all vnto the Christian faith: Baptized thy selfe within that sacred fount, Which stands still firme vpon thy holy mount: And in that Church whereas the God of loue Descended downe in shape of flaming Doue. All sacred hill, how can I choose but wonder, To see the God of lightning flames, and thunder, That rends the rockes, and all to powder pashes The sturdy mounts with sudden sulphery flashes! Descend himselfe vpon thy glorious head, When all thy Princes were baptiz'd and fed. With that true Manna that from heauen was showred, When Christ his bloud vpon thy browes was powred: Within that Temple of immortall fame, That till doomes dayes shall euer beare his name, And which before his dearest bloud was spilt. Vnto the Son was consecrate and built. O Amara which thus hast beene beloued, Still to this day thy foote was neuer moued:
But in the heat of most tempestuous warres, God hem'd thee in with strong vnconquered barres. Protected safe, and kept thy feet vpright, Against the world, the flesh, and all to fight. No maruell then since man at first was humbled Vpon thy head hath falne himselfe and stumbled, In admiration of thy gifts diuine, When Nature, Arts the Gods and all combine, To cull thee out in farre aboundant measure; And on thy browes to showre their dearest treasure. If in thy walls as some this day haue thought, Adam and Eue by God himselfe were brought, And plast secure in pleasures wondrous well, Till from thy top for wilfull sinne they fell. Some men againe more farre then these are wide, Whose large conceits in Eden cannot bide: Fond, franticke men the sacred truth to reach, And Paradise ore all the world to streach.Wolfangus. Wissenburg. Soropius. Vadianus. The land of Eden of that spatious worth, To thinke it went quite ouer all the earth. The lofty wals which hem'd the same in round, To be the Spheres that in their vtmost bound. On euery side about the world do passe, And seeme to vs much like a wall of Brasse. The flaming Sword that guards the tree of life From sinfull Adam and his likorish wife, Haue presupposd in all the world alone, To be the hot and horrid burning Zoane, That mans exile by cursed enuious fate, Was nothing but the changing of his state; When at the first from God aboue he fell, To be entombd within the graue and hell.
In ancient times when people were besotted,Patricius van 10, lib. 20. Not in that vice which some of vs vs call potted, But in blind errour of the heauenly light, Till God by Christ enlightned had their sight, Perswaded were that Paradise at first, In which old Eue and Adam both were nurst, A reall place vpon this earth was set, Vntill for sin the world it selfe was wet: With such a shower on euery side and round, That all therein were quite consum'd and drownd. Then Paradise his owne peculiar seate,Gen. 7. 1. To Thelaste. A pleasant place, delightfull, sweete, and neate, For feare the floud which o're the earth did flow, When Noahs Arke did on the waters row, Should ruinate the goodly sacred place, And bring the walls iust in the selfe same ease, That Henoch City in those dayes was found, When all the world, and all therein was drown'd: Transported it within a instant quite, Far from the earth, and reach of this our sight, And plaste the same euen in a moment soone, Within the circle of the lofty Moone. And some there be as far as Rome haue rambled,The Manichees origen. Rom. familestes ad Renegaoes. Which back againe, for want of meanes haue ambled, Like vgly Bat the monster of his kind, That vice can see, but yet to goodnesse blind; Happy were we when first they ran from hence, Casting a mist vpon the Scriptures sence, To thinke the place where Adam first did fall, Was but a tale, and no such place at all, That holy Moses in his sacred worke, Hath little true but only fictions lurke.
Damn'd wicked man, the child of vnbeliefe,Esa. 33. 15, 16, 17. The Word distrust, and thus to play the thiefe, Gods Church to rob, his chosen flock to fleece, The truth to blur, and heere to pick a peece; Wringing the same▪ or as we vse to squeese, A Sponge with water or such kind of Leese:Simile. The Scriptures true, and heauenly Hebrew Story, Conuerting all into an allegory. Thou soarest high, heere is thy lofty flight,Gen. 2. 8. 2. King▪ 19. 12▪ False hearted Rome, which canst not see the light That shineth cleere, within the Scripture lyes, The truth it selfe hath bleared both thine eyes: Like to the Bird thou beareth in thy crest, That seldome times vpon the earth can rest, But mounts aloft with proud aspiring wings.Simile. The Eagle. Till base desires downe to the ground him brings, As if the light he could no more endure, But falls and stoopes vnto a carrion lure. The Sodomites which in the dayes of Lot, About the walls where groaping very hot,Gen. 19. 11. To find the Angels that his house possest, Till fearefull blindnesse stayd their course to rest, Were beaten downe with horrid sulphery smoke, That instantly their cursed breath did choke: Transform'd their townes in lesse then halfe an houre, When God but once vpon their vice did lowre; With fire and brimstone strange vnwonted thunder, Of all the world the sad and fearefull wonder, Amazing all which at this day behold it: To see how God hath vp to nothing rold it. Made it a puddle and infectious sinke, Not fir for man once of her source to drinke.
Euen so thy wilfull cursed vnbeliefe, Prophane abusing of the scriptures chiefe, Thy Sabaoth breaking, couetuousnesse and pride, With all the sins within the world beside, Haue made thee blind to find that louely place, Where Adam first was in his greatest grace: About the walls thou canst not find the dore, To come withinland view the plenteous store; Thy braines confuz'd as in a maze are led, Darke vnbeliefe thy cloudy sence hath fed, The heauenly light thou canst not well discerne, From Sodome first to loose thy selfe dost learne, In all the earth that euer eye did see, How well these men we may compare to thee. But stay; whilst they about the world are seeking,Paradise discri∣bed. To find the Garden Adam had in keeping, My sacred Muse with lofty nimble flight, On Paradise the place it selfe doth light: From Rome transported tyrant of the west: To Nimrods Tower within the orient east, Neere Eden plaste within Assiria land, On Euphrates and Tygris goodly strand, By Babilon first Empresse of the earth, Mother of Arts most glorious in her birth, Whose towring fame as Monarch of the world, Where golden flouds in siluer streames haue purld; My sences wrapt in admirations wonder, To thinke how she hath all the world brought vnder, Making her seate the glory of her time,Franciscus. Iunius. Curtius. Plinui. Solinus. Braue star of Fortune, subiect of my Rime. Heere was the seate the likeliest place indeede, Where Ene at first did of the Apple feede,
By learned iudgement of those worthy men, Whose high desart, fames lofty quill doth pen, Which far and neere about the world haue ventred, And but at last within her walls haue entred. O Paradise, that first our Parents stai'd,Ptol Geor. lib 65. chap. 20 strabo lib. 16 Vntill such time Gods will they disobay'd; How far my pen doth of thy worth come vnder, Mirrour of earth, of all the world the wonder. Where sacred Thetis from her louely lap, Hath power'd her treasures, much inrich't thy hap, Which Euphrates and Tigris hath combin'd, Their Source deuided in foure parts, to winde About thy borders, as heauens dearest worke, Within thy bowels glide along and lurke; Venting such Iewels as were neuer found, A welcome tribute to thy holy ground. Nature her selfe hath much impald thy head,plin. lib. 2 Chap. 16 And wreath'd thy browes as fortune hath her led, With such a ridge of rocky mountaines small, To hemme thee in as with a sacred wall, Vpon the top toward the east still there stands, A smoky hill which sends forth fiery brands, Gfburning oyle, from hels infernall deepe, Much like the sword the tree of life did keepe. Deuinest land the sunne hath euer seene, How fortunate thrice happy hast thou beene, To haue that God which fram'd the world and all, Frequent thy walkes before thy fearefull fall: Yet as thou art and as thou dost remaine, The totall earth on on euery side dost staine:
Where can a man in all this world below, Find Bdelium that pleasant tree to grow, Whose fragrant branches, sweet delightfull fruite, And lofty height hath made my sences mute, The Onix stone and other things to bide, In all the earth scarce in one place beside. How is thy ground exceeding rich and faire▪ A region seasoned with a temperate aire, Thy channels crawling full of golden Ore, The fruitful'st soile that e're the earth yet bore: Neptune himselfe with foure great riuers greeing, To deck the bosome which gaue Adam being, Vpon thy temples all their treasures powr'd, And all their wealth at once vpon thee showr'd. After the floud when all the world was kild, In Noahs time there man began to build, When hauing rambled in the sacred keele, About the world, on euery side did feele Thy fragrant scent so pleasing rich and neate, Of all the earth, to make thy Throne their seate. Heere was religion planted in her prime, The golden age and infancy of time, When mans worst actions like the Turtle Doue, In all the world was little else but loue: Deere Paradise, how famous was thy name? When God himselfe crected first thy frame, Endude thy Land with such things in it set, As time for euer neuer can forget. The fabling Prayses of Elizium fields, The Turkes, Eutopia nothing to it yeelds,
The Paradise of Romes fantastike braine, Is but a iest a little wealth to gaine, And Aladeules with his place of pleasure, Comes far behind and still is short of measure, Worth honor, grace, when brought into compar With this so rich and glorious garden rare. The persian fancies of their heauenly land, In sight of this not able is to stand, The world it selfe and all that is therein, I could forsake that very place to win, And all the greatest Kingdomes euer found, But dung and trash to that most holy ground. The lofty walls were all of lasper built, Lin'd thick with gould, and couered rich with gui Like a quadrangle seated on a hill, With twelue braue gates the curious eye to fill, The sacred luster as the glistring Zoane, And euery gate fram'd of a seuerall stone: On stately columes reared by that hand, Which grau'd, the world and all that in it stand; The Chalsedony, and the Iacinth pure, The Emrald greene, which euer will endure, The Sardonix, and purple Amethist, The Azurd burnish't Saphire is not mist, The Chrisolite, most glorious to behold, And Tophaze stone, which shines as beaten gold, The Chrisophrasus of admired worth, The Sardius, Berill seldome found on earth, The dores thereof of siluer'd Pearle most white, Do shew that none by wrong oppression might Be crost, by cunning, wringing, wresting guile, By wicked plodding in all actions vile,
By foule offences like base enuy faste, Can passe the dores but those are pure and chaste. That sweete Disciple which the Gospell wrate,Reu. 21. 10. to ihe 6. verse of the 22. chap. And lent at supper, (when Christ lesus sate) Vpon the bosome of his Lord and King, He from the heauens this Paradise did bring, Perus'd the walls, and view'd the same within, Describ'd it largely all our loues to win. The christall riuer with the Tree of Life, Gods deerest lamb, and sacred Spouse his wife, The various fruits that in the garden growes, And all things else which in aboundance flowes: Hath rapt my sence to thinke how God at first, Fram'd all for Adam and his of-spring curst. To come within how can we but admire, Why should our minds to view the same a spire, It being sacred tipe of heauen it selfe, Our sinfull thoughts worse then the vilest pelfe, That all diuine by God himselfe first wrought, Aboue the Cloudes, and then by Angels brought,Simile. Like to an Infant in his timely birth, Into the Church, and plaste vpon this earth: The midwife there which did attend the same, Was deare Vrania that braue noble Dame, Whose glorious worth my weakenesse can't rehearse, Queene of the Muses, Soueraigne of my verse. But yet Vrania be not bold to pry, Into the secrets of this treasury, Lock't vp from vs and bard from all to enter, Where none but thee may without danger venter,
Least thy great God thou tracest in thy step, Should from the Heauens downe on a sudden leap, As if from sleepe he had beene rowz'd and waked, And find thy selfe like Eue and Adam naked. Adam, what made thee fearefully to hide? Entangled in the allurement of thy bride, Thy selfe from God, who by his sacred voyce, Amongst the Trees within the garden choyse; Repayred now as oftentimes before, To recreate and view the various store, Euen in the coole and dawning of the day, The winds before him vshering of his way, Thinking to find as heeretofore he found, Thine innocency vpright, perfect, sound; But contrary, thou lurkest in a bush, Vntill thy God did neere vnto thee rush, And starting of thee as thou then wast loth, He takes thy spouse and thee all naked both. Adam (quoth God) why dost thou hide thy face? What is the cause thou art so poore and base? That thou shouldst thus with simple shifts begin, Asham'd of me to couer now thy skin, How hast thou knowne in lesse then halfe an howre, To lurke so close within this secret bower, And sew those leaues to patch them so together, To hide thy shame and keepe thee from the weather? The Tree of Knowledge in this pleasant seate, I do beleeue that thou thereof didst eate, Which▪I commanded on deaths dismall paine, Thou shouldst not touch the iewce thereof to gaine, Hast thou now eate of that delicious fruite. I am afraid thy of-spring all will rue it.
O heauenly God (then Adam answered straite)Gen▪ 3. 12. I was intrapt with such a pleasing baite, That made my reason, sense, and all to yeeld; My strength but weake within so strong a field: For why, the woman which thou gauest me, A helpe most meete and comfort sweet to be. Shee of that tree did plucke but one in all, And brought it to me as a sacred ball: The sight whereof by her perswasion moued, Whom more then gold and all the world I loued. Straight in my armes began for to embrace, And she intreating with her smiling face, Gaue me that Apple in her louely hand, Which makes me thus before thy sight to stand, All naked, poore, lamenting of my fall, As loath to speake when thou at first didst call. She, she it was which gaue me of that meate, By her intisements onely I did eate. If I haue broke thy holy heauenly lawes, Blame her (not me) for being first the cause? Then God (againe) vnto the woman sayd, Why hast thou thus most treacherously betrayd Thy louing husband and thy darling deare, Whom to displease thou oughtst in conscience feare? He is thy head, thy Soueraigne, Lord, and King, Why dost thou thus his feete in bondage bring, Insnaring him, thy selfe and Issue all, In wofull danger of your soules to fall? Sweet God (quoth she) a foule mishapen beast, The vgly Serpent crawling on his breast, When but a little that I stept a side, From my deare husbands best beloued side:
A goodly fruite presented to my view, That in the midst of all the garden grew: Perswaded much the onely taste of it, Would farre increase my simple womans wit: The touch thereof would sight and knowledge giue, Neuer to die, but still as Gods to liue▪ By which inticements snared in his trap, He shakt the tree, and vp I held my lap: That Plumme alone which fell into the same, I kept it safe, and to my husband came. But yet before his presence well I saw, Not thinking once of thine eternall Law. By fresh allurement of that Snaky wite, I viewd the same, and so of it did bite. The which when as that I the deed had done, Away he crawles, and leaues me all alone: Mine eyes i'th'instant wofully did see The murraine Elfe had first beguiled me. Like to a Mouse not farre off from her muse, So is a woman sild without exscuse.Simile▪ When on a sudden God himselfe descends, The winged clowds on euery side he rends: All foggy mists of darkesome errours quite, He doth disperse and brings the Truth to light. That all the world his Wisedome may admire, To see how soone he finds the diuell a lyer. Iustice her selfe with grim and frowning eyes,Iustitiae de∣scriptio. Descendeth downe beneath the lofty skyes: That euer lowres and holdeth in her hand A paire of Scales to weigh both sea and land▪
The secret actions infinite to name, Which euer yet were hatcht vpon the same. But at her backe there oftentimes attends,Misericordiae discriptio▪ A noble Dame to many a one that bends: Of smiling cheere and sweet delightfull face, Borne of the Muses in their royall Race. Whose siluer tresses as heauens glorious Queene, The goodliest creature euer eye hath seene: In all her robes she sits at Gods right hand, Descends to some, but by his side doth stand. In secret corners of the heart she lurkes, Gods Mercies great are farre beyond his Workes: In heauen and earth, and all that in them are, None may come neere, much lesse to her compare. Alone she sits, and sendeth Iustice downe To God himselfe, that in a sacred frowne Summons the Serpent to appeare in place, Whose accusation layd before his face, Without demurre and wresting of the Law, His heinous crime before his eyes he saw, And standeth mute without exscuse at all, When God aboue to iudgement once doth fall. Accursed diuell, thrise damn'd is all thy race, Thy wicked plots and secret actions base:Gen. 3. 14. What made thee winde within this winding Snake, The shape of Serpent in thy mind to take? Why hast thou sat on Adams sacred skirt, To harme a man which neuer did thee hurt: And wrong a woman with mischieuous guile, By enuious plodding in a deed so vile?
Could it not serue that first thou wentest about To scale my throane, from heauen to shut me out? But this my worke▪ which more I did admire Then all the Angels fram'd of burnisht fire: The heauenly lights and all that euer were, Within the compasse of the spatious aire. The man himselfe in whom I tooke delight; Plac't him in Eden by my powerfull might. That thou shoulst thus with all the diuels combine, In spight to me his person vndermine. To creepe to Eue as if she were thy Ant, And fawne on others like a Puritant. What hast thou got for all thy villany? A beast thou liu'st, worse then a beast thou'lt dye. And yet not die, for euerduring paine, (For this thy treason) shalt be sure to gaine. The fire of my iust wrath will make thee gurne, As burning Brasse thy bowels scorcht shall burne.Simile. The worme of Conscience shall torment thee euer, And like a Vulture▪ feed vpon thy Liuer.Simile▪ That still in death, a horrid fearefull smart, Shalt dying liue, to ouerloade thy heart. Grinde all to powder thy damn'd wicked rout, With coales of fire, which neuer shall go out. Thy tongue shall be a sure and certaine token, How false to woman thy curst mouth hath spoken; For in the same a forked sting shall be, That after times may still thy enuy see: And all her race shall thee torment and vexe, And thou againe shalt skare her fearefull Sexe, Lurking in dens and secret holes obscure, To trap the iust with banefull breath impure.
Thy hide bepainted with a peckled varnish, Thy venom'd carkasse in thy pride shall barnish: An vgly creature shalt thou be vncouth, Thy teeth all blacke within thy lying mouth. Out of that hollow irkesome vast abisse, Vpon thy belly shalt thou crawle and hisse. Dust shalt thou eate, and canckred be thy skin, Thy body swolne with poyson all within. Thy viperous seed in vgly enuy borne, To all the world shall be the hatefull scorne. In euery path, and out of euery hedge, Their poyson fell in humane flesh shall wedge: That when they time and place to purpose feele, Their venom'd tongue shall bite them by the heele. Thus till the earth shall mould away and fall, Where men least thinke there shall they lie and crawle. The Womans seed in iust reuenge againe, Thy head shall breake, and cursed actions baine, When that sweet Babe shall to the world be borne, That heauen and earth with glory shall adorne. Then shall he trample on thy cursed hide, And on the clowds▪ with winged fame shall ride. Before his face shall ratling cracks of thunder, Amaze thy sense, and reasons false bring vnder. To see when he shall on the earth descend, How thou in chaines and fetters shalt be pend: Tormented in those paines no tongue can tell, Scorcht all to cinders with dam'd diuels in hell. Curst is thy life, thrice cursed is thy race, Voyde of all goodnes, mercy, loue, and grace: Here is thy doome vpon thy Snakie head▪ That others with thee hast to sinne misse-lead.
Scarse these last words were spake by God himselfe, Of his sad iudgement gainst this cursed Elfe: And but beginning of Eues dismall speech, When suddenly she gan to cry and screech: When in the instant from the lofty skyes,Miscricordia. Mercy comes downe and into Eden hies; Prostrated falls vpon her bended knees, But God himselfe his daughter deare that sees, With weeping eyes before his face to craue, That but on Eue he would compassion haue: Began to stay his minde, to alter cleane, And to the woman now began to leane: But that hard by stood Iustice in the place, And vrg'd him much to prosecute the case: When all the reason Mercy well could render, Was that her selfe was of the female gender. Whilest both of these each other do oppose,Iustitia & Misericordia. Loath each of them their humble suite to lose: Contending still as aduocates at Barre, Or combatants in furious fearefull Warre: And altogether iudgement speedy feares,Natura. Gods eldest daughter in the place appeares. Nature diuine, like to Aurora fac't, A noble Lady, beautifull and chast:Simile. Naturae de∣scriptio. Braue famous Queene, a royall person borne, Whom heauen and earth and all therein adorne. Her haire disheueld, trailing to the ground, And in the same the rarest secrets bound, Without all art in curious manner curld, And in her hand the Globe of all the world: Ten thousand colours in her gowne are seene, Wrought by her selfe vpon a ground of greene.
In all her iewels of admired gaine, With fower braue Ladies bearing vp her traine:The Elements She sober enters in that sacred place, And downe she fals before the Almighties face. Father, sayd she, deare Father here behold,Oratio. Giue me but leaue to be a little bold, Finding my sisters iarring neuer cease, To reconcile and set them both at Peace: A holy worke which thou hast euer loued, My selfe thereto by charity first moued. One of my deare affected sisters sweete, That from this place to heauen did lately fleete, Brought me such newes when at the first we met, Till all dissolue I neuer shall forget. And like it is this massie weighty ball Which hangs so euen iust in the midst of all: Would soone returne to what it was at first, If all thereon for this one fault were curst. Behold this Fabricke here within my hand, The mighty Gloabe of all the world doth stand: What will become of all thy Noble workes, This goodly frame, and all that euer lurkes Within the compasse of the heauen and earth, If now destroyd within their prime and birth, All will consume and vnterly decay, If Iustice once thy Mercy ouersway. Iustice I know doth vrge thy sacred word, Which from the Truth as yet hath neuer stird: Thy penalty on Adam and his Race, For foule offending in this holy place.
The execution of thy Law diuine, In the least tittle of each Statute line: Which hath ordaind that in that dismall day, In which the woman did the diuell obay; To taste the fruite and sucke it with her breath, That both of them should die a fearefull death. Mercy againe as being full of Loue, Pittie, compassion from thy throane aboue Presents her selfe before thy sacred face, Imploring Goodnes, Maiestie, and Grace: To be a meanes to mediate a peace, And that for once all further iudgement cease, When by the Enuie of a viperous tong, Hatcht by the diuell this cursed malice sprung: And their offence to take it at the worst, By Iustice weigh'd will yet be found the first. O then deare Father let me speake my minde, Be lust and Louing, Mercifull and Kinde: Punish all sinne according to thy word, The Truth preserue, that none at Iustice gird: But yet let Mercy at thy right hand sit, Thy noble workes in sacred holy writ, Shall then be blaz'd vnto their vtmost worth, And thou be knowne a God vpon this earth. Then shall large volumes with thy prayses swell. Thy Mercy drop to infant soules in hell, Which neuer haue offended much thy minde, But borne in sinne and neuer knowne vnkinde, Whose cursed parents crost thy heauenly will, The sperme of those that liue in errour still.
Thy sentence past cannot againe be call'd, And truth must stand before thy face instal'd, That very day according to thy word, In which the tree of Knowledge first was stird, By Eue and Adams wilfull treachery, Both of them then a cruell death should dye: If mercy now had not come downe in hast, And at thy feete her humble sute had cast; Before this time that iudgement had beene giuen, Both of their liues might well haue beene beriuen. O then what would become of all this frame, And all thereon, too infinite to name, The famous actions by thy spirit nurst, All must returne to what it was at first. One day with thee is as a thousand yeeres, The hower of death Incertaine full of feares. First saue the seede and let them liue in awe, Then dye a death for breaking of thy Law; So is thy word confirm'd, my sisters pleaz'd, The world remaine and iudgement somewhat eaz'd, Then shall thy creatures in all ages stand, The worke diuine of thy all powerfull hand, And euery thing that on the earth is bred, Shall shew thy glory both aliue and dead: That all may stand to all eternity, Thy only Son offers himselfe to dye. But silenc'st once by Gods commanding Word, The iarring sisters neuer after stird, But satisfied, and resting well content, They spent the time in haplesse merriment, And God aboue to iudgement doth proceede, With fearefull Evah and her timerous seede,
Her naked husband that himselfe excuz'd, And said his wife his loue had much abuz'd. O silly woman to be thus beguil'd,Gods iudge∣ment on Euah. In sorrow now that shalt bring forth thy child, A hard conception with an extreme paine, Sick loathsome vomits at my hands shall gaine, Thy husband now shall ouerrule thee still, Thy fond desires bee subiect to his will: A constant loue shall▪ hardly once be found, Within the brest of any on this ground, And from this day the most of all vnkind, Fickle, vncertaine as the wauering wind; Tost too and fro with euery blast that blowes, Entangled straight with gawdy curious shewes, That most of you your husbands will forsake, A golden bribe or licorish thing to take. Heauens glorious iudge to Adam also said,Gods iudge∣ment on Adam Because thy wife thou hast an I doll made, To trace her steps which leade to deadly sin, Thou dost but now to feele thy woe begin, Curst is the earth, and curst is for thy sake, The fruite thereof accursed will I make; In great vexation, extreme labour paine, Toyle, sweate and dust, thou shalt much sorrow gaine, The earth henceforth shall now no more endure, Vnlesse thou till, and much her sides manure, And when thou think'st thy barnes top full to fill, Thy Vintage stor'd with plenty at thy will, In monstrous Mows to pile a wondrous heape, Then thistles, thornes instead thereof thou'lt reape, Much like the beast which on his belly feedes, Soe shalt thou liue by hearbs and garden seedes,
Till thou returne vnto the earth againe, And that therein thy limbs all cold be laine, This is the mother that thy body nurst, Out from the same thou taken wast at first, Sorrow and sicknesse shall thy body burne, For dust thou art, to dust thou shalt returne. O heauenly God, heere is a iudgement past, Throughout this world eternally to last, No writ of errour can the same reuoke, When as the words by thine owne mouth are spoke: Heere is a sentence with a sacred seale, No inhibition can thy law repeale, Nor all the tricks, deuises subtill shifts, Of greedy Lawyers with their bribes and gifts, Can once dissolue a knot so surely knit, With all their braines and cunning peeuish wit▪ But that the same for euermore must stand, A iust decree by heauens diuinest hand, Drawne vp aboue in Eden ratified, With all the Angels in the world beside, And all the powers of firmament and all, To this decree consented at thy call; Heauens deerest Babe whose fame shall perish neuer, Hath with his bloud confirm'd the same for euer. The Register that vp this order drew,Tempus & veritas ear▪ de∣scriptio. Was Time it selfe clad all in Azure blew, Wing'd like an Angel, shadowed with a vaile, And Truth his Daughter bearing vp his traile, Nobly attended with a Lady kind, More quick and nimble then the swift foote hinde. Within his mouth a lofty Trumpe doth stand, And a sharpe sith or sickle in his hand.
A glasse of sand continually that runs, Within his way no liuing thing he shuns, Lock't long before his head, behind all bald, To shew whats past can neuer be recal'd. O Time, preseruer of all ages past, How are mens eyes on all thy actions cast, Thou shouldst be true and constant in thy course, Why should base gold thy mind to ill inforce, Allure thy sence and reasons temporize, Alter an order daube vp both thine eyes, When God the King and all the Lords decree, A Iudgement iust to all eternitee, In open court pronounce the same at large, Commit it safe to thy sole care and charge; Yet for a bribe within thy griping fist, Thoul't ad, substract and set downe what thou list. Princes and peeres, graue Iudges of the Land, Let euer Iustice in your actions stand, Looke well to time, for time it selfe doth call, It may deceiue and goe beyond you all: Dispatch the poore▪ and heare the widdowes cause, Let not the Orphant perish by your lawes, The Innocent is oftentimes vndone, But in defending of a sute begun: By mighty foes that ouer dares his youth, And lies suggest instead of naked truth, Then is he posted too and froin hast, His life, lands, liuing, all he hath to wast: And neuer left so long as worth a groate, His weary limbs oft times in prison rot, All by delayes when golden angels houer, Within the fist of euery seruile louer,
That but attends and comes before your face, By bribing liues vnto your foule disgrace, O to be sway'd with euery glistring fee: This is iniustice in the worst degree. But you are wise, to you a word is more, Then all the workes to this day kept in store, Can be to those that little vnderstand, And more respect, some feeling in their hand. Trace that great God in all your actions out, Let him be still to bring the day about: Your only starre sole leuell and your square, The seuerall frames of all your works to reare, But you are men your memories may faile, Let not your seruants set your worth to saile; Iustice and Mercy, Time and all for gold, 'Gainst Natures lawes outright are bought and sold, And why should man thus to base bribing fall, There is a God which takes account of all? And oftentimes what by the diuill is got, Vnder his feete he treades it till it rot. And yet what reason haue we to complaine, When England thou hast got the richest gaine,Iacobus Rex▪ The deerest treasure and the welcom'st fee, That euer any land attain'd but thee, A royall King deriued from the race, Of Edens Monarch in her greatest grace, Within whose face true Maiesty doth shine, Iustice and Mercy in his browes combine, His temples chast with lawrell boughes are wreathed, The sacred Muses in his brest haue breathed, Vpon his head three famous crownes do stand, Gods deerest booke is euer in his hand.
Whose Angels still his person hath protected, And all his daughters him for King elected, Too weake (alas) I must my selfe confesse, O that my Muse could but his worth expresse, Though in this place I doe but giue a glance, Of that which after in my worke may chance, His fame renowne shall euer flourish greene, Sire to a Prince, and father to a Queene. So shall the fame of his illustrious sonne,Carolus Prin∣ceps. Mount vp the aire, in Phoebus chariot run, About the earth on euery side shall sound, As far as Eden and the Indian ground, And still his Glory all the world shall passe, And be ingrauen in monuments of brasse, That Time for euer shall his worth adorne, The greatest prince that euer yet was borne. Braue Prince of peace from heauen it selfe descended, How hath this land beene by thy birth befriended, To haue a spirit of such noble wit, heereafter sway within her lap to sit, When England thou maist ioy, delight and court thee, Vnder his wings maist sit thee downe and sport thee, Sollace thy labours with a glad content, And giue God thankes that him to thee hath lent: Whilst other lands haue not so rich a pawne, About succeession out their sword is drawne, Nothing but bloud, confusion, shreikes and skars, As late was seene within thy ciuill wars. Heere could I stay and sit me downe and pause,Nobilitas. And view thy court and all thy reuerent lawes, Admiring all the nobles of thy Lands, How with deuotion all their seruice stands,
Prone euer prest to reattend thy will, To run and goe as thou command'st them still, Whose worth and merrit, euery one in order, Should all be ranck't within this sacred border: But that to Adam I must post apace, And tell what fell vpon his fowle disgrace, Meane while when Time shall worke vnto my mind, Then shall my Muse their seuerall vertues find. Adam no sooner had his Iudgement past, But God his Mercy on his darlings cast, As one that neuer both of them forsakes, For one sole fault but mild compassion takes, Pitties their want, and wailes their fowle abuse, Tenders their good admits a weake excuse: Like to a father of a louing heart,Simile. Loath with his son and daughter both to part, Though much prouoked by their folly meere, Still cloathes them well & makes them of't good cheere: So God aboue whose loue doth farre surpasse, The greatest loue as yet that euer was, For all their faults and fowle enormious sins, Yet cloathes them warme, in well furd coates of skins.Gen. 3. 2. 1. And thus attir'd as in a mantle curld,Simile: From Eden now they come into this world, For Iustice vrg'd vnto their sinfull face, They might not stay within that sacred place, For feare that Adam and his longing wife, Should take and eate but of the tree of Life, And so for euer both of them should liue, To thinke the fruit did life vnto them giue: Like to a man when publikly detected,Simile. But for one fault is still of more suspected.
O Holy God, heere is a mistery, The Tree of life what it doth signifie, But that deare Lambe out of whose bleeding heart, Our soules were held much to his paine and smart. The time indeede when Eue the fruite did gripe, The tree of Life was not then fully ripe, But long time after in his glorious birth, Iust in the midst and center of the earth, It flowrisht greene on sacred Sion sate, Till twas cut downe by cursed enuious fate. Now winged Time Gods speedy messenger,Tempus. A nimble hasty posting passenger, That hard by stood recording what was past, Vp to the skyes his eyes i'th instant cast, Spide Eue and Adam standing in the place, Thus cloathed both before the almighties face: When but commission from that sacred lip, He had obteyn'd, lets no aduantage slip, But mild and gently takes them by the hand, Shewes them the gate that to the east doth stand, Leades them along lamenting of their fall, For all their cryes, sets them without the wall; Bars vp the dore with such an iron leuer, As none aliue that once can enter euer. (Alas poore Adam) now thou feel'st thy hurt, The aire all cold doth make thy body smart, Weakenes thy limbs, benummeth much thy strength, And makes thee glad to fall to worke at length. Thy wandring first, and losing of thy wife, Thy pennance then and toyling weary life, With all the rest that did to thee befall, Before thy sad and sacred funerall:
Within this place I must forbeare to tell, For feare my booke would to a volume swell, And proue more bigge then any of the rest, Like one great dish mongst many at a feast. And yet a word (though Time againe do call) To answer that which in my way doth fall: Amongst some men there is a question made, Of those that loue before their time to wade, How long it was in innocency first. That Adam liu'd before he grew accurst, How many weeks, yeares, months, or count of dayes Were past before Eue fell to foolish gayes: And how long after that they were detected, They stayd in Eden all with sin infected. Some men there be which are of this opinion, Euen in our dayes within our owne Dominion: That in the day when Adam was created, The diuelli'th instant straight his fortune hated: Enuyde his glory, sought his ruine more, As in my worke I told you of before. Tis very like that when Aurora blusht, The morning cleare, and all were calme and husht: That Adam then and his sweet spouse were made, But ere that Titan farre from home did wade, In westerne Seas his weary coursers duckt, And heauens wide curtaine ore the earth was pluckt. It may be true that he might fall againe, And be expulst out of that sacred plaine: For some there be that heretofore did say, Man neuer stayd in honor yet a day.
Others there be that cannot thinke it true, Their punishment did instantly insue: But that long time they liued in the place, Enioying fauour, countenance and grace. That God himselfe did oftentimes descend To Eden land, like to a louing friend. After the man had liued long alone, He fram'd the woman of his left side bone: Brought them together, as before you heard, Whose foule offence the godly Garden mard. O heauenly God! why should we heere below Trouble our selues thy secrets past to know: When thy drad word which thou from heauen hast sent, The world and all can giue vs scarce content, But still we striue, and at thy secrets ayme, Till thou our Reason in our Sense dost maime. Here is the glory of th'eternall Crowne, Mans earthly wisedome vtterly throwne downe: Though in Gods booke we loue to pry and peeke, In things diuine sometimes we are to seeke. But Time againe to God himselfe retiring,Tempus. Where all his daughters were with ioy admiring, To see the diuell damn'd to the lowest hell, Adam expulst, themselues contented well▪ After a gentle kinde respectfull awe, Before his eyes that all mens actions saw, Takes sacred Iustice by her reuerent hand, That nobly, graue, within that place did stand, Leads her along in milde maiesticke state,Iustitia descrip. Plac't both her feete vpon the Easterne gate. In Scarlet roabes downe to her Anckles trayling, A Crowne of gold her browes all chast impaling.
Her hands are cleane, not carryed with a tale, Her modest eyes are couered with availe. Out from her mouth as heauens eternall cryer, There streames a blade of purest burnisht fire, A Sword (which shakes) that vp wards down wards curld, Like blazing stars amazing all the world.Simile. Iust by her side (at her right hand) Time places The goodliest Dame mongst all the Nymphs and Graces The sweet borne Mayd, and noblest Cherubim, That euer Nature at her best could lim: Braue peerelesse Queene, most Angel▪ like thy face,Misericordia. The Saints in heauen thy very name imbrace. There thou dost stand by Iustice reuerent side, Till all be ended thou by her must bide, And she againe at Gods diuinest word, Doth guard thy person with her flaming sword. Not long before (if you remember well) When Adam first with Eue his darling fell,Charitas. And both all naked iustly for it blam'd, Loues bashfull Lady was thereof asham'd: And as offended in that sacred place, Mounts vp the clowds with discontented face, Bewailes mans fall with teares, bedewes her cheeeks, Most louely looks, and round about she seekes, If she can find with all her toyle a friend, To set all right, and past offences mend. When she had past to siluer Cinthia fayre, Through the cold Region of the liquid Aire, And crost the way that Phaeton begun, With his prowd Teame about the world to run, Aboue the stars and fiery regions hot, With extreame labour paine and trauell got.
On euery side through danges great had ventred, Yet at the last within heauens wals she entred, Where she beheld a goodly glorious sight, Ten thousand candles all the world to light, Carryed in course about the earth to reele, And Nature nobly turning of their wheele. After those kind imbraces euer vsde Twixt Ladies faire, dame Nature smiling, musde To see her sister with her louely face Thus rapt alone within that sacred place, To passe the clowds and firy frozen Ayre, The earth to leaue, vnto her to repayre: Euen in an instant at that happy time, What heauen so high but loue diuine will clime? Scale vp the throane of God himselfe aboue, Thrise noble Lady full of grace and loue. Nature amaz'd as wondring what it ment, To see thy lookes bewray a discontent. Enquires the cause that makes thy face so sad, The newes below she thinks is worse then bad. But when she heard and vnderstood the cause, That Eue and Adam brake their Makers lawes, Incurr'd a curse on all their future seed, She thought the world and all therein would bleed, And that Gods anger for so foule offence, Would not be pleasde vnlesse she went from thence. Not staying now to heare the matter scand, She takes her sister by her louely hand, Descending both in all their rich attire, Downe the hot region of heauens burnisht fire, Through the cold Aire beneath the Moone they diued, And at the last in Paradise arriued.
Here she stood by and saw Gods iudgement past, And oftentimes forth from her eyes she cast A Sea of salt and driery briny teares. Her loue (alas) was euer full of feares, To make her venter in the heate and cold, And mount the skies, as euen but late I told: Bring Nature downe in speedy postapace, To appease Gods Iustice in that sacred place. Time spies her forth, and takes her by the hand, Which louely there within that place did stand: And as before he vsde each other Sister, So now this Lady first of all he kist her. Then leades her foorth much like a louely Queene, Spangled in Iewels, wrought with gold in greene: Brings her to Iustice, plac't her by her side, In future ages euermore to bide. That till this world by power diuine shall stand, These sisters both should be on either hand, To guide the earth and keepe her feete vpright, And gouerne all vnder the Prince of might: When Mercy, Iustice both from Loue do flow, The Scarlet garment seemes as white as Snow. Time backe retires as heretofore he did, When now the place was of the Ladyesrid, And on a Dame of Noble birth doth light, Cald Truth his daughter cloathed all in white:Veritas. He takes her gently by her lilly hand, Wherein Gods booke did at that instant stand. Brought her along (as all the rest before) Ouer the gate vpon the sacred dore, In all her roabes with comely pompe and grace, And plac't her right before dame Iustice face,
O heauenly God, may I not well resembleIusticia. The flaming Sword which made the earth to tremble, When all the world thy sacred Iustice saw, To deare Elias liuing in the Law, Rapt vp a liue within a flaming Cart, His coate imblazde might be a bleeding heart.2. Kin. 18. 40. 2. King. 1. 10. 2. Kiug. 2. 11. When Iesabel the monster of her sexe, His harmelesse soule vpon the earth did vexe: Her Prophets false to Babylon that ran, He quite consum'd, and scarcely left a man To carry newes of that vn wonted fire, Which fell vpon them at his iust desire. That Cherubin vpon the right hand plac't,Misericordia Which time himselfe hath with his fauour grac't, In all the world how well I may compare, To aged Henoch walking in the Ayre, Within whose dayes when God his body rapt Aboue the clouds in innocency lapt, Before such time as Moses Law was gaued, By Mercy onely all the world was saued The other damsell which my pen doth lim,Charitas. The sweetest fast and louelyest Cherubim, That Time himselfe vpon the left hand set, And which my Muse can neuer well forget. If that we reade the holy sacred Booke, How neare her person (all diuine) doth looke, To that Disciple which the rest suruiu'd, In Pathmos Ile into the heauens a riu'd: Rauisht in spirit on a sacred day, Within a coffin did his body lay, And round about a light there shined bright, The coffin caught quite out of all their sight.
The lesson still that he did euer preach, Both in his life, and by example teach, In all his workes like to the Turtle doue, Throughout his bookes was little else but loue. That Cherubin which stood before the faceVeritas. Ofsacred Iustice in that reuerent place: Like to an infant that his Nurse doth weane, Whose face is smiling, fingers ends are cleane. All full of Truth, not knowing how to faine, Dissemble falsly all the world to gaine. How well I may compare her setled looke, To Gods eternall euer blessed booke. These Cherubins all glorious to behold, Surpassing farre the purest burnisht gold: The radiant splendor of whose sacred rayes, Resemble those ador'd within our dayes, Iustice diuine, much like to God himselfe,Iustitia. That scorneth bribing and all ill got pelfe, And shewes by iudgements fearefull past examples, How all the world vnder his feete he tramples, Mercy againe much like to Christ his son,Miserecordia. That hath the crowne of glory for vs won, And from the heauens descended to the earth, To make vs happy in his welcome birth, Whose panting soule had neuer minutes rest, Suffring those torments not to be exprest, Surpassing farre the greatest learned wits, To see how he at Gods right hand now sits, Triumphing ouer sin, world, death and hell, In ioyes eternall which no tongue can tell,
Thrice euer blessed be his glorious name, It was his mercy made him do the same. Then Charity much like the God of loue,Charitas. I meane no Cupids which to folly moue, But that great spirit ere the world was made, Vpon the waters through the deepe did wade,Gen. 1. 2 Mat. 1. 13. 20. By whom the Virgin happily conceiued, To bring forth him that lustice wrath appeased, When afterwards by Iordans siluer sides, From Libanon to Sodoms lake that glides, Along the plaines where Iesus was baptiz'd, The holy Ghost in shape of Doue disguiz'd,Mat. 3. 15, 16, 17. Heauens windowes ope, thus speaketh in their sight, This is my Sonne in whom I take delight. When all was finish't, and to Heauen Christ went, Then downe came he to giue vs all content: As Iustice, Mercy, both with Loue are linck't,Simile. So God is one, the Persons three distinck't. These altogether as the heauens decree'd,Iustitia. Misrecordia. Charitas. Veritas. The Tree of Life protect from Adams seede, The World it selfe with wonderment they fill, Their meate is knowne to do their fathers will, Who all this while is with their sister sweete,Natura. His eldest daughter as 'twas euer meete. When Time had done, discharged full his due, Aboue the clouds vp to the Heauens God flew, Where he remaines leauing the world and all, Which euer yet was knowne vpon this ball; To the protection of that noble Dame, That to the earth with loue her sister came, So well affected, labouring what she can, That all her care is but for sinfull man,
Let him his mind to goodnesse alwayes bend, And Nature euer is his louing friend. Great God of Heauen, now is thy Iustice showne, Thy Loue and Mercy with thy Nature knowne, Time hath thy Face and glorious browes vnmask't, And thus at first my Rurall Muse hath task't, Heere brought forth Truth from her hath neuer sturd: Reueal'd the same wrapt in thy holy Word, Of Paradise the sacred curtaine drawne, The Sabaoth shew'd, on no mans vice doth fawne, Of all the world hath sung the first beginning, Told Adams faults, and Eues offensiue sinning, Their seede defac't in breaking of thy lawes, And heere Ile stay, and sit me downe and pause. The end of the first Age.
THE GLASSE OF TIME, IN THE second Age. Diuinely handled, By Thomas Peyton, of Lin∣colnes Inne, Gent. Seene and allowed. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Law∣rence Chapman, and are to be sold at his shop ouer against Staple Inne. 1620.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Beati Pacifici.
THE GLASSE OF TIME, IN THE SECOND AGE. The Argument. The sacred Muse by envious Foes is crost, Adam and Eue how each from other lost, Their first borne sonne by cursed malice led, Ʋnkindly wounds his dearest Brother dead, Apostacy the cause of all this ill, The totall World on euery side doth fill; With Bloud, Oppression, Cruelty and Hate, To waste, consume, and winde each others state, The Church deriued from the third borne child, Is staind, polluted, with Caines Race defilde, So that the World and all there in was found, Besides the Arke were wash't away and drown'd. VRania Soueraigne of the Muses nine, Inspire my thoughts with sacred worke diuine, Come down from Heauen, within my Temples Rest, Inflame my heart and lodge within my Brest.
Grant me the story of this World to sing, The Glasse of Time, vpon the Stage to bring, Be Aye within me by thy powerfull might, Gouerne my Pen, direct my speech aright, Euen in the birth and infancy of Time, To the last Age, season my holy Rime: Oh leade me on, into my Soule infuse, Diuinest Worke, and still be thou my Muse, That all the World may wonder and behold, To see Times passe in Ages manifold, And that their wonder may produce this end, To liue in loue their future liues to mend. Then shall thy lookes with sacred luster shine, The Muses all within thy Browes combine, Richly adorn'd with all the Nimphes and Graces, Shall sound thy prayse with louely pleasing faces, Ioying to see thy glorious heauenly hap, The golden Ball cast downe into thy lap; To thy delight and great contentment more, Then if the World were only thine in store. Though cursed Enuy on thy Fortune frowne, Yet thy chast Browes shall weare heau'ns lawrel crowne, In future Ages as the Muses Queene, Thy Temples wreath'd, shall euer flowrish greene. And what if Hymen something doe annoy Thy tender Fruit, yet shalt thou liue in ioy: And when pale death shall close vp both thine eyes, Thy fame shall mount aboue the lofty skyes. And yet Vrania how canst thou be glad, To see this Age wherein we liue so bad,
All ouergrowne far worse then at the first, Bemir'd in sin as if it were accurst, Nothing but bloud, contention, Brides and braules, The Serpent still vpon his belly crawles, And round about on enery side doth winde, With cunning sleights the Infants face to grinde. Nay thouthy selfe, noble Vrania deere, Since first thy landing and ariuall heere, Hast thou not beene on euery side turmoyl'd, Tost too and fro, by Enuy ouertoyl'd? Whose viprous tongue within a sacred place, Hath belcht her venome, aim'd at thy disgrace; Like to the Diuell in Paradise at first,Simile. That banefull poyson in his Brest hath nurst, To wrong thy person, weaken much thy state, Enrich himselfe to satisfie his hate, Tooke all aduantage working on thy youth, Suggested lies instead of naked truth: Lock't thee vp close (Immur'd) within a Wall, When not a Groate was due to him at all; But by the order of this noble Land, He in that place for debt to-thee should stand. Great God of Heauen it makes▪ me weepe and waile, To see Iuiustice oftentimes preuaile; To domineere and catch into her hand, When Innocence must at her mercy stand, Then doth she squeese, wring▪ wrest, extort and lurch, When seldome times oppression comes at Church, Deare friends perswasion once can ne're preuaile, To worke a peace till all be set to saile, Then swallowes all into a griping purse, Not satisfied, continues ten times worse,
Vowing to wast and Ruine all thy state. Oh cursed malice hatcht by enuious fate, When thy false heart hath made the act thy worst, What art thou then more then a beast accurst: Nay farre more worse, for thou must count at large, For euery soule committed to thy charge, If by thy fault the least of them be lost, Thy soule in hell the price of it will cost. But yet my Muse, vnfold to me the cause, Why thou didst fall into the trecherous pawes Of hatefull foes, deuouring Tigers fierce, False hearted friends which in thy state did pierce, That thou shouldst thus be tost on euery side, Compeld oft times to be from home and ride, To see if Enuy with her viperous face, Hath foysted lies in sacred Iustice place. I know no cause, nor could I euer tell, Why she should thus against thee alwayes swell, Winding her selfe, her mallice best to smother,Ier. 23. 12. 10. 11. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. Into the habit of thine elder brother. One thou hast lou'd, inough to make me doate, To see vice lurke vnder a formall coate. And thou thy selfe that yet didst neuer hurt, To harme a childe, or throw a worme i'th'durt, Or take delight to glory in the fall Of any one, much lesle thy tongue to gall. Bite, scandall, blurre, to Iniury, defame, The worth of any in their goods or name: By wicked wayes the Infants face to grinde, Nor in thy hands thy neighbors liuing wind, But to thy power hast shewd thy best endeauour, To loue the Saints withall thy heart for euer.
Vrania (deere) thy very case is mine, How did my Foes still to this day combine, Backe sliding friends (much like to slippery Eles) Haue vndermind, to turne vp both mine heeles: With fawning tearmes my company haue sought, Inuerted that (which yet) I neuer thought; Reported words, the which were neuer spake: Let euery man by this a warning take, And carefull be whom they conuerse withall, The Bird oft times in Fowlers nets doth fall: Euen when (Alas) not any hurt she thinkes, Then is she caught, vnder their burthen Sinkes. How oftentimes haue I bin tost and tir'd, Plung'd in the deepe and all with durt bemir'd, Tost too and fro by those in Ambush lay, With secret Gins to trap me in my way, Vow'd my destruction, all my state to baine: Much to my Trouble, Iniury, and paine, Swallow'd my goods within a griping purse, Haue I not cause all Romaine wolues to curse, When all I haue can scarcely giue content, Vnlesse my life and liuing both be spent. Were it for debt or title of my Land, That thus my foes did in their furie stand: If possibly they could me more abuse, Yet in some sort I would then here excuse. Deere Muse, the cause why I am thus perplext, Turmoyld about on euery side and vext, To waste my state, and passe through dangers many, Is not for wrong that I haue done to any: But by fel Enuy hatcht in hell below, In Eden nurc't, now ore the Earth doth flow.
When Adam least suspected her intent, Then was her mind on mischiefe fully bent, And euer since hath labour'd what she may, Eues seede to baine her secret traps to lay: But all the spight against me she can vse, May waste my State, and hinder thee my Muse. For this alone, by her I am misused, Hurried about▪ by slandrous tongues abused, Kept long from home, vnto my great expence, Weakened my Lands and liuing euer since, On all sides crost (by Greatnesse) ouer sway'd, By guile and cunning (treacherously) betray'd, Of smooth fac't friends abandon'd and forsaken, And all God knowes, but for a Word mistaken. Nay had I beene sole Author of that thing, Which some vntimely to my hands did bring, And blaz'd it forth, why should I thus be blam'd, When no man (liuing) in the same is nam'd, Nor any scandall in those words alone, Intended are but by a man i'th Mooue, Yet I turmoyl'd against all right and reason, Am vs'd by some, as if it were High Treason. Sacred Religion brought from Heau'n aboue, Thou shouldst be constant, full of Grace and Loue, From God (himselfe) thou hast a holy taske, O let not vice (vnder a Surplisse) maske, By this alone Christs Flock are scattred all, O're all the Earth, in euery place do fall, Some runne to Rome and some renounce their Creede,Simile. And come againe, like to a stinking Weede▪
That beares a Flower a womans Loue to win, But yet the seed contagious all within. All powerfull God, when both by Night and Day, Incessantly my Heart to thee did pray, To ease my Griefe, and if it were thy will, To send me Peace to walke vp Sion hill, That in thy House where all thy Saints do meet, My Soule might sing and offer Odours sweet, To heare thy Word come purling from the Rocke, Feeding thy Sheepe and building vp thy Flocke, Where none at all should haue a cause to fall,Simile. Christs Coate was wouen without a Seame at all: In stead of Peace which I desird in haste, Thou sentst me downe a louely Ʋirgin chaste, Noble Vrania soberly attired, Which when I saw, (with Ioy) I much admired, Finding a Friend (copartner) thus to be, A fit Companion in my miserie, Great God of Heauen vpon my bended knees, Before that Face which euery actions sees, Let me but know what good I euer wrought, That thou in Mercy thus on me hast thought? Or haue I not offended much thy will, That thou my Brst dost with Vrania fill, Sending her Downe as thou didst send thy Son, To saue those sheepe which from thy Fould did run. Eternall God, what shall I giue to thee, For thy great Loue and Fauour shewd to me? If all the World within my power did stand, And all therein were sole at my command:
If all the waues within the Seas which boyle, And all the Riuers on this Earth were oyle: With all those things that ere I did behold Vnder Heauens Cope were fram'd of beaten gold, In Thankefulnesse for all thy Mercies sweet, Ide all Surrender, lay them at thy feet. But soft my Muse, whilst thee and I am playning, Ech others griefes, and still but little gaining: Time posts away, as if it had forgot What Adam did (after the Gates were shut) In Paradise, I meane that sacred dore, Which in my Worke I told you of before. Adam and Eue about the glistring walls Of Paradise, with mournfull cryes and calls, Repenting sore, lamenting much their Sin, Longing but once to come againe within, In vaine long time about the wals did grope, Not in Dispaire as those are out of hope: But all about, in euery place did feele, His louing Wife still following at his heele, To find the Dore with all their care and paine, To come within, their former state to gaine. Like to a man that in a Pallace builtSimile. Of Iasper stone, and couered rich with guilt, One euery side lin'd with a golden wall, And no Towne neare, nor any house at all, In such a place suppose one should abide, Be entertaind like to a louely bride. Yet in the night for some abuse absurd, Perchance for drinke or some distastefull word.
If he should be fast by the shoulders caught, Lead forth a dores and set by all at naught, Haild all along (euen in the Euening late) Betweene his foes, and thrust quite out of gate, In no place neere, hearing a Dog to barke, All comfortlesse wanders about i' th' darke: Gropes euery where, if he can find a dore And enter in, he will offend no more. Or like a man that venters for a prize,Simile. Hoodwinckt, and made starke blind in both his eyes, Wheeles round about, in euery place doth reele, At euery post and corner house doth feele, To find the dore where he should enter in, With all his toyle his Wager for to win. Euen so is Adam in that vncked place, The flaming Sword still blazing in his face; On euery side the glistering walls to shine, The Sun himselfe iust vnderneath the line. The radiant Splendor of those Cherubims, Dazles, amates, his tender eye sight dims.Simile. Like to a man that gazeth at the Sun, Is then vnfit, farre any way to run, Least whilest his lookes aboue the Clowds he pitch, He chance to fall and tumble in a ditch, Such is the state of Adam and his Wife, And euery Man within this mortall life, To wander, Grope, as in the darke be lost, And farthest off from that they ayme at most: The sacred luster of Gods Word diuine, The Gospels truth which ore the Earth doth shine,
The Son of Peace (Christ Iesus) being borne, Whose glorious Light doth all the World adorne: Haue made Man blind and dazled both his eyes, To see that Ioy which in the Scripture lies. When many dayes were past away and spent, Finding at last they mist of their intent: And that their toyle and trauell to their paine, Was frustrate quite, their labour still in vaine: Much discontented for their sad mishap, Yet once againe vpon the walls they rap, Then weepe and howle, lament, yearne, cry, and call, But still no helpe, nor answer had at all. Perplext in mind, and dazled with the light, With griefe and care, distempered in their sight, Amazed both iust as the wind them blew, To Paradise they bad their last adew: Like those are Moapt with wandring hither, thither,Simile. From thence they went, thēselues they knew not whither The Crosses, griefes, vexations, troubles, care, Befell them after, with their hungry fare, Stragling about, abiding in no place, And Discontent, vpon their late disgrace, The angry Heauens, for many dayes that lowred, The sable clouds which sulphury showres downe powred: The very Earth combining with them both, Strange hideous sights, of irkesome Lights vncouth, The Elements, as all together bent, Against mans Sin, themselues in sunderrent. The Sunne asham'd, the inconstant angry Moone Began to wane, sending a Night at Noone, Surcharg'd with Sorrowes, no where now to rest: Their griefes more great, then can be well exprest.
The discontent some say which Adam found,Comment. in Cabalist vidi Reuch. lib. 1. Being expulst out of that holy Ground, By Eues foule error to be thus disgra'ste, Made Him, the World, his Wife, and all distaste: And like a Hermit in his wandring weedes,Simile. On little else but griefe and sorrow feedes, Repentant thoughts are harbour'd in his brest, His Mind impatient, finds no place to rest, But to the East from Paradise doth run, Towards the rising of the morning Sun. Heere, heere (Alas) his tender dazled sight, With the great splendor of that glorious light, Whose matchlesse grace when vp to Heauen it enters,Simile. Much like a Queene forth from her Chamber venters, Climes vp the Skies, and tramples on the Aire, With cheerefull lookes in glittring Robes most faire, Prances about, in no place long it bides, Viewes all the World on euery side it rides, The radiant Rayes which sparkled in his face, Made Adam thinke that God was in that place. With this conceit, he tarries in no coast, But on he goes, and all in hast doth poast, Ore Hill, and Dale, with toyle, vexation, paine, Like Siciphus, that labours still in vaine,Simile. To roule a stone against a monstrous Mount, His griefe more great then any man can count, Finds to his cost his trauell to no end, His weary works all to no purpose tend: So on he runs, on nothing else doth dreame, Vntill he came at Ganges watry streame, And as before, ore many a little Riuer, He made a way vp to his Heart and Liuer,
So in this streame, hoping the same to win, He enters bold, and wades vp to his chin. Heere is a Barre in superstions way, Too deepe a rubbe to make his fury stay, For all his hast he can no further passe, By Ganges coast, like to a Wall of brasse,simile. Where he is forst, to try his vtmost skill, Against the streame, he striues and labours still: Vntill by Practise with his actiue limbs, A Mile or two vpon the waues he swims, But yet too farre in absence of his Wife, May breede a skarre and hazard so his life. Thus discontented, with that watry wall, The griefe conceiued of his dismall fall; The losse of her that late before he lost, When as he thought to passe to God in post, Himselfe alone bewayling of his sins, To true Repentance faithfully begins: And as some say did Circumcize himselfe, Washt all his Skin, (bemir'd) in durty pelfe, Forsakes the World, for certaine dayes did stand, Within the streame, and neuer came at land, Vntill his flesh from top to toe was seene, With cold and froath, all ouergrowne with greene. Then God which late vpon his fault did frowne, Now smiles againe, and sendeth Raziel downe, One of the three in sacred Roabes of Light, That euer stand before the most of might, Since Sathiel one of their number fell, From highest Heauens vnto the lowest Hell,
Michael, Gabriel, this Raziel stood, Still to this day the sole Archangels good. This noble Angell brings those tidings glad, And cheeres the Man to be no more so sad, Tells him that God is not with him offended, But with the Diuell which first his Reason blinded, That his Repentance purchast hath his peace, From further Pennance wil'd him to surcease, Although of Sin he hath beene once detected, Yet his good will was in the Heauens accepted, Bad him goe seeke and comfort vp his Wife, People the World and liue a ioyfull Life. The Messenger that from the Heauens descended, To bring these tidings vp againe Ascended,simile. Like to a flame of pure celestiall light, So vanisht he from earthly Adams sight, Yet some do thinke he tarried in those parts, And taught the man the liberall learned Arts: Was his Companion as a friendly guide,Iewes and Turkes. That euer kept by Adams fearefull side, When he went seeking to his care and paine, With extreme toyle to find his Wife againe, For many yeeres within the streame did stand, Whilst Eue was wandring in the Nubian Land, His faithfull Angell, in all stormes and weather, Vntill such time he brought them both together. At Araffe hill within Arabia ground, This was the place where Eue her husband found, Heere at this Mount they both together met, And each with (Ioy) their louely eyes did wet,
With such a shower of pearely christall teares, Distil'd in Loues pure Limbeck, full of feares, That one the other finally had mist, Heere once againe they smile, imbrace and kist. Still to this day the reuerent feare and awe, Of those which yet the Mount haue euer saw, The great respect that Superstition wins, 'Mongst men denout in pardon of their sins; The Worlds conceit by Mahomet late nurst, That Eue and Adam heere repenting first, Found Peace with God vnto their soules content, Built them a House in which their liues they spent, Hath made the Hill admired to this day, For Turkish Pilgrims euer more to pray, The sacred Skirtes with goodly plaines are wal'd, And at this day the Mount of Pardons cal'd. No lesse admir'd is that Renowned streame, By Bengala which makes all Asia dreame, And fills the World with superstious guile, From Easterne India to th' Atlantike Ile Braue Ganges floud how doost thou draw together? Fierce warlike Nations mustring hether thether, Captiu'st them all fettred within thy bankes, To wade within thee, yeeld thee humble thankes, For staying Adam in thy siluerd floud, When he neglected all his future bloud, Lost wilfully his neerest deerest wife, Carelesse of all endangring much his life. This may be true, and yet I cannot thinke,Confutation of the former opinion. That those whom God in Paradise did linke,
Brought them together by his powerfull might, Should thus be parted each from others sight, Eue in the South, by fearefull Negro Land, Adam i'th East, on Ganges goodly strand, Betweene both these a wondrous weary space, For two to trauell in so poore a case: Vnshod, all bare, mongst horrid thunder dints, Through woods to walkevpon the thornes and flints: He in a maze, not knowing where to find His louing Wife: like to a man starke blind,Simile. Toyles out himselfe for that he neuer saw, To find a needle in a heape of straw; She all alone wandring she knew not whether, Blowne euery where much like vnto a Feather,simile. Inconstant light (and wauering) apt to vexe, As is the Nature of her timerous sexe. It is not like in all mens Iudgement sound, They rambled farre from Edens fruitfull ground, Or that but two so kind and tender hearted, In all their liues should for a yeare be parted: Besides the opinion of the learned wits, Graue ancient fathers euermore that sits, Reuoluing of the highest deepest works, That in Gods Booke diuinely lies and lutkes: The sacred stories of all Ages past, Which euermore eternally shall last, Haue made it cleere for euery man to tell, That in this place our Parents both did dwell, Liu'd long secure, about the Garden kept, Ioy'd with the sight, yet for their fall they wept, Though they were bard to come againe within, By reason of their fowle contagious sin,
Yet they desir'd for all their past disgrace, But for to liue neere to that louely place. Heere first with boughs, and such like broken stuffe, They built a House, vnder a simple Ruffe, Then like a couple that but late did wed, With Pelts and leaues, they make a homely Bed, Where they enioy'd more pleasure, true content, Then in the Courts of greatest Kings are spent: Himselfe all naked in a Sheepes skin curl'd, The sole Commander of this totall World, Is glad to worke to passe his time in peace, To serue his God from further sin to cease. Thus ouer-ioyd, vpon a time it fell, The circumstance I must forbeare to tell, Playing with  within that shady bowre, And in his armes his loueliest sweetest flowre, Embracing, toying, smiling, kissing sweete, The sports most chaste vnto a Spouse bed meete, Thinking the time he had with her beguil'd, Forgets himselfe, and she conceiues with child. Strange is the change she in her selfe doth find, An extreme Passion working in her mind, Longing oft▪ times some sops in Tarre to lick, Her bodies altred, and her stomack sick, Black vgly Berries, fulsome vnripe Plums, And euery thing that in her way next comes, The goodly fruits which are within the walls, Of Paradise, she to her husband calls, Desires, intreates him, as he loues his Wife, Forth with to hast, and fetch to saue her life.
Full forty weekes she liued in this case, Feeding on toyes and greenest drugs most base, On Durt and Trash, on Ashes, Hips and Hawes, She finds shees ill, and yet she knowes no cause, At length it fell whilst he was forth of dores, Chasing the Deere, hunting the furious Bores, To get some Venison, or such dainty dish, To satisfie his Wiues desired wish: Like Hercules that in a strange disguize,Simile. Retired home with such a welcome prize, Findes his deare Darling full of mirth and ioy,Caine borne. And in her armes a goodly infant Boy. Th' Admiration, wondrous great content, To see a Child thus fortunately sent, Sweete liuing Picture module of himselfe, The World and all he now esteemes as pelfe, With Ioy o're cloyd, vpon the face doth gaze: Like to a man astonisht in amaze,Simile. All mute he stands not knowing what to thinke, No Reason yet, into his head can sinke, How it can be conceiued in the brest, Of Eue (sweete woman) whom he loued best. When once reuiu'd out of that pleasing trance, The tender Babe he in his armes doth dance, Smiles on his face and questions with his Wife, How first was sent thus to prolong his life; The Child she said, to her immortall fame, She knew not well how first to her it came, But that she thought although her sence was weake, This was the Seed the Serpents head should breake, Tould him in words and gentle speeches mild, That by the Lord she had conceiu'd that Child.Gen. 4, 1.
True are thy words deere Eue, most true thy heart, Why should a Man thy meaning pure I nuert, It cannot sinke into thy sacred thought, How of thy selfe an Infant thou hast brought, As well might Adam in thy sences seeme, To beare a Child, for ought that thou canst deeme, When of the World twas in the early morne, And the first Babe that euer yet was borne, How damn'd prophane are those accursed lips,Renegado proselites. Which in Gods Church shall make such dangerous slips, Within the same to belch to thy disgrace, Euen in a sacred and most publike place, Behinde thy back when thou art dead and past, And canst not answere what their mouth out cast, Thus to be lye mens soules to sin allure, Wresting thy speech with banefull breath impure: Not terrifide with Heauens all threatning Rod, But dares to teach (that thou didst sweare by GodGen. 4. 1. Thou hadst a Child) and oftentimes to speake it, If it were true, vnto the world to breake it, Is worse then was that Serpent damn'd accurst, In Paradise which wrong'd thy Person first. Ah thus we see the cursed enuious Snake,Simile. That sleepes to goodnesse, but to euill doth wake, To lurke all close vnder the sweetest flowre, When Goddesse Flora all her pride doth powre, Vpon the Earth within the midst of May, To suck fell poyson from the holesom'st gay, When the deere painefull wise laborious Bee, Ten thousand wayes about heauens blossoms flee, On euery flower within the Garden sits, And out from them the wax and honey gets,
Conueys it safely to her well wrought Hiue, To pleasure Friends, and keepe her selfe aliue. Let Serpent snake, and all the viperous seede That euer Enuy in her wombe did breede, Hacht in the Bowells of th'infernall vault, Where none but Diuels and damned Atheists hault: Twixt God and Belial still thy speech oppose, Yet shall thy words smell as the fragrant Rose▪ Or like those Flowers in Paradise were plauntedSimile. By God himselfe, when he the Garden haunted. Deare Eue, thy worth I euer must admire, Thou sitst aboue within the Angels Quire, Tuning thy voyce vnto their sacred layes, To sound forth Glory to the Prince of prayse.Simile. Like Gods owne Daughter (whom he loues most deare) Warbling sweet Musicke in th' Almighties eare, Or that pale Virgin with her glimmering lampe, That lights the world vnder heauens starry Campe, The Vertues which within thy brest were bred, Shall neare be stained by any viperous head, So long as Fame can sound thy glorious worth, Chast Paragon, the richest Iem on Earth. Take all the Ladies breathing on this Ball, The sweetest fac't, the noblest borne, and all The famous Queenes and Monarchs of the World, Which on the wheele of Fortnne haue beene hurld, That euer liu'd vpon this earthly frame: Now gone and past too infinite to name, The saints themselues and all the blessed troope, Those that now liue within heauens burnisht hoope▪
Though thou art blam'd as Author of their fall, Yet art thou still the mother to them all. Like to the Ʋine so is thy fruitfull Wombe,Psal. 128. 3. Simile▪ Thy speech more sweet then is the honey combe: Thy Breath all pure, which from thy lips comes out, Thy Browes impalde with Chastnesse round about: From thee at first were peopled euery land, Like O liue Plants thy tender Infants standsimile. About thy Table, in a seemely sort, To ouer-ioy and make thee gladsome sport. But why should I runne farther in thy praise, Vpon Fames wings thy liuing name to raise, Blazing thy parts, maintaining of thee still, And fowle▪ detraction aymes to worke thy ill. Aye to deface thy modest speeches pure, With scandals vile, for euer to endure: When as thy worth exceeds the learnedst thought, That by thy meanes into the world is brought, And still the Truth conuinceth brings to light, The actions false, obscurd, in enuyes night,1. Cor. 3. 12. Dissolues to naught the morter made of clay, The buildings fram'd of stubble, trash, and hay, The good from bad, the sheepe from wolues doth seuer, And brands the diuell in his false tongue for euer. And yet we see, the sacred Truth not free From viperous tongues, gnawne in the worst degree,simile. Taxt oftentimes, and squeesed like a Spunge, By Romish Tygers at her sides that hunge, Inuerting, stretching, construing all her words, With error, falshood, damned wayes and girds.
Chaste vertuous Eue, now she is past and dead, The Serpents seed must breake the Womans seed. But in the heauens th' eternall God of powre, At Iustice barre will on their faces lowre▪ And on their heads thunder his iudgements downe, When Eue shall stand adorned with a Crowne: Then shall their actions in his dradfull ire, Be purged all, and tride as gold i'th fire. The wickeds words their enuious tong hath spake, To her disgrace, shall make them yearne and quake: And in the end the sword shall iust diuide, The good from those which haue her worth belide, Whose feet shall totter on hels fatall wheele, And headlong downe to damned diuels shall reele: Whilst Eue shall sit triumphant on the skies, Viewing their fall, hearing their moanes and cryes, Ioying to see the sacred Truth preuaile, Her meaning clear'd, her foes to weepe and waile. And yet deare Eue I must not leaue thee there, But bring thee downe, more children for to beare: If but with one thou hadst begun and ended, Yet had the World beene by thy meanes befriended. But to replenish with thy fruitfull spawne, From Sols first rising where his teame doth dawne, The totall earth on euery side and round, Here is a loue the like was neuer found, Within the brest of any woman kind, Our thoughts, hearts, actions, all our zeale to bind, In true deuotion to thy reuerent name, Much to admire so sweet a noble Dame▪
When thy first child into the world was borne, Straight he began to take delight in Corne, In large possessions working vp the soyle, Neare Paradise with painfull labour toyle, Tilling the ground, and planting of the graine, His name thereby was fitly, called Cain. Whilst thou againe conceiu'st a second child, A sweet borne babe of countenance more mild: And after that, about some threescore more Of sons and daughters which thy body bore, All nurst by thee after their timely birth, To fill the world, and people all the earth. Thus with thy husband (in that arbour'd Tent) Thou spentst thy dayes in wondrous great content, In true Religion, Sacrifices, Rites, Such as thy heart vnto thy God indites, Ioying in him, and he againe in thee, The sweetest life that euer eye could see, When as together in your children small, You trayne them vp on Edens God to call: And teach them yong by your owne steps allure, Them to all good, chaste, honest actions, pure, The golden ground, the heauenly starre, and guide, From which but few do euer after slide. Happy, thrice happy are those children borne, A crowne of Glory shall their browes adorne, Whose infant yeares are by their parents first, With the pure milke of true Religion nurst: In riper dayes when blustring blasts assaile, The mountaines high, that ouertops the dale, Their Faith stands firme as fixt, vpon a Rocke, Not easly stird by euery wauing shocke:
But constant bides, most permanent and sure, The assaults of Sathan strongly to endure. In Elder Time when Age doth threaten death At latest gaspe, euen when our vitall breath Begins to faile, in hastning on our end; And kinsfolks, friends, vpon vs all attend, With sad lamenting, discontented eyes, To see our Soule how vp to heauen it flies, Forsakes the Earth, willing the world to lose, Incombred with a thousand cares and woes, That in this life dayly attend the sheepe, Vntill with Christ aboue the clouds they keepe. O then the comfort▪ sweet delight and ioyes, When all things else seems to their sense but toyes. There the good shepheard in his armes embraceth, All those that loue him, wondrously he graceth, With this kinde welcome, Come ye blessed Soules, Come drinke the Nectar kept in Christall bowles, Eate this Ambrosia as a sacred token, That for thy sin my body once was broken: Receiue heauens crowne th' eternall kingdome kept, For all those (Saints) which from the world haue slept. But soft my Muse, what makst thou now aboue Out of this world, thus on a sudden moue Adam to leaue his fruitfull wife, and all His pleasures, ioyes, and both his children small, Euen in the spring and glory of their birth, Weary of all, thus to forsake the Earth, As if thou tookst more pleasure, true delight Within the heauens, then in their sinfull sight.
Stay yet a while, and as thou hast begun, So to the end thy course directly run: Leaue them not thus; O do not now surcease, Till thou hast brought them to their graues in Peace: Shew all their liues, the chiefe of euery thing, Their Crosses, Griefes, do thou (diuinely) sing, But yet (at first) tell how in louing sort, The Brothers liu'd, and made their Parents sport. Those that long time without a childe haue beene, And neuer issue of their owne haue seene, But without kindred, friends, and those which may With some content succeed at latter day. If these (I say) when least of all they thought, Should children haue so fortunately brought, To prittle, prattle euery word by chance, And vp and downe about the house to dance: With many toyes that in their minor yeares Giues great content, the Parents loue endeares. Let these men speake, but with a Iudgement sound, What high content themselues haue often found, In the like sports of tender Infants sweet, That hardly▪ yet can crawle vpon their feet; The fame we may of Eue and Adam thinke, And ten times more then in our heads can sinke, How in their Babes they ioyd and tooke delight, And neuer well when they were out of sight. Caine in the blossoms of his blooming youth, As tis recorded in the sacred truth, Takes much delight in planting of the seeds, The fruitfull Vine, and all that Nature breeds, The choycest, rarest, daintiest, and the best That euer yet she bare vpon her brest.
Walkes all about, and viewes the richest ground, By Paradise on euery side and round, With shou'ls and spades he tumbles vp the earth, His chiefest ayme to be a man of worth, And Lord it ore his other brethren all, That they may bowe, within his presence fall: To that intent he labours, workes and toyles, In sweate and dust, i'th'durt (oft times) he moyles, Like a meere worldling spends his youthfull dayes, His minde (oft runs) a thousand kinde of wayes: If he can finde some new contriued tricke, To ease himselfe, the soyle vp cleane to stricke, And bring the same in temper for the graine, That he may play and yet possesse the gaine. Industry, Reason, all the Arts conspire, To frame an Engin fiercest horse to tire; The Oxen, Cattle, and the strongest Waines That euer wrought vpon the fertill plaines: Himselfe and all (in labouring with) this plough, His Ioynts grow stiffe, and brawny hands all rough, Yet in the same he finds so much content, That his best dayes in this hard worke are spent. His brother Habell doth not idly liue, But to some Art his toward mind doth giue, Whose chiefe delight is in the harmelesse sheepe, The bleating flockes vpon the downes to keepe, To follow them when oftentimes his eyes Are vpwards fixt towards the lofty skies, Obseruing thus a thousand seuerall things, That heauenly matter to his sences brings, Their number, Order with their great encrease, And quiet life, spending their dayes in peace,
By faith perceiuing hidden mysteries, The sum of that which in the Scripture lies:Esa▪ 53. 67. How from the fould a Lambe shall forth be taken, Which would be one day of the rest forsaken, That he should be the sacrifice and guide, Sole Ransome full for all the world beside. Thus these two brothers liu'd, and spent their dayes Oft times in worke, sometimes in sport and playes: In as much loue, delight, content and all, As euer two that breath'd vpon this Ball. If you should ramble ore the totall Earth, Youle hardly finde two brethren from their birth, Throughout the world in all the Ages spent, In true bred Loue an euener course that went, At Bed, at Boord, at Home, abrode i'th' weather, They seldome part but alwayes keepe together: Walke, talke, discourse, euen all the day and night, They are not well but one i'th' others sight. All the weeke long delightfully they passe The time away in browzing vp the grasse, In husbandrie and such as I haue told, But on Gods Rest pins them within a fold, Or ground well fenc't on euery side about, That they may feed, but yet not wander out▪ Vpon which Day, when once out of their bed, By the example of their Parents led, They altogether meete, to Rest and Pray, To sanctifie the sacred Sabaoth day, To thinke on God, craue pardon for their sins, Where Adam then to teach them all begins,
Instructs them well in true Religion first, Tels them the cause which made them thus accurst, To vse their wits, to labour worke and toyle, In the wide fields to spend their dayes and moyle, To keepe the sheepe and by their cunning sleight, To frame an Engine of such wondrous weight, Whereas God knowes before their fearefull fall, In Paradise they needed none at all, Wils them to loue intirely, void of strife, The Heauenly way vnto the Tree of Life. This is their worke and holy practise pure, Sweete exercise for euer to endure, Thus they continue running of their race, Whilst shearing day and Haruest comes apace, Then they bestir them; toyle it out all day, Inning their corne making the new Mowne Hay, And in the end they altogether feast, So giue God thanks, and from their labour Rest: When the next Sabaoth clad in seemely suites, They Sacrifice the first of both their fruits, In shew of thanks for all the plenteous store, That flocks and fields to their content hath bore. Habell begins to shew his gratefull mind, Seekes all the flock the chiefest Lambs to find, The first falne fruits, the goodliest fat and faire, That all the World cannot with them compare, The golden prize that Iason brought to Greece, From Cchs Ile was not so fine a fleece, As each of these vpon their backs did bring, To fleede and cloath in Earth the greatest King.
He brings them freely with a willing heart, Euen glad with them and all the rest to part, And layes them downe before the God of might, Both in his fathers and his brothers sight, Offring them vp a sacrifice most pure, Vnspotted cleane his sinfull soule to cure, Implores th' eternall praying euer still, For to be pleas'd thus to accept his will, As a meere figure and a (sacred) Tipe, Of that deare Lamb whose bloud away shall wipe, The scarlet sinnes that in the Earth shall flowe, With Isop wash, clense them as white as Snow. The Prayers, speeches, heauenly gratefull words, The inward heart and meaning all accords, The ascending sauour, sweete perfuming scent, With that pure Lambe which in the same is meant: Climes vp the Aire and mounts to God aboue, An Offring free, (accepted) full of Loue, Which thing to shew that he was partly pleaz'd, His anger past, and all his wrath appeaz'd, Iust at that instant downe from Heauen did shine, A burning fire and sacred light (diuine) Which in their sight conuey'd the Sacrisice, Of from the Earth, vp to the lofty skyes, "When presently a voyce was downeward cast, "This I accept for thine offences past. Caine more for shew then either Loue or zeale, To God, Religion or his owne soules weale, Stands by beholding of the sacred light, And voyce (diuine) downe from the Prince of might, Expecting that his formall sacrifice, Stuft with all Guile, Hippocrisie and Lyes,
Ambition, Pride, base Couetousnesse accurst, Yet thought his gift should he accepted first, As comming from the eldest first borne Peere, The Son and Heire, whom Adam loued deere. Medusa (damn'd) in foule black vgly cloathes, That all the world most deadly hates and loathes, Swolne (like a Toade) her lookes cast downe to hell, Where none but fiends, and hatefull monsters dwell, Whose cursed haire about her shoulders falls, Powdred with Serpents full of poysoned Galls, Hissing and crawling round about her head, Hatcht by a Viper in her wombe that bred, Rends vp the Earth ascendeth like a Ghost, Conueyes her selfe into the promist coast, By Paradise where Caine was sacrificing, Some of his corne his double heart disguising,
Watches the Time when as she thought most best, And windes her close in his dissembling brest. No sooner she was in his heart acquainted, But his best bloud was with her venome tainted, His vaines swolne vp and all his body puft, His Head, Heart, Lungs (infectuously) were stuft, With Enuy, Malice, Wrath and deadly Rage, Nothing could now his stomack fell asswage, Finding no ease, his countenance falls downe, His cankred mind discerned by his frowne, Now Father, Mother, Brother, none he brookes, That Heauen it selfe takes notice of his lookes. Since first the light from darkenesse was discouered, Or that the Clouds within the Aire haue houered, The Heauens and Earth, the Sea and all begun, And Phaeton his endlesse Race hath run, About the World in twice twelue howers right, Or siluer Cinthia shew'd her pale fac't light, Neuer was seene a more delightfull day, The glittring Sunne in burnish't bright aray, Nor Heauen (it selfe) more pleasing euer smil'de, Then when the brothers on Loues Alter pilde, The Sacrifice before their Fathers face, To God aboue within that holy place. But when Medusa from Hells deepest vaults, Began but once to spy mans secret faults, And from her Den in darke Obliuion pent, The bowels of her Mother Earth had rent, To come aloft into the open Ayre, With her foule breath, infectious poysoned haire, And Rags (most base) as late before I told, To seate her selfe in Caines securest hold.
Then Heauen and Earth, and all began to change, The winged clouds about this Ball to range, The burning lampes within the firmament, Seem'd for to winke as if their oyle were spent, The glorious Sun to hide his glistring face, Asham'd of Enuy in a sacred place: And all at once most fearefully to lowre, To threaten tempests or some sudden showre, When instantly on Caines dissembling head, A sable cloud from all the rest out shed, Began to stand himselfe and all iust vnder, Hearing this voyce out from a dreadfull thunder. "False Hippocrite, how canst thou simulize, "Before my face thy actions fowle disguize,Gen. 4. 6. 7. "To thinke that I which all the World adorne, "Would thus be fed with riffe raffe of thy Corne, "Or yet in bloud to satiate my selfe, "To liue as thou by base and Earthly pelfe, "And not conceiue that Holy thing is ment, "Within the same which giues me full content? "Why is thy Soule thus pestred with a sore, "Ranckled, bespaked, like a rotten core,Simile. "Thy conscience, deedes, false enuious mind so bad, "Thy lookes cast downe, and countenance so sad? "Dost thou not know that if thy heart be right, "Thy actions good and pleasing in my sight, "That thou shalt be accepted best and more, "That other wise sin lyeth at thy dore? "Think on my Words, halt not within my sight, "I am that God which brings the Truth to light "Amend thy life, at cursed Enuy hisse, "Repent thy selfe of what is done amisse,
"Let her not once be harbourd in thy brest, "Nor in thy Heart her banefull poyson rest, "Redeeme the Time, behold the lofty skyes, "Where Loue and Mercy for offences lyes. "One comfort more then thou deseru'st I giue, "Thy Brother yet shall at thy seruice liue: "Thou like a Lord shalt ouer-rule him still, "And his desire according to thy will, "Shall subiect be, deuoted euer stand, "To run and goe with (Ioy) at thy command, "But yet take heede, do not too high aspire, "Goe (sinne no more) and adde no coles to fire.Caueat. The Heauenly voyce down from the Clouds descending, In these sad words sweetely diuinely ending, The day cleer'd vp, and Sol began againe, To shew his face vpon the sacred Plaine: The Aire all still, the lofty Winds quight calme, Adam and Abell singing of a Psalme; Caines sacrifize alone vpon the ground, Vntouch't at all still to their view they found, Whereat (with Ioy) to see the God of powre, To smile on one, and on the other lowre: To vaile his face vnto their sinfull sight, Hearing his voyce out from the dradfull light, Home they depart in wonderment and peace, Minding a while from further worke to cease▪ Whilst Caine alone retireth discontent, Forsakes his God, and to the field he went, His enuious mind still runs on his disgrace,First Aposta∣sy in Caine. False to be found before his fathers face, All working Power, deepe searcher of the Reines, Discerner of the in ward heart and Veines,
What secret Art can from thy sight be hid? Thine Eye still saw what either Brother did, How iust art thou and full of mercies sweete, The eyes of all are cast downe at thy feete; The greatest men and Monarches of the earth, The first borne seede, and noblest in their birth, The proud Commanders in their formall coates, The homebred Sheepe thou dost deuide from Goates: The eldest Brother, yongest in thy sight, Are both alike, so that their hearts be right, No outward forme can make thee partialize, Thou look'st vpon the inward sacrifize, Beholding Habels willing gtatefull gift, Which thou art pleas'd vp to the Clouds to lift; When Caine false hearted, though he was first borne, Him thou forsakst, leauing his Gift forlorne. O wofull, fearefull, is the dangerous state, Of euery man so ouerswolne with Hate, Whom God by this cannot to good conuert, But giues quight ouer to a storry Heart, Apostacy making a man to quake, God, Father, friends all vtterly forsake: Prince, Country, Kingdome, all the Land in hope, To run perhaps vnto the Turke or Pope, In discontent, for conscience, gaine or pelfe, To sell their soules vnto the Diuell himselfe▪ Some to their shame haue had small cause to boast,Mat. 12. 31. Luke 12. 9. 10. Mar. 3. 29. Pro. 26. 11. Of this foule sin against the Holy Ghost, Accurst and damn'd of all that euer fell, But few I know, but quick went downe to hell, Amongst the Diuels in euerlasting paines, Loaden with Boults of heauy burning chaines;
Whilst those return'd like to a Dog that gurnes,Simile. That back againe vnto his vomit turnes, Or beastly Sow bemir'd in dirty tilth,simile. Cleere water shuns to scoure away her filth, But in a ditch with some vnsauory Bore, She layes her downe far worse then ere before. How can we thinke or well conceiue in heart, That those which once do from their country start, And shall distast the grounds wherein at first, With Pastors pure they were train'd vp and nurst,Heb. 6 4, 5, 6. That do renounce their Faith and euery thing, Their Oath Alegiance to the State and King, And in this sinne without Repentance fall? How of that man can there be hope at all, When as his case what shew so ere he gaine, Is but the same with cursed enuious Caine? I must confesse Repentance is a worke,Repentance Of Gods great loue, which caunot lye and lurke, Within the Heart, but that it forth must shine, Like to a Light vpon a Hill diuine,Simile. Kindled by faith, a conscience cleane and pure, That cannot once her former wayes indure; But by good works doth blaze the same abroad, Without all Guile, Hipocricy or Fraud, Full of true Loue, auoyding babbling suites, A Tree that's good is euer knownebi'th fruits.Mat. 12. 33 But yet for him that from the Church is sold, And in his Heart is neither hot nor cold,Reuel. 3. 16. With God and Mammon can with both indent, Whose mind on mischiefe is full set and bent,
That what he can into his hands doth get, And all is Fish which commeth to his net. That doth forsake his owne Religion first, The same I meane wherein he hath bin nurst, Inconstantly another shall imbrace, What ere he thinke he is in wofull case. Well may one iudge his conscience may be pang'd, For that one thing how many haue bin hang'd: And he againe that in his ripest yeares, Forsakes the same, as plaine by Caine appeares, And both of them he hath distasted quite, May be in's Age demned Pagan right. Besides examples in the Scriptures pure, Which aye shall last, eternally endure, Of cursed Athiests in their bitter gall, That Iulian like from God and Christ did fall, The Monster vile within the Gospell curst, Which hang'd himselfe, when all his bowels burst: And diuers others tedious here to name, Whose ends haue shewd iust iudgements to their shame:Act▪ 1. 14. Hath not Experience in this Age of ours, Branded Apostates of the heauenly powers, With fearefull Vengeance wofull to behold, Vpon the earth for being (impious) bold: As amongst many, infinite to write, But one neere vs in steade of all Ile cite, Whose scandall foule about the world is blowne, His Story rife amongst vs all well knowne. Faustus by name, by birth a Germaine bred,The story of D. Faustus. Whose minor yeares were with Religion fed, In liberall Arts his minde but yong did wade, A schoole Diuine and Doctor after made,
Traind vp as well as euer man could be, In learnings Lore, and sweet Diuinitie: So was this Caine, the like was Iudas fell, All three no doubt with damned diuels in hell. The foremost two with bolld their hands defilde, But this a man, which neuer hurt a childe. How with a knife made he his veines to bleed, Then with his blood to write the diuell a deed, Conuaying Soule and Body by the same, To be tormented in eternall flame, Neuer repenting till it was too late, Damn'd, wofull, fearefull, in a desperate state: Cursing the howre of his vntimely birth, By God for saken, taken from the Earth, With exclamations, hideous fearefull cries, Sprites, Ghosts, and diuels about the house there flyes: His braines thrasht out on euery post and wall, Sad spectacle, dire, mournfull, fearfull fall, When soule, life, learning, all at once he lost, A wofull purchase to his painefull cost: His bowels mangled carrion like (and tore) Imbrude in filth, and stinking poysoned gore: Next day tormented in this case, was found (By diuels) cast out vpon a dunghill ground. When once the Prince of darknesse in the deep, By power diuine, enioyned was to keep, And that the Serpent hatefull and accurst, Was in the center of the Earth downe thrust: Their vgly spawne then hacht the vilest Elfe That euer crawld, besides the diuell himselfe, Foule furious Enuy, as but late I told, With viperous snakes about her head all rold:
And she againe outfrom their banefull breath, Hath brought an Impe like gastly fearefull Death▪ Limbe of the diuell still worse then all the rest, Mishapen, vile, base Antichristian beast, Monster of Nature, false in euery part, Apostacie with crablike crawling heart:simile. Contagious, fell, most dangerous in her tong, From whom all treasons in this world first sprung: The hatefull deeds which some haue pacht together, Vnder Religion, may be brought all hither; The secret actions infinite that lurke, Which in mans heart and gall together worke: The poysonings, murders, euery cursed rape, For whom this Earth doth yawne her mouth, and gape, Seeking to swallow, in her Iawes deuowre Within the midst of her darke wombe, to powre The actors damn'd vnder obliuions night, Not fit to breath, or to behold heauens light: Base scum and dregs, the works of darkenesse first, Proceeding from Apostacie at first. But what make I with damned Atheists vile, My sacred verse with Antechrist defile, To rowze from hell tormented hideous sprites, Foule gastly Ghosts which all the world afrights: That my deare Muse should thus by freinds be crost▪ From heauen of late within the deepe be tost. Hels vgliest Monster to vnmaske, and lay All open thus, falling within my way, That little taste to euery Palate yeelds. And all this while Caine wanders in the fields With passions working in his hatefull brest, Sad, discontent, may in his face be guest:
Reuenge all bloody, with a poysoned dart,Reuenge. Starts vp from hell, enters within his hart: Base cursed Furie hacht by Enuie first▪ Apostacie this damned heil hound nurst: The masked traine that all her life befriend her, Are Guile, Deceit, and Falshood to attend her. This monster, Caine close in his brest did hide, With all the rest of that damn'd rout beside: And home returns as if he had forgot, The discontent of his discouered blot: The blurre late made in his Religious cote, As out of minde he seemes not now to note, But full of forme and outward complement, As if his minde was all to goodnesse bent; With much respect vnto his father first, And duty shewd to her his body nurst: Vpon his brother (fawningly) he lookes, And learns him then to make the shepheard hookes, To catch a sheepe running with all her speed, And he againe helps him his land to weed. Thus Caine continues for a certaine space, Before his fathers and his mothers face, In outward guise, formality and speach, As if his heart had had no further reach: Vntill that Act▪ foule barbarous deed befell, Which makes me mute, almost afraid to tell: But that from God the same at first I heard, Described plaine in his drad sacred Word.Gen. 4. 3. Caine but few nights in this bad meaning slept, For Fire in Flaxe can but a while be kept: And not long after as may well be guest, When father, friends, and all suspected least,
Euen then he takes Occasion by her lock, Singles forth Habel from his harmelesse flock, With flattring wordes traines him along to walke, The fragrant fields, holds him on still with talke, Vntill at last (Inhumane wretch) vnkind, Base Villaine curst he staid a while behind, To find a Leauer that he late had laid, Within the corne which wondrous heauy waid. This on his shoulders vp from thence he takes, His fatall way to his deare brother makes, Who all this while lay in a slumber sweete, Vpon the grasse resting his weary feete, Thinking no hurt, full of all Peace and Loue, His mind in Heauen walking with God abouc;
Which when the Caitife (varletvile) had spide, No longer then he could his Enuy hide, But with a blow on Habels head downe right, With both his hands, and all his maine and might, The Leauer laid him in that wofull case, That Bloud and Braines flew round about the place: And least his deede might afterwards be found, He takes his body, rakes it vp i'th ground. Damn'd Miscreant, vnworthy that thine eyes, Should once behold the cleerenesse of the skyes, What hast thou done vnto thy brother deare? That thou shouldst thus about the corne fields leere, And watch a time to worke that fearefull fact, For which twere pitty but thy neck were crack't. What art now the better to haue seene, His crimson bloud bedew'e the ground all greene, His Body mangled, Skull to pieces beate? How canst thou (Vengeance) from the Heauens defeate? Dost thou not see that all begins to lowre, The Clouds to wrack, vpon thy head to powre Downe sulphery flames of hot consuming fiers, The Sunne for shame his glorious face retires; All to grow darke, the singing birds to weepe, To see man brought thus to his latest sleepe, The Furies loose the Diuels from Hell to roule, Aboue the Earth gaping for this thy Soule? How canst thou thinke to hide thy cursed deede, When as the Foules within the Aire which breede, The creatures all presented to thy sight, Will murthers shew and bring the truth to light.Nemesis the Goddesse of Reuenge. Acts 28. 4. Great Nemesis the Lady of the skyes, Without a Maske before her nimble eyes,
On Pegasus the Horse of Fame doth ride, With Iustice Sword close to her valliant side, Scowres through the Aire iust at that instant time, When as the steame of Habels bloud did clime, Vp to the Heauens like to a smoke ascending,simile. The Clouds in sunder all betearing, rending, Casts downe her lookes vpon his crimson bloud, Beholds the gore like to a streaming floud: No longer stayes but mounteth vp the Throne,Simile. Of God aboue making a fearefull mone, Tells all the cause discouereth this thy deede, Desires iust Iudgement on thy selfe and seede, Imploreth all the sacred powers diuine, That they would now but with her selfe combine, And grant her leaue to take Reuenge on this, So foule a murther as thy fact now is. Behold a voyce downe from the God of might, Reuenger of the poore mans cause and right,Rom. 12. 19. That seldome sleepes but in the Heauens he heares, The wrongs, oppressions, mournefull cryes and teares, Of Innocents by greatnesse ouersway'd, By Guile and Treason oftentimes betray'd, Brought to their ends by the malicious guilt, Of Enuious men that others bloud haue spilt, Wasted their State, consum'd their lands and life, Swallow'd their goods, contending still in strife. The sacred voyce out from a thunder-clap, Of dradfull lightnings at that hard mishap, Thus spake to Caine hard by that fat all place, Where Habels bloud lay couered in that case, With clods and moulds as euen but late I told, By that vile Wretch ouer his body rold,
"Come tell me Caine the thing I shall demand, "Seeke not to hunt, on no excuses stand, "Halt not before me as of late thou didst, "When a false heart vnder thy coate thou hidst, "What mad'st thou heere thus wandring all alone, "Where is thy brother, whither is he gone? "What is become of Habel▪ lou'd thee deare, "That next thy Parents was to thee more neare, "Then all the World, and all that therein moued, "Whose faithfull mind thy presence euer loued. The gracelesse Villaine impudently bold, As if he scorn'd of God to be controld, Or ask't a question from that heauenly lip, This answere straight out of his mouth let slip: I cannot tell, for what haue I to doe, To take account of Habell yea or no, Or in his presence to be tyde to stay, Within the fields as heretofore to play, Tis like enough if that the Sun had shin'd, About the foulds you might him chance to find, It may be that hee's feeding of his sheepe, Vpon the downes or fallen fast asleepe, Or else you may go looke a little deeper, How can I tell, am I my brothers keeper, "Blasphemous Wretch, what hast thou done, quoth God, "Art not afraid of my reuenging Rod, "But thus to spill thy deerest brothers blood, "Vpon the ground in thy inhumane moode? "Why (Ʋarlet) hast thou to my face belide, "How canst thou thinke thy fact from me to hide, "When as the bloud of this thy Brother shed, "For Vengeance iust vpon thy murdering head?
"Cryde from the Earth making afearefull moane, "With pitteous shreeks ascended vp my throne, "That downe I came from heauen aboue with speed, To giue thee Iudgement for thy damned deed. "Curst therefore art thou in thy chiefest worth, "Curst from the heauens, and curst from all the Earth, "That kindnesse shewd her mouth hath opened wide, "Within her wombe thy brothers blood to hide, "Hereafter now when thou the ground shalt till, "It shall not yeeld not yet thy barnes shall fill: "With that encrease which heretofore it gaue, "To thy content that thou desirdst to haue. "A vacabond vpon the spatious face "Of all the earth, Roming from place to place "With euery Rascall thou shalt now cologue, "Base Runnagate, no better then▪ a Rogue, "Thy dayes shall waste, thy glasse shall hourely run, "Vntill the thread of this thy life be spun, "Content with peace, quiet, thou shalt haue neuer: "A Scared conscience shall torment thee euer: "And in the end euen in thy fearefull sight, "Hels Furies curst before thy face shall light, "The damned diuels with all their hideous rout, "Shall wind thee in, hemming thy Soule about, "Attending on thee till thine eyes be shut, "And so deuoure thee in their greedy gut. The sturdy villaine with these last words stroke, In woefull feare his heart is welnigh broke, Despairing quite of any helpe at all, To this sad speech doth (most prophanely) fall. O who shall rid me from these torments fell, Hacht in the Bowels of the deepest Hell,
Nurc't in my brest, harbourde within my hart, That now I feele much to my paine and smart, The Furies (damn'd) about my head I heare, My punishment is more then I can beare. A vacabond I am cast out this day, Both from the earth, and from thy face for aye, I shall be hid from all the world beside, Wretch that I am, which know not where to bide: My Father, friends, will euer after hate The foule disaster of my enuious fate, And whosoeuer finds me one or other, Will murder me, as I haue done my brother. The voyce (Diuine) left him not thus alone In Desperation, making of his mone; But from the Clouds, yet once againe it spake, Perchance for Habel, or his Fathers sake: Goe where thou wilt, for he that dares to lay Reuenging hands vpon thy head, for aye, Vpon the earth, to murder, slay or kill, Which in his wrath shall seeke thy blood to spill, That damned wreth both in his goods and fame, In life and death, and all that thou canst name; Euen in his lands, his basket and his store: That man (I say) Ile punish seuen times more. Because thou shalt not need that thing to feare, My badge (diuine) for euer thou shalt weare, A fearefull Signe, which whosoere shall eye But in thy face, my dradfull Iudgements spye, Shall see and know that I haue markt thy hide, And branded thee from all the world beside. Great (powerfull God) Creator of this Ball, The heauens and earth the firmaments and all,
How good art thou, in euery action iust? Thou Habels blood beholdest in the dust; Com'st downe below, examinst first the deed, To Iudgement then thou dost at large proceed; And lest the same might chance neglected bee, Thou dost thy selfe the execution see: Searing Cains conscience, body, heart and liuer And marking him (as now I tolde) for euer. Yet (holy Father) let vs know the pith, The Badge and Signe that thou didst brand him with. Some men there be which thinke the marke of Caine, Was that foule, horrid▪ irkesome, fearefull paine, Scabd Leprosie, or wofull falling Euill, As if possessed with some spirit or Diuell: Or shiuering, shaking of his sturdy ioynts, That euery way his body reels and poynts, Feares, quauers, trembles in that dradfull case, As most of vs haue seene before our face: Or some such thing apparant to ech eye, That euery man may his foule fact espye, Yet what it was, who sound this vaste abbisse, When Reason blinde leades euery man amisse. Tis true, the▪ world in euery States Dominion, Is now of this, and then of that opinion; For none aliue (which on the Earth do well)▪ Can shew what 'twas, or yet for certaine tell, But by coniecture (likelyest) to be guest, The ground and sum of all mens Iudgements best, Reueald by studie in the Arts diuine, To all the Sisters, learned Muses nine, That Cains most fearefull punishment and marke, For raking vp his brother in the darke▪
Was that his skin was all to blackensse turn'd, Like to a Coale within the fire halfe burnd.simile. Ah cursed Caine the scourge of all thy Race, Now thou hast got a blacke and murdring face, For God aboue (in Iustice) hath ordaind, Thy ofspring all should to this day be staynd, Vnto the griefe and terror of their Soules. For laying Habel in could dusty mouldes: No other cause the world could euer tell, To make them looke as if they came from hell, Amongst the diuels at euery step to start, The fatall place where thou (vile wretch) now art. Some haue alledg'd out of their brains and wit,Alex Prob. Celius Rhod. The Sun himselfe to be the cause of it, That in the hot and torrid burning Zone, Vnder the line there Phaeton alone Must driue his Cart and teame a little hire, Or else againe the world would be on fire, The heate extreame their bodyes doth enflame, Their flesh it parches, and their stomackes tame, Their blood it dries, their humors all adust, As if their skin were ouergrowne with rust: If this be true, how is it that there bee In Africa, America, to see Vnder the line both people white and faire, As many men that now in Europe are, There borne and bred by courteous Natures lawes, A pregnant Signe that cannot be cause. Againe, the Sun with labour great and paine, If that the line but once he doth attaine,
Though to the Earth he seemeth somewhat nigher, Yet in his Spheare he mounted farre more higher, More temperate there, the people liue and well, Then do the men vnder the Tropicks dwell, And twice a yeere he vseth there to burne, When once a yeere (i'th Tropicks) serues his turne. And other men haue other Reasons found, To shew the cause which to like purpose sound: There be that say, the drynesse of the Soile, May be the cause that doth their bodies foyle, To make them looke worse then a Colliers Elfe,simile. Much like the Diuell and cursed Cuine himselfe, From top to toe, from heade vnto the foote, As if▪ with grease they were besmeard and soote. Vnto such men I would but know and try, If the Libian desarts be not far more dry, Whose people parch't, the very Sun doth rost, Yet are they white or tawny at the most, The want of water with the Sun and Sand, May be the cause that they so much are tand: But yet in Negro land the people haue, Of water store in euery ditch and Caue: For Niger great, euen from his very source, Iust through the midst hath euer kept his course, And all the land on euery side and round, Euen like to Nilus ouerflowes the ground, The drinesse of their Reason we may waue, Because tis knowne they water plenty haue. Those that ascribe it proper to the Earth, And see vs there euen from our very birth,
How we and they are borne within one place, And we are white, and they are black and base, May sit them downe and well may take a pause, To thinke with vs that cannot be the cause. And some there be which to this day affirme, That tis the blacknesse of the Parents sperme, To be the cause and for a ground it take, But how came they so close a search to make? If it be black, which some men haue denide, How came it so Imprinted on their hide, That in their youth iust in their prime and bud, Then is their skin as red as any bloud▪ And in their age when perisht is their sight, From top to toe they are all yellow quight, And if you try to throw one in a ditch, To wash him white, hee'le be as black as pitch. Others there be aboue the clouds do fly, To search the secrets of their destiny, Whose wits and learning sure must wander farre, To a Constellation or some fixed Starre, I would the cause they would vnto vs teach, And not to flye to farre aboue our reach, Vntill which time I shall be well content, To thinke it was Gods righteous punishment, On cursed Caine, and all his of-spring lewd, For doing that which I before haue shew'd. I must confesse vpon the vpper face, Of this wide Ball almost in euery place, Variety we see in strange attire, Complexion, Colour, Nature and Desire,
Shape, gesture, face, the belly, limbs and back, But none more differ then the white from black, The Indian borne there where the Sun doth rise, Is palefast (Ashey) with red flaming eyes, The American which we but late haue seene, Is Oliue coloured of a sad french greene, The Libian dusky in his parched skin, The More all tawny both without and in, The Southerne man, a black deformed Elfe, The Northerne white like vnto God himselfe: And thus we see, euen still vpon the earth, God shewes his workes both in our liues and birth. The fatall place where Habels bloud washed,Esay. 7. 8. Is call'd Damascus, Arams chiefest head, Iem of the Earth, the eye of all the East, Pearle of the World, where Iupiter did rest, In Siria Land, the goodliest Citty seene, And sister to (Ierusalem) the Queene,Eze. 23. 4 Sweete Parragon, a royall Empresse borne, That all the World with glory didst adorne, Vntill the second Habels deerest bloud, Ran downe thy streetes like to a crimson floud,Simile. Titus in Iosep. & Adri. Aelius. Then was thy fields with bloud and slaughter dide, And made the Stage to all the World beside, Whereon fierce Tyrants in their barbarous hearts, With murdring minds haue acted all their parts. So hath Damascus seldome beene at rest, Whose fatall name bewrayes her bloudy brest, When Benhadad, Hazael, Rezin, fierce,2. King 16 9. The scarlet sinewes of her Heart did pierce, There were the Titans murthered by the Blade, Of Iupiter, that all their army laid,
In such a sleepe as till the Earth be shak't, By powre diuine will neuer more be wak't, Great Babilon, the Tyrant of the East, The Sarazens and Aegypt in her pierst, Braue Pompey wan it in sad mournefull sort, And Tamberlaine, he made them all amort; Ierusalem, which lou'd her deerely well, Euen in her streetes hath tol'd her passing Bell. Haalon, the Tartar in his lowring warre,Ch. Adricom. Theatrum ter sanct. Within her bowels made a fearefull skarre: The Persian, Grecian, Christian, Romane last, The cruell Turkes haue all their fortunes cast, And fill'd the Ayre with pitteous shreikes and grones, Piling vp heapes of dead mens Skuls and bones, As if the place where Habels bloud was laid, The buriall ground of all the World were made. Euen as the bloud of deere Adonis slaine,Simile. By cruell Mars, faire Venus loue to gaine, Stain'd all the ground, bedyde the crimson graue, That powers diuine willing his worth to saue, From darke Obliuions black forgetfull night; Which smothers all in silence from the light, With Nature ioyn'd to bring forth such a signe, As shall for euer to all Ages shine, In memory of that detested fact, Which murthering Mars did in his fury act: Vpon the body of that louely youth, Though some perhaps will hardly thinke it truth, But rarher by the ancient Poets fain'd, Yet they I say haue to this day ordain'd, That from the bloud of deere Adonis young, The Safron▪ flowers of all the Earth first sprung▪
So may I say that from the scarlet blood Of Habel shed, like to▪ a crimson flood Within the midst of rich Damasco plains, When Caine vnkindly pasht out all his braines. It pleased God to his immortall Fame, That still the Soyle should testifie the same With fragrant flowres, adorning all the ground, As no where else in all the world is found: That some haue thought by this vile deed accurst, The Damaske Rose sprang from his graue at first. Ah dearest Muse, here in this world of woes, Mongst Tigres fell, and cruell barbarous foes, Prodigeous men, (Inhumain) in their minds, Deuouring Beasts that all to powlder grinds The Infants face, the Innocent to hurt, The Lambe to teare, and throw him in the durt. How blest are we, which haue such wholesome lawes, To keepe vs safe out from the murdring pawes Of rancorous men, that in their deadly rage Would (else no doubt) straight shorten all our age, By macerating blowes to wound and braine, And spill our blood, as did that damned Caine. But yet we cannot say, that we liue free From as fowle sinnes, and hatefull treacherie: Now Murders, Treasons, enuious deeds begun, Must close be kept, and priuately be done. We diue to Hell and sound the deepest pits, Ransacke the Graues, and vse our vtmost wits To find a Diuel, or some small sugred Gall▪ To witch a friend, or poyson him withall: Or else perchance, if we do hap to faile▪ As some there be, will not set all to sale▪
Yet that which curbes them from this damned vse, I meane the Law, how do they it abuse, Making the same the poore mans feet to tye, The instrument of all their villanie? How are some men by greatnesse ouer swayd, Their Liues, Lands, Goods, and all they haue betrayd: The Foote-ball made, tost vp and downe by foes, Turmoyld and vext, plung'd in a world of woes, Neuer at Peace, forc't all their state to sell, Vnfortunate by enuious men to dwell: Clapt vp in Prison, all their dayes to spend In wrangling, Iangling, brangling to noe end. There is the Law where Purses well are linde, To wrong the weake to satisfie their minde, The louing Wise, the selfe same course must run, The Children small all vtterly vndone. When once mans heart infected is with gall, How doth it then to all foule vices fall? Baines the whole house, leauing them all forlone, Much better farre if they were neuer borne: Then here to liue (subjected) toyld with paine, But neare the dore to some fell enuious Caine▪ Yet sacred Muse, euen in this mortall life, The Iudgement, iust of those delight in strife: Thou often seest vpon their heads to fall, Some breake their neckes off from their horse and all, And some there be which wanting of their will, Haue sought themselues their owne heart blood to spill, With Poyson strong hastned their way to death, Or with a Rope strangled their cruell breath: Vsde all ill meanes to make away their liues To childrens griefe and terrour of their wiues,
Rauing, inuoaking, all the Damned fiends, That all the world takes notice of their ends. Others there be that toucht before their death, With some remorse lye languishing in breath: Out of this life cannot at all depart, Till they haue crau'd forgiuenesse from their heart, To ease their soule their conscience ouer pang'd, Haue sent for those whom they before haue wrong'd Confest the Truth desirde them all to pray To God aboue for to be pleasde to lay No further torments, (Iudgements) full of feare, Vpon their backes then they can welnigh beare. Those that run on their current with the tide, And all their life in enuious courses bide: Deare Muse thou knowst their lowring daye is neere, When pale fac't death shall to their eyes appeare. Then shall the diuell take them within his powre, With gastly lookes euen at that dismall howre: Tortring their soules in euerlastling woes, Heauens iust Reward for all damn'd enuious foes. Meane while the Ioyes that are layd vp aboue, For those delight in quiet Peace and Loue, Which haue bin wrongd with Patience much enurde Earths stormy brunts haue to their paine endurde, That yet do liue suffring the wofull smart, Vexation, griefe, trouble of mind and hart, And to their end like Christian Martyrs bold, Holde on their Race, as I before haue told, How is there in the Heauens aboue the line, A sacred Crowne of purest gold most fine,
Inlayd with Iems and orient Pearles of worth, More richer farre then all vpon this Earth,Iam. 1. 12. Reu. 2. 10. Preseru'd for those, and layd vp safe in store, When all theirfoes must stand without the dore, In endlesse paines with all the Diuels of hell, And they with God aboue the clouds shall dwell, Possessing there this conquering crowne of life, Free from all care, vexation, trouble, strife▪ To muster here vpon a Sacred stage, The Murders, Treasons, Plots in euery age, Iniurious dealings, treacherous actions, base, Sly cunning traps to grind the poore mans face, Vexations, wrongs, fell viperous proiects vile, As bad and worse then those which do defile, Their fowle blacke hands in Christian crimson blood, Waste others State to do themselues no good: The damned rout of hell spurd Furies curst, That from Caines fact tooke all beginning first, Would tire my Muse, and weary all your eares, Amaze your thoughts, and fill you full of feares: With Wonder strike you as a man halfe dead, And set your haire vpright vpon your head, To see since first this world by God was fram'd, The enuious deeds not fitting to be nam'd: But Time diuider of ech day from night, Will all disclose and bring the Truth to light, Successiuely shall lay them open all, Iust as Occasion in my way may fall. Meane while (deare Muse) let vs retire againe, To shew the life of cursed enuious Caine: And tell what course after this deed he tooke, How round about on euery side his looke
Was fearfull gazing, least his fathers eye Might glance that way, and so the fact espye, And see Gods iudgement on his branded skin, His blacke foule face for this vile murdring sin. Asham'd, and shamelesse barbarous wretch vnkind, From thence he goes, leaues Habel dead behind: Steales out away, and pryes in euery nooke, For feare his fact should be bewraid by's looke: At length by chance as he was lingring late, He finds his sister by his fathers gate, Takes her away, euen in the euening darke,simile. As doth a Kite a simple harmelesse Larke, And when (Alas) she could not well descrye His foule blacke colour by her clowded eye. His speech she knew, which made her willing more To leaue her Iewels, kindred, and her store, And go with him then all the rest beside: She little thought his hands with blood were dide.Simile. All night they walkt, talking of this and that, She louely fayre, he like an vgly Bat That shuns the light, is neither bird nor beast, Of both partakes, (a monster) at the least: Or like to those that in our dayes do hie, From vs to Rome, from thence againe do flye, And little care so they may haue their will, Mens Soules, their Liues, their State and all to spill, As was the case of that damn'd murdring rout, Which from Hels bowels brought their treasons out, Vntill at last with wandring weary growne, And want of sleepe together both lay downe, Whilst he euen then, layes open all his mind, Tels her his loue he mindes with hers to binde,
That she shall be the Obiect of his eye, His darling deare from her to neuer flye, By meanes of which adulterous flattring wilde, Incestuously he gets her there with childe. But when Aurora, glory of the World, Heauens candle bright about the Earth had purld, And but began to shew a burnisht face Vpon these two, in that polluted place: From slumbring sleepe his Sister sodaine wakt, Starts vp and cryes, most fearefully she quakt, So foule a sight by her was neuer seene, Thinking the diuell in shape of Caine had beene: Vpright she stands, her hayre vpon her head, Rowzd in the light from her adulterous bed, Faine would she run (wishing her selfe at home) Cursing the Time when she from thence did come, And glad would be no longer here to stay, But that from thence she knew not well the way. Like to a Lady in an euening darke,. Walking alone within her pleasant Parke, Thinking to meet her louing husband deere, Her father, brother, or some welcome Peere; Is by a villaine suddenly surprisde, In shape, speech, gesture all of them disguisde: Carryed away, traynd on a long to walke, Misdoubts no hurt in all his trecherous talke, But freely spends the sable lowring night, Her ioyes, toyes, pleasures in her loues delight, Vntill the morning of the day appeares, Draws wide heauens Curtain, all the skies it cleares, And makes her see how she hath bin misled, By folly, guile, brought to an vnknowne bed:
Weeps, mourns, laments, teareth her Amber hayres, Raues, frets, and grieues, as one distracted stares. That once her body louely chaste and pure, Should now be staind thus by a wretch impure; And that her corpes when Heauens bright Candle winkt, Should be but found close to a Monster linkt. So may we iudge was this young Virgins case, Traynd (as I told you) from that louely place, Where father, friends, acquaintance all she had, To cast her fortunes on a Varlet bad: Damn'd homicide, dame Natures vglyest marke, To be betrayd thus trecherously i'thdarke: The vnblowne Rose defended by the thorns, Vermillion blush that both her cheeks adorns, Chaste, modest thoughts to giue the soule content, When these shall be all ech in sunder rent, Deflowr'd, defac't, by treason cropt and staind, To haue i'th'end none but a Mungrell gain'd. Thus in a maze astonisht all the while, Caine looketh vp, and on her face doth smile, Gently entreats, perswades her not to feare, The Sun burnt colour that his skin did beare: Tels her his face was nothing else but tan'd, With walking much about his new plow'd land: And that the colour on his face which lay, Would cleane be washt and skowred all away. She him beleeues, and so from thence they went, Like Ʋagabonds without a pasport sent:Simile▪ Roming about, vntill at last they found, A pleasant, sweet, delitious, dainty ground, Iust to the East, hard to the lowring face Of sacred Iustice in that Orient place,
Far from their Friends, their Country, Church, and God, To liue with ease within the Land of Nod, Heere first they stayd, and to secure their state. They built a house of timber, stones and slate, Turfe; Morter, Durt, and euery thing they finde, They pile vp close to keepe off showers and winde, And at the length as if they were afraid, That after wards their liues might be betrayd, By sauage beasts, in humane monsters feil, Such as himselfe hath hatch't below in Hell, Reuengefull Tyrants, murthering men and all, About his house he builds a spacious Wall, And in the same he liues for many yeares, His conscience stuft with horrour, drad and feares, At length his Wife brings forth her first borne child, A bloudy Elfe, deformed fowle and wild, Like to the Sire, so is his picture drawne,Simile. Brought vp to sweare, cheate, couzen lye and fawne, No God to know, his tongue to curse and fret, With enuious face, for like doth like beget, And he againe his sister rude doth take, Makes choyce of her to be his onely make, That she and he and all the rest beside, Which in that place within the walls did bide: The cursed spawne of Caines adulterous race, Did in short time soouerswarme the place, With multitudes of that incestuous rout. Poligamy from this vile Race sprangout, That in seuen hundred twenty yeares and ten, Their hatefull stocke grew to a world of men,
This was this Age that Caine did liue some say,Genebrard x Rab. sol. When then began his fatall lowring day, For Iustice alwayes in mans life or death, Will yet at length her flaming sword, vnsheath, Lamech the fifth, from his own bloud descended, With one hard blow his vitall life straight ended: Iust Iudgement of the Highest euer still, To make the blind to execute his will, That though man runs vnpunisht all his dayes, Yet in the end he payes him many wayes, And when the least of all his time he thinkes, Then is he caught, vnder Gods vengeance sinkes. For as the Rabbyes of the Iewes do tell, This monster Caine about these parts did dwell, And was the first that euer City built, Led thereunto by his fowle murthering guilt, More to secure him in so strong a Wall, And shun the curse then any thing at all, Euen where sinne most of all the earth was bred, He layes him downe and makes that place his bed, There wallowes, tumbles, spends his aged dayes, In wicked workes ten thousand kind of wayes; When at the last he for a beast was slaine, By Heauens iust Act in treacherous Tubal-Caine, Guiding the hand of Lamech being blind, To murther Caine against his fathers mind, And Tubal-caine had his iust Guerdon paid, For Lamech struck him that all dead he laid, His bleeding corps vpon the cold greene ground, What they wrought others, they themselues haue found. The City Caine by Henocks name did call, His eldest Sonne whom most he lou'd of all,
Some say the same by Libanus was fram'd, But afterwards by others (Oenus nam'd) And some affirme the building Iesca leed, Great Iebab Mauly were his only deede, And Tehe, Celet, Cities sixe in number, Were raiz'd by him with such a world of lumber, As in our dayes those that behold the place, May see their ruines in Caines wofull case. You Cities all, how were you fram'd at first? But in the sin of wicked Caine accurst, Was not your Morter tempered with the bloud, And slaughter vile of righteous Abel good? Is not the Earth her bowels rent and torne, Your walls to build and lofty towers adorne? Great Thetis lap is all beslic't and cut, To bring forth treasures in your wombs to put; The lofty Ceders, Timber Trees of worth, Are hack't downe flat, and leuel'd with the earth, Base gold and siluer that mans mind appals, Where doth it rust but in your cankred walls? How are your streetes with Paracides bepestred, With noysome Air (contagious) fowly festred, So banesull growne, that from you, all or some, Hels Antechrist the Prince of Diuels shall come. So Babilon the tyrant of the earth,Dan. 7. 8. And Rome Vsurper since her Popish birth, How were they built but in the crimson gore, Of thrice ten millions of mens soules and more, Nimrod the hunter of Gods fearefull flock, First raiz'd that Tower which seem'd the heauens to mock By tyranizing on the feeble weake, As in my worke heereafrer I shall speake,
And Romulus the monster of his age How did he murther in his barbarous rage, His brother Remus, in whose scarlet bloud▪ Rome first was built by Tybers treacherous floud, And since the sincke of superstition made, For euery wretch within her walls to trade, Idoll of Nature sprang at first from hell, As afterwards I shall haue cause to tell, But what make we (deareMuse) within the walls, Oftraiterous Townes and Citties full of braules, Where nothing sauours wholesome, sweete and faire, But earthly bad to putrifie the Ayre, Let vs retire into the country coates, To heare Heauens birds to chirp ten thousand noates, About the woods on euery side along, Sweete Nightingales to warble forth their song, The Lennet, Larke, the Blackbird, Thrush and all, How night and day their smooth sweete tunes do call, Melodiously vnto the God offame, To sound forth prayses to his glorions name, And where our Grandsire Adam last was left, When Caine his brother of his life bereft. Whether the Soule of Habels body slaine, By the curst hand of treacherous damned Caine, His Genius spirit Angell, bloud, or Saint, Or God himselfe did Adam first acquaint, With the sad newes of this so vile a deede, Or that suspicion in his brest might breede, Abroad he walkes, and findes the bleeding quarre, Of Habell slaine vnder a fatall starre, Weepes and laments▪ grieues to haue lost his sonne, Caine, Daughter, Brother all of them vndone,
He louing Father piles a wondrous heape, (Collossus like,) of massy stones not cheape,Simile. And with much care his dying name to saue, Builds a huge Mount vpon his crimson graue, From thence as one distracted for the time, With deepe conceit of this so foule a crime, Surcharg'd with sorrow, ouergrowne with griefe, He hates the place as Author of it chiefe, And with his Wife and all his children left, He bids adien vnto the ground and wept, Trauels along like to a Pilgrim poore, Or as a Hermit with small litlle store;Simile. Till at the last, it was their chance to stay, In Canaan, and there their bones to lay, As in this rugged, ragged, rurall verse, I hope ere long (diuinely) to rehearse. But sacred Muse, here we must stay awhile,seth borne. And with Sethes birth the posting time beguile, That sweete borne Babe of Heauen it selfe befriended, From whom the Church is lineally descended, Iust as a hundred twenty yeares and ten, Of Adams age into this world of men, He was begat, Tipe of that promist Lambe, To saue the World, into the World first came, Preaching Repentance all our liues to mend, Whose Gouernment shall neuer earthly end, Vntill the Trumpet in the skyes shall sound, To summon soules from their dead sleepe i'th ground: How did the Heauens euen in his infant birth, Reioyce and dance about the Ball i'th earth,
Melodiously their sacred Organs went, To see young Seth into the World thus sent, In Minor yeeres their fortunes on him showred, And on his head their deerest blessings powred, Enduing him with towardnes and wit, That on his temples all the Arts did sit; About his Browes the Lawrell wreath haue wound, As the first man that euer letters found, How did the Saints at this thy Fortune smile, "True Isralite in whom there is no guile.Ioh. 1. 47. Thy manly▪ dayes they were not ouersway'd,Gen. 4. 26. Chap. 5. 34. With fond conceits but in Religion stay'd, Enuy, Opression, Lust, and Rauine base, Within thy heart could neuer find a place, Nor yet the thought of any deede vnkind, Could once be found to harbour in thy mind, But full of peace like to thy father deare, Or God himselfe in all his workes most cleare;Simile. So art thou blest to bring forth such a Sonne, From whom the Church successiuely must runne, True Picture of thy Body Mind and Thought, Enoch the man to God himselfe that brought,Enoch borne. Thee sacred flock which wandring almost lame, And taught them first to call vpon his Name, By prayer, preaching, Heauen blest dearest Muse, Which on the Sabaoth they did dayly vse. Yet some do say the Church againe did fall, In this mans dayes to wicked vices all,Brough. Mart. Luther. Caluin▪ Tremelius. Perecius vpon Gen. 4. 26. That Sethes great sonne, and all his future Race, Did now begin (dumb Idols) to imbrace, And that their rites and sacrifices slaine, Were all intended vnto Charles his waine,
The Sunne and Moone▪ the Starres about this border, As blind Deuotion led them out of order. Yet Enoch deere, my Muse can hardly thinke, Nor can it once within my Braines to sinke, But that the Plant from whence rose Christ his flock, Did yeeld forth fruit according to the stock, And that the line from whence the Church is sprung, But that must be vnspotted, chast and young, Cleane, vndefiled, pure in euery part, In Ages all according to the Hart: Euen in the time when Adam and Wife, Liu'd both in peace, deuoid of care and strife, And Seth their Sonne though all the rest were bad, Yet he the knowledge of the Godhead had, And taught it thee to leaue vnto thy seede, By which thy soule did hourely on it feede: Vntill the last of this thy Glasse was runne, Then didst thou dye and leftst it thy sonne, And so from thence in euery Age it past, Till Noahs Arke was on the waters cast, Successiuely from whence it after went, Till Christ himselfe vpon the Earth was sent, And that the Crosse (with crimson bloud) was dide, To pay the sinnes of all the world beside; With such a Ransome of eternall fame, As euermore must alwayes blaze his Name, From whence the Church now in her latest night, In many a place yet hath her Candlelight. Full ninty yeares thou liuedst at the least, When Kenan was conceiued in the brest,Kenan born▪ Of thy deare Spouse and thou wast all the while, Quight out of hope, not seene at once to smile,
In disperation as a man for lorne, Till thy first Babe into the World was borne, Thy name bewraying of thy discontent, When Kenan be to glad thy heart was sent, And made thee Father of a thriuing sonne, Whose actions all vnto thy mind did run. He at the age of threescore yeares and ten,Psal. 90. 10, Mahalaieel. borne. (In Dauids dayes, the dying age of men) Did then beget great Mahalaleel young, A sweete fac't Imp with nimble pleasing tongue, Whose whole delight was working euer still, To prayse the Lord and execute his will: Whilst by examples void of enuious guile, By smooth sweete preaching in a goulden stile, And beating downe Oppression, Pride and Hate, The Churches eyes he did illuminate. Iust at the age of threscore yeares and fiue, Adam and Eue yet being both aliue, Great▪ Mahalaleel sonne of Kenan past, He ared brings into the world at last,Iared borne. Whose whole delights were all to goodnesse bent, As if that he was from the clouds downe sent, To cheere vp Eue and Adam in their Caues, And comfort them vnto their happy graues. He long time liues the chastest man of all, Loues darts were throwne but at a brazen wall, Vntill at length it sanke into his brest, The Churches Line vpon his Race should Rest. Then doth he pause, and vnto marriage goe, Iust at a hundred threescore yeares and two, And in the strength of this his body high, Begat a child which neuer liu'd to dye.
Enoch the seuenth that euer yet was bred,Enoch borne. Gen. 6. 24. From whom the Church doth now deriue her head, But Enoch stay, I cannot but admire, The chast condition of thy reuerent Sire, To liue so long within so prime an Age, When euery obiect as a pleasing Page, Might rauish sence, allure the chastest eye, With lookes more cleere then is the purest dye, And when the Angels if the Booke be true,Book of Enoch Came downe from Heauen their beauties all to view. Great powerfull God what can I thinke or speake, When all my wits are for this point to weake, But to conceiue thy glorious Angels bright, How they can be intangled with the sight, And pleasing lookes of this fond sinfull sex, Though fram'd as twere out of the Virgins wax. Yet drawne (entiste) to euery thing is ill, Euen as occasion workes vnto their will. I know some thinke their weake opinions sound,Viues Euseb. Lactan. That in those dayes few women chast were found, But that Pride, Enuy, Lust, Dissembling, Guile, Did their white hands with all foule things defile, And that the Diuels with Lucifer which fell, From Hell arose with woman kind to dwell: By which their seede against (dame) Natures lawes, Prodigiously thus mixed was the cause, To bring forth Monsters in that fearefull case, Huge Giants tall of Gog and Magogs Race,Eze. 38. 23. Reuel. 20. 8. Such as not now can any where be found, For whom the world was shortly after drown'd.
Others there be that thinke the Angels bright,Tertullian. Sarazens l. 3. 5 Which then stood pure before the most of might, With twelue great Princes of their royall band, Came downe from Heauen, in lareds dayes did stand, Vpon the top of lofty Hermon Hill, There curst and vowd for to obtaine their will, Vpon mens Daughters which their eyes had seene, Sweete louely faire, delightfull, young and greene, And that the Mount from that time forth was nam'd, The Hill of Hermon as not once asham'd, That their foule plot to this vile Hidra growne, Should by the name still to this day be knowne. Semixas great, which was their chiefest Prince,Book of Enoch Iude. 6. 9. 14. Disswaded first from this foule curst offence, Fearing the tortures of the Angells all, Their sins and shame vpon his head would fall, Till by Arachiell and the rest all ten, That in this place my Muse is loath to pen: He gaue consent, and so from thence all went, Euen as their minds on Hermon hill were bent, But God aboue soone sendeth (Michaell) downe, Who binds Semixa with a sacred frowne,Reu. 12. 7. 8, 9. Chaines him in hell and all his of-scum Race, Ties to the hils as Fairy Goblins base, The rest and all the selfe same cup do taste, Heauens fowre Archangels these foule fiends so waste, That all Earths monsters sprong from hell at first, Must by the flood be washt away and curst. A third opinion that our Age doth yeeld, In this large, goodly, ample, spatious field, Amongst the Arabian, Christian, Turke and Iew, Which sounds to reason (likelyest) to be true.
Is that Seths issue from the Church deriued, Though in the depth of learned Arts they diued, And seem'd Gods Sonnes (adopted) sweet of face, Yet linck't themselues in Caines adulterous Race, By which their Spawne from this vile mingle mangle, Began with Pride (contentiously) to brangle, With griping pawes to satiate their fill, The harmelesse childs poore weake mans state to spill: Most barbarously to trample on the head Of the chaste Virgine to deflowre her bed: To feed on gore (inhumanly) to tare Mans flesh in peeces, gnawe his bones all bare, And tyranize, the great to wrong the lesse, To act those things which all the world may gesse. Out from this Medly sprang those Gyants first,Gen. 6. 4. 5. 12. 13. Monsters of men that made the Earth accurst, Base diuelish minds with big aspiring lookes, When as a man his neighbour hardly brookes, But sheds his bloud squeeseth the flesh and gall, Licks vp the gore worse then a Canniball, Nature (prodigious) in their mungrell birth, Made them adord, yet demy Gods on earth: Whilst feare restraind the weaker men in aw, To Idolize against her sacred law, They spend their dayes to treade the selfe same trace, Or worse if may be in this barbarous case, That in the end with Brazen cotes of maile, They tempt the heauens and seeke the clouds to scale, To pull downe God from his triumphant throne, By their damn'd Pride and hellish power alone. Thus whilst oppression ouerflowes the world, The little men still by the greater hurld,
Their states consum'd, their lands and liues all spoyl'd, Their cause (though iust) by greatnesse crost and foyl'd, Themselues by others (basely) bought and sold, And hardly vs'd as I before haue told: Adam he grieues at this accursed Race, Eue she laments with discontented face, Both prostrate fall before the God of power, To take their soules and send them happy howre. So deerest Muse heere in this mortall life,The Author. That swarmes in troupes of those delight in strife, Which neuer rest till all my state be spent, But at my Ruine all their aime is bent, How could I wish that my last dayes were come, Or that my foes were Cardinals of Rome, Or that my Peace which (almost) cost the best, Of Lands and Life, to liue in quiet rest; Were granted me, I car'd not which of all, But in my way would (fortunately) fall, So should I rest, no liuing man annoy, Or to the Heauens translate my soule with ioy. But why do I cast stones against the wind, Thus to disclose the secrets of my mind, To waile my woes, lay open all my griefe, My foes wish well as Authors of it chiefe, And all this while no comfort yet I haue, But still fell Enuy more and more doth raue, To wound my Soule with such inueterate hate, As murders all to swallow vp my State. O pardon me, God may an Angell send, To worke my Peace, or else some welcome friend,
Conuert my Foes, their Conscience touch with feares, Or bring my Cause vnto my Soueraignes eares. Oh then how ioyfull shall that happy howre Be to my Soule, more sweet then sweetest flowre: And glad me more then if I (treasures) found, The greatest Riches on this Earthly ground: My future life shall warble (sacred) layes, To sound my God, and then my Soueraignes prayse. But Adam (yet according to thy minde) Thou dost Gods loue and all his fauours finde, Though in thy youth thou wastvntimely croft, When Paradise was by thy folly lost. Thy first borne sonnes before thine eyes both slaine, Thy daughter stole, thy dayes to end in paine: And worst of all, that these vile Monsters base Should but descend and come from this thy Race: That thou shouldst liue but to behold the sinnes, The wrongs, Oppressions, in th nd begins, The Horrors, Griefes, Vexations howrely fall Vpon the heads of this thy of spring all: And last, these Gyants heauens blew vaile to rend▪ To treade in blood without all hope to mend, Made thee desire that thou thy wish mighst haue, To come (in Peace) to this thy welcome Graue. God heares thy cry, and sends his Angels bright, Clad in white garments of heauens sacred light, Attir'd like Nymphs of chaste Dianaes traine, With glistring wings a Crowne of life to gaine, All to be spangled in rich costly Iems, From the crowns top, vnto their skirts and hems, With Lawrels wreathd close to their Temples chaste: And Trumpets dangling by ech louely waste
These all came downe thy sorrowes to aswage, In thine nine hundreth thirtie yeares of Age, To guard the soules both of thy selfe and wife From this worlds care, vexation, griefe and strife: Of from the earth, vp to the lofty skies, When they haue cheerd and clozd vp both thine eyes. Then all their Trumpets in the ayre doth sound, From Heauens blew wall downe to the lowest ground, Melodiously about the clouds resounding, The hils and dales (with Eccho) all rebounding, Till at the last they brought both safe and sure, Two welcome soules into Gods presence pure. Seth yet suruiues, grieues for his parents losse, Mourns, weeps, laments, at this sad heauy crosse: So he conceiues the Loue of two such friends, From this worlds poynt, vnto hervtmost ends: On euery side of all the Earth and Round, Can hardly well be parareld and found. He sheds salt teares, downe from his cheeks distilling, Plaining his woes, shewing himselfe vnwilling To part with both, stoops downe (oft times) and kisses Their dead pale lips, and from his soule he wishes That his liues blood (deare tender hearted Seth) Had gone before, and but excusd their death. His friends (come in) and brothers, sisters all, Some cheare him vp, others to weeping fall; Euen as we see the case (oft times) our owne, The losse of friends to cast our courage downe, Amate our minds, and makes vs vaile our face, Knowing that we must tread the selfe same trace. Then vp they take their withered bodyes dead, Imbalme them both, and wrap them close in lead
But first with Nitre Orient spices meet, And Mummia, Cedar, fragrant, rich and sweet, They all perfume, and dresse their bodyes cold, Then winde them vp as I (before) haue told, And lay them (seemly) on a Sable Hearse, Sad heauenly sight, a bleeding heart to pierce, To see the Parents of the totall world (Before their eyes) thus vp to nothing curld. Foure of Seths brothers on their shoulders take, The Sable trunke, and so from thence they make Procession like, a solemne sacred way To Caluerie, vpon our Lady day: For as the Church doth euermore begin. Since God heauens crowne for all our sakes did win,
Vpon that day to count the Christian yeare, So some still say he did mans body reare, Out of the dust, iust at that instant howre, The day and time in which himselfe did powre His holy Spirit in the Virgins wombe, And did therein the second Adam tombe▪ And true it is that Adam (fram'd by God) Liu'd yeares compleate, no months nor dayes as od, By which we gather that that very day, They were both buryed wrapt vp cold in clay. The Ceremonies and the sacred Rites, The forme and manner (all my Sences) cites; Which Seth then vsde and holy Henoch pure, Drawes on my Muse (as with a golden lure) To sing the same vnto all future times, In these rude, ragged, harsh, vnpolisht rimes:: But that my course another way must bend, As one that trauells neare his iourneys end, And that my Muse may chance for to be curst, When this shall grow and swell beyond my first. But yet one thing I may not ouer-slip, And leaue the Vales, vp to the Mounts to skip: For certaine tis that euermore the Iew, Hath stedfast held his owne opinion true, And he affirmes the likeliest place of all: This goodly spatious, wide, delitious Ball, Where Adams corpes was by his children laide, Was not ith' mount, as late before I sayd, But in the sweet and dainty pleasant vale Of Hebron plaine, hemd in with such a Rale, And lofty border of braue mounting Trees, With fragrant Flowers to feede the hony Bees:
And all Heauens guifts vpon this holy ground, As search the world the like was neuer found. Here afterwards was Sarahs body layd, Both Abraham and his sonne Isaacke stayd:Gen. 23. 12. 4. 7. 9. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Cha▪ 25. 9. 10. Cha. 35. 29. cha. 50. 13. Rebecca, Iacob, Patriarkes and all Were here inter'd (as in a Brazen wall) And many a Iew wrapt vp within this plaine, That till Doomes day shall neuer rise againe. This is the place that Abraham admired, Which more then gold his very soule desired, And made him purchase on his bended knee, That with his Fathers all his seed might bee. And there remaine vntill the trumpe shall sound, Then rise together from that holy ground, And so mount vp the throane of God aboue, And scale the Heauens vpon the wings of Loue. But yet deere Muse amongst the dead mens graues, With piles of sculs in hollow vaults and caues, Ghast (fearefull) sights, we must no longer stay, But post with speed to some more pleasing way, Though all the Earth be but the sinke of sin, For Adams Race to (tumble) wallowin: Yet is it better euery way beside, With liuing men then with the dead to bide. Shew therefore now what afterwards befell, How most men liu'd, worse then the diuels of hell: In blood, oppression, feud and deadly hate, Base cruelty to wast ech others state, Making no conscience of th' eternall Law, When Adam's dead, that kept yet some in awe: The Father, Mother, Sister Friends and Brother, Like treacherous Wolues deuoure vp one th' other,
Each▪ man cries out, the little ones as fishes, Can scarcely liue to serue the great mens dishes, All sinne abounds from poore to men of worth, Like to a Streame which ouerflowes the Earth,Simile. Or generall deluge from great Neptunes hand, That on a sudden ouerflowes the Land, In such aboundance with that powerfull sway, That nothing now can this maine current stay: But Heauens great Maker of Earths totall frame, If he discend and but behold the same, When least of all the World shall thereof dreame, Then may he Alter, turne their tide and streame. Tis true as then they had no Law beside, The Law of Nature in their Conscience dide, Grauen in their hearts, and stamp't within their mind, By him whose Image in our Soules we find, The sin the lesse yet not to be excuz'd, When God himselfe hath in our Brests infuz'd, Both in our birth succeding infant youth, His holy Spirit to leade vs in all Truth. But yet if God so sharpe a Iudgement tooke, As shall be shew'd heereafter in this Booke, Vpon these men the monsters of their time, Whose haiuous sins vp to the Clouds did clime, What may we thinke of this last Age of ours: Wherein we liue not many dayes nor howres, Yet we exceede the former Ages all, And God to Iudgement ready is to call, The Glasse neere run mans dated Time expired, Doomes fearefull day when all things must befired, Drawes neere at hand Earths candle light doth blinke, When all the World must vnder Iustice sinke;
And giue account of euery action past, This Age of ours it cannot long time last. For now Oppression ouerflowes the Earth, Farre more and worse then in her Infant birth, Fowle Cruelty, Extortion, Enuious Pride, Hypocrisie and smooth fac't sinnes beside, I etting and masking vnder formall Coates, That hard it is to know the Sheepe from Goates, The Puritant which hates the name of Mammon,Act. 2. 44. Is yet content to hold mens goods in common, And all the rest in this my tedious taske, When Time shall serue I hope for to vnmaske, Meane while Romes Wolfe hath entred in our Ile, Deuoured some by Craft, Dissembling, Guile, Base Couetousnesse the monster of our Age, How doth she creepe vpon the Graue and Sage, When Mony swayes, and Charity is cold, What is it not, but some will do for gold? O Plague, O Poyson, hatcht in Hell below, Thy banefull Breath o're all the World doth flow, The Earth it selfe within her bowels pent, Her proper wombe is ript for thee and rent, The (sacred) lap of Thetis cut and slic'st, Aboue the clouds with Belzabub thou fly'st, Thou gnawst the minds of holy men like Mice,Ier. 6. 13 Chap. 3. 10. 2. Pet. 2. 3. Eclus 40, 12. Thy sight doth sting worse then the Cockatrice, How hast thou spoyl'de corrupted in all Ages, The purest minds of greatest Personages? Whose Seruants painted with foule leperous Kibes, Now sell their soules and all they haue for bribes.
Like curst Gehazies base polluted pawes,simile▪ 2. King. 5. 22. 26▪ 27. Which wrong'd his God, and holy Masters lawes, And runs apace to catch into his hands, A little gold to purchase Nabaoths lands, Perchance to hang vpon his gawdy back, When Wife and Children staru'd at home may lack, Or else to spend in drinking drunke and play, 'Mongst beastly Wbores to cast the same away. But God aboue that spyes the inmost thought, Discernes the fact which is in secret wrought, Vpon the top of damn'd Gehazies head, Showres downe his Iudgements as Elisha said, And in an instant all his body o're, From top to toe is pestred with a sore, An Irkesome Scab vpon his skin doth grow, A Leprosie as white as any snow, Nor this alone vnto his body sticks, A mates his mind and seared conscience pricks, But all his kindred best acquainted friends, Forsake him quight and none vnto him sends, And to this day his of-spring and his Race, Are leperous tainted in that cursed case. Father of Lights, and God of Spirits all, Power downe thy Iustice let thy Iudgements fall, Vpon the hairy Scalpes of those that wrest, Dishonestly their Friends or Neighbours beast, Their goods, their Lands, their liuing or their life, Not satisfied, continue still in strife▪ Great God that all the world may see thy good, Taint thou their Issue of-spring and their bloud, These are the Cankars of the common wealth, Base Caterpillars powling best by stealth;
That neuer care so they may haue their will, Mens bloud their liues their state and all to spill: If thy good pleasure sayes my prayers nay, Thy Will be done, Lord fat them for thy day. But holy God, what will become of those, Which in an open publike place shall chose, To giue occasion first to shew their gall, Do call a man both this and that and all, And afterwards shall lye vpon the catch, Their friends estate, into their hands to snatch, By Deedes, Conueyance, Obligations, Bonds, To wring and wrest, to make them sell their Lands, Before such time as any thing is due, To clap vp such with Cerberus his crue, In wofull prison sick to lye and rot, Not once to case, assawge their griefes a iot; And all the while in Equity and Right, There's nothing due but what is got by might, By Wrong, Oppression diuelish traps and guile, And wicked plodding in such actions vile. Lord pardon them, forgiue their great offences, Call once againe, illuminate their sences, Waken their carelesse too secure a slumber, Forget their faults too infinite to number, Let them Restore what they haue wrongly got, Else will those goods consume away and rot, And aye the Infant yet vnborne will cry, For Ʋengeance iust on their posterity. But let not vs (good Lord) O let not vs, Trace out their steps to giue examples thus,
Make vs auoyde to fall into the like, Lest suddenly thy Iudgements do vs strike, With farre more terror on our bodyes knowne, Then euer was vpon Gehezi showne, Or all thy chosen people thou didst make A warning sad for vs (in Time) to take, Besides the losse (eternall) of thy Grace, Where such a one shall neuer see thy face. But chaste Vrania, Soueraigne of my Muse, In whom the Heauens do their best guifts infuse, Why dost thou now thy loue so farre ingage, As to descend downe to our times and Age, Leauing the world that at the first was drownd, To ramble out, beyond thy scope to sound? Damn'd Vice, vnmaske with those that wrest and lurch, And all this while (thus) to forget the Church. Retire againe, and stay not with vs long, Thou maist be blam'd for this thy wholesome song, For 'tis most true one harldly▪ scapes of▪ ten, That hunts the Foxe too neare the Lions den. Auoyde, begone, contend not much with these, For feare perhaps thou dost some men displease, And so incurre some danger on thy selfe, For taxing those which are in loue with pelfe: Come to the Church deare Muse, where last of all Thou Henoch leftst vpon this goodly Ball. There thou art tide; O do not much abound. Take sanctuary in their holy ground: And from these things till time shall serue surcease, Then shalt thou Rest and liue in perfect Peace. Henoch the seuenth from Adams pupillage,Gen. 5. 21. Iud. 14. At sixtie fiue yeares of his manly Age,
Begat a childe whose like was neuer found, From this worlds birth in all her spatious Round, That liu'd to see so many weekes of dayes As this man did, and yet no strength decayes: Methuselah the wonder of his time, Whose age may claime of all the earth the prime, Which liu'd to see with Simeons heart inflam'd, The Arke of Noah before his death all fram'd;Luk. 2. 25. 26. 27. Tipe of that Church which from mount Sion purl'd, When Caesars scepter swayd the Westerne world. Methuselah both ancient, graue and sage, One hundred fourescore and seauen yeares of Age, All chaste doth liue, and then begets a Son, Vpon whose death the world was quite vndon, Lamech the father of that faithfull child, Which sau'd seauens Soules, and all the rest beguild, When that the Arke was by the waters heaued, O then they knew their wits were all deceiued. Great Noahs selfe from Lamechs loynes descended, When full one hundred eightie yeares were ended, And that the Sun had foure times crost the line, Then is he borne, and in his birth did shine, Like to a glimpse of that all sacred light,Simile. Which in these dayes may dazle all our sight: His name fore-tiping from his mothers brest, That he was borne to be the Churches Rest.Ioh 1. 19. Fiue hundred yeares (or neare vpon) he past His manly dayes both continent and chaste, And then espowsed to his future Fame, A Noble, Faire, and courteous, louely Dame,
Some thinke the sister of great▪ Tubal-Caine,Genebrard. in Cron▪ Iew Rab. Sweete Naamah his loue at first did gaine. Though from the Line of cursed Caine descended, Yet of the Heauens she was so highly friended, As that her Lot before the world was drown'd, Fell lucky forth within the Churches ground. Oh God thy workes are farre beyond our reach, The least of them may all our Sences teach: Thou hast thy sheepe disperst in euery place, From Henochs, Seths and Caines proud enuious Race: It is thy pleasure bad mens sins to pay, To saue (some yet) and cast not all away, The Flowres oft times which do mongst Cockle grow, May smell more sweet then any plant we sow. And tender Seeds out from the Popish Seate, May yet at length proue Eares of perfect wheate, Chiefly when Noah Gods husbandman shall till, And worke the ground according to his will, With pruning, planting in that forme and manner, As was the Church once vnder Caesars Banner. So Abraham was out from Chaldee cald,Gen. 12. 28. Chap. 12. 2. Cha▪ 41. 42. 43 44. Iob. 1. Exod. 2. 5. 6. 11. 13. 15. Hest. 2. 17. cha. 7. 6. 10. And Ioseph great in Egypts Court instald: Iob in the land of Vz amongst those men, Where so he liu'd that grieues my soule to pen: And Moses milde amongst the murdring sort, Was nurst, brought vp within king Pharohs Court. Hester the Queene, that made her foes a scorne, Was marryed, (tide) vnto a Pagan borne. And Paul hims:elfth' Apostle of vs all, Yet first was bred within prowd Tarsus wal: And diuers others which my Muse could name, Were traind vp thus, and yet deseru'd no blame.
For he that builds vpon the slippery sand, Yet Time may serue to make his fabricke stand, And these were such as from the rest reculde, The weaker sexe are by the greater rulde, Though some (perhaps) haue tride the same and mist, Yet wise men still do winde them as they list. As by example, from Noahs happy choyce, This world of ours may euer iust reioyce, To haue a mother without blurre or staine, When all were lost to store the Earth againe. But what make wee (deare Muse) with Noahs wife, Chaste Matron, graue preseruer of our life? Whose Fame deserues heauens azurd richest gowne, A garland deckt and Lawrell wreathed Crowne, And in her lap the Frame of all to hold, I fall were made of solid beaten gold, What if she be deriued from the Race, Of cursed Caine, yet hath she better face▪ A Conscience cleane, Religion in her brest, Within whose Soule Heauens dearest guifts do rest, Tipe of the Church now to perfection wrought, Which was at first but out of darknesse brought. Looke backe againe, and post not one too fast, For feare thou beest beyond thy compasse cast: Tell what befell to Adams issue left, What misdemeanours all his ofspring kept, Ech man his neighbor deadly hates and wounds, Sin ouerflowes (in euery place) abounds, The greater still deuouring vp the small, That in the end th' oppressed blood doth call For vengeance iust vnto the God of Powre, Who doth descend, and on the world doth lowre,
Repents himselfe that ere he did begin, To frame the same thus poysoned all with sin, Whose true repentance from his eyes did draw, That streame of teares which wofully they saw, When all the Earth could scarce support, containe The Inundation of his furious raine; But sunke, shranke in, vnder the water diues, As loath to saue the wicked treacherous liues, Of hatefull men that neuer liu'd at Rest, But when they bloud spilt on her (crimson) brest. This was the cause which made the Clouds to drop, Sad sudden showres (downe) from Dame Natures shop, And all the fountaines of the greatest deepe, To be broke vp o're all the Earth to creepe,Gen. 7. 11. Heauens Windowes ope, the ratling Aire to sound, With fearefull stormes like to a Chaos drown'd,simile. Rumbling and tumbling, iumbling all together, As we haue seene in sudden sulphery Weather, Gods voyce to teare (Heauens Curtaine) to our wonder,Psal. 29. 23 Out from a darke black horrid dreadfull thunder. But yet before God doth to Iudgement passe,Esa. 40. 67 simile. 1. pet. 1. 24. psal. 90 56 simile. He meditates, and sees that mans but grasse, Like to a flower that in the morning cut, Is yet ere night with their dead bodies put, Into the Graue, and so consume together, Euen in a Moment changed hither thither, Dride vp to nothing by Heauens altring time, When (yesterday) they flourisht in their prime. God re-ascends, and lets the world alone, Takes Enoch vp that liu'd therein to mone,
Waile, grieue, lament, the abuses which he saw, Committed were against the conscience, law, Of noble Nature in that sinfull age, Small hope to mend when all could not asswage, The furious current of their streame and tide, Too good (sweete Saint) with these foule men to bide. The Angels bright, and all the powers diuine,Enoch taken vp▪ Before thy face in glittring Robes do shine, Their number more then are the stars and sands, With golden Censors in their pure white hands, Winged with Fame to mount the highest Heauens, Ranck 't all in order mustring iust by seauens, Descending sweetely on thy louely Brest, To bring both soule and body to their Rest, By safe conueyance in a Charriot fram'd, Of burnisht gold, the Horse with loue inflam'd; Mount vp the Aire with stately stomack fierce, And at the last the brazen Wall doth pierce: Where like a Prince that Paradise had gain'd, Of Eue and Adam thou art entertain'd, With farre more loue within so braue a field, Then all the World and all therein can yeeld, There thou dost liue when they are wrapt in dust,Gen. 5. 24 Jude 14. The seuenth from them, Tipe of our Sabaoth iust. Now thou art gone what can be heere expected, But Enuy, Hate, with all good deedes neglected, Pride, Cruelty, Extortion, ouer-rules; Making the Earth Vermilion dyde with gules, And sable shewes of foule inueterate spleene, Hatch 't in Hels vaults whose like was neuer seene, Before this time so strongly to abound, And ouerflow the Vniuersall Round,
As that small hope there is at all to mend, Till God to Iustice shall from Heauen descend, And view the world not as he made it first, But as it is poluted, stain'd accurst, Contagious, vile in Caines adulterous race, And ouerspred with all damn'd actions base, When what we should not in our pawes we get, As bad and worse as ere I told you yet. But cease deare Muse for thou at large hast layd, Their sins wide ope and all their spight betray'd, Vnmask 't the Browes of all that wicked Rout, Which diu'd to Hell to bring their plots about, The rest preseru'd I meane those Children deare, That liue in Loue and worshipt God in feare, Whose bloud ascended, Mounted vp the skye, And for iust Vengeance at his Throne did cry. God heares their moane and re-descends againe, And sees that Sin the totall Earth did staine, In stead of Flowers and wholesome pleasing fruite, He finds but Weedes and barbarous actions bruite, The weake poore man still by the greater cast, In far worse case then when he view'd it last; Now Cruelty doth grinde the Infants face, To swallow all with griping proiects base, Corruption, Bribes, the World it selfe doth fill, From Sodoms Vale to Sions sacred Hill, Comes neere the Church to enter in her walls, To fill it full of deadly poysoned galls. But one man liuing on this spacious Round, From Sols first sight till where his teame is drown'd,
In all the Earths large goodly plenteous scope, From Colmogro vnto the Cape of Hope, That God could find to haue an vpright heart, Which from his Loue could not be drawne to start, By ill examples of that froward Race, Which ouerswarm'd (the World) in euery place, With Guile, Oppression, Cruelty and Hate, As in this Worke I told you of but late. Him God selects and (graciously) culs out, From the rude Rabble of that murdring Rout,Gen. 19. 16 24, 25 Psal. 34▪ 6, 7 19. 22 Psal. 83. 35. As in the dayes when Sodom was destroy'd, Iust righteous Lot was not at all annoy'd, But well brought forth by Angels safe and sure, Preserued was from their curst hands impure, The harmelesse man may suffer extreme wrong, Amongst those men that are (perchance) too strong, In Wealth, Friends, Kindred, Combination, Coate, To draw slye oathes to cut the poore mans throate: Yet this may be a comfort to his soule, For all their tricks and treacherous actions foule, Damn'd Pollicies vnto their vtmost might, Although he fall, he shall not perish quight. So art thou iust in all thy works O God, When the World feeles the burden of thy rod, And heauy weight of thy all powerfull hands, The vpright man still (at thy mercy) stands, Although sometimes thou shewst thy hinder part, To let him taste that which his mind thinks tart,Exo. 33. 23 1. Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14. Thes. 4. 6 Esay 26. 16, 17, 18, 19 Yet as thy Word in many places saith, Thou dost but try to proue his vtmost faith, And when (oft-times) his courage failes and sinkes, As brought neere to their dangerous pits and brinkes,
Then dost thou keepe him from their murdring pawer, Base, cruell, curst, deuouring, griping iawes, And full of Loue, compassion, pitty, grace, Vnuailsthy Browes to shew thy glorious Face, (Ah dearest God) euen whilst my Muse was working Vpon this Place, how were my foes all lurking About my house, to vndermine my state, With secret traines, close to my dores and gate. But thou didst wake when I was fast asleepe, To make me know that thou dost alwayes keepe, Thy sheepe from danger of a Wolfe most fierce, Which in my bloud (next to my state) would pierce Then didst thou giue me at that instant howre, A Vision strange to shew thy secret powre, That in a dreame when once my body wak't, My inward thoughts and all my sences shak't; But Reason guides and swayes me downe her streame, To make me prize it boue an vsuall dreame. Whereat I went, lockt vp my dores most sure, To keepe me safe from treacherous pawes impure, Which neuer yet in all my life was done, The hatefull lawes of cruell foes to shun; But (Heauenly God) when least I knew ofharme, How did they then about my house all swarme On euery side, with rauing speeches hot, Like Sodomits about the walls of Lot,Gen. 19. 4, 5, 9, 10, 11. Till thou protectedst broughtst me safely out, From the curst fury of that griping Rout; Stroke them with blindnesse all like Tygers lay; While thou conueydst my body sure away, To sound thy prayse, and blaze thy glorious name, To end (this worke) to thy renowned fame.
So dost thou now to make vs all admire, Thy fauour shewde vnto our reuerent Sire, Descend to Noah the wonder of his Time, When Nemesis vp to thy Throne did clime, To craue iust Vengeance at thy hands for all, The bloud shed, spilt, vpon this spacious Ball, Told him an end of all mens barbarous liues, With the sad fall of their (incestuous) Wines, The cruell Race of monstrous Giants great, That like to Wolues (the flock) did tare and beate, And wound them so, as now not one was left, Besides himselfe, that from his birth had kept: His mind vnspotted (Conscience) cleane and pure, Not tainted, stain'd with euery golden Lure, And euery beast which on the earth doth feede, The fowles of Heauen that in the Aire do breede, With all flesh liuing on this goodly frame, The young and old too tedious heere to name, With those hard hearted which the weake anoyd, Should (by a floud) be all of them destroyd, And that himself would (alter) turne their glasse, Before a hundred twenty yeeres should passe, Those which repented in that time and space, Should respite haue to find his loue and grace, And all the rest within this boundlesse round, Should then be washt, consum'd away and drown'd. God wills him further to prouide in time, Against the Floud that highest Mounts will clime, And frame an Arke for to secure his life, His children deare and tender hearted wife, From the fell furious raging tide, and streames, Of Neptune (proud) that vndermines her seames,
To pierce her Ioynts and lay them open all, When blustring waues vpon her sides do fall:▪Maesia in Asia minor. Bids him go poast to Maesia land with speed, And fell those Pines which now the world did need, whose wondrous height may dazle all our sight, To see them grow two hundred foot vpright Firme from the ground, and to be parted plaine Into the three parts, and then vnite againe. Tipe of that Church, whose ground was layd by Paul, When three make one and one but all in all. So was the Arke diuided into parts, To amaze the minds of true Religious harts: Three stories high the same was fully fram'd, To hold the sorts of creatures wild and tam'd, Made all of Pine, pitcht both without and in, To suckor none that perisht for their sin: And that the rest as God had iust decreed, The Male and Female in the same should breed, To store the world, replenish it againe With fruite more milde then first the earth did staine. The Arke once fram'd according to the forme That God had layd before the furious storme, Fell crosly forth contrary to the minde, Of those great men, which did the weaker grind: They wondred all at this so huge a frame, Derided, scoft, too bitter here to name, And at the last attempted barbarous rude Their hands polluted all with bloud imbrude: To teare it downe and make it but the scorne To all those men hereafter should be borne▪
But God aboue perceiuing that their pride, The totall earth on euery side had dide, With crimson gore and that they ment outright, To spoyle his Worke, deface it vtter quight, Powers down his Iudgements, sends those feareful showers That all the Aire i'th instant thunders lowers, With sable clouds, and sulphery flames of fire. Tearing the Heauens, making the World admire: To see the Earth, the Aire, Fire, Waters all, Flock altogether round about this Ball, Ioyne all as one euen in an instant soone, To stop mans breath sending a night at noone▪ Thatin a Moment all their liues are dround, Their pride much like the Aegyptian army found, That in the Sea vpon the crimson sands, Against Gods sheepe heau'd vp their murdring hands, The Arke protected from their trecherous pawes, Damn'd Enuious fowle base curst deuouring Iawes, Heau'd from the Earth, vpon the Water bides, Secure from hurt, when God her Pilot guides, Triumphant marches, in all stormes it stands, Their vnbeliefe bold impudency brands, With that iust scourge, which if they had repented, All had beene well, his Iudgements staid and stented. Full sixteene hundred complete yeares were ended, And fifty sixe when God in sunder rended, The sable clouds, and made the Waters mount, To drowne the World according to the count, Of all the Hebrewes, glory of the Earth, Whose sacred stories of admired worth, Haue purchast fame, and aye deserued well, Before the rest to beare away the Bell. Heere could I sing th'afflictions, sorrowes, griefe, Vexations, troubles, sundry mischiefes reife:
That dayly hapned to Noahs sacred Arke, Tost too and fro as is a little Barke. Vpon the wings of (enuious) Eols rage. And some good men within this iron Age, The Surges, Waues, vpon her sides all beate, The sturdy Rocks to split, her wombe do threate, The Sands to choake, the stormes to batter downe, As all the Rest so she her selfe to drowne. But still protected by Gods powerfull hands, Against the streame of all these rubs she stands, And on the Waters Waues, foule mischiefes all, She passes through, and viewes this spacious Ball, Vntill at last she chanst her selfe to ease, From the fell fury of the enuious Seas, Vpon the top of that admired Hill,Ararat. Gen. 8. 4. Whose worthy fame the totall Earth doth fill, As more at large shall be described plaine, In my next Booke, when once (my peace) I gaine, Meane time deare Muse, with Noahs sacred Pile, Let vs but stay and rest our selues a while. FINIS.
