19910.5 23936061 26989
PARAPHRASE VPON THE SEAVEN PENTENTIALL PSALMES OF THE KINGLY PROPHET. Translated out of Italian By I. H. Qui eminant in lachrymis in exulta metent. M. DC. XXXV.
TO THE RIGHT HON.BLE FRANCIS BROVVNE VISCOVNT MONTAGVE OF COWDREY. RIGHT HO.BLE TAKE serious notice of this rare Copunct. Heere true Contri∣tion is deciphered in its practise, to the life. See this afflicted with arpe anguishes. & most direfull agone Se this ouercast with darknesse, as trpasses, and in suh plight, as u
horror, now  of comfort to th height. Reade him again, For heere appeareth hee, and most assuredly, through the beni∣gnitie, sweete grace, and boundelesse mercie of The Allmightie, a Man glorified, a Man (though formerly a greiuous sinner) sanc∣tified. Attentiuely then obserue, the curious Theorie, which from him a Patterne may bee well extracted: For it rightlie teacheth what; and of whom is to bee craued aught, and earnestly besought; and when soe it; and how; then what is true felicity; then solid rules as to conseruation of such pos∣sessed dignitie. The Penitentialls of the Kingly Pro∣phet, as they are found by him penned, are by diuers iudged to be parcell difficult, nay each of them abstruse, and hidden. To other some, they make shew indeed, of being oo succinct. Verily therein I doe not mer∣ile muh at the vulgar since that in th
soe sublime mysteries are deliuered, and with such breuitie. Therefore for the better satisfying, and enlightning them to their end: They are heere by Paraphrase layed open both perspicuouslie, & at large: which primarily was compiled, and divulged in the Italian tongue, by a Florentine as well literate, as elegant. I lately (to my power) haue made it English. The learned kinde of Commentators, often giue light vnto their Authors. Too frequently doe Trans∣lators eclipse diuerslie, the genuine meanings of what they wrote. For the most part at least, they are deficiēt in the rendring them, with a curious manner of expression, and eake lustre. I cannot but mise-giue: that I much faile therein. Reallie I misdoubt: that I am too farr out, not nigh alas, the grace, & puritie of his stile soe worthie. Nay that the me appearing vnto mne, will clearely shew y weakenesse. And yet truely it admitteth ot aught of strange to me: since I well
perceiue; that low are my talents: then no lesse that the taske is hard, for any one, though of what soeuer rare endowments, to giue an Author his embellishments. But I will hope that in the version of this Treatise into our owne speach, I haue rendred its true sense. For the rest; I assume confidence in your Honors connivence, at my defects in cloquence: since well its Knowne to me, and many more, that yur right Noble, and sublime spirit, doth cheifely valiew what in reall substance, nay, little, careth it for aught of shadowe, which solely doth conferr, to an attraction of some sort of Readers to attention. And emboldned thus; humblie I ffer vp This Piece vnto your Honors charitable intention, to our Nation. By this, many ay prooe enabled diverslie to perfection: who likly will from hence with much fa∣ciliti vnderstand the matter in hand, an its consequence: and heereby discerne th meanes, and manner how properly, they
may breathe out sighes of inward com∣punction, and send forth words from sincere deuotion, to their vnexpressible releifes; as euen thence to the winning of Deine grace; thence to the obteyning of pardon of their severall delicts; yea and thene euen to the compleate acquisition of Beatifique vision. Syr, I rest Your Honors devoted servant. IOHN HAWKINS.
THE PREFACE. GENTLE READER, TAke in good part my coun∣saile ingenuouslie heerein tendred vnto thee; convert it to thy vse. Contemplate on the subiect following, & that leriouslie. Indeed, it cannot likely bee: but that in soe doeing thou freely vendicate thy selfe, of time it's losle: For verily; there is to bee read the dolefull la∣mentations, and noe lesle; there is shewen through euen most curious shadowes, then conspicuous lights, the heart its comforts of the Kingly Prophet. Thou mayest well appre∣hend, if there vnto thou lend thine eare: that it, though written, may bee
taken, foreuē a Figure, an Embleme, yea rather, a more liuely Image as well of deepe griefe, as also meruai∣lous reliefe. Beholde a true Com∣punct deciphered there. What more? and such an one, as on whom thence shined Devine inspirations: which by him sweetlie received, made him an evected, with that high dignitie, of a Registred, in the booke of sanc∣titie.
Qui seminant in lachrymis in exultatione metent Printed at Paris
THE MEANING OF THE EMBLEME SEE griefe's true modell, In this horrid Caue Is Israel's Prince, as living in his graue. Behold his Harpe that speakes his vvoe: Those streames Not from the Sunne, but immateriall beames. The craggs & pearly drops that from them rise, Seeme to vye grones vvith him, teares vvith hi eyes. His royall ensigne scattre'd on the flore, Seeme forfeite to his Liege Lord; His no more. Herby vvee learne sin's nature: Hence vve knovv Her stings are true her ioyes but ioyes in shovv: Bereft of ioy by sinne, by teares suppli'de, He gaine's true ioy, vvhich pleasing sinne de∣niede.
THE courteous Reader, vpon notice that the Printer of this Treatise vnderstoode no English, will easily pardon what errours he finds against orthographe, the ioy∣ninge of two wordes together, or dis - ioyninge the same word into two, &c. Wherefore I onely desire without puttinge accordinge to cō∣mon course a table of Errata's, that he will please to vnderstand in the 36. page and fift line, the wordes not through the workes of contrition, for∣mally.
HAEc expositio septem Psalmo∣rum poenitentialium, ex Italico in Anglicnum sermonem conuersa, pia & catholica est, nihil habēs fidei, aut bonis moribus aduersum. Datum Duaci 26. Septembris 1635. Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Doct. & Regius, ordinarius{que}, ac primarius Pro∣fessor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri Prae∣positus, Duacensis Vniuersitatis Cancel∣larius, & Librorum censor.
THE PROLOGVE OF THE FIRST PSALME. LOVE taking his stand in the eyes of Bersabe, to giue lawes to gentle and flexible spirits transformed himself, in a glaunce cruelly pi∣teous, and making through-passe to King Dauid, first casting a mist before his eyes, then after breathed into him poison, and in a seeming sweet touch of his senses, had ac∣cesse, yea ingresse to his very bones, and there dispersed his fire. No sooner perceiued be the effect, namely that these were alto∣gether inflamed, but that by a liquid poison, he entred into the whole body of his heart,
and there fixed himselfe, not without his soules affright. For he bowed to this image, which in its first presenting it's obiect, made impression in his breast. Hence the minde of this so great a man, was become slauishly enthrald, and an adorer of a new picture of beauty; so surprised was hee, that forgetting all true iudgmēt ab! w to these kingdomes whose Kings want it) entangled with desire and loue; neither reguarding the Maisty of God almighty, nor his owne state, vnder pretext of scnding Vrias the Hittite, hus∣band of this his Idol to secure victory, gaue him vp a prey to the enimies sword; that he being made away, he migh become husband to the others wfe, vvhom he loued more then God or himselfe; and such his desire obteined, that lasciuious bed enioyed (by vvhose like the vvorld's conceiued notable offence, and heart-burning hath often turned Empires and Kingdomes) Nathan the Prophet deeply vveighed his enormities, yet compassonating him, in plaine termes, laid
before his vnderstāding, his iniustice, asvvell in murder, as also in adultery, contrary to his Maker's commands. The good old man astonished vvith the punishments vvhich Heauen prepared for his sinne, felt asvvell from his soule, heart, as also his senses, his desire, his fire, & his ouer vveaning delight, to for sake him, to departe, to vanish, euen as heate from the limbs, and the heart, in the encounter of ought vvhich maketh it shake for feare, yea miserably tremble; sovvas he taken on the sodaine, so liuely and sprightly vvas his apprehension, that he forth vvith rent from his head, and body his crovvne, & royall purple garment, flung his scepter on the ground, made an exchange of the great height & pride of his dignity, for an humble pnitency, couering againe his euen naked body with sackeloth; the haire of his head, and venerable beard negligently disordered, the one and other white in honor of his age, thinking vvith himselfe that he vvas a sinner, not a King, he seemed in his counte∣nance
euen penitence it self. He tooke to him his Harpe, vvhich instrument euermore offered vp his lamen∣tations, sent from his heart, to the happy blessing of his soule. Moreouer he retired himselfe into an obscure place vnder ground, as it vvere a prison of his sinne. No sooner entred he, but his thoughts vvere further af∣frighted by the darkenes of the caue: He not∣vvithstanding neglecting these horrors, vvithout any delay, tooke deeply, yea and to heart, hovv he ought to doe to appease his God; he humbly kneeled, tooke his instrumēt, aptely placing it to his breast, rarely compo∣sing his countenāce, & erecting it to Heauen (the sorrovvfull sound of his sighes acquie∣ted) touching the strings, and most tenderly, vvith a svveet feruour, deliuered to God these follovving vvords.
THE FIRST PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. Domine, ne in furore. Psalme 6. LORD, since thou giuest leaue to me to pronounce thy name, and that my ton∣gue may call thee my Lord; my heart hence taking an happy coniecture, fauoureth my hope, that it's penitēcy, hath in thy clemency and mercy, where with thou doest comfort those vvho are truely sad for their offences against thee. Hēce I am emboldened, with my voice and teares, in such manner to conjure thee, by thy good∣nes, that thou please not (although thu art incensed against me for my sinnes) to chastise me in thine anger.
O God I feare thee, and repent me from the bottome of my heart that I haue not feared thee, and am fully resolued to feare thee truely; hence behold me not with that wrathfull as∣pect, vvith vvhich thou lookedst on humane kinde, when as the pride of their wickednes thought not onely to equalize, but to trālcēd thy mercy: for which cause thy then present will and command did scatter the clouds through the aie, and did breake the prisons of the winds, laid open the cataracts or sluices of the heauē, tooke dayes light away, confounded all by whales, and shooke it by thunder & lightning, trees crashing by stormes, human kinde rooted out, with all liuing creatures ouerthrowne, beaten downe. Thou did'st not onely drowne the face of the Earth, but the brow of the Alpes, and tops of the mountaines
in like manner: Hence tookest thou away the foule soile, vvherevvith the common and generall vice had sullied, and defiled all the parts of the vniuerse, the most abominable ofspring of the people destroyed, thou did'st in such sort purifie it, as I desire by meanes of my penitency to cleanse, yea purifie my soule: lo as behold me not with the countenance vvherevvith thou lookedst on the re∣bells, in that time vvhen Noah, and the rest were saued in the Ake: but reflect on me be mindefull of me, as thou vvert of him, vvhom thy diuine favour, and singular benignity saued from the dreadfull deluge, and cleare my minde, too too much busied with phantasies, and those yea such most vaine, euen as sometymes thou clea∣redst the heauens troubled by clouds, vvhich lay ouerthwart before the lampe of the vvorld: and let it please
thee to secure me frō the punishmēt, vvhich is euen ready to be inflicted on my sinne: the reflecting on which mooueth in me a quiuering, not vnli∣ke to a twigge in ye water. Let it suffice that I cōfesse my errors, my greiueous offences, the feare which I apprehend of thine anger at the day of Iudgmēt; at vvhich time the teares and sighes of the culpable, of the vvicked, shall haue no more place in thy mercy, nor vvilt thou in their behalfe be further for them, as novv benignely thou art, and thou wilt be for euer and euer, our good, and pious Lord. Lord euen for feare, meditating on thy iudgment, vvhich possesseth me, yea euen all my spirits, keepe back, retaine altogether thy vvord in that direull day. Vouchsafe not onely, not to chastise me, but also not too seuerely inflict on me punihment, conformable to the tenor of thy iust
ire, prouoked by our greiueous faults; vvhich although thou par∣donest vs whilst thou correctest vs for our offēces, make me yet not with∣standing trēble. For the correctiōs of the sinne of makinde, are cōflicts, ba∣nishmēts, plagues, stripes, hūger, wāts, bondage, dishonor, hostility, losse of children, and stings of conscience. Pacifie thine ire good Lord, vvith vvhich my greiueous trespasses haue inflamed thee, for the good that I am ready to worke; & by thy pitty haue mercy on me, for that I, alas! am sick. My very heart is wounded by that selfsame arrovv, vvhich the bow of feare of damnation hath shott at it: my soule bewailing languisheth, for that my infirme body giueth it an inckling, yea as it vvere a notable signe of estrangeing it selfe from it, not ought reguarding the state of my disgrace vvich thee. My senses are not
sensible, my tast hath no tast, mine eyes see not, my sense of feeling doth not apprehēd it's obiect, my smelling doth not distinguish odors, nay smell at all, my hearing heareth not, my infirmity is such, as that it is not con∣tent vvith the help of plants, nor the force of charmes: Earthly physiek cannot be a salue to my sores, in it there is no validity to cure my such heauy suffrances, for thou onely cāst cure them, and if thou composest not remedies for my maladies, I cannot recouer my health, hence lament I, and with the teares which euen come from my heartes veines, I beseech thee my Lord, that thou deigne to heale me fully and compleatly. My senses and my soule, vvhih are in their hot, and cold fitts, promooued by the force and desire vvhich I haue of my not hauing power, and of my willingnes, to be recōcilled to thee, are
full of vaine, empty, idle phantasies, doe dote like one who is besides himselfe, become such by the great affliction, occasioned by his feauer, in so much as he is one while hot not vnlike to fire, another while cold as ice; and the same heate which dryeth, yea parcheth his lips, is found in me, who onelie desire to drinke of the fountaine of thy mercy, which doth more comfort him who drinketh thereof, then doth water prejudice the sick, Alas! my good Lord, grant vnto me that I may moisten my mouth from thy grace and goodnes, for that elswhere is not health for me. I doubt Lord lest I heape offence on offences, by my importunity, being vnworthy to craue thy mercy: but my sinne which pierceth me quite though, in such sort that it hath sea∣ted it selfe in my bones, and marrow, maketh me ouerbold, and indeed as
it were impatient: my bones trou∣bled, notably disquieted, yea wasted through my insupportable griefe, are vnknit, their sinnewes are vntyed: but peraduēture the danger is more grei∣ueous thē the sicknes, for that I being composed of flesh, and sensible of it's suffering, doe feare lest I proue not valiant in the combate, in which if I faile my eternall losse of soule might follow: and vndoubtedly I shall yeild to the force of it's assaults, if so be thou defēd me not vnder the buckler of thy mercy. Lord, my soule is beyond measure troubled so many and such like are the temptations which asseige it. It hath for a receptacle, yea and castle, weake human flesh: the hostile armes of wordly vanities haue conspired, & vsed stratagems against it, and the senses which reanswere to their flat∣teries, corrupted by stately, and most
magnificent sights, by hearing the harmony of flattery, and selfepraise, by sweet and most odoriferous smel∣lings, by tasting the delicacie of meates, and by feeling sensibly volu∣ptuousnes, endeauour to render it a prey to the pleasure of the world: Hence the miserable soule flyeth for refuge to, and vnder the shade of the hope, which it hath in thee, euen as a child vnder the skirt of his mothers garment: The Hart so much feareth not the cruell and mortall bitings of doggs, vvho is euen then ready to be sharply nipt, as my soule feareth my aduersaries vvho inveigle it. Since so it is with me, support it with thy mercy, if not I shall faile, yea euen fall into my irrecouerable and vtter destruction; and though it vvere so, that I cannot at present merit so farre, that thou grant me my petition, how long wilt thou please to deferre thy
such gratious aspect, with which thou doest fill with joy, and blisle the An∣gells. Thou moouest the Heauens, as∣signest bounds to the Elemēts, giuest motion to the Planets, makest the Sunne to shine, giuest light to the Moone, & brightnes to the Starres! Alas! yea and alas! ô Lord, take in thy attentiue consideration, the mise∣ry into which the not hauing known (as I might haue donne through thee) to bridle my proud will, hath brought me to, I say, and the not hauing he∣therto reflected on my selfe knowin∣gly, vvho being composed of earth, must necessarily returne againe to my mother earth, and hence restored to my flesh and bones, for my greater confusion, must appeare before thy Iudgmēt, in the presence of all such, who haue been, vvho are, and vvho (as yet not in being shall hereafter be. Grant vnto me Lord that I may ima∣gin,
but not see that thou forgettest me, for by meanes of such imagina∣tiō I shall learne to put thee in minde of my exigents, my great wants, ex∣treame necessities, as well by fasting as prayer: in seeing here of I might not vnlikely despaire of pardon & mercy, vvhich they finde, vvho though they haue disobayed thee, yet chastise thē∣selues vvith the scourge, working to amendment of life. Looke againe on my soule, my Lord, vvith the selfe same benigne countenance vvith vvhich thou fa∣uourably dost behold him, vvho by long penitence is more worthy then am I poore wretch, and consider it to haue more shame, and confusion, in it's trangresse of thy cōmandements, then in it's feare of eternall banish∣ment and vtter losse, vvhich attend's it for it's foule sinnes. My hearts quel∣ling heauines vvould bee singularly
cheered, if so be that thou wouldst with thy fauorable aspect appease the contestation afflicting it, vvhich pre∣sents to my Phantasie, to my minde, thoughts raised from the day-booke of my sinnes; Surely I shall hence∣forth be more solicitous to serue thee then heretofore I haue been, as hauing been slow, carelesse, and altogether dully sottish. O my Lord, if without all feare and trembling I might call vpon thee, vvould'st thou not vouch∣safe an answere to me? at least should my dayes proue long, vvhich thou lendest me to liue, I should truely hope that sack cloath, teares, sorrow, vvatching, fasting would obtaine, yea vvinneso much in my behalfe, that thy grace vvould shower on me, in such manner that I should be re∣ceiued no otherwile then as they are, vvho through their truely humbling themselues haue returned into thy
grace, their peace so made. My sinnes indeed deserue any whatsoeuer paine may be inuented, yea but it would not be conuenient, it, alas, would be my vtter vndoing that thy benignity should retard it selfe, be slow, ought remisse to shew it selfe vnto me, and that with plentifull mercy on my greiuous offences: which I deny not, I hide not, but if sinne were not, thy clemēcy would not appeare what it is; admitt that there is no clemency, by which way should sinners acknow∣ledge their good God in his mercy? Euen now Lord giue quiet to the soule, which vvith an aduese eye of enemity troubledly gazeth on the body, not vvithout iust cause of of∣fence, for that through it's inordinate appetites, the soule is eun condēned to the euerlasting punishments of Hell; & as for my body which dayly, nightly, incessantly is gnawne and
worne by its consciences affliction, soone vvill fall, soone become ashes, if thou be not to it, it's sustentacle, it's strength, it's full vigour, alas! my my soule dying in such state, vvill goe to a place which I haue horror to name, yea to thinke of. But if I dy my Lord, not being among the dead vvho can call thee to minde, how shall I make mentiō of thee? how shall I call on thy name? on vvhose name neuer any called in vaine, vnprofitably; and most true it is, that there is no comfort so fully consoling the heart, so restoratiue to it, as is the hearing voiced the har∣monious sound thereof. Thy name appeaseth the afflictedst vexations, greifes, and addeth increase of ioy, yea euen to those vvho vvere before in state of comfort: Hence let me not perih vntill I write of the great ver∣tue, the swetnes, the ioy, the povver,
the health vvhich is in it: Let the world heare and vnderstand by my vvords, vvith what cōfident security, vvith vvhat grace, and vvith vvhat abundant felicitie, hee liueth, vvho hath it alv vaies in his mouth. Alas! yet vvhat shall I say of my state, I shall dye the death, I shall make my passage to Hell, and goeing thither, it being not allovved but othervvise decreed, that any there being loue thee, for that thou vvilt not be beloued of such, hovv shall I publish and praise thy infinite good∣nes to them there abiding? vvhich vvho so should attempt to define or circumscribe, he should seeme to prescribe an end to infinity. How shall I being lost, voice forth thy mercie? vvhich through thy goodnes dost please not onelie to helpe & ease, but to aduance, to pre∣ferre vvith great dignitie him vvho
hath been refractorie, yea a hundred yeares, for the contrition of one mo∣ment offered vp. And how can I Lord deliuer vnto the world as a perpetuall memoriall, the benefits conferred by thee, if so I goe from thee banished, exiled, vt∣terly forsaken? Cōserue my life ô Lord that I may publish thy benefits, whereof my being is a part, vvhich thou hast giuē me according to thy similitude, thy likenes, thy heating of my prayers, long and quiet life, the loue of my neighbours, patience in aduersitie, temperance and moderation in pro∣speritie, modestie in daughters, ver∣tue and courage in sonnes, peace and concord, encrease of goodnes, re∣nowne of charitable vvorkes and hope of Paradise. What haue been my endeauours, my greate labours to deplore my
state, to vveepe on it bitterlie, this my body which I carry about vvith me well knoweth, vvhich not withstan∣ding a thousād promises it hath made me, to be continent, to containe it selfe within the limitts of thy law to all purposes, hath not, yea in any one, been ansvverable to it's word. This earnely by me sued vnto, deliuered vnto me vvith greate asseuerations, that in the midst of the spring, it vvould leaue the soft feathers of it's nice couch to confesse by feruent prayers it's foule offēces: but no soo∣ner had it put forth the foote out of bed, but it retired it selfe to it's warme place, so was it giuen ouer to slothe, neither by allurements of the bene∣fits vvhich hence vvould redound frō thee, nor for the threats of the iniu∣ries, wch by so slugging id did to thee, coud I att all thence moue it, nay ra∣ther it remained in such drowsines, as
if neither death nor Hell, had any re∣lation to it. It came to dinner, and supper: I forbad it wine and meate, it cast such a looke on me, as doth a sick man on him vvho taketh from him that vvhich (though vvith preiu∣dice of his health) infinitelie pleaseth him. Strange & harsh seemed it vnto it, to be dispoiled of it's golden, and purple garment, alas! to be cloathed in rude rough cloath, I not giuing attention to the reprehension that by disrobing my selfe, my royall dignity hath checkt me vvith (vvhich for that it obserued it selfe to be adored by men, emblodned it selfe in com∣petencie vvith that of thy eternall Maiestie) haue taught it to valiew at nought it's delights, and these very eyes which were wōt to looke cheer∣fullic, so made liuely by laughter, so soon as they apprehended their objects of delight, haue relinquished
that their liuely spirit, yea now ouer∣flow with teares in this obscure place, for hauing donne, if not so much as they ovve, so much at leastvvise as they can. My pallace is this tombe, this hollow darke place; the place of my rest, is this earth. My meate, the anguish of Compunction; & drink∣ing my teares, I vvill extinguish my appetit's greedines, & the hard earth shall mortifie the tendernes of my bones; and if euer I shall lay downe these my limbes on my bed, I will so vvash it vvith the raine from myne eyes, that being such in it's luke warme moisture, it may not giue time to sleepe, to destroy, and poison me by rest; hence my dreames vvill not ensnare me, enueigle me vnder their deluding maskes, but such like visions, vvhereby I might be shevven revvard, in thy propitious and serene aspect, vvhich they deserue according
to thy stating it, vvho call them∣selues in, into themselues, to ouer∣come themselues. Lord not for feare of thy fury whe∣rewith thou chastisest and inflectest punishments, but of thine anger, wherewith thou correctest, & admo∣nishest mine eyes euen through wee∣ping haue lost their sight, as the day it's light by night's obscuritie, & my eyelids are so soe, as if I vvere buried in a er, & my heart seemeth to rēd in sund r, and my sou'e to be torne; meane space I (whilst I take notice of my miseries) breath forth sighes, & some pslages I haue in deepe quel∣ling thoughts hereon, thate mine eni∣m es still perseuer against me, those of my alke yeares remaine bad, euen as hey wee, they open their hearts to me, I am reallie a hamed of my whte haires, that they haue seduced
me, and vvithdravvn me from thee, euen as the good are enticed from goodnes by the vvicked; and novv hauing found out new snares against my repentance, euermore assemble themselues & make it their discourse, in vvhat manner I am to finish my dayes, taking me yet to be in hold of lasciuiousnes as are they, & I am really troubled at their whisperings, vvhich they buzzein in mine eares. One of them presenteth to mine eyes, the rare image of her vvhose comelie graces, and beautie, on me haue heaped more then many sinnes, another tellth me of her harmo∣nious speech, hovv sweete it vvas; vvhich novv so bitterly reoundeth in mine eares a third sheweth me the Trophees and spoiles vvhich my ar∣mies necessarly will inuest me with; one promiseth my heade a double
Diadē, another my right hād a new scepter: there is not vvāting who will incircle and adorne my neck with a chaine of infinitevaliew; likewise who placeth before me a golden throne, most magnificēt pallaces sumptuous pauements, and other Kingly pōpes: in such manner each one of then vse all art, all subtilties to entrap me, to besott me vvith vaine glorie. I that make a fence impenetrable by their hookes, and eschew the baites of their guiles, their fraudes, by the flouds of teares gushing from mine eyes, stopping mine eares to these Sirens of the world, hope to suppresse them, to confound thē in the greatest height and furie of their assaults, and I likewise hope to be free from their netts, vvhich vvith much craft and most vvily ambushes they haue pit∣ched: yet not by mine owne guifte, mine owne skill, but through the
grace and care that thy bounty hath of him vvho by the scourges of peni∣tency hath brokē his sinnes wilfulnes and obstinacies, vvhich I hold in my hands by meanes of these, to disin∣cumber my selfe of the deceipts of mine aduersaries. And forasmuch as I am become gray-haired continuing in sinne; that I mav recouer my monethes and yeares spent in vaine, I vvill doe like a Traveller vvho ob∣seruing that hee went out of his way in the euening, recouereth his vvay the next day at noone, by the solici∣tude of one houre. And vvhile I touche my faults vvith the torture of a contrite heart, I finde, I know not vvhat, that aduanceth and promoo∣ueth the repentance that doth me good, & represseth the sinnes which endamage me. But now I see them all confounded as it seemeth to me that they attempt to forsake & leaue
me, so troublesome, and hideous seemeth my prayer vnto them. Get yee gonne farre from me, yee wicked flattering enticers, awoide yee, vanish yee out of my sight, yee vvretched counsellors, your incite∣ments, your instigations, haue no place in me, mooue me not ought, for that God hath propitiouslie heard the voice of my vvailings, my deeplie sorrovvfull mournings, take yee no∣tice that his grace is povvred on me, vvhence my spirits sensiblie possesse fullie enioy a nevv comfort. I finde my selfe novv aboue the earth, and earthlie vanities, and am become all spirit, and my soule repriued yea ran∣somed from all feare, into vvhich ca∣lamitie, it's sinne brought it, novv being all cheerefull, seemeth not ought vnlike to one, vvho is cleerlie got of from danger, into vvhich hee
vvas euen as it vvere falling. Novv I finde a full and most compleat re∣couerie, in so much as I begin to breath, as one vvho is arriued to vvhat he long hoped for, my erie bones vvhich not long since languis∣hed, are comforted, nor is my flesh infirme and feeble as it vvas, nor doe I giue anie attention to wickedlie en∣ticing memorialls; novv all displea∣seth me, vvhich before pleased me, I am not (as novv it is vvith me) puft vp vvith ambition, nor am I through the blandishement of flatterie ba∣nished from thee my Lord. From my Lord vvho hath heard my prayer I speake with which I haue dispersed and discharged my sefe of that tormēt, which my misled life had prepared for me, & I haue not onelie appeased both his present displea∣sure, as also his further wrath by my
prayers, but I haue fully extinguished them; and the force of my prayers & acclamations endighted and sent frō my soule, deliuered by the tongue of my heart, haue moued my Lord to pardon fully in an instant all the mis∣demeanors and vvrongs vvhich in the course of so many yeares, without once reflecting on my well being or my vtter losse, I haue donne against him. And his goodnes shall defend me with the weapons of his mercie, the sense ouercom by that reason, which so often it hath carryed on it's triumphant charriot, is now vvith confusion, amazed, and I hope, more I say that vndoubtedly it vvill come to passe, that our Lord vvill make it seruant, yea slaue to my penitencie. At this instant vvithout any further delay, let the vvhole crue, and frau∣dulent swarme of them be ashamed, and let them feele in themselues a
confusion, and folding vp againe the ensignes, vvhich as vanquishers of my liberty they displayed in the prin∣cipall place of my forefront, let them be conuerted and blush at their run course of life, & let them not further glory therein: For the goodnes of my Lord doth well require and deserue, that they lend their eares of vnder∣standing to him, that they returne to him, and vvhen as the frailty of these such, doth sting them, vvhen it im∣portuneth them, and vvhen it vrgeth them, let them arme themselues with patience & reflect on it, nor let them giue themselues ouer to their vaine pleasures, let them glory to become disdeigners of politenes, ouer-nicenes of their scarlet, of their treasure, of their armies, of their Citties, and of their Crownes: for that all the hap∣pines that wee seeme to contemplate on earth, is a certaine kinde of an in∣comprehensible
miserie & all florid beautie of the world may vvell bee cōpared to the flowers of a meadow, vvhich fade, yea dye vvhilst they are thē sprouting forth, in their growing. Againe the vvorld is a cup of Gold curiouslie adorned and enriched by jewells of great estimation, vvhole sight doth allure. And in such sort by it's splendor are mine enimies sur∣prised, that the miserable wretches are not cautelous take no notice of a Serpent vvhich therein is couhed, vvhich therein lurketh, vvich vvith the fire of his eyes enflameth desires, and vvith his vvins mounteth them on high tovvards heauen, and then poisoning them by his breath, re∣ioyceth to see them destroy dn he bottomlesse pitt of Hell. And ther∣fore you the attendants on vice, re∣concile your selues, as I haue donne, lay aside your deceipts and snares,
follow the tracts of my way: nor be disanimated if the wayes be rough, and craggie by which  leade you: whē so you shall arriue to that your iour∣neys end, you will forget your wea∣risomnes, which is of no long conti∣nuance, but short, and you shall exchange it for eternall rest. The end of the first Psalme.
THE SECOND PROLOGVE. WHosoeuer hath seene a sick man immediately after hee hath made truce, and an attone∣ment with the heate and cold (compagnions and symptomes of his disease) and in like manner when his paines hath altogether left him, with which he languished, yea was euen tyred out, contemplateth Dauid the most iust, through the benefit of his prayers: the moisture which hee povvred from his eyes staunched, hee as one marueilously com∣forted made a period to his complaints; and laying aside his harpe for a vvhile, the hor∣ror of his sinne did no more terrifie, affright, lessen aught the hope vvhich hee had in the mercy of his Lord; vvhich vvith threats,
was wont to appall him before, hee resolue d to be vvaile with abundant teares greiueous offences: And now the place of his penitency, seemed the house of deuotion; The Pastor of the Iewes gazing wistly on his eyes, those his eyes bedewed, nay ouerflowne vvith teares, valiewed him worthy of reuerence and ho∣nor, esteeming him to deserue the same ho∣nor, vvhich holy things are vvorthy of, are crovvned vvith. But assoone as hee had taken breath, & taken vnto him more Spi∣rit, more viuacity, more courage, being now free; vvith a sigh from the bottome of his heart, opening his lips, and vvith the har∣morny of the strings, his voice cleared, ta∣king it's height, it's compasse, curiously ap∣plying himselfe to various motions of his fingers vpon the hollovv vvood, in such manner hee earnestly deliuered this vvhich followeth.
THE SECOND PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. Beati quorum remisse sunt. Psalme 32. OBLESSED they vvhose iniquities God pardoneth, leauing the vnpu∣nished, not through the workes of con∣trition, nor other acts hence arising, as austerities, and denying themsel∣ues, although without thē, our finnes acquire not remission, but through the benefit of his grace, vvhose goodnes taketh mercifull notice of a tender mollified heart, & by meanes of his compunction inclineth to hide his sinnes vnder the skirts of his
mercie. Really are they blessed vvho vvell obserue that God doth not pu∣nish them for their faults, for they knowing their desert, through their conceiued feare of not falling into the wrath of our Lord, with bridles vndiscouered by any: retaine, keepe themselues from wickednes, vvhich couertlie they formerlie did put in practise vvith dishonest and effrene concupiscences; vvhence the wrath, the disdeigne which God prepareth against the like, appeareth not, and hence the defects, the greiueous sinnes, vvhich produce not in others ill examples, remaine vnpunished, sheltred; for such like sinners make themselues cautelous by hauing sin∣ned: and with a penitent heart are not seene in the troopes of the wic∣ked. Wicked sinners are they, vvho not onelie in their ill effects & other course of life offed, but doe also sinne
in vaunting that they sinne not at all, yea euen in sinning, that they haue not sinned. And such like ini∣quities, vvhich displease the Maiestie of God, euen to the very shadow of an ill affect, and peruerse will, are punished and discouered in the light of each one, asvvell by the scourge of their losse, as also by the confusion of their shame. From vvhence they are torne and transfixed, as enimies of that vvell liuing, by the labours vvherein one ouercommeth and dis∣cardeth vice; vvhich vvho entertai∣neth is not happy. Happy is the man on whom God imputeth not the delight of sinne, rather looketh on him as one clean∣sed from the filth of the vvorld ha∣uing seuered himselfe a loofe from sinne (euen as a serpent vvho latelie hath cast his old skinne:) and vvith his cleare sight, such as it not dimmed
by any misty foggs cast before it, ta∣keth most singular content to behold his spitit, his minde, the state of his soule, vvhich glittering bright ligh∣teth, yea and stationeth it selfe, as doth a purelie white doue, who ha∣uing set in order, and fully pruned her feathers by the riuers side, com∣forteth her selfe through joy, clap∣ping her wings, that shee hath bathed, purified her selfe: and taking exact notice hereof in good earnest, and fully feruent in his duty, taketh sin∣gular pleasure to see the wayes he walketh in, and of his approach to his God, directing his stepps in a bet∣ter vvay, as light in night's obscuritie directeth one. For that hetherto I haue beene too too silēt not confessing my sinne, I through my selfe am hurt, and I seeme not vnlike to him vvho asha∣med to shew his wounds, findeth
himselfe for is not disclosing them, to be in the state of perishing irrecoue∣rably, vvho vvould haue seene reco∣uerie, perfect health by his laying opē his greife. Alas! vvhat shall I say my Lord? Such is my state, that my bones are grovven aged in vveaknes, haue long been seazed on by infirmi∣tyes; nor can human assistance availe, to an inueterate miserable sicknes: The vndoubted salue for my reco∣uerie is the oyle of thy mercie: which can lenifie, yea cure the fierces and crueltie thereof, allodged in the maine pillers of my body, vvhich boyleth vvith a dangerous, perma∣nent, and lurking heate, vvhich im∣perceptiblie consumeth it. And vvhilst it suffereth, I haue neuer cea∣sed to call out, and that aloud, vvith the voice of a stout man, vvhom fu∣ture losse shaketh not, affrighteth not; notvvithstanding my sinnes
against thee, my lasciuious carriage vvherevvith hatherto I haue offēded thee, not onelie with all my senses, buth vvith all my heart: and herein appeare I not onelike to chickens, who no sooner taught to open their billes, to nourish themselues, to flut∣ter vvith extension of their wings, newlie come from their nest; but that euer after they leaue to take notice of the bird (the hen that bred them) who taught them the vse of meate and wing. Lord, I say that I haue with great earnestnes diuulged to the world my worth, my merit, but not alas my faults against Heauen, it seeming vnto my depraued iudgmēt (I being a King) that I might not onelie giue vvay & consent to sinne, but that thou shouldest in my grea∣test offences, giue way to me, reguard had to my kingly rank, not to my ill and sensuall courses cōtrarie to thine
Honor: which haue been so much maisters of me, that now I may true∣lie say, that for these many yeares I haue beē bōdmā to sensualitie. Nor vvould it euer haue come to passe that I should haue takē notice of my miserie, if thou hadst not caused me to reade the booke, the greate vo∣lume, wherein my trespasses of all vvhich I must giue account to the, are registred. Moreouer for that thou hast night and day laid thy heauy hand on me, willing that I feele of many & those diuers kindes of miseries, vnhap∣pinesses, where with my minde which hath alvvaies led a life with much disquiet, and hath been conturbed with the stormes of perplexed thoughts, is become languide, euen very weary, through the stings of cō∣science, which euen to the midst of my heart, and euen to the inward ca∣binet
of my soule, haue made their through-passe. I haue clearlie made known my defects, and haue them readily to shew at a beck. Behold these my greiueous defects, my enor∣mities, but so as it be without thy wrath whereof I am certaine, for that the teares of mine eyes haue extin∣guished the fire of thy iust disdeigne. And vvhen all is said that can be, am not I the worke of thy hands? am not I like vnto thy likenes? and if it appeare to thee, that I know not how to afflict my selfe, so much as my duty ought, teach me I beseech hee the vvay to punish my selfe, in such sort that in thy sight and the worlds, my faults may be satisfied by my suf∣ferings, not inflicted by thee, but wil∣linglie elected by me. I haue discoured vnto thee all the sinnes vvhich heretofore I hid from the: I, and the feare vvhich I had in
hiding them, vvhilst I doe discouer them vnto thee, is converted into hope to haue remission of them: and coniding in thee, I am like to him who making known his sore gazeth vvistlie on his Phisician, and looking on him passeth of the feare he appre∣hendeh of the violence of his probe, vvith the hope of his cure: and I reioyce exceedinglie, that I abhorre the sinnes, wherewith I was so much taken heretofore, euen as sick men loath meate; And I am ashamed now of that, vvhereof I vvas formerlie proud; for that hence my soule, vvas evidentlie exposed to the danger of it's perdition: and blessed be that in∣stant wherein I vvas first compunct, and sorrovvfull for my sinnes; and I acknovvledg that it proceded from thy goodnes, vvho seeing vs euen lost through our disordinate life, vvith the plenty of thy bounty dost
inspire into vs, vvhat thy vvill would we should doe; and let it please thee that the content I take in denying my selfe may euer be vvith me, and may fully take me vp vvith delight, for if so that I take such liuely, and reall pleasure in the sorrow of my pe∣nitency, as I haue had in the iocun∣dizing mirth of my sinnes, my bles∣sings notvnlikely vvill participate those of the glorious Angells, so shall I be compleatly happy, in that I haue not hidden my iniustice, my wretch∣ednes from thee: and vvhen so that I shalbe receiued in the armes of thy mercy, as are those who beate downe their owne sinnes, I shall see after the teares of my amendement moued through my penitēcy, a happy good exchang with my fore-runne vces. But Lord, whoe imagination can arriue to the thousandth part of thy bounty, and of thy mercy, which
is not comprised, but vvithin it selfe? Loue aboue all loue, inexpressible fulnes, and height of all loue, thou art truely sweet, for aloone as I thought to haue recourse to thee, and to con∣fesse against my selfe all my sinnes, willing tho choose to me austeritie, rather then thy scourge, I onelie ad∣drest my selfe vnto thee vvith my humble prayers for mercy, for that thou more willinglie dost pardō thē punish, thou hast receiued me into thy grace, vvith that feruent charitie, with which the father receiueth into fauour his humbled sonne who him∣selfe abstaineth not euen from teares, in tendernes of heart, hearing his sonne's vvell expressed promises of amendment, of not farther trans∣gressing, and of not straying out of the boundes of obedience. And alas! my heart (the memorie of vvhose impieties thou hast most mercifully
laid aside) is euen vvasted vvith the desire it hath to consume it selfe in the feruour of thy holy name, and it panteth alwayes, it is so inflamed by benefit receiued frō thee, and it selfe, it selfe onelie accuseth, saying, such vvas my vvill, so was I lulled asleepe, euen so did I. And yet what shall I say of this my impiety, vvhich vvith obstinate ingratirude I did put in practise against thee my Lord; mine vvas ve∣ry fortunate. For this cause euery de∣uout person shall pray vvhilst time is granted oportunely. But vvho is hee that could require further, or could craue more of thee, all iust, all worthy through his merits, to the obtaining from thee what fauour soeuer? since that the wretchednes of my heart, masked, soyled a while since with the wicked conceites vvhich haue se∣duced it from thy knowledg, hath
great neede that they vvho are neere thee, thy beloued vvho haue interest, priuiledg of moving thee to pardon whom soeuer they interceede for, offer vp their prayers for me, for me who hetherto as mine owne enimie, haue not weighed my state, nor haue had vvill to pray for my selfe. Howbeit I am comforted in the joy I take of hauing through my a∣mendmēt mollified my stubbornes, although not speedily, at least not so late that thou for this vvilt not par∣don me, and that thou canst not re∣ceiue me, as thy wont is to take into thy fauour and grace, those penitents vvho repent in time: from hence followeth it, that they vvho shall prove slovv to repent, and to poure forth floods of teares from their eyes, hauing not demurred ought to en∣tertaine sinne, shall not approach thee: for that thou vvilt not further
heare theire lamentations, thou wilt not take notice of their fastings, not regarding farther their too late com∣punction, wilt giue them to vnder∣stand in vvhat manner God can be moued to vvrath vvith men, vvho vvilfully vvill professe though their disloyalty, and perfidiousnes that hee commiserateth not those their prayers, those their teares vvhich the lingring and not entring into them∣selues, and vvarily bethinking them∣selues of timely amendment causeth their acts either from their eyes or voice in vaine, of no force to them, yea euen too late. But thou vvho solely art my re∣fuge, and the end and full scope of my hopes, and my onely comfort in tribulation, vvhich hetherto hath compassed me about, held me fast, & bound me in such sort, euen as the Feare of death seizeth on one, vvho
seeth himselfe arriued to the vtter∣most point of his exeution: make me now at length all cheerefull with the incomprehensible joy vvhich maketh it's passe through the breast ouerflovvn, ouercome vvith com∣fort, issuing from their hearts and soules vvho vnexpectedly, yea and without all hope are freed frō bonds and fetters, from prison, from tor∣tures, vvhich their enimies haue long time inflicted on them, vvho perle∣ver to deride, to scorne them, the snares and prisōs of their aduersaries being broken, euen as mine enimies deride my vvell-being, my lafety, in my hauing made my recourse to thee, vvho solely canst in a moment not onely free me from them, but acquit me and saue me from danger of their strong assaults, vvhich they haue made with the blandishment of vaine delights, on my wauering
and fond desire vvhich maketh euen bitter all those svveets vvhich it gaue me to drinke of in the cup of volup∣tuousnes. Me think's euer more I see, ty admirable countenance, vvih fauourable motion to cast a glimpe on me the stormes of Heauen, of Earth, & of the Sea appeased, to light, and leate it selfe on me; and so pla∣cing it selfe it seemeth vnto me that I heare deliuered from thee to me, & vvith such more then most harmo∣nious accents, vvhich not destroying me, yet ouercome me vvith delight: I vvill giue thee such like vnderstan∣ding, as I giue to those who are good, vvho deserve to vnderstand hovv immense, and vvhat is the renovvn vvhich hee gaineth in my gloy, who learneth first, vvho prefereth the pleasing of me, before my displea∣sure. Lord yet not vvithstanding I see a vvay shevved me by thy goodnes,
vvhich I am to obserue, to follow, and to trace to thee, hence is it that mine eyes alwaies looke on thine, as Pilots on the tvvo starres, vvhich in the passing the dangers of Seas, are their guides. Ovvhat repose will that bee, vvherevvith I shalbe made hap∣py so soone as I shall haue vvalked the vvay vvhich thou wilt direct me in as a Pilgrim, who lost the way, which leadeth each one to the place where thou keepest, where thou liuest. Alas! a while since my footing was in a wood, a desert, where they stray who loue the world more then God: and I had lost my selfe in the world's labyrinth, had I not conuerted my selfe to my Lord, from my him cra∣ning inuctions by what path, by what valley I should walke; now in thy seruice, and to my singular bene∣fit, I walke in those wayes taught me by thee; alwaies thanking, alwaies
piaising thee: otherwise I should be vnjust to him, vvho giuing me my being in the world, hath made me di∣stinct from brute beasts, and hauing made me man, hath placed me in a farre higher degree then are any of them, and I hauing been hetherto scarce sensible hereof, yet hath hee giuen to me such lenght of life, and so much illumination, that I hope in regard of the repentance of my for∣mer sinnes, and for the punishment I will inflict on my selfe hereafter, that I shall come to be enrolled in the lyst of his seruants. Bee yee like the ackowledgers of the benefits receiued from the boun∣tifull hands of God, & for this forme which wee haue answerable to his si∣militude, let vs giue all thankes, en∣deauoring, to the height and full ex∣tent of our power, not to resemble in ought the horse, or the mule, in whō
is no distinct perceiuance, no vnder∣standing; and for that through the defect of their natures, they are vn∣thankfull, rather (I should say) re∣turne no voluntary seruice, no prōpt and ready vvill, and duety, for bene∣fits receued; it is before expedient, yea most necessary to tye thm vp, to courb them vvh rough naffle, vvith headstall and reines, to the end that they bite not, and that they kick not, that they hurt nt their masters, who vuallv punish their resty tricks vvith rough and smarty cudgellings: thus handled they are restrayned & courbed, in despight of their ill con∣dition, alvvell of heeles as of biings, euen as vvee are, who ffend our Lord, by our maledictions, our trās∣gressions, and by our perdious stub∣bornes, yea stony hardnes of heart, asoone as hee smiteth vs with crosses vvith feares, with dstructions, with
deepe Melancholies, & vvith being more infortunate from day to day, from ill state to vvorse, making our treasures of no benefit, no profit to vs, nor our ranks, our seruants, our delights, as also the glory of them, who are the proud fauourers of the world, not without the great offence to Heauen. Euen as the Starres, the sands of the Sea, and the leaues, are vvithout the compasse of number, so are the punishmēts innumerable to sinners. In the tread of a foote, in the mouing of a hand, in the very straining to ex∣pectorate from the lungs ought, in sleepe, in meate, in walking, in stan∣ding still, thee is danger ready at hand to encounter vvith for any one to stumble at; who so failes in puni∣shing himselfe, and the affliction, the mortifying the body, & the sorow, yea languishing of heart, and the
earnest attention of the minde, fore∣teller of it's ill, neuer cease to molest him vvho liueth in sinne. But they vvho confide in our Lord, vvhose bountifull goodnes is a spring euer florishing, euer floridly greene to the leauy branches of our hopes, are en∣vironed, fully endowed, plentifully enlarged, by his mercy and gratious benefits, and his benignities are al∣vvaies vvatchfull, tenderly solicitous on their necessities, their vrgent and pressing vvants: and whether they sleepe or wake, yet doth his fauour accompany them, to their conserua∣tion, be it vvhatsoeuer they doe, the benignity of our Lord is clearly shewen on them, vvho conserueth them in trāquilitie, in peace, in ouer∣flowing most-abundant herts com∣fort, they being such vvho keepe themselues in the loue of God, vvho is the onelie comfort, the onelie free
distributer of the hearts consolation of those, vvho vnderualiew, yea vilifie all vainelie esteemed happines in cō∣parison of his seruice. Reioyce yee in our Lord, let your hearts consolation adde lustre, make serene and cheerefull your counte∣nance. O to yee doe I addesse my speech, vvho euermore walke in the right vvay, in the vvell directed path, and vvith vpright heart, looke on those heauenlie lights, those his eyes: and liue vvithout furious otrages, vvithout enuy, and vvithout fraudu∣lency, vvhose life is prolonged by him, vvho is infinitelie pleased with such perfections of the good and the vertuous, and no lesse is appaied and rejoyceth at the iust punishment of the vvicked. And yee each one of true and sincere heart, glorie in that yee are iust, and that you feare our Lord more then correctiō, yea death
it selfe, for the sweat, the intensiue paines, of your seruice tendred to God, is of more worth, then the quiet possession, & full enioying of all the free Monarchicall Kingdomes, and Empires of the Vniuerse. But I pray what comfort, what hearts delight∣full rapture may that bee said to bee, wherewith they are possessed, nay therein dissolued, and seasoned, yea vvholy fermēted with: vvho to obey the soule, to serue it, to giue it it's sa∣tisfaction, alvvayes and incessantlie displease, yea totally, and euermore abridge the bodie's inclination and vvill? It cannot be esteemed a litle while, for the revvard which wel∣doing hath from God cānot be mea∣sured by the capacitie of humane imagination, and euermore vvhen vvee exalt our spirits vvith joy, vvith vvhich our heart abūdeth, so soone as it is purified, & gratiouslie looked on
by God's illumination, vvee doe not onelie participate of the joy of the heauenlie troopes, of the heauenly Army, but of that very selfe ame in expressible ioy, vvhich is in the countenance of our Lod vvhilst he beholdeth the sonnes of men truy feruent to their procuring, and vvin∣ning of grace. The end of the Second Psalme.
THE THIRD PROLOGVE. NO sooner had David harmoniously & with great feruour breathed forth the aboue writte words, but that for a time he imposed deepe silence to his voice, and in this his holy sup∣presson of his speech his silence seemed as if it enterchanged discourse vvith the dungeon, or grott, vvherein hee vvas inclosed and namely of the peace which hee had made vvith God, and he euen as a bondman, vvho perceiueth in the eyes of him, to whom hee is slaue the forgiuenes of his fault, vvherein hee transgressed formerly; hee povvred forth some teares, vvhich ouer∣flovving ioy, through the merit of his peni∣tency swetely extracted from his heart.
Here might you vvith astonishment behold a strang spectacle, for he seemed in one pos∣ture, in one scituation, as well vvith his hands devoutly lifted vp to Heauen, as also his eyes; the figure, the statue of an old man (to vvhom nothing more could be added to delineate reuerence and fulnes of honor) cut in stone, vvhich by art is made seeme to breath, and vveepe, expressing most inten∣siue greife. In the meane time vvhile hee was in this rapture; a ray of the sūne which neuer goeth dovvne penetrated the Caue, and vvith such a splendor enlightned it, that it made the place delightfully cheerefull, euen as Aprill doth it's spring, and faire vveather the aire: and glimpsing on the strings of his Harpe, vvhich he bad placed to his breast, made them send forth irradia∣tions, glistering beames, in like manner as doth pure gold, exquisitely burnish't, by vvhose splendor the light begetteth light, and his eyes strucken vvith the lampe, his soule hence felt comfort, yea as vve may
say, it was oueriored, for that his Royall heart in an extay, rapt infulnes of piety, deuotion, and fuent zeale, was now more inflamd with the loue of God, then was he erst with the fond and wretched loue of Bersabe Hence fully possest with a cer∣taine hope of his safety, setling his right knee vpon the ground, his left foote on the , his boay inclining to the left side, his instument well tuned (euen as it often happeneth with one vvho delightth, and pleaseth himselfe vvith diuers a crds) hee meditateth in the meane vvhile, and wistly loketh o the record of his memory to finde vvhat hee vvould sing, vvhich at the present hee hath forgott; clearing his voice, remembring himselfe againe, lovvly sang thus.
THE THIRD PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. Domine, ne in furore. Psalme 37. OH! alas! as I haue besought thee, and euen as vvith all humble petition, I doe novv againe, earnestly craue of thee, that thou rebuke me not in thne anger, vvhich euermore is eter∣nall damnation to the vvicked, for it will import Hellvnto them Ah! farre be it othervvise vvith thee, that thy mercie looke on my teares, my plaintes, my hearts deepe greife, with alike disdaine, vvith vvhich the selfe same mercy will looke on them with
scorne and derision, vvho gaue not foode to thy hunger, nor vvater to thy thirst, nor cloathes to thy vn∣cloathed nakednes, nor visited thee sick, nor lodged thee a stranger, thee a Pilgrim; nor releiued thee a prisoner, nor gaue any comfort to thee com∣fortles, and afflicted. But let all thine anger conuert it selfe into thy mercy; what say I? I firmely ackowledg that thou vvert alvvaies, that thou novv art, and euer wilt be, mercifull; and that which they giue to thee as attri∣butes of anger, is no other then a punctuall and an exact iustice in all respects prescribed, fore-determi∣ned, so destined by the infinity of thy goodnes, for their punishments who first dye, and then repent. My Lord I ought to haue satisfied thy seruants hunger vvith foode, vvith drinke their thirst; I should haue supplyed their wants, releiued their sufferāces,
asvvell in cold, in vveakenesses, in want of repose, in imprisonings, as also in all their aduersities and tribu∣lations, and reflecting that I haue not donne herein my duty, I finde my selfe euen to the quie vvonnded by the compunction of my peni∣tency, and by the feare that I haue deeply conceiued, to be swallowed vp, into the whirle poole of the bot∣tomelesse pitt of Hell; and since such is my hearts greife for my transgres∣sions, accept me a penitent, let my complaints, and my distressed la∣mentable moane makings, make me worthy of pardon; & let it neuer come to passe, that I feele what is that anger which our sinnes in offending thee, operate in thee. Hence thou pu∣nishest vs with thy scourges, for that vve doe not chastise our selues, vvith our owne inflictions, in such sort as I correct my selfe euen now, who am
not vnlike to such a bondmon, to such a slaue whose trangressions haue disquieted his maisters minde, yea farre aversed it from him, who being in such state, in such disgrace, redou∣bling aswell with humble sorrow, as also his solicitously attentiue seruice, vvith all earnestnes commandeth, yea euen forcibly compelleth him∣selfe to vvorke in such sort that he may procure to himselfe a selfe for∣getfulnes of his passed offences through the goodnes of his euen thē painfull solicitous and faithfull ser∣uice, by which hee striueth to winne in him hope of himselfe to proue a singular good seruant in time en∣sueing. For that thy darts, for that thy disdeignes, and thy affrights, which terrifie, vvhich amate one as light∣ning (for these haue the rayes, the sprightly beames, of fire, of sword,
of sicknes, of dearth, of hearts-greife, of death) haue deeply struck me; I haue raised my selfe through their scourges, from the miserable sinck of sinne, euen as a horse plunged in a durty heauy bogge, is by the shar∣pe incitements of spurres released & fully acquited thereof: And knowing that the calamities thou inflictest on man kinde, is for that thou vvouldst it should learne, to forsake sinne, to returne to better, to liue vvell. I am fully resolued that the seeming sha∣dovved beautie of pleasure, (vvhich dureth much lesse, is more momen∣tary then is the continuance of a gentle and spetious flower) (a rose it selfe) shall not depiue me the win∣ning the possession of that eternall blessing, that eternall reall good, which he enjoyeth euerlastingly, who taketh the course, and hence well ap∣prehendeth the vvay, yea feareth and
loueth God, whose mercie is of so great extent, as euen the sinner could wish it to be. Hence the hope that reuiueth me, deepely meditating on thee my Lord, doth take vigour, and hopeth (though I am burthened with sinne,) to acquire through meanes of contrition, eternall beatitude, vvhich all those soules attaine to, vvhich feruentlie desire to be invested there∣vvith: and I confesse thy darts, thy thunderbolts, sensible warnings to me haue been the meanes to stirre me vp to contrition: and that thou hast pleased to lay thy hands on me, as the good Surgeon doth on the sick, I am beyond measure com∣forted; for I haue the same need vvhich hath a body vvhose vvounds haue not been for three dayes conti∣nuance opened, the emplaisters of the first day as yet there remayning. Alas! in what state am I, there is
not the least portion of health in my bodie, and for that, it remaines onely in thee to cure me, I am bold to haue recourse to thy goodnes, and from thee doe I onelie expect my health, which will so consolate me, as day is made happie by the Sun: and to declare my selfe yet farther, my infir∣mities are not to be enstyled nau∣seousnes, or loathing of foode, they are not feuers, are not paine of spleene, but in summe there is not in me any health, I am all ouer distem∣pered, yea sick to the death. How so? Ah! sinne vvhich euen breketh my heart, hath euen thus depriued me, brought me vnto this state; and through the feare vvhich my consi∣derations of thine anger draweth on me, I lāguish no otherwise then a mā whom human remedies cannot a∣vaile, and for that my bones are , vvhich are sustentacles to my
body, euen as are the mightie co∣lumnes, the great pillers to Theaters (ah! poore wretch that I am) so farre is it that I am at quiet, that euen as yet y feare, that I am not reconciled to thee, I am afraid to fall into the pit of Hell, through my transgressi∣ons, the vnspeakable monstruslie-he adlong peruersenes of vvhich doeth euen call on themselues thy justice, thine anger, thine implacble wrath. For that all mine iniquities, and all the occurrents, the causes, vvhich haue induced me to transgresse thy lavves, are on my head, alvvaies threatning to hurt it, and vtterly to spoile it, I am reduced to such an exi∣gent, as that I cannot lift vp my de∣iected face to Heauen, and by hovv much the more I endeauour to lift it vp, by so much more doth it incline downeward: and those things are wrought by my sinnes, vvhich euen∣ly
heauy on my head, as if thy vvere an immoueable lumpy vveight, in so much as I yeild, and bovv vnder the burthen, euen as a bovv drawne by a strong arme; and for that there is no vveight, vvhich equalizeth the heauines of sinne, to vvhich gold and lead must in vveight giue place, in me there is left no health, nor strength: for vnder the heape of my heauy sinnes, my faculties and my strength is euen spent vvith vveary somnes, euen as a Pilgrim through the long vvay and roughnes of his iourney, is enfeebled, vvorne out, and in such sorte vveake through the tediousnes of his trauaile. The scarres which on my liuing body are found, testimonies of the vvoundes vvhich sinne inflicted on me, reliques of my foule offences are putrified a new, euen as vlcers to soone skinned, and hence it comes,
for that my contrition, my truely hearts deepe sorrow, vvhich I make my buckler against it's blowes, hath not bin able so to defend me, as that I doe not feare that my vvounds wilbe opened againe, vvhich through volu∣ptuousnes I drew vpon me: and that vvhich doth greiue me more, and whih vvith more inwad sorrovv doth contristate me, is that their cor∣ruption is so putrified, so extremely rotten, that none but good & patiēt men can endure me: But alas! for my offence to Heauen, my Lord is hidden from me. Ah! the corruption of this my soule, doth moue his dis∣pleasure, vvhich hee gaue me vnspot∣ted, nor doe I wretch accuse my frail∣ty, nor any ocasion whatsoeuer pre∣sented to me, but I lay iustly all my ouerweening indiscretion and folly, vvhich hath giuen it selfe ouer to be led by the snares of the vvorld; yea
euen to making it selfe a prisoner of sinne, vvhose flatteries, vvhose allu∣remēts, doe entice me in such māner, that I am not aware of the danger that the putrefactiō which breaketh forth of my vvounds do dravve on me, vvhich my vaine ottishnes, mixt with madnes, hath opened againe vvith late trespasses. In the opening of my searres I haue clearlie discerned te milerie into vvhich my not sereing God hath brought me, the prde of my minde (raised on the vvings of vvorldlie fe∣licitie, vvordlie delight, in so much as I seemed to be full possessor, full Lord of all worldlie contents is now come dovvne, stoopeth, is become lovvlv hūble, euen as trees brāches sprouting out boldlie heauen-ward, are wrought downe, are made lower, vvhē the Sheepheard vvill bēd them dovvnevvard; and I being become
euen crooked vnder the vveight of the pleasures of my losse, will leaue to stoope vnder the heauy burthen of hearts-greife, for my saluation, euen to my liues end, and the deepe con∣ceiued melancholie vvhich I tooke to my selfe of my trespas (vvhence all the day I vvalked in such a man∣ner heauilie sadde, vvith much vn∣quietnes, as doth hee vvho is afflic∣ted, yea torne to peece vvith the stings of conscience, which are more fierce, more cruellie sharpe, then are the torments of the strapado, of the gallovves and scourges) for that it was the motion, the instigation to make me remember my selfe, let it be vnto me conuerted, turned into fulnes of joy: for I am determined to arme my reason with the teares of penitencie, and I am sure that it vvill ouercome vvith them the pride of sense, vvhich more feareth the sha∣dovv
of correction, then doth the braue Coursier the rod. But since that my loines are fraught vvith illusions, for that my soule is environed vvith reflections vpon the vanities, of vanities, vvhe∣re with it is possessed, in vvhich it is so much ouervveeningly enthraled, I may vvell say that I enioy no health, that I am vveake and feeble ineede: that in my limbs there is no soūdnes: the faculties of my senses are cleane lost, my hands, mine eyes, mine eares, my mouth, and my nose, are depri∣ued of their due operations: brieflie all the faculties which God hath giuē me, as guifts of his bountie, I finde corrupted, to haue lost their validity; and to the end that I should knovv him onelie, and my health onelie, from which I shall alwaies be farther and farther of, for that I haue been estranged from my Lord (vntill tht
I framed my selfe to lay open my sinnes in song vvith teares) if I doe not mortifie my selfe in the afflictiōs of penitency. I haue afflicted my selfe, and humbled my selfe exceedingly, vvith teares sent from the bottome of my heart, for that reflecting on thee, I euidently savv mine offences, the knowledg of which hath turned my felicities, into miseries, & hath made humble my pride, and hath mollified the hardnes of my heart, and by the vvaies of trueth, and sincerity, hath purified all my senses vvhich vvere coupted, neuer resting but in the mansions of goodnes, nor want I ought but the fortitude and constan∣cy, vvhich commeth from thee and from thy largesse, together vvith that veue, vvhich thou giuest for guide to all thē vvho earnestly craue it of thee; as now doe I, vvith all my
faculties, vvhich abandon occasions, and grounds, & all leading subiects to sinne, vverefore let not thy aide be vvanting to me, or in ought remisse. I know surely, most vndoutedly, that thou art more clement then I am vn∣iust, and no lesse know I, that thou vvilt be more commiserable to me, then I haue been wretchedly cruell against thee; and blessed were Dauid if he could frame his petitions, craue his pardon, proportionable to the extent of vvhat thou canst grant, cāst forgiue: and thrice happy shall I be if so that I be patiēt in the bewailing my sinne, ansvvereably to thy lon∣ganimitie and patient suffering of me a greiueous sinner. O my gratious good Lord, before thee, apparant to thee, (who through the foggie mistie darkenes seest that which to any other eye is impossible to be seene; and whoe eyes through-passe
the inmost Cabinets of hearts, as the Sunne penetrateth pure chris∣tall) all my desire is trāsferred; which not hauing other voice then it, which is euen ouerflowne vvith teares, can∣not duelie, and as it ought expresse all my trespasses, all that I vvould it should And therefore it is hence dis∣patched as a messenger from me to the sight and throne of thy Majestie, carying vvith it engrauen in the blank of my heart, what my prayers cannot deliuer, so is it that my disa∣bilitie by vvordes to performe so much, as from my soule I desire the selfe same vvords not vocally brea∣thed forth, remaine insculpt in it, through the true feruour of my con∣trition, ah! looke on my vvillingnes, which hath taken it's seate in my heart, and thou shalt cleely reade the purpose, the resolutiō, it's minde
hath made, to enroll it selfe vnder thy banners, to bee thy soldier, to fight thy fight, vvith a more then most determinate vvill neuer to di∣sobey thy discipline (glorious Lea∣der) neuer to sinne against thee. Ah! poore vvretch that I am! my eyes vveepe, yet distill they such small drops, that they are not suffi∣cient to extinguish the fire which my ardent desire is taken vvith of cra∣uing, yea impetrating of thee mercy: and to account my teares of weight enough to ouerpoise my sinnes in scale of iustice, my new faults would weigh down, transcend my amend∣ment, so farre, as greater is the omni∣potent power of God, thē the (alas!) weake strēgth, weake power of terre∣striall Kings: but it sufficeth me that I am penitent, & thē my Lord behold with vvhat will, with what true and
zealous resignation my heart is all ouerflowne, (as vvas the world in it's deluge) by invisible teares vvhich are evident to thee, vvho knowest vvhen it weepeth, vvhen it is aggrei∣ued, and vvhen it reioyceth, more valuing one teae, and the least sadnes of it, then a thousand from the eyes. My heart whose teares haue ap∣paied thee (as one vvho is good, is satisfied by the candid and sincere meaning of any one) is troubled, cō∣tristated, for that the faculties and the strength, columnes, pillars of my soule, haue abandoned me, haue vtterly forsaken me, and I am mise∣rably shaken vvith feare of my de∣struction, and vtter losse, since that I finde, I am depriued of such susten∣tacles, such maine supporters. Ah! hereon speake vvho vvill sensibly de∣liuer their mindes, vvho I say vvill,
who is hee and vvho would not feare to be depriued of such like associates, such companions? Fottitude, and the vertue, & faculties of the minde, are the weapons wherewith the fal∣laces, the enticements, and snares of the world are ouercome and brought to nought; herewith the aduersaries of all good (I meane by aduersaries, the Deuill, and his fiends) are troden vnder foote, and vvere it not that my soule euen assured it selfe, and were confident in our Lord, I should be a thousand times more heauy, sad, lumpish, then is the Pilgrim in the verie midst of a vvood, where no path appeareth; but I take courage and full vigour, for my soule is come to another state, then erst it vvas, it is euen ouer ioyed for that my eyes obey me now, no vanities take them vp, their light is estranged from vo∣luptuousnes, in so much as now, hap∣pilie
it is with me, I see not, or at least take no notice of the poisoned baites, masked with delicate and well tasted Manna, which formerly allured me, possessed me by mine eyes; the raies of others beauties doe not now asto∣nish, do not now as vnproportiona∣ble obiects dimme my sight, vvhich might vvell be termed, the nets and entangling birdlime of soules: I take no pleasure but in my sorrovv, and my God, for I take no notice, I take no delight in the liuelie green of the boughes of trees, nor in the flowers of the meadowes, nor of the pleasant currant of a cleare faire riuer, I as litle reguard the luster of gold, or spar∣kling gleaūces, glitterings of gēmes, rare jevvells: nor doth the sight, the ouer-glorious splendor of solemni∣ties touch me ought, I gaze not on the worlds carriage, be it neuer so miniard, so in times liking, in fashion
howsoeuer, for that my contrition for my sinne, and the many anxieties in the vvay of vvinning grace and pardon through penitencie, haue so fullie entertained my eyes vvith the vaile of repentāce, that I am to them happilie blinde. Whilst my soule, my gratious Lord, doth rise against sense, doth maister it, that so it is, I take and receiue it from thy light, and by thy raies, thy irradiations, thy beames my Lord, hereby I rise againe, I am releiued euen as a flower (hanging it's head by nights cold drooping; and farther so stated by the heauines of the dew, at the sunn's shining on it) is succou∣red, raised vp, held vp, by thy pro∣uidence, by thy vertue, in such māner doe thy commands sound in my tongue, such force haue they on me, and allies to my losse, to my great vvrong haue applyed their ill endea∣uours
against me, yea and to hurt me notablie they haue dōne their vtter∣most; but these following words of thine doe I interprete and deliuer vvith the spirit of prophecie vvhich thou hast endowed me vvith, for I seeme to see euen novv the troopes of thy favourites, of those on whom thou hast euen accumulated, & plen∣tifullie heaped graces & most aboū∣dant benefits, armed vvith svvord, & fire to assaile thee vnthankfullie, re∣turning for thy most pious, tender, & most iust helpes assistances, graces, rare vvorkes nought but pure ingra∣titude, nor seeme they moued other∣vvise to reguard thee, to appeare be∣fore thee, but to interpose a veile of their ignorance, to the alseing eyes of thy truth, vvhich shall appeare, shall spring forth, rise againe in the punishments, prosecution of their iniquities; euen as the Hydra's heads
cut of, appeare: and the same trueth is made a lookin-glosse of men to contemplate. Woe! yea all woe! to those transgressors who in God shall see, contemplate, behold clearly the full expression and liuely image of their harshnes, their crueltie, and of the perfidiousnes of their hearts; and blessed is hee that euer hee had being vvho shall see in the truely represen∣ting glasse, the faithfull loyaltie of his beliefe and confidence in our Lord. Yet farther continueth Gods word by my voices deliuery, and hee hath deigned that myeares, heare hesoūds of his accents prompting me as fol∣loweth. They vvho vvere nigh haue eslonged themselues, are gonne farre from me, and vvith all speede possi∣blie, euen as a stone from a sling, is flung farre from him who flingeth it, hence shevving vnto me, vvhat the
world is, that they vvere not my friends, although they kindled the lampes and burnt incense, vpon the holie altar; their hearts are not true, sound, and feruentlie zealous, they are not vvhere they are; as euidentlie appeareth, as may be clearly demons∣trated: for that their speech seemeth to honor me, but with an ill mean∣ing, ofsuch like friends as they are, whose hearts fly from me, as smoke from the vvinde, & to make appeare their farther wretchednes, their grea∣ter perfidiousnes, vvhilst I taught thē vvhat is trueth, they fullie endeauou∣red by docttines of men, to empo∣uerish & weaken the vnderstandings of men, to depraue them vtterlie, to ouerthrow them, to make good their false assertions, and to peruert them who sincerelie desired to vnderstand my meaning, that is to say, my true intentions, as flocks of sheepe, and
heards of beasts doe seeke for water and grasse. But my glorious good Lord, by vvhat deserts of mine commeth it to passe that I am allotted to speake with thy tongue, vvhich maketh me continue in prophetizing. And they vvho endeauoured to finde ill in me, vvith more sollicitude, then doth vveariesomnes seeke rest; haue a∣gainst me spoken their idle fancies frō their invented chimeraes, windy, empty vanities, most false things not vvith vnlike rancour, but vvith the same vvhich wicked and most vvret∣ched men vse to speake: and all day long humming like bees, riuers, and the vvindes, and scandalizing my goodnes, endeauouring to peruert others vvith dislike of my sincere trueth, meditated with strange ima∣ginarie vvaies, a throusand varties of deceipts against my innocencie,
and vvith sharpe reprehensions, and vvith mligne accusations, molest∣ing me daylie & nightlie, they more then most earnelie endeauoured to finde a fault in my bountie, in my goodnes; and euen as the wicked and peruerse, they called my prayers blas∣phemies, my examples malices, and my miracles witchcrafts. But I like a deafe man, vvho hea∣reth not the noyse of other pratles, or brawles, heard not the shrill iangling prate of the enuious, vvho most in∣juriously, most vniustlie spake de∣spightfully of me, vvho all zealous in their behalfes desired to make them know the trueth and no otherwise, then if so that I had beē borne vvith∣out a tongue from my natiuitie, or othervvise dumbe, I vvas silent, I was still: notvvithstanding I heard their false testimonies asseuered by oathes: and surpassing vvith my humilitie their pride vnder the shovver of lyes
which tempestuouslie powred on my head, euen as a tēpestuous shower of haile, & raine, falleth impetuously on the yles on the top of an house, I see∣medlike a gētle meeke lābe, who with head inclined vvithout bleating, suf∣fereth himselfe to be shorne by the shepheard, vvho vvhilst hee fleeceth him, threatning hm to take avvay his life also, for that the poore beast vnderstandeth not the noise, the horror of his danger, of his state and being, he is not affrighted a jott, as I am not terrified, and for that I may not heare the conspiracie of calum∣niatiō, that my enimies deuise against me, I vvill stop my eares as doth the serpent against inchantments. Thou yet my Lord speakest a∣gaine further: and sayest. And I am like to a man vvho heareth nothing vvhich can (entring his ares) passe to his heart: for it is the manner of the just, not to giue audience, not so
much as to heare the vniust speake, vvho vugratefully oppose them selues against the great favours, singular graces, vvhich vvere giuen them: and I am as it were a servāt, who not will∣ing to transgresse the commande∣ments of his Maister, although he is tormented by the peruerse malice of his competitors, his envyers, hath not in his mouth those wordes, which the innocencie of them vvho are causleslie injured, is vvont to frame: and somevvhat strang is it, that I suffer the malice and the igno∣rance of others, I not hearing the hatterings of the crovves, nor thee creaking noise of the crickets, vvhich burst foth in their nights neuer cea∣sing molestation. O goodnes of God thou art great indeed, and thou art truelie benigne, for thou by thine owne sufferings, teachest vs to ouercome the cosses
and disquietnesses inflicted on vs by the vvicked, and to acquire thy grace by meanes of patience: and to giue vs example, thou gauest way for ca∣lumnyes, to ouerrunne thy iust, pure, and vnspotted head: and sure I am that thou for farther demonstration of thy constant prudence, desiredst, that the number of thy accusers, who with false inventions, vvith lying te∣stimonies, did molest thee, diuerslie afflict thee before the tribunals, in vvhich seates vvere placed vvretched Iudges, might be multiplied; where∣fore I heare that thou comandest me to speake in thy name, in thy person, as followeth; I care not false swarme, false route for your vvicked persecu∣tions. Hence haue I hoped in the me∣rits vvhich my sufferances haue pre∣pared for me, vvhich vvill proue to the benefit, to the health of soules, vvhich would perish if I dye not. But
for that I sensiblie perceiue that thy grace is wanting in me, vvhich hath thus farre made me speake with thy tongue, with thy voice. I recom∣mence, I returne againe most hum∣blie to my deuotions, vvhich thou my Lord and my God vvilt heare vvith attention and fauour. For I haue besought thee vvith such an heart, vvhich thou vvell knowest, vvhich thou cleerlie seest, not requiring, not crauing ought els then fortitude against enimies, now I call againe vvith all the organs, in∣struments of the voice of my soule, I humblie & earnestlie, suppliantlie, craue againe: that thou vouchsafe that those vvho cruellie byting me, stand ouer me, no otherwise then doe vultures ouer the harmelesse inno∣cent beasts, may not scorne and de∣ide me seing me as an edifice with∣out sustentacles, columnes, or sup∣porters,
headlonglie falling into the hideous darke sepulcher ofsinne, but let it be so, that they greiue and frett themselues, to see my joy, my good state, vnder the shadow of thy boun∣ty; gnawing one another, through the sharpe bitings of their perfidi∣diousnes, loosing themselues in their wretchednes, vvhilst the wicked con∣demne me vvith that earnestnes, vvith vvhich the good pronounce sa∣fety to me. Incredible is the malice of the vvicked, for that at each least motion of my foote, at each stray vvhich I vvalking make, scarce ob∣soruing the going out of my right vvay, they haue deliuered such oblo∣quies in my preiudice, which (wicked as they are) by them should not haue been spoken, nay euen against them vvho had obstinate vvil, neuer to returne to thy vvaies: But I am con∣tent, I am appaied, that I am conver∣ted,
that, I am turned to thee, ready to satisfie for my sinnes, to banish sinne, yea to treade it vnder foote, through feare which I am well taken with, of thee my glorious good Lord. For that I am prepared for punish∣ment euen as a beast readie at the altar for sacrifice, thy afflictions, thy scourges, are not to me at all heauy, yea rather I may vvell say I receiue them in the bosome of my past life, as fruits', and effects of it's patience. And were it not that the greife which I haue, for hauing offended thee in my disordered error, from thy wayes, and in my vvickednes had not laid open the leafe where in thy booke it is registred, I would enforce my selfe vvith serious attention, vvith all my power to lay it open before thee, vvith more bevvailings, moaning, as from my heartie sorrow, and then should flow from mine eyes showers
of teares: but since that all what I am is in thy sight, I onelie say, that since I haue acknovvledged the manner of my trespasses, I haue not, neuer∣theles borne patientlie thy corre∣ctions, but yet I haue chastised my selfe, without any regard or compas∣sion of my selfe, vvith compunction so farre as I could, cloathed vvith hu∣man body; as is vvell knovvn vnto thee; nothing seemed to strike me more, to displease me more, then that my enimies should triumph ouer me, seeing me buried in the depth of my vtter ruine. Let my aduersaries be assured that I vvill confesse mine iniquities, and that I vvill tenderlie and carefullie thinke of my transgrssions, the sor∣row of vvhich is humbly prostrated before thee; let them rather be assu∣red that after my acknowledgment of them, I shall so meditate of my
selfe, as that I shall be so sollicitous of them, and of my zealous duty to my Lord, that the hearts-greife that I shall take deeply to my selfe for thē, shall be so intensiue, that my heart hauing broken & passed ouer all it's stubborne hardnes, shal be so enabled with the clemencie of thy mercie, that the painefull inflictiōs on my sinnes, shall proue no other then the suffe∣ring the paine I shall haue of my not being able to grieue so much as I would; and through the merit of so fervent, so vigourous, so profound a heart-quilling greife, and yet vvith∣out which there is no accesse to thy kingdome; I hope to ascend by those such steps by which the feate of the starres is arrived to, heauen come to; for that my cōplaints, my moanings, my extreame afflictions, my showr∣ing teares, which I will tēpeuously through the anguish of my greiued
soule powre forth both day and night incessantly, shall be my scourges, my Purgatorie, my Hell. But alas! mine inimies liue, they are established, remaine stout, and pertinacious, no othervvise then is pride against humilitie, and there are more risen vp, euen as Ants in corne and flies in milke, vvho vvickedly hate me: and yet I am not hence sha∣ken at all, troubled ought thereat. For I, whilst they become peruerse and mischeiuous, vvill vvinne thy iustice, with me dolefull teares, vvhence the wicked, and those vvho care more for the terrestriall vvorld, then for Heauē, (not as yet destroyed accor∣ding to their sinnes wretchednes) shall fall into the extremitie of mise∣rie, in vvhose armes they so much re∣ioyce, as litle infants in the bosomes of their mothers, for they knovv not the fourd, the passage that they come
from, that tender, preserue, and sol∣licitouslie keepe the vvings of their soules, from the entanglings of it's birdlime, in vvhich ensnaring laby∣rinths confounded is hee for euer, vvho acnovvledgeth no other God then vvordlie pleasures: hence reallie is it that such an one may most vn∣doubtedlie be called miserable: for that hope doth blaze, nay tvvinckle any ray, beame of it's safety on him, euen so much as hee is punished by the selfe fame his sinne, as are the en∣vious by their selfe same rancour, their selfe same envie. But I my good and gratious Lord, vvill neuer staunch my eyes weepings, nor vvill euer impose stilnes or silence to this my tongue, nor euer will take to me a minute of repose from my greife, and heauy heart's throbbs, vn∣till that euen here vvhere I breath forth and that earnestlie, my lamen∣tations,
thy mercy shew some signe at least, that thou hast pardoned me. All they vvho vniustlie returne euill for good (vvho are most lke to the keepers, the watchers of bees, vvho vvhen so that they haue had from them tribute of hony, & vaxe, they chasse them from their hiues, their houses, vvith fire and smoke) haue torne me in the sight of the people, with the tallones of their wickednes; and for that I follovved not the vvaies, which their crooked steeps had made, they would praise the semblance of my iust workes with the spittings of iniquitie, in publique aseuering, baselie estee∣ming my feare of God, & prouoking me to shew my dislike of the stings of their falnesses; their vvaies I de∣cline, bending my body, and fixing mine eyes, on the ground, my head downeward, and altogether contrac∣ted
with in my selfe bearing with the stings vvhich sometimes haue nota∣bly hurt me, with the slfe-same pa∣tience, where with wisemen suffer the boldnes and want of vvitt of fooles; it sufficing me to be iustified in the iudgment of our Lord, vpon which piller doth all my hope rest, for I am most assured, that hee vvill alwais be such, and the same to me. Abandon me not my Lord, my God, who am vvithout thee as is a horse vvithout a courbe, yea euen without a bridle, a ship vvithout a rudder: and as that moued by the fiercenes of his nature, is wont to be resty, to runne away vvith his rider; and this made ouer-swifly glideing through the impetuous windes, often abutteth, striketh against the rocks: Euen so I prouoked, enforced, by the perfidiousnes, & vexation which my persecutors impose on me, shall
likelie fall head ong into my preci∣pice, be broken in pieces, and vtterlie ruined, if thou hide thy face, subtract but thy fauorable assistāce from me, vvith the twinckling of vvhose eye-brow, thou gouernest the gouernors and the celestiall and terrestrial regi∣ments. O Lord for pittie-sake deigne to be my Leader vvho am blinde, & vouchsafe, not to seperate thy selfe from me, vvho beseech thee, by the teares, and the deepe sighes vvhich my sorrow powreth forth, and fra∣meth for no other cause, but to sepe∣rate my selfe from sinne, vvhich hath brought me to such miserie that I am vnworthy to loke thee in the face, vvhose splendor olie is con∣solation to the distressed, afflicted as am I. Encline then to help me, as chari∣tie doth assist the needie, & the mo∣thers milke the child's hunger. Haue
reguard my Lord to my health to my safety, for it is all in thee onelie, who art my vvay, my trueth, and my life, and likevvise of all those vvho appre∣hend the vvay of conseruing them∣selues from the snares of sin, as from sword, and fire: and although they sin they know vvith more affect to lamēt their defects, thē can the good soule rejoyce in their perfections. I beseech thee vvith my heart euen come vp to this my tongue, vvhich deliuereth vvhat it dictateth, in such sort, that it is not in thee to denie, that pittie, that mercie, neuer denyed by thee to any, who craues it in such sort as doe I. For otherwise I should be a prey to the fraudulencies of my eni∣mies, greedy of my losse, yea of my vtter destruction, were it not that I had reacknowledged my selfe, were it not for the hope vvhich I haue had in thy infinite goodnes. The end of the third Psalme.
THE FOVRTH PROLOGVE. ASSOONE as Da∣vid ended his third song, hee seemd not vn∣like a Pilgrim, vvho calculating vvithin himselfe, measuring in his minde, and silently cast ng vp the length of the way hee is to walke, and hauing ouercome a great part thereof already, re∣poseth himselfe vnder the shade to whose cooles, the pleasant gently whisking winde invited him, there somewhat taking his breath, which the toile of painefull trauaile had partly bereft him of. And as a Pilgrim's minde is all bent, all taken vp, medita∣ting on the iourney which hee is to make; so was hee all converted to God, his thoughts wre onely entertained, and intensiuely on
God, and neuertheles playing or rather ca∣relesly dallying with the strings, moving his fingers here and there on them, without any whit reflecting on their sound, which hee hearing, yet well might I say, heard not; resting his chin on his breast, the hot∣test and bitterest teares that euer issued, eued rained, or vvere euer povvred forth, from the eyes of any one that neuer so deeply greiued; hee let fall. One might take notice so farre of his distilling, his melting in teares, as of wa me water in a large bason, which receiueth the blood of a veine opened may be taken notice of as water all ouer bloody: and to this his plentifully powring forth of teares, were interchangably ming∣led some sighs deeply fetched; so greiuous, that if the fall of such floods of teares, and the sound of such sighs had been heard by any man breathing, hee would euen haue sworne, that in the Cauerne or grott there was a windy raine, a sharpe and bitter tempest: and vndoedly if the windes
could haue had ingresse they would haue made fly, would haue scattered, and made knowne, the complaints deliuered by his eyes, his tongue, and his breast, and car∣rying them to the eares of all the people of Israël, each one of the vvould haue made all hast to comfort their poore King; vvho (some grosse and heauy teares svvallovved vp, blubbering, yexing, throbbing) in an instant turned his eyes as a man affrighted, extreamelie possessed with feare and terror of vvbat came then to his minde, vvhat then vvas presented as object to his phan∣tasie, or rather impressed, and it seeming to him that the horrible and obscure sha∣dow of his transgressions, vvould hastilie, and most violently snatch him avvay; hee with feruency equivalent to his conceiued misery, cryed out aloud, in an high straine singing thus.
THE FOVRTH PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. Mserere mei Deus scundum. Psalme 50. HAVE mercie on me God, not ac∣cording to the propotion of my litle, my poore, my alas! poore, my feeble merit, yea alas! I may say euen my scarce no desert, either through my fasts, or prayers, or vvearing sack cloath, signes though of denying my lelfe, or for my bitter teares, but according to that thy great mercie, vvherevvith thou dost surpasle in height of magnificencie, (and in vvhat not?) Heauēs beautifull vault,
the braue seeming comelie boult of the mountaines, the sea's armes, the earth's bosome, the bottomlesse deepes, and the measure and extent of the vniuerse: insomuch with thee, let trespasses be, vvhatsoeuer possi∣blie they may be, they are lesse then a litle pointe in the midst of a circle of great capacitie, of marvailous compasse: euen poison vvhich in it selfe engendreth sinne, sometimes maketh it svvell in such manner that it though mouing thee to disdaine, boldlie lifteth it selfe vp in such sorte, that it seemeth it vvould aspire to the top of the height of that thy mercie. But for that I am sure that thy mercy ouercommeth the seueritie of thy justice, I finde not my sin's so despe∣rate which heretofore feared to come too late to finde pardon, for thou vvillest that a contrite heart say one∣lie, I haue sinned. And so much one∣lie
said from a contrite heart, thou endovvest them vvith such plentie of thy grace, that their hearts, yea and their very soules ioynt ie bevvaile, bitterlie bemoane themselues, for the iniuries that their hardnes, their such peruersenes, vvrought to their mise∣rable preiude, and to their vnspea∣kable greife against thee; my hardnes my peruersnes, differeth not a vvhit, from vvhat is spoken of, vvherewith hetherto I haue offended thee; ah! but alas! vvhatsoeuer poore vvretch I am, I seeke to hide me vnder the braue ample shrovvding-vvings of thy mercifull indulgencie and pittie, by it's goodnes I beseech thee most humblie that thou succour me. O Lord help me, and according to the multitude, the infinite reach, large extent of thy mercie, thy com∣miserations, vvhich are more then are the flakes of the snow, then are
the drops of the raine, blott out, can∣cell mine iniquities, my crimes, which although iustlie acknowledged to be infinite, yet they arriue not to the number of thy pitties, of thy com∣miserations; by vvhich thou sauest trespassers. And the bridles, the res∣traints vvherevvith fasting courbeth gluttonie, vvherewith chastitie cur∣beth luxurie, humilitie checketh and restraineth pride, charitie couete∣ousnes, and true good-nature, vvell disposed humanitie envie; and the spurres, the liuelie stirrers vp awaken and chase avvay sloth and lazines, are the guifts, vvhich these compassions doe giue, which thou hast on distres∣sed miserie and ignorāt errors which daylie are donne in thy sight: thy cle∣mencie mercifullie shineth vvith more fauorable and cheerefull aspect on him, vvho after transgression rea∣sumeth himselfe, then on any one,
vvho hath neuer tespassed: and there is nothing to be farher herein deli∣uered, for true it is that there ae more acts of vertue, as more resigna∣nations to thy vvill, more earnest en∣deauours, and more merit it amend∣ment after sinne, then is there for such to haue abstained from sinne; and the feare vvhich a man is sensible of vvhilst hee is contristated, deeplie sad, extremelie afflicted for his sine; his such like heart's deepe compunc∣tion is more availeable, then the se∣curie of him, vvhosoeuer hee be, of Paradise, reioycing in his not hauing trespassed: And for that, ô Lord, my mercifull God, I vvould tender such a sorrovv, as might be ansvverable to my greiuous offences, and that I knovv all to be in vaine, of no validi∣tie, vvithout the fauour of thy grace; I the same coniure thee, call thee to accounte on that ground, that tenent
of the ioy known, that thou hast of the moanes, lamentions, and hearts-grifes of sinners, that thou cleanse me in the font, and euer-flovving-cleere spring of thy infinite mercie. Wash me, and vvash me againe cleane, vvich the vvater of that mer∣cifull spring in all, and all fully who∣lesome, full of grace; full of health, vvhose least channells, whose least veines bedew, besprinckle the heads of the just, vvith grace and health. Let the earnest petitiōs of me a poore distressed man, soe farre take place vvith thee my Lord, my God, that I may bathe my selfe, wash my selfe, cleanse my selfe in vvater of such qualitie vvhich is good against rusti∣nes, and mire which my sin's and im∣perfections haue vvrought and con∣tracted on me, euen as drops of raine, of a sweet gentle shower powred frō Heauē do please, marvailously com∣fort,
yea conferre to the better being of a bird, after it hath suffered the Sunn's heate. Here is the full state of vvhat I humblie craue, that thou wash and cleanse me from sinnes; for the blotts, blurres, staines, they haue made on me, are foule & filthie to abhomination, & vvhilst they are seene on this my flesh, my soule (that abhotreth thē, as those things which prompt vnto it the danger of it's health) can neuer enjoy the tranqui∣litie, the entire peace, vvhich they enjoy, vvho serue thee vvith a pure & cleane heart. But be it so that thou vvash me, and cleanse mo often, my soule each hower be comming more pure, more vnspotted, vvhite, hence, vvill receiue that comfort, vvhich vvill the limbs of one euen now re∣leiued, & released from an infirmitie, in vvashing himselfe in a bath of costlie and odoriferous spices.
For that lastly I haue opened the eyes of my minde, closing those of my body, I know that my sinne (vvhich I cast behinde me and vvas carelesse of, hauing taken the world's delights for my counsaile, for my di∣rections) is alvvaies against my selfe; and vvhatsoeuer at any time hath fallē out against me, hath beē drawne on me for my trespasses: hence I to keepe of it's heauy burthen from me, to make it stand farre of, and to secure my selfe of it, haue made me a buckler, a defence framed of the feare I haue of thee, my Lord: & the per∣fidious, and vvicked, neuer cease to molest me vvith shrewd and impor∣tunate snares: but because I am vvell aduised how to carry myselfe against them I am able, assisted by thee, held vp by thee, to keepe my selfe from being ought deceiued by them, and keepe my soule from their frauds,
their foule deceipts; and vvith the hope that I conceiue, and vnderstand more in God, then in my teares, I shall make them fly farre from my face, as I desire to fly farre from it; the vvhich sweet and faire though it seeme, is both sharpe and brutish, most horridlie vgly. But thou yet Lord seest with what gestures, and in what manner, they (they vvicked) flatter me, and endeauour to make me such as they are, by their diuers waies of drawing me to be alike to them, laughing at my teares, & shew∣ing at the selfe same caue, vvhere I praise, giue laud, and glorie to thee, the pallace where thy despisers keepe in, incessantlie vilfying, scorning the patience of my pentencie; whilst I crush, euen burst my knees on the earth, they lye at ease and pleasure on their downy coutches; I vvho neither see them, now heare them as earst I
vvas vvont, my thoughts entertained by my phantasie farre otherwise thē to giue attention to them, strength∣ning my selfe vvith guifts of thy ver∣tue, hope with my spirit to transcend as farre my bodie, as the bodie doth surmounte, command, and ouerule the spirit, for being oppresied, bur∣thened by it, I was in imminēt dāger, there vvas litle, alas! wanting that it had not made me fall vnder thine anger, thy heauy vvrath. But here behold the propheticall spirit, vvhich entreth into me againe, I am hereof truely sensible, I perfect∣lie know it Lord, yea euen as the eyes of a dimme sight, yea of a man al∣most blinde sensiblie distinguisheth the appearance, and disappearance of light and therfore I acknovvledg & perceiue that I haue sinned against thee, in thy sight; but the ill vvhich I haue donne in thy presence, shall
maintaine, make good, yea iustifie thy word, vvhich thou hast so often sent forth, spoken by the tongues of thy Prophets, in which thou didst lay open, all the sublime subiects, the hidden, the profound, and vnsearch∣able mysteries of thy trueth; hence thy Sonne, all taken vp, all enamo∣red, with loue to humane kinde, des∣cending of my lineall stocke, will come to suffer, cleansing, yea purelie purifying by his death, the foule spotts which Adam contracted on it. And in the same instant, that thou shalt be arraigned, yea adiuged, thou shalt ouercome thy persecutors, being vvretched against thee, in so much as that they astonished, and al∣together possessed vvith admiration, with a cleare, loude, & high strained voice shall deliuer, this is the Sonne of God indeed. And therfore my Lord pardon me, who come to thee,
my onelie refuge, in such manner let thy forgiuenes be, as thy Sonne in his preaching, teaching, shall state, shall ordaine. Alas! my good and gratious Lord, pardon me my trans∣gressions for that (so lōg as my heart is prōpt, & most readie to repent, and my tongue liuelie quicke & nimble to pray to the, and my eyes vvell dis∣posed, altogether bent to poure forth teares) I am not in state euer to want faith, in my well apprehended confi∣dence of thy mercie. Not to couer, not to excuse my trespasses and crimes ô Lord, but to demonstrate to vvhat exigent I am reduced, vvhat neede I haue of thy mercie, I say that I am conceiued in iniquitie: vvhence it consequentlie follovveth that thy iustice truelie for∣get not my sinnes of frailtie, vvhich are in numerable, as also those of my Ancestors, and hovvbeit in carnall
delight, vvherein each one is concei∣ued, is no damnation, yet from the same proceedeth our hereditarie stray, our error, euen such from the first of men for vvhich vvee are pu∣nished vvith coporall death, and by reason of the vvorlds growing worse and vvorse, there and worse, there vvould also follovv vs that of the soule; if thou hadst not prescribed by foredecree the comming of him, vvhich by thy grace I haue spoken of before. But vvhat miracle or wonder is there in a sinners transgression, being borne in sinne? my mother conceiued me in sinne, hence sinned I, before I was borne, and comming into the worlds light, sinne accom∣panied me, vvhich is multiplied on me, as my houres, dayes, monethes, and yeeres, in such sort, that the haires of this my beard, and the haires of this my head, and tresses of it, are
very few, compared with the num∣ber of my sinnes, and to attempt to disburthen my selse without the assi∣stance, and fauour of thy grace, is for one man's strength, one man's force, to make mountaines euen, to lay mountaines flat, to roote, to grubbe vp the vvoods, and make the Seas dy. Behold for that thou hast alvvaies loued trueth and iustice, yet hast not thou made me knovv that no sinne, and that no desert is euer without its punishment, or with∣out it's reward from thee; but by thy makeing me returne to the vnder∣stāding of my selfe, which is sounde verie difficult, in a man invested with humane flesh, thou hast declared to me the vnknown, obscure, and the altogether hidden things, and the misteryes of thy wisedome: & deig∣ning to enroll me among the Pro∣phets, I haue foretold and vvill Pro∣phecy,
that which cannot be other∣wise, that vvhich cannot faile to be so, and what sometimes taketh not effect, by the meanes of grace gran∣ted by God, to the desert of repen∣tance. Truelie my Lord the appre∣hension, the vnderstanding I haue of the state of thy juslice, hath made me lament, weepe on, and for my sinnes, which transgression I doe bewaile, and will inceantlie, yet so long as I may haue leaue and license so doe: and this my holie resolution hath made me, and further will make me worthie of thy mercie, and of thy wisdome, and hence issueth, ariseth, springeth that constancie for which I alwaies besoúght thee, onelie to be enabled in the perseuerance of thy seruice and in abstaining from Sinne. Therfore that I may keepe, my selfe from all that vvhich moueth, and with great temptations inciteth
a man to forget thee, thou shalt cast all ouer me hysope, the meanest of herbes, to the end that I through example of it's meanesse, and ver∣tuous lowlines, may correct by such a patterne, my pride: or giue me it to drinke, as doth the hisitiā in forme of potion, who knoweth that the in∣firmitie is inward, I shall be purged, released of any defect whatsoeuer shall be found about my heart: and after thou shalt haue purged away my such inward infirmities, with the juice expressed by the presse of thy pious hands, and gathered from the same herbe growing and nourished in the garden of thy mercie; thou shalt wash me outwardlie with the water which leaping, casteth forth, twinckleth, and gurgleth, in the fountaine and euerlasting spring of thy mercie; hence shall I be cleansed of any whatsoeuer least deformitie,
which my conscience might haue contracted on me, through the fer∣uour of my repentance, which dōne I shall in whitenes surpasse, farre exce∣ede, & excell the snow, which flaketh on the top on the bosome, & foote of a mountaine, which is not forciblie carried by any vvinde: and so clean∣sed, purified, in wardlie expurged and washed, I vvill appeare in thy pre∣sence, as a soule euen now come from Heauen, and taking beames, irradia∣tions, from the lampe of thy grace, as a man who though ouer ioy keepeth no meane, is become euen now not himselfe, I vvill open my mouth, and vvith al feruour, thanke thee, and praise thee with my voice, and vvith the full straine of my hearts true affect. I vvho ruminating on my losse, my destruction am become humble in that pride, and sad in that ioy, in
which (to my great preiudice) I was vnhapie, vvhen as heretofore I was both proud and merrie, in so much as I shall neuer be happie, neuer mer∣rie (as it seemed to me I was in times past) vntill thou cheerest me vp with that fauour, that superabundant grace, which may from thee proceede to the assuring me of my safetie, of my saluation. O then, and not be∣fore my humbled bones vvill exult, will take comfort, will expresse their great ioy, then truelie, reallie, all the spirits, all the faculties of my soule, shalbe reioyced, vvith a true, and most vnfained gladnes, lessened, yea formerlie depressed though the fault of sinne, by meanes whereof the sus∣tentacles, the maine columnes of my life, are afflicted, perplexed, en∣feebled, euen as the stemmes of the flovver de-luces by winde and raine: and onelie for that the power of sense
weakeneth the minde, & the power comming fom the minde, represseth the sense, and subdueth the body, hence is it that vertue, ouercome by vice of sense, can onelie be sustained, can onelie and solely be releiued through the helpe of thy grace: which no sooner commeth to anie body, but that the soule maistereth the body in all his reasons, auersions and fullest powers: so that pronūce, aswell ioy to me, as also sprightly and fully possessing comfort, and exceeding gladnes by the tongue of that thy grace, thy mercie, vvithout vvhich each repentance is of no effect, is al∣together in vain, vvere it not for that litle comfort, vvhich the teares of my penitencie affordeth me; vvhich vvere it turned into despaire, vvill be to my vtter losse, yea both death and Hell to me. Looke not on my sinnes, hide not
thy face from me, for my humbled bones are rejovced, haue taken com∣fort, and since that hysope hauing been vsed in my behalfe, hath had the effect of a wholesome medicine to me, and that I am vvashed, yea cleansed vvith the vvaters of thy gra∣ce; grant I humbly beseech thee my Lord that so it be. For thy presence vvhilst it looketh on a sinner, iudgeth his sinnes, his greiuous trāsgressions, and adiudging them, likevvise infli∣cteth on them condigne punishmēt: Hēce be it that thou take no farther notice of them, for if thou dost not marke them, thou vvilt neuer call them to thy memorie, nor record at all their iniquities; which are so grei∣uous vvhensoeuer they are laid open and displaied before thy sight, that though thy mercie haue forgiuē thē, thy iustice might punish them. O yeild my Lord so much vnto me
though a miserablie distressed wretch that thou not onelie not looke on my transgressions, but looke not at all on them, turne aside thy eyes frō my peruerse vvill: & doeing me such like fauour, such indulgence; my tres∣passes, all vvhich are registred before thee, may become cancelled: Hence they vvill be no more seene, hence not adiudged, hence not punished: and I haue not a wauering but a con∣fident hope, that thou wilt entirelie, and most compleatlie fulfill these my ardent desires, for that I haue chāged my selfe, I am transformed, for that I now am become, a new man, a∣nother man: nor am more hee, vvho hath so much sinned, alas no! farre othervvise is it now vvith me, my being other then formerly I vvas, my being better is through the ptiuiled∣ge, the prerogatiue of thy grace, vvhich hath so inexpressible a quali∣tie
and force, that no sooner hath it inclined it selfe, euen sprinckled it selfe on any vvho craue it humblie, but that it so rectifieth him, yea in such vvaies, in such inclinations, as that hee hence becommeth a man of good vvill, a man vvho desireth no∣thing more then to take vp thy com∣mands, to obserue them, to honour and loue thee, yea for thy goodnes, as a contrite doth. Lord now, yea euen now, newlie create me, make vnto me euen now a cleane heart, and propitiouslie grant that I may make my selfe such an one, that I may become through the meanes of sorrow for my transgres∣sions such an one that standing by thee I may seeme like to a litle boy by his father side, vvho laughing and vveping is full of deuises in his mi∣nardizing tricks & daliances, which puritie, and innocentie moueth in
him. And for so much as thou know∣est my heart, vvhich cannot be said to be cleane (respect had to the old sinne) notwithstanding through thy grace, do thou please to let it be so, that it be enobled, made worthy to be the place of abiding yea euen the lodge of thy grace, and the organ or instrument of thy profound secrets, and roote of those branches, from vvhence must spring the fruite of v∣niuersall redemption of mankinde. Forme, shape, make in me a nevv heart, such an one as is cleane, most candide, in manner of such of theirs vvho neuer transgressed against thee, for I am now another manner of man, then earst I vvas for so much as concernes my particular; hee vvho is a sinner hee vvho is loaden with sinne, is no cōpanion for me, I desire to haue no conversation with him, hee is not fit for me to conuerse with.
Ah! since so it is, most expedient it is, that the hand of thy mercie alone, doe not onelie create in me a nevv, and cleane heart, but that also with the selfe-same act, thou do newlie make in me a spirit, a soule iust, vp∣right, and clearlie purelie good, vvhich voide and free from the en∣thralments, the miserable subiection & slauerie of sense, may be enabled, become hence fully, and compleatly endovved with guifts, with vndoub∣ted abilities, to preach; to teach forth to the people of the world vvhat, and of vvhat condition, of vvhat rare nature, is thy grace, thy bountie, and thy mercie. Oh! alas! my Lord, euen as thou art pleased to digne me, through thy singular fauour, to hide thy face from my transgressions; disdeigne not also, yea voutchsafe gratiouslie, not to chase me from thy aspect, from
the glorious sight of thee, let thy ani∣maduersion, thy taking notice fall more attentiuelie on my good will, my good-meanings, my zealous de∣sires, then on my vvicked transgres∣sions; and for the fault of my sinne, bereaue me not, depriue me not, of that thy blessed presence, thy blessed aspect, from the lights of vvhose ir∣radiations, euen showers of inex∣pressible consolation, are powred on the lust, thy saints; let me not be a cast of an abandoned of God, let not thy holie spirit be taken from me, which through thy goodnes thou hast en∣larged me with, hast freelie giuen me; vvhich is that remorse of conscience which maketh me lament and bitter∣ly vveepe for my sinnes, and that perceuance I haue knowing how to confesse them interceding for my selfe through thy great mercie. But be it so, thou doe not giue me leaue
to see thy countenance, shutting thy eares, in so much as that thou heare not my voice I shalbe reduced into such an estate, that I shall proue to haue no remorse of conscience, nor ought of knowledg, which hath made me haue recourse to thee; hence should I become the misera∣blest of men, alas! a prey of despera∣tion, the case altred, changing holie spirit into a peruerse, wicked, and re∣probate spirit. So that my Lord take tender care of me, for my case is full of danger. Turne thy gratious beni∣gnitie tovvards me, my Lord, grant vnto me that I may affixe myne eyes, on those thine eyes, rare lāpes, euen as the Eagle looketh on the Sunne, and let me contemplate in thee, that thy countenance, thy bles∣sed vision, my safetie. Giue vnto me againe the ioy of my being saued, which through sinne
I had lost. Be it so that thou doe not gratiouslie giue it me againe; I am more then assured that I shall neuer recouer it. When thou shall through thy bountie haue giuen it me, make good, make safe, confirme in me that principall spirit, that is, that spirit which is novv full entertainer in me, of me, vvhich vvholie and fullie pos∣sesseth me ouercōmeth me; for thou vvell knovvest that in vs are tvvo in∣citements, tvvo spurres, one of sense, the other of reason, vvhich are the good and ill spirits, and vvithin vs they continuallie contest, fight it out for the prey of the soule. Conserue in me therfore that good vvhich may vvell guide me, and be a certaine, and most perfect directorie to my vvell-being and giuing it strength and ver∣tue, grāt vnto it that it may remaine constantlie victor of it's aduersarie, and I through the securitie of my sa∣fetie,
and through the grnce I am en∣larged vvith of this my good spirit, vvhich vvill be as an effect of my thankfulnes, I vvill teach to the vn∣iust, to the wicked, the meanes by vvhich the fauour of God's mercie is acquired, is vudoubtedlie vvonne. I will instruct wretched transgres∣sors in thy Law, (not men of vpright heart, who haue no neede of my tea∣ching, my directions) the fordes of thy holie and most sacred vvayes; in vvhich each one vvho taketh for guide the lampe of the just, may be assured, vvalking on, perseuering, to arriue to thy glorious pallace. And I will labour vvith earnestnes, vvith such ardent feruour, that euen im∣pious and most vngodlie men, vvho feare not thee, are not affrighted, and are not shaken, at thine anger, thy vvrath, and thy furie; shalbe conuer∣ted, shall returne to thee, become
other, new men: and thy being come to such passe, so reclaimed, speedilie they vvilbe fauourablie heard, for in thy presence is seene I know not how to call it, human wit cannot atriue to expresse it, that, vvhich teacheth one to know ones elfe, and to call, craue humblie beseech thee for mercie, on the effect vvhereof, the issue vvhere∣of, doth the safetie of each one de∣pend and hence be it that thou con∣serue in me that spirit vvhich I haue spoken of, vvhich frequentle repeate to thy goodnes, and by the meanes thereof I vvill cease farther to vvepe for my sinnes, to bevvaile them anie more, and I vvill make an end of all my lamentations, and become thy friend, hence vvill follovv, vvill suc∣ceede a doctrine and vvisedome, a fulnes of knovvledg, vvhich vvill shevv score out, euidentlie demons∣trate the vvaies, the pathes, yea the
trackes, the foot steps, of thee our good and glorious Lord to all future ages. Yet againe my Lord, whilst fauo∣rablie thou lendet thine eare to these my prayers, my most humble peti∣tions, free me, acquitt me, ô my eer good and gratious Lord, from the vvicked, levvd, cruell, and abomi∣nable villanie of murther, vvhich mi∣nistreth deseruedie occasion of thy disgrace tovvards me: and therefore free me my Lord from it, for being that I am appointed to preach, to de∣clare to the Vniuerse, to the whole vvorld, thy mercie, by vvhich here∣ticks shalbe conuerted, and the per∣uerse wicked also, it is necessarie that thou pardon me, giung me full re∣mission of all my trespasses: and so doeing and giuing pardon to me so hainous a transgressor of thy lawes, through this one example of me who
haue sinned, to the swing, to the full extent, of what man can miserablie arriue to, each sinner allured, all pos∣sessed of desire, and of hope to saue himselfe, vvill haue speedie recourse to thee, to craue, to humblie beseech thee, of thy such grace and mercie, euen as I haue donne, euen as I haue called on thee my Lord, and God of my saluation, whose innate conna∣turall goodnes, and bountie (when so that thou shalt haue freed me from the guilt of my carnalitie, as also frō the blood of one, when as, ah! wretch that I was through my effrene, disor∣dinate, & restie vnbridled appetite, I immersed, drownd my selfe in mur∣der) my tongue expeditelie with all promptnes, shall exalt & shew forth thy name, preach thy iustice. Hence hould I be well known to sinners, ho recalling themselues into them∣elues, who conuerted, will deplore,
and miserably lamēt their trespasses, euen as I doe mine. Lord, since that I am invested, seated in the place, in the degree, in the ranck of the good, through the bountie of that thy bountie, and not through the merits of ought good I haue donne, and being so changed, as that from a vvicked and vvretched man, I am become a new man, a iust man, euen raised through thy grace; thou the selfe same benigne Lord, shalt open my lipps, by thy holie spi∣rit, infusing into thē guifts of speech, euen such which may be best agree∣able to thy will, expedient, yea ne∣cessarie: thou hauing so enabled thē, giuen vnto them such power, such facultie, I shall no sooner be hereof aduertised, but that my mouth shall breath forth hymnes, shall exalt, and magnifie thy praise. For that oneie and indeed is true and entire laud,
which is sent foth to thee our Lord, our God, others are vaine, deceiptfull and meere shadows, howbeit the praises vvhich thou deseruest, are in∣comprehensible, and cannot be ta∣ken vp, be reached vnto by human capacitie, by human vnderstanding, for that thou art the moouer, and Author of all guifts, all vertues, and of all graces which vvee know; hence is it that in all my composements of Palmes, and singing them I haue al∣vvaies giuen attributes to thee, of glorie, and praise: and the glorie and praise vvhich deseruedlie and duelie I haue giuen the, haue beē the hostes, oblations and sacrifices vpon the ele∣uated parts of thy Temple, and vpon thy Altars. Praise and glorie by tongue and heart I haue sacrificed to thee my Lord, and wouldst thou haue had other sacrifice, truelie, reallie, I would
haue offered vp other; but I see in spirit most euidentlie, and am satis∣fied fullie, that thou vvilt not be ap∣peased, pleased, like of holocasts, & the time vvill come that thou shalt dislike, be displeased at such sacrifice; for that they are ceremonies vvhich outvvardlie make a shevv; and othervvise is it vvith thee, for the mindes good intentōs are receiued, entertained, and gratefull to thee: & therfore vvouldst thou that Abraham should sacrifice his pure heart, his simplie good and sincere intentions, and not his sonne; hovvbeit the sa∣crifice of the old lavv, vvas no other then a meere figure of that sacrifice that the Sonne of God vvill make & offer vp to his Father in redemption of human kinde: But if thou art not pleased, art auersed from the sacrifi∣ces made of beasts, thē shall not there be any offered but vnto thee? & how
then shall vvee appease thee? vvhen thou shalt be euen ready to inflict on vs scourges for our trespasses, vvhen they are euen miserablie falling on vs, shall then thy mercie be in vaine, of vvhich wee can take no benefit at all? and shall vvee no vvay penetrate so farre, inuestigate, finde out hovv, by what meanes possibly, to acquire it? if so thou please that sacrifice bee our meanes by vvhich vvee may ar∣riue to it, fully attaine it, gaine it ac∣quire it. Looke here, obserue vvell, for that I doe foretell vvith the spirit of prophecie, vvhat ought to be the sa∣crifices now spoken of: the sacrifice pleasing, accepted of, gratefull to God, is a spirit a soule contribulated, a troubled and afflicted heart, not vnlike to a beast brought to be sacri∣ficed, vvhich is killed on the Altar vvhich bleateth, belovveth, and kic∣keth
strugleth in his fall, vvhich is vvrought by the sharpe, violent ins∣trument of knife, and fire, suffering in the same manner as vvill thy most blessed Sonne: and hence is it that the lamentions, the heauy teares of an heart contribulated, much grei∣ued, ruminating seriouslie on it's of∣fences, in meane while praising our good Lord, demandeth, craueth his grace, is accepted by him in place, in lievv of a beast, victimed, offered vp in sacrifice. The simple, pure, cleane, sincere, and sanctlie minde, is alwaies readie, through it's loue to suffer martyrdom, death, and that sacri∣fice vvhich God vvilleth: such a rea∣dines of a sincere minde, and purelie taken, fullie enamored vvith true repentance, not farther ouervvhel∣med in vvickednes, is that host, that sacrifice vvhich doth reconcile man vvith God: from a contrite and an
humble heart God will neuer looke of, or despiset; but vvill not reguard oxen, sheepe, and lambes offered vnto him vvithout zeale, and vvith∣out the teares and sorrovv of the heart. And assure as anie thing can be true foretold, infalliblie it vvill come to passe, that the Messias to come shall say vvith a loud voice, shall giue notice to the vniuerse, to all the vvorld: Bulls, and beasts I haue at times receiued as sacrifices to me of∣fered, but the hearts and minds, their pure and sincere meanings, not al∣vvaies: then my Lord since that I sa∣crifice my heart, and my minde, en∣ritch me vvith thy mercie. Through thy infinite goodnes, be bountifull, gratious and mercifull to Sion, vvhich such name haue I giuen to the contemplation and specula∣tion of them, vvho though their de∣sire of trueth will obtaine, will arriue
to the knovvledg of thy Sonne. Alas! my Lord let it be so, I humblie craue at thy mercifull hands, that the walls of Hierusalem, may be built, vvhich I conceiue as a shevv of peace, and v∣nion which ought to be with human kind in human kinde, to the prai∣sing, honoring, and adoring thee one∣lie. Stay not, delaie not to performe this thy benignitie heretofore within thy selfe resolued of, fullie decreed: and send thy Sonne, by vvhom, on vvhom this our new Church must be instructed, taught, built, and groun∣ded: and in such manner building, raising the vvalls of Hierusalem, there vvill be built, raised in their soules, the excellencie, the vertue of thy sa∣pience, thy wisedome which will im∣proue them so much enlghtē them, will so build and frame in themselues that such vnderstāding which giueth the perceiuance, the cleare light, and
euen the verie vision of eternall peace, vvithout vvhich their soules would perish together with their bodyes, aswell through the generall ingratitude, as also by reason of the sinne of the first father, vvhose faults would haue proued Hell & damna∣tion to all human kinde, vvere it that with thee, thy bounteous decree, mercifull benignitie, had not other∣wise stated a supplie, a redresse, to this inexpressably wofull misery, through the hands of that thy selfe-same cle∣mencie, and of thy proper bountie; who art more inclinable to shevv be∣nignity to Sion, then that of the rais∣ing of the walls of Hierusalem, which I craue not, vvho am all teares, all penicencie, and all scourge of repen∣tance, to confirme and assure my selfe in the grace of my Lord and God, who when he shall haue sent his Sonne to the vvorld, vvill verifie
vvith his trueth my wordes. When so thy sonne shall descend into the world, thou vvilt accept the sacrifice of iustice, for it vvill be iustly expedient, and it shalbe offered vp vnto thee, in memorie of his passion, and of his death. I say that thou vvilt accept holocausts, sacrifices laid on the Altar and oblations: guifts by which meanes God is acknowledged rendring him glorie, apparantlie, most euidentlie, not without the sin∣gular, and inexpressible ioy of heares comfort, vvhich oftentimes made all cheerefull, doth visiblie appeare in the sight of it's sacrifice. Lord, then vvor∣thilie calues shalbe laid on thine Altar, for that they vvho then shall sacrifice to thee, may become illumi∣nated by thy trueth; hence thou shalt receiue from them, not onelie victi∣mes, beasts killed for sacrifice, obla∣tions, and holocausts, but likewise
the sacrifice of a sincere heart, the en∣tire loue of a pure soule, and the ho∣locaust that the light, yea fire of cha∣ritie, and true zeale of faith, together with the other perfect and holie ver∣tues vvill offer vp to thee: and all those externall demonstrations those outward workes wilbe receiued frō thy goodnes in signe of those in∣tenall, and true ones of the minde and heart. These wilbe the sacrifices and presents, wherevvith thou shalt be honored, & vvhere with thy Ma∣jeste shalbe glorified, and appeased, & here I end for that thy sprit doth not dictate, or prompt me with more which hitherto hath caused me to speake. The end of the fourth Psalme.
THE FIFTH PROLOGVE. AFTER that the Pro∣phet had earnesily im∣portuned, yea een con∣jured the great mercy of God to take compas∣sion of him, to haue ercy on his trespasses, hee was yet on his knees, moued not place, and fearing that he ght yet againe see the image of his sinne whih gaue signe of punishment, euen poin∣ed at the place thereof, Hell: hee durst not ift vp his head, his countenace to heauen, hich hee contemplated more with hidden, hen hee did vvith open eyes; and standing without any motion, he recited, recorded (with his heart to God, his lips mouing not t all) the forevvritten, fore deliuered Psalme; and who liuing had seen him, and
obserued his posture, in that venerable ges∣ture, vvould not onely haue beheld a sinner truely penitent, but he might likewise haue learned, how one ought sincerely to repent, being burthened vvith sinne: and for that it seemed to him, that he was vnworthy of pardon, in such sort his thoughts on his tres∣passes did greeueously oppresse him, that hee bewailed, piteously groned, sighed and sobbed deeply. Imagin the inexpressible greife, for no otherwise was it, then as if hee had heard a crtaine voice deliuer vnto him that God almighty had ranged him among the reprobate, that hee had alto∣gether abandoned him and had vtterly forsaken him, in so much as that hee was for all eternity depriued of his grace: and vvhilst thus hee vvas astonished, confoun∣ded yea meruailously abstracted from him∣selfe hee measured with the arme of his phā∣tasy, of his deepe thoughts the largenes, the extent of the body of his trespasses; his dili∣gent inquisition finding them immesurable,
insomuch as hee could not by any meanes giue accounte of the immensity thereof, at once hee shooke and trembled all ouer, and in that shaking and trembling hee seemed to be a sikman, now being taken with qui∣uering shakings and the rigorous pangs of death: and much fearing that his scattered and weake prayers, through want of words and manner of their deliuery, had no au∣dience from God, preparing his sorrovvfull and deeply aggreiued heart, yea making it redouble it's contrition touching againe the strings, now newly reviving, and quickning his voice, clearing his pipes, which had al∣ready moued to commiseration of his case, the seate of his penitency, humbly vttered.
THE FIFTH PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. Domine exaudi orationem meam. Psalme 101. FAVORABL heare my prayer  my Lord, my gra∣tious Lord; in which thou sees the contrition of  heart contribulated, contristated, ag∣greiued to the height, the full extent and vttermost period of a sad, ah!  sad soule, for it's hauing sinned a∣gainst thee. Alas! let it be so that my lamentations, my moanes, my dole∣full cryes, may come to thee in such their state: nor let for thy goodne
sake, that distance of place be an ob∣stacle to them, nor let windes trans∣ferre them, or violentlie carrie them away; let there not be any impedi∣ment which may haue power to in∣terpose it selfe betweene thine eares, and my voice; any thing vvhich may disuiate, turne another way thy hearing from my (oh!) such lamen∣tations: rather receiue the prayers I send forth to thee, conormable to the nature of thy mercie, and obserue me, looke on me how it is, for I pray more with my heart, thē call I loudly out with my tongue. For I right well know that who turneth himselfe to God with sincere, with vnfained in∣tention, fulfilleth, accomplisheth his prayer, before the wordes are vttered: thy goodnes, not expecting that the words appeare before thee. So that let the clouds be dispersed which through this aire, haue made the
foggs of the pride of my transgres∣sions, and let my cry through-passe vp thither, vvhere thou abidest, that I may vvith it testimonie, giue thee assurance of my minde most atten∣tiuelie, seriously, and vvith fulnes of spirit, contrite. Oh! my Lord, hide not thy face from me, as those Masters hide their faces from their seruants, vvho tres∣passe against them, vvho for that they take themselues to be iniured, by such their transgressions, doe not onelie denie their countenāce which they humbly craue, but also denie the hearing of them speake, and to giue them leaue to aske for pardon, for mercie, therfore doe they so, to the end that they may learne to cor∣rect themselues, of their neglects of duety, euen as I haue learned vvho deseruedlie should haue inflicted on me my selfe onelie, for my not fea∣ring
of thy chastisements all the scourges vvherewith God punisheth the infinite coute of the wicked. But though so it be, though I deserue such inflictions, doe not hide thy selfe from me: rather at vvhat time soeuer I am oppressed, encline thine eare to me, not ansvverablie to my peruersenes, but according to vvhat becommeth thy mercie, in such sort that in the tribulations, extreame af∣flictions vvhich my soule shall feele through repentance, and in these, vvhich my body shall suffer in peni∣tencie; heare thou with a friēdlie eare, and if so doing thou commiserate not, thou be not moued to mercifull pitty on my prayers, vvhich my mi∣serie vvill desiuer, vvill send, vvill make knovvn to thee, I am then euē content to stand to my miserie, to abide in this miserable state. But if thou heare me, for that thou art pitty
it selfe, I am then free from fetters, from bonds, in vvhich sinne made accounte to hold me for euer. Though the great the ardent de∣sire I haue to be free from the snares, the entanglements of sinne, I revn∣fold my selfe to thee, and beseech thee againe my Lord that in vvhat day soeuer I shall inuoke thee, call earnestlie on thee, thou heare me fa∣uourablie, and that speedilie, I say that thou please to grant vnto me thy grace, at vvhat time soeuer the light of vvell knovving of vvell dis∣cerning, distinguishing, shalbe with me, my eyes being freed, disincom∣bred of obscurities, obfuscations, vvhich euen at noone day, the vaine vvindes, the puffes of vaine glorie, doe blast, doe blow on them. And for that my daies faile, va∣nish as smoke, not producing, not bringing forth in my seasons, in my
harnests any thing but fruite of dam∣nation, I might well doubt to finde peace and attonement with thee; but still auring confidence in my peni∣tent sufferance, and my contrition, one vvhereof argueth my outward sorrovv, the other giueth credit and testimonie of my invvard hearts greife, my compunction of soule I doubt not, I feare not ought: For the strength of thy great mercie doth secure me. But it greineth me verie much that pride hath conuerted them into such smcke, into vvhich their thanklesnes, their careleses, euen aiming to haue vvill to raise themselues to Heauē are turned, re∣turning their puffe of vanitie into that nothing at all, into vvhich are dissolued mists, foggs, and clouds, the vvinds aduersaries, enimies of their condensitie, of their grossnes, sharplie blovving. And my daies
being that is my vaine vvorkes, my vaine deedes, in vvhich I spent my time, deficient, ill pased ouer, vn∣vvorthily consumed, my bones in∣flamed by the fire of vvordlie plea∣sure, are become no othervvise then a thing quite burnt: for that the soule retired, altogether recolected into it elfe, hath bereft them of that nou∣rishment; hence they remained in continuall heate: and in their last burning heare, not vnlikely had they offended, and notablie hurte the fa∣culties and the vertues of the soule, had not eturnd to thee my Lord, vvho helpest the poore, the beggars, supplye them, makest the strong feeble, and exaltest and raisest vp the humble. My heart hath been smitten and is dryed in me not vnlike hay, and hence falleth on me all this,
for that I haue forgotten through my vvretched carelesnes to eate my bread. The true bread of our life, are the commandements of the Lavv, the workes of mercie and other pious offices, vvhich are spirituall foode on vvhich the soule is fed, to the end it perish not, it's vtter losse and death follovv not, vvhich hence commeth and hence onelie, for that it eateth not of this foode, for other nouri∣sheth not, but poysoneth. But I who timelie haue reflected on my selfe, & in time make my recourse to thee confessing to haue fallen greiviously, to haue offended mortalle, for not hauing accustomed my selfe, for not hauing vsed and made election of such forde, yet despaire I not of my safetie, of my saluation: But rather like a man vvho hath druncke poy∣son, vvhose heate extreamelie bur∣neth his heart, and all his bovvels,
his entrailes, and suddainlie hauing recourse to helpe, hath put himselfe, into the hands, and skill of a learned, expert, and prudent Phisitian, by vvhose presence hee findeh him∣selfe to be alleviated, eased (though the hope hee hath) of the greatest part of his sufferance, of his giefe: I requiring, humbly crauing assistāce, cure, helpe of thee, finde promised vnto me through my pnitencie, and through thy commieration, thy mercie, the health, the safety, which I seeke for my soule, vvhich recom∣forted, newly reioyced, in the com∣punction, the deepe griefe of it's heart. Through the continuall and in¦cessant voice of my plaints, my grei∣uous lamentations, my bones are in such manner so clung to my flesh, that I seeme to be a bodie hunger-starued, cōsumeth for want of foode,
in vvhich is shutt vp a spirit so weake, so ouertyred vvith faintnesse, that vvith much difficultie can it send forth so much vitall breath, that may shevv that it liueth, and to this state am I reduced, to this passe am I come, for that I haue not nourished my soule vvith thy foode, hence is it that my bones are destroyed, my strength gonne, and (the forces, the vertue of my soule, each day more and more consuming through my faults, my trespasses) I am reduced to such an estate, that I am as it were a man who lying on the earth, can hardlie be thought either to be aliue or dead: and through thus such like vveaknes, I haue so litle breath, so litle strēgth, in me, that I fere I cannot open my mouth to comfort me vvith the bread of health vvhich the hope gi∣ueth me vvhich my teares haue in thee, I say those teares vvhich my
heart powreth forth to make thee foget my transgressions. I am become like a Pellican saist thou by my tongue, & I apprehēd it, I vnderstand it right well; for that in enlightning me, and giuing me grace, that I may conceiue it, thou dost througlie purifie my spirit, dost giue light & force to such a tenor, to such being, to such an height, that I re∣turne, reassume to speake in thy name, in thy person, and hence thus doe I speake; I am like a Pellican; I vvill open my breast with the bill of my mercifull vvill, and in the sollitude of the vvorld (vvhich vvell may be so termed, for that in it, respect had to thee, relation to thee vveighed, each one is dead) vvith my bloud will I resuscitate, raise againe Na∣tions, the Gentiles, as doth the Pel∣can, his young ones, vvho dead re∣assume life in the blood of the bird,
which hath brought them forth: but euen as the Ovvle in his place of abi∣ding, in his perching place, seeth no∣thing but darknes, so I in the vvorld shall see no other but obscuritie, hea∣uy, gloomy darkenes of sinne, fogḡs, mists of pride, and smokes of vanity. Yea yet and againe thou speakest (my Lord) saying, I avvaked, wat∣ched, and am become like a sollitarie sparovv vpon the roofe of an house: thy vvord meaning that when others shall esteeme thee dead, thou wilt vvatch, thou wilt avvake, vvhich is asmuch to say that to our seeming, resuscitating, rising againe the third day, thou shalt haue seemed to haue slept, but in the dayes that thou shalt sleepe, imposing end, making com∣pletion of thy miraculous workes, vvhich thy vvill hath decreed to ex∣pedite, to finish compleatile, vvith thy vvorkes thou shalt euen sweat,
take heauie paines for the common good, the common safetie of all the Vniuerse, of all the vvorld, and brea∣king, rending a sunder and in peices, the gates of Hell, vvith the force of thy pitty, thy tender mercie, binding, banishing, and to euerlasting fire condemning our old aduersary, thou shalt demonstrate in this such like slumber, in this such like sleepe, that thou vvert attentiue, that thou wert alvvaies watchfull, that thou didst fully vvatch for the publique benefit of thy creatures. And in so doing thou vvlt resemble a louelie retired solitarie sparrow, who after his flight from elvvhere, strangerlike, alone, one onelie, pitcheth himselfe, alligh∣teth, and remayneth, as in a place of rest, in a house, vvherein are manie people allodged. I say that thou ha∣uing disposed, consummated those affaires vvhich thou hast to doe on
the earth, thou shalt aduance thy selfe, and moūte to Heauen, remay∣ning euer after in Paradice with the Angels, and among the soules, as one onelie God, and one onely Sauiour of the vvorld: But thou procedest fur∣ther in my vvordes. At all times euen they vvho most especially should remember them∣selues of the benefits they haue recei∣ued from my larges from my greate bounty, calumniated me, laid to my charge falslly & malitiously crimes, in such sort as if my good workes were vvicked and those vvho praised me in my presence, speaking ill of me behinde my backe, yea tearing me to pieces with their spightfull ma∣litious tongues, conspired against me as if I vvere not a Sauiour, but a Ty∣rant of their vvell-being, their safe∣tie, their saluation; and it shalbe true, Lord that the vnfaithfull, and they
vvhose hearts are perfidious, and blinde at the light of thy miracles, taking in ill part thy vvonders, which they cannot infringe, cannot denie (height of the vvorst of damnable vvretches, then whom none exceede) will come, vvill arise against thee as vvoles doe against a simple & most innocent lambe; hauing no vvill to take notice, to remēber themselues, to haue knovvn the trueth of those thy misteryes, in thy presence, which they praised, they extolled; and farre othervvise, farre from that trueth, they made a head, they made a con∣gregation, and sect against thy most just, thy most precious blood, yet shed for them, so that they confesse, and penitentlie acknovvledge that they vvrongfullie iniured thy inno∣cencie vvith their enuie, their mali∣tious heart burning, vvhich vvas in∣vented against thee, vpon those their
false grounds, vvhich one day thou vvilt deliuer and expresse thy selfe. For I most humbly did eate ashes, as bread, I mingled my drinke with teares, thanking them heartilie, yea further enriching them vvith my fa∣uours, whosoeuer made me hott with the fire of charitie, and sprinkled and dropped on me these ashes, and these teares, giuing me them to dinner & to supper: The enuie and vvickednes of the vnjust disquieted me, moles∣ted me vvith the iniuries of repre∣hension, rebuke, controll, it displea∣sing them that I should re ceiue into my grace sinners, by reason of the vertue of their repentance. And not onelie vvill they seeke in such man∣ner, by such ill offices, to calumniate me to detract from me, and to forge crimes against me, but they vvill ma∣chinate, vvorke, prepare death to me innocent, for my, innocencie.
And as sure as ought can haue infal∣libilitie, this shall follovv, shall hap∣pen, for that thou sayst it; and for the falsenes, the perfidiousnes, and heighth of disloyaltie, of the mindes of Princes of this people; in their knovving that the preaching, letting be divulged, and declaring thy trueth, is the end of destroying vvic∣ked custome, vvhich they vvill bring in practise to thy Church, to depriue the poore ef their meanes, vnder pre∣text of great deuotion, greate zeale to sacrifice their guifts to thee, by charge vvhereof, their purses emp∣tied, they shabe open enimies of thy iustice, and of thy trueth. And for that that vvill be, that thou vvillest be, I speake in the person of human kinde, vvho speaketh vvith the tongue of the first father. Through thine anger, and thy disdeigne, thy wrath, moued in thee,
through my sinne, vvhich I Adam transcending the bounds of obedi∣ence, committed, I was depriued, beeft of the principallest state of happines, of felicitie, and beatitude of the blessed yision of all goodnes of God: and I was through mine er∣ror, my fault, my sinne cast dovvne into ruines from a precipice, I vvas cast headlong downe to a miserable state through such my lamentable fall. And so is it that the magnificent aduancement, vvhich vithout any merit of mine I receiued from thy bountie, through fault of my ill and peruerse malitious will, and ingrati∣tude hath been my vtter and laft ouerthrovv and ruine; but thy mer∣cie will not, that the punishment of my trangression, of my greueous faults (if vve will not our seues, pro∣uoking thy displeasure, thne anger, by new trespasses) be the losse of the
soule, but onelie of the bodie, hence may I say, that. My daies are declined as the Sunne, vvhen it goeth dovvne tovvards the Euening, and they are become euen as shadovves. And vvell deliuereth hee the trueth: For if there had not been transgression in our first farher, our daies, that is asmuch to say, our liues, vvho haue our descent from him would haue been eternall, and not short, not suddainlie past ouer as a shadovv; vvhence the sonnes of men vvould not liue vvith that care, and vvith that feare, vvhich they in∣ceslantlie haue of their graues, and of death; and I Dauid should not haue come vnder the yoke of time, of yeares, arid, dry as hay: vvho before ouercome in grenenes the Emeralds, and if so it vvere I should not haue to expect the sacrifice of the sonne of my Lord, nor vvere I to suffer, to
participate of the punishment of this transgression, through vvhich thou hast not onelie shortned our life, but vvee are subject, and lyable to the scourge of pennance and sigthe of death. But thou my Lord shalt not faile, nor come to nothing as a shadovv, thou shalt neuer be lessened, thou shalt neuer be changed, be otherwise then thou art, rather thou shalt be and remaine for euer and euer, and euen as then thou vvert powerfull to punish vs, so likevvise thou shalt vvithout end be powerfull to free vs, and the memorie of thee shall re∣maine from generation, to genera∣tion, in all ages and times: nor shall the Heauen euer be beheld, be gazed on, nor Sea, nor Earth, but that each one shall vvonder at the povver of thy vertue, and for that thou art that mercifull God (the memorie of whō
ought to last together with thy pow∣er to all times, and ages) thou will deigne to recouer vs againe to re∣ceiue vs gratiouslie, being the workes of thy hands, into the bosome of thy mercie, to the end that through all ages, all times, in the hearts of people susteined and made happie therevvith the memorie of thy goodnes, and of thy povver, vvhich is infinite, as art thou shall remaine, vvho. Rising againe shalt haue mercie on Sion, although the trespasses of our first father, and of vs are infinite; When thou shalt rise againe, I am as∣sured, that thou vvilt pittie, commi∣serate, and haue mercie on Sion, vvhich I figure for human genera∣tion, for human kide: and for that at length the time is come to haue mercie thereon, let sinners reioyce, vvho through the comming of thy
Sonne into this vvorld, doe rise and come forth, from the place of their sepulchers, through the hand, of the povver of thy merits, mercifullie cōferred on them: Let them reioyce, vvho vvill knovv to suffer the perse∣cution of the vvicked. Giue them courage my Lord, and comfort them vvith the hope of arriuing to thy kingdome, for that thou hast laid open to them the gates vvherebie they may ascend thether, through the vertue of faith, and their endu∣rance, their sufferance, their patience: and vvell deserue they to be vvith thee pertakers of Paradice, since that Martyrdomes for thy sake are dearly vvellcome to them. I say Lord, that there vvill arise manie Apostles, and seruants of thy sonne resuscitated, risen againe, to vvhom the stonnes of mountaines shalbe more pleasing, thē the iewells,
then the gemmes of the East: an these such (enamored, altogethe taken vp, fullie possessed, rapt vvit Martydomes, by vvhich meane they may haue place in thy grace, they may please thee, winne thee t them, despising sword, stones, gal∣lovves, crosse, and prisons) will di∣vulge, will preach the trueth, dicta∣ted, deliuered, appointed to be in th tongue of the Gospell; and after their passions suffered, and at an end, to exalt thy name, moued through ex∣ample, which thou our Lord wilt giue them, praying for their Cruci∣fiers, they shall haue compassion of the countreys wherein they suffered: I say that the Martyrs shall be mo∣ued to pittie, to sensible commisera∣tiō of them who do put thē to death, doe Martyrize them, praying thee that the authors of their pesecutions, be conuerted, vvho although they
are wicked, were yet not vvithstan∣ing framed, moulded of the same arth, vvhich vvere they themselues amed of by thee. And for that thou vvilt haue an mcomprehensible compassion, an credible mercy on human kinde, & r that thy most iust seruants shall ke delight, & singular consolatiō in Martyrdome, which shall be impo∣ed on them, inflicted on them in thy eruice, Oh blessed truth to appeare, o shine in thee vvith more splēdour, nd vvith much more cleare light, nd countenance, then doth the Sun ake shew of, vvhen it is euen newly sen from the Ocean, the maine ea, and through the faithfull meanes f thy preachers, all Nations shall ot onelie honour thy name, but ey shall tremble at it, and feare it: nd all the kings of the earth, percei∣ing that their splendor, and geeat∣nes
compared to thine, are farre lesse then the light of the starres, vvhilst the beames of the Sun enlighten the firmament, vvith their bright resplendent rayes (vvhich imitating thy goodnes, vvith the same bounty, doth shine on the vvicked as on the good) shall feare hy glory, more then their subiects, their people shall feare them, vnder whom they are in obedience, in duetie, vvhom they obey, for that in it, in that thy trueth is seated, the height of iustice vvhich seuerelie doth execute iustice on all their transgressions, vvhich vvithout ought fearing thee, haue been hai∣nouslie and mortallie committed, in thy sight, before, or after the know∣ledg of trueth. For our Lord hath built Sion in the pure, and sincere hearts of men chosen, elected by the holie Ghost thanks for Sion, thanks for this ne speculation, and this new Church
there wilbe laid open a way, an euen path, by vvhich vvith fevver, readier, shorter steps, Heauē may be arriued to, Paradice acquired: and that this is true, hee vvilbe seene in his glory: Hee shall euidentlie be seene, in that direfull, most dreadfull day of doome, of vniuersall iudgment, in vvhich vvill appeare as to his glorie, hovv hee she vved himselfe, vvhat hee did, what hee suffered to redeeme vs, it will be then seene, how hee dyed for vs, hovv hee dyed that wee might ue and not dye; it vvilbe also shewen, that if it depend not on our obstinacie, as to his glory, the Deuill shalbe ouercome, and tyed vp in his proper chaines, for that the mercie of redemption, ought to extend it selfe to the sauing of vs all, and so ought to be and is of such nature, for that he loueth vs each one eqnally; and if so that yet not withstanding
the desert of our vvicked wretched trespasses transgressions, greiuous sinnes, shall condemne vs to the pitt of Hell, yea euen that is agreable, & conformable to his glory; for herein shall his power be demonstrated, cleerlie shewen, to all and each one of those who would, that so farre as con∣cerne them his blood should be lost, be of no worth, spit in vaine, and re∣maining alwayes in perfidiousnes, in peruersnes, in wretchednes, are neuer consoled, comforted vvith li∣uelie hope of sauing themselues: hence is it that God doth neuer turne the such eye of his mercie, vvith which he looketh on them who are humble. Hee hath respected the prayers of the humble; and so hath hee donne, for that the irrecouerable cause of losse, is not the burthen, the weight, the greiuousnes, nor the number of
sinnes: but the danger is placed, hath his being and seate, in the hardnes of minde, hardnes of heart, in that ini∣quitie, that wretchednes of not being of good will to be conuerted, and to remaine in such pride, as not to haue recourse to God: from hence ariseth it, that they who liue in such like ob∣stinacie, are necessarilie damned, for they lying dovvne, wallowing in the dreggs, the mire of sinne, without euer turning themselues either with heart, eyes, or vvorkes to God, it is all to nothing, it is impossible to be otherwise, thē that they dye in Gods disgrace, as perfidious wretches, and enimies of their ovvne safety, and of their soules. But they who looke not on the vveight, the burthen, nor on the number of their trespasses, but rather rectifie, and turne aright their mindes, to his immense and inex∣haustible mercie, imploring humbly
crauing pardon of their transgressiōs cōmitted against him; procure vnto thēselues, through teares & through penitēt hearts-griefe, that God neither will nor can refuse them, deny them the grace of his mercie, and be their sinnes as heauy burthesome, greate as imagination can cōceiue, as much, & as fully, as farre as can be passibly, he hath not onely not despied their prayers, though coming from sin∣ners voices, but not hiding his face from them, hath giuen full hearing, full audience to them, and fauorably hee heareth them, he inclineth his gratious attentiue eare, as hee doth to the benedictions, and prayses, vvhich those vvho are perfect in heart, and spirit giue to his blessed name. And such bounty of God shalbe known to such an one, vvho shalbe vvorthy to know it. These deliuered shall be written
in another generation, hereafter, for the Ievves, through their most vvic∣ked and perfidious pertinacie, obsti∣nacie, shall know them; as the day is discouered by the Moles, and the Sun by the ovvles; and the wilfullie blind not seeing the lights of the new Testament, shall not receiue the trueth preached by the word, the Sonne, to the justice of the first, shall God's mercie assist: nor hence can it be otherwise, but that by the le∣wes hee suffer death, whence the knowledg of this new law is taken away from them. But the Gentiles which shall be certainlie thine, faith∣fully thine, on vvhom shall be trans∣ferred, translated, turned ouer, this thy trueth, vvill praise thee their Lord, receiuing each part, each par∣cell of it, & obseruing it, as the lawes of diuine mercie ought to be obser∣ued, vvhich vvill neuer despise the
prayers of what sinner soeuer, who is contrite, & humbled, euen as a people (so farre as concernes the light of trueth) new he created, vvho hereto∣fore were possessed, altogether in be∣liefe of false Gods; hence they vvill giue praise and thanks to thee Lord, for that thou hast been to them boū∣tifull of those thy graces, through which thy bounty man is made se∣cure from death, and from Hell; and all this vvill come to passe, wilbe in it's time; for that God hath vouch∣safed to looke on them. For our Lord hath looked downe∣ward from on high, for that he hath looked from Heauen on Earth, ou soules are made inhabitāts, Citizens of his kingdome; and this guift hath his goodnes bestowed on vs, vvh looking on the world foreseeth th eternall danger on vs the woorkes o his hands, & for that hee reguardet
those his workes, loueth them with that affectiō, vvith which God loueth him, who alwaies loued him, moued tenderlie to pitty, commiseration of human kinde, made his Sonne man, and dying as man, taking man out of the deepes, hath receiued him in the bosome of his great mercie. But I feare, I tremble, to thinke on vvhat vvill become of vs, if God did not looke on vs, from his residence on high; if hee did not seriously affixe his eyes on the necessities of human kinde; or if hee looked on vs vvith lesse affection, then hee hath hereto∣fore donne, wo! yea wo indeed to our soules, nothing but lose & vtter perdition, for that vvould haue been another greife, and torment, another inexpressible-lamentable calamitie vvhich Hell vvould haue made for them, then is that vvhich time vvor∣keth, and the bringing to nothing
these tresses, this flesh and bones. But in considering what thou hast donne from Heauen on Earth, thou com∣pleatlie finishedst, gauest full effect to that vvhich thou thoughtest on, decreedst on the day in vvhich thou createdst the vvorld; and the mise∣rable lamentations of human kinde (vvho seemed with loud voices, to call out vpon thy Sonne to their helpe) as it vvere, enforced thee. The hearing of the pittifull moanes of bondmen, occasioned in thee, caused in thee, bred in thee the effect, the issue of thy most sublime, and most profound care, hence thou vouchafedst to send thy sonne for our Redemption. O my good and gratious Lord, it being that all things that euer shalbe, are present to thee, thou didst heare the vvay∣lings, the moanes, the compassio∣nable outcryes and teares of Limbus,
vvhich shovvred like a tempest from their eyes, vvho confined in darke∣nes, vvere fauoured, assisted by the goodnes of their workes; vvhich they had donne in their liues time, and deseruing pardon for the trespasses, made by Eve's husband, by Adam, thou determinest, thou decreest, that they should taste of the fruite of hy mercie, as the sonnes of them vvho vvere dead, likewise haue tasted: I meane Christians, whose ancestors dyed before that attonement vas made, & fully established betweene God and man, vvho liued in thy dis∣fauour, in thy disgrace, through the sinne of him, vvho vvas the first who disobeyed thee; and were it not that thou did'st humble thy selfe, to in∣carnate thy diuinitie with thy huma∣nitie, neither from Limbus, nor from Hell, vvere they to be vntyed, nor euer vvere they to be freed, dischar∣ged,
no not thy friendes, nor the sonnes of them that haue not known Christ. Thou shalt illuminate vvith thy grace, the sonnes of them, vvho are dead vvithout thy light▪ to the end that they declare in Sion, the name of thee our Lord, and thy praises in Hierusalem, vndoubtedlie these selfe same vvill preach thy name, to the beneit, to the safetie of soules: for that from fruite of preaching succee∣deth praise and to Gods glorie the conuersion of Nations, and to Hierusa∣lem and Sion peace, and the specula∣tion, the contemplation shall bring ioy & singular hearts-comfort, (true faith obtained) the true, & most per∣spicuous light of trueth, by meanes of the seruants, and friends of Christ, & then shall the world triumphe, in it's perfect ioy, for that God shalbe ac∣corded, God shall haue made attone∣ment
vvith man, in testimonie whe∣reof, hee shall forget the disobediēce of him that vvas expelled, banished, from terrestriall Paradice, for hauing valued an aple at an higher rate then God's commandement. But vvhen so the name of our Lord, shalbe preached through all the world, congregating and gathe∣ring together contemplation, specu∣lation, and peace in one, both kings & people, to the end they may serue God, the Christ ā Church, into which shall be collected, assembled, the people as also Kings. Maketh this ansvvere to God, who in the vvay of his goodnes, his vertue called it his spouse, it pleased him to see it held in reuerēce, much honored by the selected number of the good. Shew me the length of my dayes, sincel perceiue, I clearlie see my ac∣crease, aduancement, and glorie,
Kings and people coming to me, for no other end but to serue thee. And so much doth it say alvvaies, behol∣ding it's greatnes, as if it had before it all Hereticks, all Antichristians, & all false Apostles, vvho vvill come to molest it, to displease it, to vvrong it, to trespasse against it, vvith the malitious peruersnes of their deuil∣lish doctrines, vvith the power and might of their abominablie vvret∣ched vvorckes, and vvith the deceipt of a fained goodnes: And thus ear∣nestly encited, prouoked vvith a sen∣sible feare, conuerting it selfe to thee vvith all it's feruour possiblie, yet againe thus proceedeth. Let not thy goodnes call me away in the midst of my dayes: Lord thy dayes, thy yeares, thy time shall out last all generations, and shall trans∣cend all ages; but I vvho perceiue dangers to be hāging ouer me, which
tongues, ill example, and wretched mindes of wicked Christians, will at∣tempt to make me headlonglie fall into, am in great feare lest I become lesened, and faile in the midst of my dayes, as doe the lambs of a flocke decrease in nūber, trhough the rott. For it seemeth to me, alreadie to be gouerned, by the rod of some pastors, much more greedie, desirous of my blood, & of the blood of my flocke, then vvill they be, of my firmenes, my strength, my constancie, and their safetie, their saluation hence trem∣bling not vvithout reason, not vvith∣out great cause, I humblie craue that thou let not me become lesse, faile in the fairest bloome yea flovver of my youth, and remember, reflect hereō, that I am thine handmaid, and thy spouse: hence is there no reason that I faile to flourish. Grāt vnto me that I may liue euer joyned to thee (vvho
shalt euer be, alwaies liue) at least as long as the vvorld and human gene∣ration lasteth: and that shall so be, if so thou from age to age, from nation to natiō mainteine me in the hearts, & in the vnion of kings and people. Thou Lord in the beginning didst make the Earth, and the Heauens are workes of thy hands: and in the la∣bours of such operations, of such vvorkes thou shevvedst thy povver, thy glory, & thy eternitie; & so didst thou to the end that vvee might liue here below, vntill that our workes might deserue there aboue their re∣vvard: so boundles is the loue, that thou vvho art the maket of all things dost beare to vs, who setting aside the priuiledge which wee haue of being of thy making, wee are euē as things of nothing. Thou my Lord God madst the Sunne, the Moone & the Starres, vvith other Heauenly vvorkes of thy euerlasting hands, and all for vs, for
our soules to speculate on, to looke on, to contemplate, vvhose soules free in their election, in their choise, are able, if vvilling, to be accepted of, admitted, and to be receiued in the Colledge, in the fellowship of Angels in the order, in the state, and ranke of Archāgels, in the number of Che∣rubins, in the quire of Seraphins, and in the societie of all the military tro∣opes of Heauen, treading vnder our feete the Celestiall signes & Planets, vvhich shall haue an end, if so it shall please thee. They shall perish, but thou shalt alvvaies be, thou shalt alvvaies re∣maine, and they shalbe consumed, come to nothing like garments. It is true Lord, that what participateth not in condition, in qualitie and sub∣stance of thy eternitie, shall become fume, shall resolue it selfe into smoke, shall come euē to nothing: but those
things vvhich haue measure, haue quantitie, and substance from thee, shall remaine entire: for that thou onelie art eternall, and the Heauens participaters of thy vertue, shall re∣maine, together with all other things that thy omnipotēcie please remaine, as our soules, vvhich thou createdst, for (if that they through themselues be not deficient) they eternally dwell with thee. But each other thing shall decline, be vvorse and vvorse, euen as daylie worne cloathes, are become at length through cōtinuall wearing, nought vvorth, altogether vvorne out, consuming, as doe all terrestriall things. And in this secōd death where∣vvith time, armed vvith yeares, beateth dovvne and maketh an end of all things, thy power and eternity is demonstrated, is clearly shevven, vvhich can doe vvhat it vvill, hence if it please thee, thou vvilt likevvise
change the Heauens. So that it please thee, if thou vvilt, thou shalt remoue the heauens out of such their now place, and thou shalt change them as a garment: for the same power thou hast on the world, thou hast on the Heauēs: thou hast made them and thou canst des∣troy them, thou canst pull them all to pieces, vnioynt them, remoue them from their proper spheres, and in a moment thou canst make other ax∣eltrees, new Poles, and other lights, other Sunn's, other Starres, & other Moones, and the Heauens vvith it's lights shalbe subiect to change, and increase of number if it so be thy will. But thou art alwaies the same vvith∣out being vnder any other power but thine owne selfe-same, and thy yeares vvill not faile, for time hath nothing to doe vvith them, they are not subjects to time; hence they shall
alvvaies haue being, they shall neuer haue end nor though there pae, it importeth not hovv many lusters, hovv many ages, hovv many hūdred yeares; to thee the accompte, is euen of one day, is not diminished, is not vvanting: for thou art hee, vvho is author of the selfe same Eternitie, vvhich ought necessarilie, must be vvith thee alwaies in it's proper state, in it's proper povver. And for that thy pitty, commise∣ration, thy mercie is infinite, answe∣rable to the affection, to the great loue, thou bearest vnto vs; the of∣springs, the sonnes of thy seruant shall liue and inhabite vvith this thy eternity, and the generation of them shall euer remaine, be conserued for euer; and from hence thy graces, oc∣casion that thy mercie dilate, extend it selfe to iust men, and to such per∣sons vvho vvill employ all their time
and labours in obeying thee, both fearing thee, and louing thee: from vvhence the good soules, alvvaies re∣maining shall haue more felicity thē the Heauens themselues, which thou peraduenture wilt make a new, but these shall alwaies liue with thee, and this hath not onelie been largesse of thy bounty to thy seruants, but also to their childrens children, for euer, if so be by their default they faile not to make election at all, to liue vvell. The end of the fifth Psalme. THE SIXTH PROLOGVE. AFTER Dauid had vttered the aforesaid prayer, the last sound of his voice, of his har∣monious tunes, made a murmuring, a like to vvhat is heard in the Heauens, and in the
aire, vvhen it beginneth to thunder: and falling of, breaking of by a seeming stealth by litle and litle, as it were insensensibly, no otherwise then doth the last enclining, lowly and couert sound, in the silent murmure of instruments of musique, vvhenas the skil∣full art of the Musitiàn leaueth to touch them; the penitent King receiued into his soule an vnvsuall consolation, an vnspea∣kable comfort, vvhich denoted to him, gaue him so cleare vnderstanding, as that he found in himselfe an infallible, and most vndoubted certainty, that God had opened his eares to his prayers, and receiued him by them, vvith that clemency, wherewith the prayers of his true and faithfull ser∣uants finde entertaiment. But not withstan∣ding it not seeming apparantly vnto him that his penitency was yet arriued to the completion and period of the remission of his sinnes, not abstracting a jott, not tur∣ning of his minde a vvhitt, from serious, and most attentiue contemplation, conside∣ration
of the mercy of God, he was asto∣nished, and in deepe suspence, reapitula∣ting in his minde, taking into his thoughts againe casting vp againe the accounts of his first life, how formerly he had liued, and thinking within himselfe, of his good and just enlightning thoughts, which moued him to giue credit, to the vvholesome and sound Counsailes and threats of Nathan: for from hence came it that hee entombed, en∣terred aliue, enclosed within the horride darkenes of the Caue, deploring his greiuous transgressions with such like affect and fer∣uency, which God requireth at the hands of a siuner; hauing been all time takē vp with such pleasures which the vvorld willingly giueth vs; for that wee loue it, as we ought to loue Heauen; yet reposing some vvhat his right hand on his beard, and his fore-finger ouerth wart his lips, he vvell knowing, being most ascertained, that onely brea∣thing forth, yea pathetically singing hymnes of his penitency, could set him againe in state
of well being, in the grace of God returned to him with his heart, with his face lifted vp, with the countenance of a penitent, vvith vvords vvell and harmoniously de∣liuered straight vtered these. THE SIXTH PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. De profundis clamaui ad te. Psalme 129. FROM the deepes I haue called out to thee my Lord; ô Lord my Lord fauorably heare my prayers: for now I beseech thee, as I haue many times arnestly implored thee, and this my petition, my supplicatiō, my humble prayers, which I ofter at thy feete, arise from the depth of my hainous transgres∣sions, and for that they haue as it
vvere ouer cast, ouer whelmed, yea euen buried my soule in the bottom∣lesse pitt of Hell, I come to thee, alas! I haue recourse to thee, vvith a voice rendring forth vvords, dravvne, sent from the bottome of my heart, and framed in the bottome of this Caue, this dungeon, onely to mooue thy mercies, pardon vnto me, for all the sinnes I haue miserably and vvret∣chedly trespassed in, vvhich I haue humbly acknowledged from the houre, from the moment of my re∣assuming my selfe, euen to this verie instant. In such sort that my prayer may be registred in the booke vvhere are recorded the transgressions for∣giuen to them vvho know to sinne, and who knew to repent themselues, vvho hauing sinned, yet ran the course to recouer themselues by re∣pentance. Let thy eares be attentiue to the
voice of my supplicaions, for there is no center so discost, so farre of, so deepe, vvhich controlls thy hearing of them, vvho invoke thee, call vpon thee for helpe, for aide from their hearts. The words my Lord framed by them vvho haue some diffidence, doubt, mistrust in thy grace, are not blown avvay by winde, or dissolued into vvinde through the distance vvhich is from thy height, to our low, & deepe places, it is farre other∣wise, for thou hearest them in such sorte, as if they vvho send them vp to thee vvere at hand, present: and so being it, that vve are in thy sight, in thy presence, through the infinitenes of thy bounty, although vve are most vnworthy to be nigh thee, thou dost saue vs. And therfore good God heare me attentiuely, vvho call on thee vvith my heart, vvhilst also I vvaile, I moane, I weepe in this ob∣scure
and darke Caue: Heare me with such fauourable audience, as thou didst hearken and lend thine eare to Ionas, vvho from the bottome of the Whales belly, called on thee his Lord, earnestly, fervently, and with a truely contrite heart; O then my Lord let me also be heard, fauourably heare me, yea and heare me in such man∣ner, that hearing me thou grant me my requests, my humble petitions; for ô my Lord now it is lōg sithence that I haue vvith my prayers invoca∣ted thee, called vnto thee, vvith a loud and earnest voice: and though so it be, that thou art in the height of thy glory, and  in the Center of my sinne, let it please thee, deigne that thy eares heare me cōpassionatly, to whose eares it is euen harmony to heare their prayer vvho in this life pray with their hearts, as is delectably svveet in that other life, other state
and being, the hearing the lauds, the thanks, vvhich the Angells tune to thee, and melodiouslie send forth, with exalted voices. But if so that thou shalt take stricte notice of iniquities, of trespasses Lord, ô my Lord, vvho soyled with them, vvho so burthened, shall be able to sustaine thee; vvho such can looke on thee? not any such vndoub∣tedly will there be who can support thy justice, if thou doest not forget, lay aside the taking notice of the sinnes of such: for that there is not any so just, nor so perfect in this horrible sea of tribulation, vvho can (if so be it thou dost adiuge him, vvith the se∣ueritie, the rigour of thy justice one∣lie) sustaine, beare the burthen (al∣though hee doe couer himselfe, defēd himselfe, vnder the buckler of the verte of heart & fortitude of minde) of his trespasses, for on the head of
him that transgresseth thou doest in∣flict thy terrible punishments, thy horrible scourges. But for that thou hast made thy mercie companion of thy juice, and for that each of them is infinite, I being not able to haue accesse, reourse to thee, by meanes of this, make me vvorthy that I may arriue to thee by meanes of the other. Truelie there is not any who through his ovvne deserts, and through his innocencie, being in such state of sinne, could sustane, vndergoe thy judgment, if so that on such an one, thou hadst put in practise▪ in execu∣tion thy iustice onelie: But because thou knowest Lord vvhat, and of vvhat qualitie, what condition, is human frailty of, thou hast mae vs know thy mercie, hence are vve con∣fident, hence are vve appeased, hence rest vve sure in it, thankes be to it through thee.
For with thee is mercie, for thy lavv haue I sustained thee: I say in demonstration hovv much, yea and vvhat is the mercie of thy gratious commiserating goodnes, thou shalt send downe thy Sōne into the world, vvhence I vvho through thy grace and vertue know this new lavv, and this nevv order, this new disposition of things, vvhereby each one vvho vvill may be saued in thy decreed mercie, haue in sustaining, supporting placed my hopes in thee, and I am not cōfounded, I am not in despaire, but if thou so vvert not pleased, that I knovv to recount the goodnes of thy grace, vvhich thou hast giuen me, as also that thou vvilt not par∣don euerie one, but yet vvilt send thy Sonne to dye for the saluation of sin∣ners, I should not haue been this pre∣sent day to be confounded and to despaire of my selfe, onelie thincking
on the demerit of my most greiuious transgressions. My soule hath sustained it selfe in thy vvorde, my minde hath hoped in our Lord through the stable hope, vvhich I haue had in God, my soule is held vp, lifted vp, mainteined in thy vvord, vvhich hath dictated, vvhich hath spoken that vvhich thou hast vvilled I should speake of, and concerning Christ, vvho vvill not onelie come to preach his mercie to them, vvho hope in it, but hee vvill likevvise teach it to him, vvho after him hath Commission, command, and is bound to make it knovvn in his name as I deliuer it cleare, vvho am all consolated in the hope vvhich I haue alwayes had in thy mercy: and it seemeth to me that I haue donne much hauing sustained on my selfe the burthen of these my such so great transgressions: but I should not haue
been able to vndergoe so much had not my soule hoped in it's Lord, and had it been bent, employed, wor∣king in so feruent a penitencie, which with thee is of some merit, which thou so prisest, thanks be to thy goodnes; thy grace, vvhich enlargest it vvith, to the end it deserue; but I hence forward will yet further bring forth fruite worthy of penitencie, not onely repent me to haue been a trespasser, to haue been vvreched. From the morning watch vntill night let Israël hope in our Lord: for that God is fullie mercifull, and for that he loueth vs so much from the beginning, to the end of our life, let the elected people, that is, those who seeke for their health, their safetie, their saluation in God, hope in our Lord, vvho from the instant that a man is borne, vntill the instant of his death, is alwaies mercifull; nor
supporteth hee that the sinner sheed in vaine any of the teares proceeding from his repentance, nor anie of the vvordes of his prayers; no, no; for they are safelie laid vp in the Esche∣quer, vvhere are carefullie conserued, surelie kept, the treasures heaped vp, laid vp in store in Heauen, to adorne with sempiternall, vvith euerlasting magnificence and glorie the soules of the elected. And let not the good onelie hope, and sinners in God al∣waies, and at all times of their liues, but let them hope, watching euer∣more on their safetie, their saluation: euen as a seruant doth in the vvatch vvhich his maister hath appointed him to, vvho not for that he began to execute his charge, but for the ha∣uing fullie discharged, what hee was appointed to doe, to the very time that hee called him from it, atchei∣ueth, winneth the revvard prepared,
appointed for him. For that in our Lord is mercy and most copious, most fully abundant redemption, I haue alwaies hoped in him, & I haue euermore cōfided, put my sure and most vndoubted trust, in my castigation, in my reclaime, in my amendment, and in the health, in the saluation which the coming of his Sonne shall bring to vs. And for that I without all vncertaintie know, that I shall make attonement vvith him, (notvvithstanding I vvas mas∣ked vnder the disguise, the vveed of sinne, vvhich had so estranged me, that I vndervvent imminent danger, to haue neuer reassumed my selfe, neuer reacknovvledged my selfe) I will reioyce in the height, in the depth of my pensivenesie, of my greiuous heavines, and vvhilst that I shall endeauour, heartilie labour to praise my Lord, and to render thanks
to my Lord alwaies imploring par∣don, peace, and tranquilitie, thy or∣dinances ô God, thy decrees will hasten to giue happie dispatch to the safetie of Israël, which trustethin thee our Lord, fulfilling, accomplishing thy trueth as I by my voice haue de∣liuered. Let the elect confide in our Lord, and this our mercifull and gratious Lord vvill redeeme Israël, vvill free Israël from all it's transgressions; and sending into the vvorld his onelie begotten Sonne, all the trespasses, all the hainous sinnes of mankinde shalbe bought out, be redeemed, by his most pretious blood: and through the merit of it, vvee shall not onelie reape the fruite, the great benefit of hauing our old sinnes forgiuē vs, but in like manner all our offences which by vs hauue been possibly able to be trespassed in, in his sight, vvho vvill
alvvaies be indulgent, fauourable, cleare in aspect, to any one who shall endeauour to behold vvith a pure minde, and a feruent vvill of a con∣trite heart, the peaceable mild and rarely fauorable cast of his admired and dreadfull countenance; from vvhose eyebries, raies, beames are cast, are sent forth of that glorie, vvhich his mercy dispenseth to anie vvho desireth to glorifie himsele in him. The end of the sixth Psalme. THE SEAVENTH PROLOGVE. IF so be that at any time the peti∣tions, the humble supplications, the most feruent importuning prayers of his seruants vvere acceptable, pleasing, gratefull to God, then vvere these
of Dauid, vvho pulled vp them by the rootes, from the bottome of his heart, no o∣thervvise then doth the winde roote out, grubbe vp, from the Earth's deepes, the roots of tes, vvhich it by the great force, the vice of it's tepestuous motion, throw∣eth downe. And vvell made he shevv of it, in him it vvas eidently seene, that his prayers had fauour able hearing, and were pleasing to God, for hauing opened his be∣nigne, mercisull, and most commierating eares to his heartiest vvishes, hee struck him with such an inexpressible joy in an in∣stant, sprg and framed in his heart (hee being in a kind of an extaie, not knowing how so) that hee seemed a man whose minde hath apprehended some vvhat, such as hee cannot expresse, giue a denomination to, de∣clare vvhat it is, which not with anding proceedeth so farre that it marvailously ta∣keth him, extreamely possessed by ght of hearts-ioy, yea, and to ouerjoy  such like as are they, who are ascended to the height,
to the compleate fulnes of Beatitude, vvhich they desired. And in this his suddaine sur∣prise of hearts salae, hearts inexpressible comfort, his spirit attentiue, nay fixed on diuine ontemplations, hee savv as it vvere in a vision the vvord of God to come dovvne from Heauen, and to proceed from the mouth of the Angell incarnating it selfe in the blessed Virgin, hee savv Christ borne, hee savv him adored by the Magj. The three Kings, he savv him dispute in the Temple, hee savv him fly vvith his Mother into Egipt, hee savv him baptized in Ior∣dā, he savv him with his Apostles, he saw him hale the ick, raise the dead, and cast out Dewills, and traunced, extased in a Propheticall vision, he savv him anointed by Magdalen, savv him at his last sup∣per vvh his Disciples, savv him pray in the garde; savv him betrayed, savv him scourged, savv him crowned with thornes, savv him adjuged to death, saw him nayled on the Crosse; and in seeing him breake the
gates of Limbus, hee vvas taken, and fully possessed with that joy, that vnspea∣kabls hearts-comfort, which hee was to feele a soone as Christ should redeeme him out of the darkenes together vvith his an∣cestors, his forefathers; and hee being sanc∣tified in his merits, hee savv him rise a∣gaine, and in seeing him ascend to Heauen, and to sit at the right hand of his father, a∣nevv breake forth into these vvords. THE SEAVENTH PSALME OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID. Domine exaudi orationem meam, auribus. &c. Psalme 142. LORD, fauorably heare my suppliant petitions, my humble prayer; stitre vp thy selfe, awakē, be thou moued to looke
vvith the gratious eyes of thy mercie on my heart's sincere repentance, which through the desert of prayers, vvhich is tendred vnto thee, is not vnworthy of thy gratious and fauo∣rable audience, thy trueth and thy iustice vvell weighed: not according to the trueth & iustice of thy Lawes, vvhich condemne, and inflict sharpe punishments sodainelie on sinne, ac∣cording to the qualitie, the greatnes, the hainousnes of the demerit; but according to thy trueth and ustice, with which is ioyned that thy mercy, vvhich is absolutelie and olely in thee, for thou being the author of the Law, thou onelie through the height of thy bounie cast forgiue the trās∣gressors, acquit them of it. There are many valued by thee iust, vvho are accounted by the iudges of the world delinquents: but the cōtrary seemeth to be in me, for by the people I am
deemed iust, and in thy sight I know my selfe so burthened vvith tresps∣ses, that vntill I perceiue thou hast forgen me, acquitted me of them, I will neuer dry mine eyes, they shall alwaies vvepe, and I vvill neuer close vp my month, I vvill alvvaies call on thee, and I vvill neuer be at repose of heart, vvhich imploreth it's Lord, that hee. Enter not into Iudgement on his seruant for to take notice of each fault, trespase on a seruant, is not a vvorke vvorthy of a maister, and to take animaduersion, strict accoune of each our trippings, our stumb∣lings, vvould be to make vs all des∣paire: for if thou weigh the multi∣tude of the fault we commit, the vveight of them vvould be such, that nothing would be found so burn∣some; hence vvee should be all lost: and therefore, forgt patcell of our
trespasses, let them not be brought, and laid open before the Tribunall of thy most iust iudgment, for that all those vvho hold themselues iust, in the other life vvhen all human ge∣neration shall bee iudged, thy shall not be iustified by thee. Enlarge me, be bountifull vnto me, and make me vvorthy of the gufts of thy grace whereof by thy goodnes, and thy bountie, euerie man is made worthie vvho offereth the purenes, and innocencie of his soule, by te meanes of a contrite heat, so shalt thou our God as it were substitute thy goodnes to my correction, in reguard that it maketh for my saluation and thy glorie: Nor for this cause shall thy iustice be im∣paired or lessened, which were it not in so geat a Majestie (so greate is the presumption of mankinde) that they vvould receiue as from a firme
deed, that the infinite benefits which they receiued of thee were due to thē by obligation: whence it would fol∣low that there were no way, whereby those that are vvicked, might come to amendment of themselues, to cor∣rect themselues, and those vvho are incorrigible, vvho neuer wilbe good, but are peruerse and refractory (who liuing haue not beleeued in thee) shall in nothing be diferent from the good, and those who haue reco∣uered goodnes; for as much as workes are not paid according to deserts: & herein it is necessary that thy justice faile not, but whilst wee are in this life, which is the place of our race, which we must runne ouer to come to thee, for this cause ought wee each one (the reward being certaine and eternall, extending it selfe, beyond the bonds of sinne) alwaies to deter∣mime time, to abtaine the sett downe
price, which is not allotted to one onelie, but to all those who shall come the goale, to the bounds of the race. Let damnation fall on them, vvho haue depised so great a gaine, so great a reward, which thou hst pu∣blished to be run for, and to be re∣vvarded, though yet for their so small, so slender desert, when the time cōmeth of each one's receiuing rvvard, they doe not onelie finde themselues farre of from receiuing ought of valuation, ought of price, ought of reward: but euidentlie they perceiue that they haue rayed, yea, that they are altogether out of their way, and hence so it happeneth, for that they pursued lesse worthie ends, and lesie honorable. O Lord and my God, the effects, the fruits of sinne, haue reduced me, haue plunged me in obscuritie, in darke places, euen as are they vvho
are dead for time and ages. My sinne Lord hath seated me in darkenes, for there is no greater obscurity, then that vvhich is interposed betvvene the vvay of good, and the eye of our perceiuance. Hence strayed vve, and lost the light which directeth vs, she∣vveth vs the vvay, the meanes to come to our true end. And certaine it is, that a ma blinded in the night, the obscuritie, the darkenes of sinne; parteth not yet from day, from light of vertue, and trueth, but hauing cō∣tracted custome and habit in the clouds, the mists, and foggs of vice, he is best and onelie pleased, vvith them: and onelie hateth the Sonne, the light, vvhich ariseth from the bo∣some of vertue and liuing well; on vvhich if I had contemplated, my spirit had neuer proued anxious, full of greiuous care, and my heart would neuer haue so much, (alas!) for me
been troubled, cōtribulated. Truely if I had opened mine eyes to the light of trueth, hutting them from the obscurities, the darkenesses of fal∣senes, of lyes: contribulations, and those anxious, rising & taking groūd from feare of damnation had not moued my spirit to reflect on it selfe: From vvhence my heart, my soule which seeth in me nothing els but sinne, would not be so conturbated, so much out of frame, by reason of the contemplation, of the thought of the miserie of it's sinnes. I haue reflected on other past and former times, and recording them, remembring my selfe of them, I haue thought of the felicitie in which thy largesse, thine infinite bountie stated our first Father: and likewise shall I weigh how hee was punished by thee for the transgression of thy Com∣mandement, not onelie that hee
should dye, but also that liuing, hee should sweat, feare, be a cold, be hun∣gry, bashfull, and should haue all o∣ther such like passions, with vvhich each man is borne through sinne, drawing on himselfe such thy disdei∣gne. And further meditating on all thy vvorkes vvhich giue vnto vs health, conserue our liues, saue our soules, heare fauourablie our prayers and make vs vvorthy of thy grace, and ruminating also, on, the day, night, moone, starrs, sunne, water, aire, fire, Heauens, deepes, moun∣taines, vallys, plaines, woods, birds, brute beasts, on the hot, the cold, the temperate season, the vvinds, the haile, the snow, the Clouds, raine, and on all that vvhich is apparent, besides vvhat is vnder the phantasy, and hu∣man imagination: and knowing that such admirable mysteries are workes of thy hands, to the end onelie that
our soule, (to vvhich thou bearest an immense and vnspeakable loue, for that it is made to thy likenes) may enioie thy Paradise, and among thy Angels; in this knowledge I haue la∣mented the infelicitie the nhappines into vvhich my sinne hath brought me: and each day fearing the sword of thy iustice, which hangeth ouer my head, it vvas doubtfull, that I had not been ruinated, and vtterly ouer∣thrown in despaire; but the sinne, the stedfast hope of my safety, which my desert leadeth mee to, my desert through my most profoūd, my most deeply cōceiued greife, which I haue for that sinne, vvhich first drew mee from thee, teacheth me to implore mercie at thy hands. I haue vnfolded my hands to thee, and in such manner, and in such car∣riage, in such act I haue demōstrated, the lowlines of my heart, and the dis∣positiō,
the inclinatiō of my minde, & in so doing, I haue made appeare that I vvas vnlike to brute beasts, vvho haue their hearts fixed on the earth, vvithout any spirit or sparke of reaon: and in such remorse of it's se fel haue opened the mouth of it, crag of thee, calling vnto thee, imploring remission of my transgres∣sions, and to shew vnto thee, that I onelie desire, and nothing so much as to be returned into thy fauour, into thy grace; behold here my Lord, that euen now newly and againe, I doe beseech thee, vvith mine armes extended, and with m tongue, and vvih my lowly humble minde, that thou please to shower, poure downe on mee thy grace, and mercy: for my soule is euen, yea and no otherwise then ad, dry earth, vvithout water, in thy presence; vvater mee I say, shower on mee, cast on me thy grace,
vvhich if so thou doe, I shall bring forth to my saluation most plenti∣fullie and abundantlie fruite, as doth the earth replenished vvith it's mois∣ture, vvhen the heauens in it's due season povvre on it raine, vvhence Aprill all jocund, all delightfully pleasant, taketh pleasure, singular content to see it's meadovves, & it's gardens, vvhich by meanes of the vvaters, bring afterwards forth roses and flovvers, and likevvise fruites of all kindes. Heare me fauourablie, yea and speedilie, my Lord, and let fall vpon me the irrigations, the waterings of thy grace, for I am prepared to re∣ceiue them in my soule; and that hence onelie for that the intention of my extreame bad will is novv changed, is not now wretchedlie bent and maligne, desire teacheth me no more, she weth me no more to flie in∣to
the bosome of vice; it flyeth its inticements, euen as sence flyeth rea∣son, and the bodie the scourge; hence maist thou shovver on me thy diuine grace; for I shall receiue it in my soule with that proper and euer seene greedines, that dry and barren land, and the ad, and parched sands, re∣ceiue, drinke vp, & blesse the show∣ers of raine, vvhich fall from Hea∣uen in the midt of sommer; and the fruite, which the land promiseth thus enabled, thus notablie supplied by the vvaters which haue been ve∣rie singular helpes, and vvelcome guests to their vvelfare, slaking, yea satisfying their thirsts, doth my pe∣nitence promise to thee, Lord, so let it be that thy grace vvhich I so much call out for, and with a lowd voice, abundantlie fall on me, for vvith ear∣nestnes and fulnes of sinceritie I craue it, I implore it.
Hide not thy face from me, de∣priue me not of thy gratious aspect, although I am vnworthie to cōtem∣plate it, to be such a fauourite of thy benignitie; for if so that I perceiue my selfe to be bereaued thereof, I should then cleane loose my selfe, I should then be out of my vvitts, I should not knovv vvhat to judge a∣right, euen as a Pilot, vvhom the im∣petuous, furious and outragious vvindes haue bereaued of helpe, and all judgment; and I should become like to those vvho goe dovvne into the Lakes. Truelie Lord, if I should once take notice that I were banished from thy sight, I should be drovvned in desperation, and so my wickednes, my abhomination by vvhich I am insulted on as the Mariner by tem∣pests, and fearefull and terrible vva∣ters:, in vvhose furious merciles depthes, hee is alvvaies, yea, euen
readie to be svvalloued vp. So that I humblie beseech thee withdravv not, retire not, no way hie thy face, thy gratious aspect frō me, in which is seated the hope, the helpe, and the beatitude, that blessing, and the in∣expressible ioy of each one vvho good is: to the end that I fall not mi∣serablie into the profound deep Center, bottomlesse pit, horride ulfe of despaire. I am sure that though my sinne, through it's hainousnes hath passed the boūds of anie remissiō, yet is God inclinable, disposed, readie to pardon me, for that I haue learned, yea I knovv hovv to implore him for mercie: farther I am vndoubtedlie ascertained, that hee will neuer slake, neuer deferre, put of the forgiuing of anie, vvho is not sluggish to craue, vvho loytereth not to repēt himselfe: for his clemencie hath such povver, that it can in one moment, in one in∣stant, cancell the sinnes of many
long runne yeares. In this, euen now in this present morning, let me know the nobility, dignitie, excelencie of thy mercie, and remitting all my greiuous of∣fences, shew vnto my repentance, & to my hearts sorrovv, that it avai∣leth any one, to haue hoped in thee, to haue put trust in thee: but if so that thou heare me not fauourablie, gratiouslie, vvhat example vvould they patterne by, vvho think, resol∣ue to returne into thy grace, through meanes of punishing themselues, for their former wickednes, girding themselues vvith sackcloath, so cloa∣ted? Pardon me ô my Lord, my God, and retard not, delay not, prorogue not. For besides that the vveake bo∣dy is inclined to sinne, as fire to burne flaxe, or vvhatsoeuer that fullie dry is, as tinder and the rest, the danger, the (alas) great hazard of despaire, vvhich attempteth to drovvn me in
it's lake, is as thou seest, vvell know∣est yet imminent, hanging yea yet ouer me, and vnhappie for me, if thou doe not direct my feete by the said wayes. Instruct me in the vvay, dravv its lines for me demonstratiuelie, by which I am to walke, since I haue ele∣uated, lifted vp my soule vnto thee, my vvay ought to bee charitie, sim∣plicitie, sinceritie, pietie, goodnes, trueth, pouertie and faith: and when so thou shalt haue remitted my for∣mer transgressions, teach me from thence forward how, and in vvhat manner I may restraine my selfe, courbe my selfe, keepe my selfe from offending thee, and sustaine, be a sustentacle, strength, and a columne to my soule eleuated raised vp in thy seruice, not now at all valuing vaine pleasures, which vsuallie entice, entangle yea enthrall the bodie, and forsomuch as it is now fullie solici∣tous,
tenderlie vigilant in obeying thee, confirme it, enable it, sprinkle it, yea powre out on it, thy fauonr: that so assisted, yea strengthned, in it's vpright and iust carriage, in it's vvell doing, vice enter not, nay come not nigh it, but that it seeing it selfe in hope of its saluation, it be farre more contented then it vvas in the ouer-weening delights of it's dāna∣tion, that it may fly from them, euen as the vvill to sinne hath left me, is extinguished in me, fled from me, as also all the affections which I haue borne to the disports of sinne, which gaue me vp a prey to it's associates, and my enimies, from whose hands free me ô Lord. Discharge mee of mine enimies, free me from thē, my Lord my God, for that I vvho heretofore estranged my selfe, alienated my selfe, vvent farre from thee, flying frō thee vntill this presēt, through their alluremēts
I vvho conjured, conspired against my safetie, my saluation, am now, ô now my Lord altogether returnd to thee, and from thee doe I expect my ioy, my hearts gladnes, and in thee solelie, and onelie doe I hope, confessing my sinne, and my ingrati∣tude; and therfore free frō the hāds of the vvicked, & wretched aduersaries Dauid, thy seruant: and vvhen so that thou shalt haue endovved mee vvith so much abilitie, so much fortitude, that I may be able to defend my selfe from their assaults, yet farther teach me to doe thy vvill, to alleternitie, instruct me to obeie thee, to feare thee, to serue thee, for thou art my Maker and my God. And for that thou hast created me, conserue me in the obedience of thy will, & make me such, that I may withdravv my∣selfe from the societie, companie of my enimies, vvho greiue for that I perseuer not in working iniquitie
conformable to their maligne, most malitious, and vvretched desires, vvhose perfidiousnes, made mee lay side yea forget my obligations, my duetie to thee, and as if there vvere ot a oule in me, they enticed me to place all my care in giuing ease, in giuing pleasure to my bodie, (which being of earthlie mould, ought to be despised as dust) striuing by all mea∣nes to procure an eternall habitation for an immortall soule. Thy good spirit, shall conduct me into the right land: for thy name sake Lord, thou shalt reuiue me, make me liue againe, in thy equitie in thy justice, thy vprightnes, since that the peruerse spirit, a vvhile since, which had drawne meto the depths of Hell, is passed of, is gonne, is no more to be found: the pure and perfect spirit of God shall giue vnto me, allotte me a place, a degree in the congre∣gation, in the companie of the just,
and shall exalt me, aduance me in the regions of the liuing; and in such manner, through thy bountifull goodnes, not for any vpright office of mine, thou shalt raise me, make me liue though I be a sinner, which is not to be enstyled other then a pro∣per iustice, annexed vvith the cle∣mencie of the same diuinitie, and for that euē now I am extinguished, put out, through such desert of my grei∣uous transgressions, reduce me into grace, enlighten me with thy grace through thy mercie: & in o doeing, it will be euen a rendring me that life vvhich sinne hath bereaued me of, which so often killeth the soule, as often, as it trusting to it, giues it vvay, povver, and poession of it selfe. And to be vvilling to raise it a∣gaine, it is necessarie that my contri∣tion employ it selfe, by meanes of equitie, vvherevvith thy most be∣nigne and clement minde, vvithout
preiudicating, foreiudging, the rea∣sons the grounds of iustice dost for∣gue vs, and returne vs againe to life. Thou shalt deliuer my sonle out of tribulation, anguish, griefe, afflic∣tion, and in thy mercie thou shalt disperse myne enimies. Whē so thou shalt haue restored me againe in state of thy grace, Lord, ô my Lord deli∣uer my soule frō those heart-greifes, and from the passions vvher with the sting of conscience doth quell it, sub∣due it, vtterlie ouerthroweth it at all howres, at all times; for there is no heauie burthensome greife, which may be compared in anie propor∣tion, can anie waies, yea euen seeme to arriue to the height of that inex∣pressible sorrovv, alas! deeplie and inlie conceiued, meditating, rumina∣ting fully of the losse of so inestimable a iewell, of that excellentlie sublime, that incompehensible, and perpe∣tuall felicitie, and for vvhat? for his
demerit, his iust desert, contracted on himselfe, for vvhich they are puni∣shed vvith the miserable depthes of Hell and damnation. But yet looke on againe, Ah! behold here vvhilst wee liue in this world, we are recōso∣led, vve take courage again, so soone as we doe but euen so much as reflect on thy illimited, thy boūdlesse mercy and goodnes, into vvhose armes my repentance hath cast mee, for vvhich, thou shalt disperse, cast of from mee, & acquit me of all my transgressions through thy clemēcie: euen as winter shall let fall and scatter the leaues of trees, and faire weather the vvaters of the Sea with it's billowes, and so shall I be free from tentations, and from molestations and vexations, vvhich our commō aduersarie machinateth, and alwaies vvorketh against our soule, his end being to conduct it, to carrie it, to eternall horrid punish∣ment, to Hell.
Strengthen mee against all those occurrences, which disturbe, disquiet, & put my soule out of frame, disperse all my enimies who euermore molest mee and afflict mee, for I am thy ser∣uant: nor am I affrighted or daunted, although the number of them, vvho lie in waite to molest & to intrap me is infinite, for that thy power, thy arme onelie can with it's least motiō, suppresse, cast downe, vtterlie destroie what army soeuer, what force soeuer there be. So that Lord haue care & re∣gard of thy seruant, defending him, protecting him frō the hostilitie, that his enimies moue against him, vvho are enimies likewise of thee Lord. It is the office of a true Lord and Mais∣ter (so much the rather, if so hee be powerfull as thou art) not to suffer any to wrong to iniurie his seruants, for in protecting them, he salues, he conserueth his owne proper honor. And were it not that I deserue that
thou applie thy mercie for other res∣pect, the desert, the merit in acknow∣ledgment that reallie I am thy ser∣uant might take place: and into this such like seruitude, the sinne of the first man, hath brought mee, vvho so farre as concerneth him deserued e∣ternall death, but thy clemencie hath donne, as doth a seuere, vpright and iust father, vvho being offēded most greiuouslie by his sonne, abstracting the loue of his flesh and blood, yet pittie, commiseration, mercie, giueth not way to him to punish him conformablie to the greatnes of his transgressions, but depriuing him of his paternall inheritance, by no mea∣nes vvill he giue way that he be at all about him, except onelie in the na∣ture of seruāts, vvho necessarily must labour for their liuings vvith indus∣trie, much paine and sweat, through continuall toyle. Whence he vvho is iustlie punished through his fathers
wrath, remaineth in such a meane es∣tare, in such a low condition of life vntill such time that mercie (time o∣uer coming disdeigne) returneth him againe through his fauour, into his first vvell being. Lord I through my old former disobedience, am become of a free man, a laue, and I shalbe like to the Sonne that hath prouoked his fathers vvrach against him: hence it is expedient, that I passe my daies, in this state, sweating, labouring to appease thee: vntill thy Sonne come to release me from the yoke of neck and soale, vvhich the seruitude, into vvhich human kinde is fallen into, through the first transgression of thy commandement, hath contracted. Then vvee receiued againe into our first happines, thou vvilt not receiue vs, not account vs thē, aliens, strāgers, not slaues or bondmen, but being made by thee Citizens of thy glo∣rious Kingdome, and Empire of
Heauē, thou vvilt receiue vs through thy grace as sonnes of adoption. The end of the seauenth Psalme. THE EPILOGVE To the Seauen Psalmes of the penitency of David. AFTER, that attractue loue of vvinning heavenly glory, and the terrible feare of horrid punihment had mo∣ued Dauid, in Seauen Psalme to be waile his transgressions, the hope of reward, and the comfort of hearts-ioy inwardly concei∣ued, for the fruites vvhich hee vvas hence to reape, to gaine, to vvinne (thanked be his penitency) he suddainely raised himselfe from the ground, and standing bolt vpright on his feete, first taking vp his harpe, and placing it vnder his left arme, novv armed with courage as  man freed, set at full li∣berty, hee vvas so strangely enlightned that
he heard with the eares of his minde all the Psalmes, vvhich hee had with teares sung; rehearsed, recorded, and rarely war∣led by the Angells, and being thus seriously attentiue to the harmony of their notes, vvhich were deliuered by the Angelicall tongues, voiced with an incomprehensible, and vnspeakeable swetnes, in an instant he found himselfe, eased, discharged of the bur∣then, that his trespasses had laid on him, & hereby perceiuing that God had receiued him through his mercy into the bosome of that grace, which he so fervently implored, he retired himselfe, issued out of the tombe, made hot by his ighes, and moist by his teares. No sooner came hee to the light, but that the aire it selfe seemed to cleare vp, in the cheerefull splendor of his countenance; vvhich though it were pale through fasting, and obscure, muddy, svvarthy, cloudy through his penitency, his eyes seeming as it vvere without motion through his teares; his spirits not vvithstanding vvere so puri∣fied by hauing entertained the grace of God
(vvhich made pure his soule, with the selfe∣same resplendēt light, that the Angells a ∣luminated vvithall) that his face seemed the face of Moyses, glistering bright with that diuinity which God had thereon impressed, vvhen as his magnificent, his most high & mighty majesty, vvithin a Cloud of fire, vvhose fllames hee composed of the strea∣ming fulgore of the Sun, and of the heate of the starres, yet vouchsafed not to speake; but gaue vvay, granted that hee might behold those his most sacred and holy shoulders wherewith hee holdeth vp the Heauens, & all the Hemispheares. Now Dauid infla∣med with the holy Ghost vvith which our Lord had infused him for his repentance, eturned to instruct and correct his people, who moued by the exāple of their good King, all their endeauours, their workes turned to make themselues perfect in the ight of him their God. But vvhat fortunate ages, vvhat blessed times, vvould happily fall vnto their shares who so should be crovvned vvith such happines, as is to liue vnder the
lawes of those Princes, vvho laying aside the height of minde, and the pride of their Kingdomes, cōfesse the transgressions which they commit to the prejudice of men, yea, & to the dishonor of God? Truey people would be more blessed then are they miserable, if so that they vvho raigne, I say not lame their cruelty, injust homicides, and adulte∣ries, with the same feruour of minde which David did his, but if so that they (no o∣thervvise then if God were not, or being ha no power ouer their pride) at least vvould not glory in their adulteries, in their m∣thers, and in their impieties, vvhich da they greiously and hainously offend  vvith open deng of him vvho first  last punisheth or revvardeth each one. The end of the Epilogue.
