20487.5 23955520 27009
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. BY THE SIEVR DE LA SERRE, Historiographer of France. Nevvly turn'd out of Franch into English, by FRANCIS HAWKINS, dravving on to the tenth yeare of his age. A PARIS, Chez NICOLAS & IEAN de la COSTE, au mont S. Hilaire, àl'Escu de Bretagne. M.DC.XXXVIII.
portrait of Francis Hawkins Francois Hawkins tirant a l'aage des dix ans. Francis Hawkins about the age of Ten yeares. See here th' effigies of a Child whose witt So farr outstripps his yeares & ruderthronge That at Ten yeares he doth teach with whats' fitt For their behavour from a forraigne tongue
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE EDVVARD SAKVILE. EARLE OF DORSET, One of his Majestye's most Honourable Priuy Councell, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and Lord Cham∣berlaine to the Queene's Ma∣jesty, &c. RIGHT HONOVRABLE, Truely; though I am vnder tender yea∣res:
yet my ambition so∣re's so high, as to call your Excellence the Pa∣tron of this my Treatise. My lovv degree, then myne age, to censure strictly, alas, suite not properly, to offer vp aught in this nature vnto your Honour: Deigne though in your benigni∣ty, to connive at this my boldness: for vvhich I cannot produce express defence: vnless this may agree vvith your propi∣tiousness,
that it may not seeme vnto you amiss, to bee honour'd by each one, even from shrub to Cedar. Right honourable, I take my most submissiue leaue Your honour's devoted Servant, FRANCIS HAWKINS.
THE PREFACE. GENTLE READER, The first Treatise I pre∣sented the vvith, vvas of good beha∣viour. I had thy candor, favour, and honour, as a benigne receiver, of that my labour: vvhich encourag'd mee to vvaite on the againe, vvith another of an higher straine, and of a rarer na∣ture, allso of a more vsefull matter. It vvas a Formulair of Compliments to bee expressed by voice, and Missi∣ue Letters, the one, and th' other re∣duc'd vnder their proper Titles. In my Preface there annex'd, I said; that I vvould present thee vvith
another Piece, and make my Posy one, compil'd of three. Behold heere my just tender. Though this each vvhere agree not vvith thine eare: yet may'st thou heerein discover theise ti∣mes vice even in perspicuous cypher. Fare-vvell.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The first Dayes Worke. AWAKE yee, Ladyes, awake yee, at the dreadfull sound or this Trompet. It's the summon of your apparance in the name of God, to that inevitable judgment, such is it, to which all human Nature
must obey, must bow: It's a judg∣ment that astonisheth the most in∣nocent, and causeth the most just to sighe, yea rather through feare to tremble. Awake yee, forsake your, though nice coutches speedily, come yee out of them, as if they were no other, then your graues, where the worme of your con∣sciences doth devoure yee; Heare attentiuely the last time, the finall decree of your safety or loss, your liues, or deaths. Open your eyes to this dole∣full light of the Sunne, which this day sendeth his beames soe bright into your chambers, which I may well enstile dolefull; for who well knoweth, whether each streame of this Planet, bee
not a funerall torch, which sur∣roundeth your beds, as your first coffins: since that our liues haue not in proper one sole moment: Surely, it were to much purpose to number your yeares, the bells call on yee to the buriall of one of your company, much yonger alas! then are yee. How is it possible! that in the proper posture wherein yee lye, yee once reflect not on your dea∣thes, on your last end? Behold yee stretcht forth at lenght, to your vttermost extents, in that self same linnens, which likely will serue yee in lieu of your winding sheetes. It's well indeed, that yee can breath as yet, this witness of your liues is the signe of your dea∣thes: since that each respiratiō doth
denote a minute of the clock of your lungs, vntill the last breath, the last sigh, make yee know, the last hower of your retreits. And as all your other actions necessa∣rily returne thither; can yee bee sensible of life, without feeling your selues to dye, and dying void of thinking, that the self same day which by grace hath been lent yee, may by justice bee your very last: where you must render a strict account of each moment, which haue fore-run even from your births? At the lenght; behold yee risen: but wherewith doe you enter∣taine your pretious time; yee ma∣ke your address vnto your lookin∣glass, and giue your selues the first, therein, by yee the day is
given over to the good morrow, to all th' inchantments of your fai∣re face, alas! It were requisite, that some one, or other, should whisper in your eares, as it was formerly to the wife of Mithri∣dates, Sooner, or later death will at∣tend on you, it will come inevitably: Is it credible, that your bloods even frozen with feare, and hor∣rour, become not changed into very ice, where ruines may bee plainely discovered by the entice∣ments whereby yee appeare ido∣latresses? This mighty, as vnhappy graced by beauty, made caresses, and homage, as doe too many others of yee to her face, in her lookinglass, alas! even when shee was tould: that she must dye, there was newes indeed!
How is it now Ladyes? doth not one daily sing the self same song vnto yee? were yee happy of the least memory, it would certainely cause yee to reflect se∣riously, that there are very many of your companions dead; and I can assure yee, that yee trace them apace. Are yee confident to gaze on your faces with self delights in your lookinglasses ever: since that beauty dooth flitt daily, daily fa∣de, and giveth it's adieu? Yee ad∣mire with eyes idolatress, not weighing seriously, that your sel∣ues are the sacrifices lay'd vpon the Altar. This world at the mercy of the Deuine justice, the officer of wich is Time, doth though by slow paces, vsher yee to death,
where yee must endure eternall paines for your offences. What curiosity see yee? what rare gemmes contemplate yee on in the lookinglasse, that there yee stay so long? Maketh it shew vn∣to yee, that your foreheads are as smooth as glass? alas! The one, and other hath deceiu'd yee farr: Your foreheads coutch their wrin∣kles vnder the vaile of your owne arts, for yee daily paint them; And besides, your lookinglass, which flattreth yee, by a new de∣uise of the cunning artificer, who to oblige yee doth decypher yee such as yee would bee, not the same yee are: what novelty ad∣mire yee now? your eyes? It would ever grieue me, if they ouerflow not in teares, to deplore their mi∣series.
Is it your mouths? It suffiseth mee to know: that they can not vtter words of more validity: then are theise which declare, and divulg the trueth of your calami∣tyes. And for your tinctures, deli∣cateness, they impose on me cha∣ritable silence fearing to wrong them by the sole aire of my breath. Can I not impose silence with patience, on my self as yet, that yee may rest in peace, since that yee are seriously intertained so; Where there are found more drea∣mes: then grounds, then reasons, which I must needes beleiue? We∣re yee awakened: then would re∣sound the direfull Trompet, which call's yee to the day of Doome: where each one must appeare in
proper person, and answeare for himself in particular. Set before yee now the confu∣sion, and disorder yee shall bee brought vnto. Is it not likely, that yee will blush for shame: as often as yee haue lay'd white on your faces? will they not become pale with feare, as often as yee haue lay'd on them, red? therein, yee will betray your selues, publi∣quely discovering the secrets of your guilty slights. I excuse Narcissus in the fable, where as it's found that there hee became his own enamoured, the adorer of himself. How was hee deceived? Alas poore Narcissus! thou never didst discover thy self in that guise, and manner: But how can one pardon yee? or in
any wise conniue at the errours found in yee, of the like nature? Can yee make the least question of your defects: since that yee are fully fraught with them? And for your forgettfulness of your miseryes: it's strang! What yee fe'ele a thousand times a day, can not butt make yee confess: that yee are not pasted of aught else, nor formed of any other mat∣ter. Awake yee then speedily, re∣deeme your selues out of this earthly sloth, wherewith your soules are burthned, are indeed heavily oppressed, and lending an attentiue eare vnto the dreadfull sound of this Trumpett, which summoneth the Vnivers to judg∣ment, ponder seriously▪ that it
giveth not a vaine warning: sin∣ce that each moment, an infinity of soules, come thither in trou∣pes. See in what case yee would bee found: if death should sur∣prise yee even then: when your faces are painted, your phanta∣syes charged with vanityes, and your soules soyled with a thou∣sand kinds of crimes: Oh God of justice, who will not feare thee, at the day of thy vengeance? Belieue me Ladyes; since that your death's are inevitable: since that yee must expressely dye in∣deed: sollicitously note your day∣ly demeanours. It seemth to any one, who observeth the care which yee employ on your faces: that you liue for them onely. The fairest of your company, who
yesterday dyed suddainely to day affrighted her vassals, and though yee bee tender to maintaine her former beauty: yet I assure mee: that yee defye to come nigh her without stopping your noses. Enstyle yee those horrours gra∣ces which appeare on her face? those her eyes suncke? those her wanne lippes? I tell yee truely; that hew of death, that it's tin∣cture, would as it where even make mee hate your sexe: were I not a fruite of the same tree; The rootes, and body of the tree, are of the self same stamp; The leaues and flowers, are of the self same nature, there is not a pinne to choose. To apply my self more nigh vnto yee, I will state it thus; that
there is amongst yee one, who is the flower, the mirrour, the won∣der of this age, what honour, what lucre, what returne of pro∣fitt will hence accrew vnto her? were it that one sing her praises in each tongue: there will not be found aught; but aire in diuers fashions. Should one erect, and consecrat vnto her Altars: she must bee the sacrifice, for having been the Idole. Were it that shee could impose lawes to all mortalls: she can not exempt her self from beeing subject to all their mise∣ryes. Were that courtly Fortune led her by the hand, to the height of thrones: the self same may oc∣casion her to fall, into the pre∣cipice of a lamentable prison, there to dye through greif; as it
was to Darius his wife. Il'e goe further; namely; that herrenow∣ned beauty, had the vant in the judgment of many ages; what then? where may be found her aduantag therein? A thousand ho∣nours will bee ascribed vnto her. What will the world render vnto her, where shee is no more, nor ever shall bee? and likely shee shall then burn in Hell, there so re∣maine eternally. Her body I say, shall bee food for wormes. Her soule, for the flames, and somti∣mes her name, and fame shall bee celebrated heere below. Whe∣re lyeth the honour now? My spi∣rits doe suffer, in theise contem∣plations, through their conceiu'd feare, and astonishment. Ladyes; in what a miserable
condition are they; who solely haue beauty, for their share, for their part? What rate set yee on beauty alone? I say it's no other: then to haue a gay posy of flowers, wherewith one may deck, and dress one's self trimmely in the morning, during the space that they are fresh: butt about noone, indeed so soone one leaueth the regard as well of the flowers: as stemme: even so, at the approach of night, this admired obiect, (the self same ment) is misprised of the Vnivers. Truely what soever is say'd; I find nothing good but Vertue: the rest passeth by, and vanisheth. One of tall, and comely stature stoopeth. A cleere voice changeth. And a polite wit sometimes loo∣seth
it self through Vanity. Ver∣tue is it, which is solely stable, solely permanent on it's one ground, never giving vs over to our ruine. Bee yee then Ladyes, since so yee will needes haue it, as faire as was Cypris say'd to bee in the fable: yet yee will gaine but an apple for your recompense. Ad∣mitt yee bee as beautifull, as was Lucretia famed to bee in the Hi∣story, yet dyed shee through greif. All the beautyes, who ha∣ue appeared on the earth, since the instant of it's hauing beeing, make but à hillock of it's gross dust. It's vertue solely which lead's vs beyond our tombs. But whither goe yee now so well accoutred, so neately dres∣sed?
If it bee to Confession, to make that desseigne your good morrows; since that it's the first Sunday of the moneth: then reflect how yee haue prepared your sel∣ues. In lieu of examining your consciences before a Crucifixe; yee haue been curious to enquire the state, and being of your faces before a lookinglass. Yee goe to craue pardon for your offences, and a new tran∣gress yee, in the same which calls for justice. Yee part I say from the Confession chaire to the Al∣tar, there to receiue your Saviour with soules more disposed to of∣fend heere after: then resolu'd to repent of what is passed in your former liues. Is not this to crye for vengeance against your selues.
Me thinckst I see the rare sainct Francis to appeare with that per∣fect charity, which enflamed him on earth, and by the self sa∣me fire wherewith the Seraphins are surrounded, and entertained happily in Heauen, and yet hee thought himself vnworthy to ta∣ke vpon him the order of Preist∣hood: Yet will yee bee so auda∣cious, so shameless, as to receiue your owne Creatour with im∣pure mouths, and prophane hearts; the sole thought of this crime, doth put my spirits out of frame, cau∣sed through confusion, and asto∣nishment.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The second Dayes Worke. I Warne yee Ladyes, in the name of God, for it's himself who giveth yee notice: that yee nei∣ther know the day, nor hower, when this Trumpet, which cal∣leth yee to his judgment will gi∣ue the last summon. How is it
with yee? Thinck yee it not amiss, to pass the moity of your ages in dreames, and folyes? Yee sleepe with soules as black, as Hell; what repose can yee enjoy at the eue of your everlasting restlesness? The Heaven; though insensible, quaketh for horrour, at the cla∣mour, the great noise of this Trumpet. The earth; though im∣mooveable, doth thence tremble for feare; The Angells themselues in their purity, and all the Saints jointly in their innocence, are toutched with astonishment; all∣though they are not capable of feare: and yet yee sleepe, during the time of this publique alarum's being: which fright's all Nature. Awake yee speedily, and prepare your selues to render an account,
even of the least idle word which yee haue let fall. Ah! how out of frame yee are; when yee wake, it seemeth to me: that yee haue set by to dye in shew, yee will dye now in earnest. Let me see how it is with yee? Yee are at a bay for feare, and dread. Oh! how profitable would theise agonyes bee found vnto yee: if yee would oftenti∣mes vndergoe the paines to ap∣prehend liuely God's judgments: but your spirits avers'd from so serious thoughts, are the cause of your missprise thereof, with∣out reflecting on your loss ther∣by, that's à pitty, alas! I perceiue, that yee are risen to dress your selues, and yee are never vnready to deck your bo∣dyes
repleat with infections: but forbeare a while I pray: then look out of the window; there's a spe∣ctacle for yee to meditate on, that stinking carcass, which is carried to be buryed, the same with whom two dayes since, yee con∣tested with for beauty, it's now as yee see, borne to the tomb; and yee will follow it thither: it's but a pace before yee; it's not knowen as yet wether yee arriue all three together thither: This dreadfull Trumpet soundeth day∣ly, and yee trace the ground in∣cessantly, and run the self same race. Obserue a right how it doth agree to judgment: that yee bee seen buryed in the way, one whi∣le; to frisle your haires for to hide your nitts; another time; to make
white your teeth, those little bo∣nes: whose least infected, ruineth your graces, and thus much is in favour of your bodyes: which ap∣parantly doe putrify; and hence the wormes expect their prey in this world, and the infernall spi∣rits in the other. What is the be∣nefitt which your soules doe reape by the graces of your faces? Thinck yee; that at the hower of your deathes, your Confessour will demand of yee, how many yee haue enthrall'd, enchained, and made your slaues? No no, but at larg, namely; how long it hath been, that yee haue em∣ploy'd your time in so vnhappy a beeing at such rate, in so com∣miserable a state: There is no fur∣ther talke of your excellent per∣sons
your rares faces; their gra∣ces shall possess no places, no mo∣re shall they domineere: your sou∣les onely shall pleade their causes, God grant that they want not plea to obtaine their suites. O how faire is the employ∣ment of this second dayes enter∣tainment! it's passed off in admi∣ring, and tricking your selues, meaning thereby to tempt and attrap weake persons to idolatrise! But, alas! I find yee farr, more simple yet. It doth appeare, that yee labour onely to advance and advantadg the fiends of Hell: sin∣ce at the dayes end, they cary with them away all your spoiles. Further; heerevnto adjoine their conquestes of your selues. It's con∣fess'd, that yee are ritchely cloth'd,
that there can not bee added aught to the stately curiosity which serue, as a new lustre to your enticements: But whither bend yee your way so nicely deckt? if it bee to a Comedy. Ah! how Cleopatra, that young Princess, representeth a dolefull personage, on the stage the Thea∣ther of her marriage, in the Tra∣gedy of King Philip her deere husband's death, for she dyed, by the same stroke of misfortune, which caryed that great Monark to his tomb. Shee was as faire as are yee. How comes it to pass: that yee are happyer? She was as yong as yee. What reason haue yee not to apprehend her misery, her missfortune sensibly? The Trumpet which cited yee
to death, and judgment, soun∣deth incessantly, thither doth each one make their recours in troupes, and croudes. Who can assure yee, that yee shall not appeare there this very day: since that yee ma∣ke your way as fast as the rest? Is that a reposed life, is it to possess tranquillity, to perceiue your sel∣ues dye without your beeing pre∣pared for death? will yee expose those things to so great a perill: Which yee can not loose but on∣ce? Yee liue not but for Eternity: for the life of this world is not properly a life: and yet yee let pass your time without reflecting, on∣ce thinking of Eternity, which will last as long as God Almigh∣ty. What? will it not turne to your
reproach: that on Earth yee shall bee found to haue donne nothing else, but dress, and deck your bo∣dyes of earth? Oh! what a rare e∣xercise would it bee: if so your soules were of the same matter! Oh! the sweet entertainement: if it were not expressely necessary to dye! if so one were to liue for e∣ver: but; daily to liue the eue of an eternall loss, and passing all the time, to the dressing, and dec∣king of your carcasses; by conse∣quence it must follow: that Hell will bee your recompense. Notwithstanding what heerein is fore delivered; behould yee pass your time, in seeing a Comedy at the Burgugnion house: but know yee not, that yee there act your parts, and are at the end, of each
interclude, giving occasion of laughter and scorn to all the sage Democrites, for the vaine employ∣ments of your times? yet it is ex∣pedient, that I extract your gai∣nes, out of your losses. Atleast thinke yee, during this your en∣tertainements of time; that the world is a Theater, where even new yee represent those persons whom God hath endowed for E∣ternity: Doe yee well or ill; yee shall not appeare but this time solely on the Theater, yee play your parts for ever, the Angells, and the Diuells are your lookers on, expecting the end of the last act, whence yee are to receiue praises, or reproaches, I meane recompense, or chastisement. Yee haue a faire petition to
deliver, descended from the Thea∣ther into your sepulcher. Oh! gi∣ue vs leaue to rise againe, wee will liue better then in former times wee haue. The intercludes are pas∣sed. The play is ended. The can∣dells are extinguish'd, each one shall receiue his guiderdon, ac∣cording to his merit, and for an Eternity. O fearfull judgment! But what'is more dreadfull yet, is that the Trumpet doth summon yee thither amongst the disorder wherein yee liue: I leaue yee to consider heere on seriously.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The third Dayes Worke. HAPPY are they, vvho rest in our Lord Ladyes then  yee: for  to the  I find yee, your  are as black as poss  though your faces
white. Behold yee are bridled vn∣der the chinne, as are little infants with a mask lined with waxed linnen to fright them. Oh! how would yee bee a∣mazed, if yee must necessarily ap∣peare before God Allmighty within a moment, to vndergoe the sentence of his judgment? Which of either, ought to bee more deere vnto yee the beauty of your bodyes, or your soules healthes? Your bodyes, concei∣u'd of corruption, and borne vn∣der the imperfection in which they liue, can they eleuate them∣selves, to make comparison with , created by the hand  llmighty, through his  charity, and for his
Yet and againe, Oh! prodi∣galls of misery, of infirmity, of meere weaknes indeed; who mis∣prise nothing els but your soules safety; and are not passionatly tender for aught els, but for your bodyes. Them you adorne often∣times, with new clothes, with ni∣ce robes; without weighing: that they consume all which they toutch; and ruine all which decke them. Yee doe well to bestow on them haire to adorne their bald heads, with a perrewig. The wrinckles on their foreheads, ma∣ke appeare atlenght, the borowed gally pot of roses, to shew vs clearely, the thornes wherewith their age is stated in. Conserue your beautyes with the art of limbeck, renew your
teeth each yeare, hidet your lim∣ber, and flaggy brests vnder a handkercher, allsoe shrowd som∣what, which may make them seeme round, and hard: the default of such vprisings would bee va∣liew'd as a most apparant defor∣mity; It would destroy all, Then; and Time, who trayleth along all things, who spareth none, ma∣keth an other breach, such a rui∣ne; which can never bee repair'd: I referre it to your quickned, to your more liuely spirits hitherto drowned with sleepe, to the re∣covery of your better reason long since strayed; Whither this con∣dition of life, which yee lead on Earth, can conduct yee to Hea∣ven? The third hower is even at
hand, at it's period, in all which time, yee haue been mervaillously serious, but in what? to put on your new clothes, and your bands according to the fashion: May I bee bold to enquire of yee what therein yee meane? If it bee to shew your selues at the Revells, and there to dance, make not hast. It was tould mee: that shee, who mooved for that meeting, is surprised by a continual fever, and the smale pox. Alas! what a chang of Medaile: Yet faile not to visite her. Her affrighting ma∣lady, will teach yee to despise the baits, inticements, and beau∣tyes which yee valiew soe highly. Yesterday morning shee conten∣ded for the golden apple, with the fairest found amongst yee;
this euening the curtaine of her bed is drawen to hide her, for fea∣re, least that shee hurt her ado∣rers: Oh rare Beauty! It's to flat∣ter thee too much, to compare thee to the wind, and to the smoke: for thow art (as it see∣meth vnto mee) much less in va∣liew. The Revells yet goe on, I mea∣ne the dancing to which Nature even from your cradles invited yee, and to which, Time is the violin: for by it's continuall mo∣tion, it trayleth vs all together, to our sepulcher. I much doubt, least the aire of this dance bee dissonant to your eares: but how soeuer; yee must dance to it, there is no gai∣nesay. Further; it's time must bee
kept strictly, it's all in cadence, it's musically compos'd indeed. Oh! obserue well it's burthen, there hath been much care em∣ployed on it: Each thing flitteth, and glydeth without ceasing, beauty leadeth in cheif, as the most fraile most brittle. Yee may plainely see your shares, your lotts: yet must yee of necessity pass the residue of the day in som∣what, which may seeme to please yee: but I pray yee what is it? Yee are euen now very busy; Yee court your selues in the loo∣kinglass, as did the wife of Nero: Oh! sayd this Princess, that I might dye first: rather then haue the least diffigure on my face; shee considered not what then shee did, how she liv'd, nor what
shee say'd: when shee dayly ma∣de this prayer: that each moment, of each hower insensibly depriu'd her, and robd her, of parcell, of her rare beauty. Ladyes, it's not expedient, that yee craue earnestly on Heauen, for that dessigne: since that, all the instants of your liues, are soe many secret theeues, who subtle∣ly rob yee of the principall, and most curious enticing draughts of your faces, I say subtlely begin∣ning in the bud, dawning, or ra∣ther call it Sun-rising of your age: yet thereof, yee take noe heed. By serious attention on their a∣ctions, is raised suspition; and hence are they partly detected to be theeues: but in the evening they are expressly found no less,
then publick Pyrats, who cary with them all away, together with your selues. Oh! is it not even so, what I now relate? that theise trueths ought to be sensible vnto yee; in such sort, and manner: as that yee should not euer meditate on aught else: since of such like se∣rious, and tender speculations de∣pend your safetyes? for if yee pre∣sent vnto your selues this variabi∣lity, this incessant circumvolution, wherewith all things heere be∣low are chained, and to be bu∣ried one after an other within this whirlepoole of Time, which de∣voureth all, and that yee turning the other side of this medaile, would ponder: that soules onely are eternall, would it bee even
possible, that yee shall not bee fully taken vp with the loue of Eternity? It's more then six thousand yeares, since the Creation of this World, and it scarcely seemeth to bee one day. It's very true; that what's pass'd, is suddainely for∣gott: But Ladyes; this Eternity, where God is the limit, and mea∣sure, is it which solely ought to entertaine all your affections, all your desires, and apportion all your hopes. Bee yee pleased that even now I shew yee the meanes. It's all∣wayes to lend the eares of your phantasyes most attentiuely, to this dreadfull Doomes Trumpet; where the share of your happy E∣ternity, or vnhappy, is to bee
seen determinatly. Hope not a jot for favour there. Iustice will beare the Scepter: Trust not to your consanguinityes or affinityes, your vertues will bee your fastest freinds; Yee haue a great catch of them indeed, yee haue a rare plea, to say: that yee are the daughters of a Prince, the wifes of Kings, and the mothers of Emperours: all theise circumstances serve you to your sepulchers. Your works so∣lely accomplish all your honours: or your infamyes, all your felici∣tyes: or your miseryes. Oh! Ladyes, how it's to bee great persons, and happy on earth: yet there to pretend not aught. Those who are borne, who are destined for Heaven, naturally haue such a disgust of Earth: that
thereon they spinne out their ti∣me: as if they had no beeing the∣re at all, still lifting vp their spi∣rits, and their thoughts to this E∣ternity: as to the onely good, the sole Sanctuary. The fruition of it, is able to satisfy their desires com∣pleately. O Eternity! thou art singular∣ly gracious vnto mee: that thou receivest favourably my good in∣tentions, my well meanings. I will never cease to meditate on thee. Oh Eternity! how benigne hast thou been to mee in particu∣lar, well may I say; in making mee applye, all the abilityes, all the facultyes of my soule, on the meditation, of thy longanimity; in so much: that I shall never ha∣ue other obiect then Thee, no
other sight then speculating on Thee. Doth it not follow neces∣sairily, that I loue thee entirely: If I abhorre all that flyeth thee, that forsaketh thee? If I seriously misprise each transitory: am not I constrain'd to esteeme thee per∣fectly? Let no man speake to mee but of Eternity: each crime, not returning to the same, displeaseth mee, nay rather; doth mee nota∣ble injury. In a word; if there∣bee any taken sensibly with aught, by how much the greater it is: the more doth it's excess menace vs of it's privation. Presuppose La∣dyes, that in this world yee bee both faire, and ritch; It's much. But I pray tell mee, what is their permanence? Had I to dispose of an age: I would alow yee to en∣joy
the full terme of it: But at the last moment; what would remai∣ne vnto yee? What would accrew vnto yee? your beautyes would not subsist: but in your owne transitory times, and your trea∣sures though now possessed, shall bee farr from yee, as constrained to abandon them for ever. Your cases are thus; all the goods of Fortune which yee enjoyed, chan∣ging their names, propertyes, and natures will afflict yee, to thincke of. It's truely even so: that it's so∣lely Eternity, which can quenche our hearts continuall thirst.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The fourth Dayes Worke. WHAT say'd the wife of Rosidates to her self, with a voluble tongue, and very nimble, as passionate in∣deed when she heard the dolefull Trumpet sound at her doore, si∣gnifying
vnto her the decree of her death, by the command of her brother King Hertodorus. Oh! Ladyes, how much mo∣re dreadfull is that Trumpet which doth summon yee to God All∣mightyes judgment. This Rosida∣tes liv'd, and dyed a Heathen: but yee, who are destin'd for Heaven, will yee pass your times on Earth, solely for Hell? It will soone bee noone by the watch of your li∣ues, as well as by the town clock it self: Where is your dayes work? If in such sort yee pass the rest thereof carelesly, either sleeping, or besotting your selves, it will be found at lenght: that yee liv'd here in this world no otherwise, then dreaming, and that in the other there, yee shall liue perpetually
awakened, amidst the heates of eternall flames, everlasting fire. Perceived yee not clearely, that the Sunne the other day, blamed yee notably, and such like sloth∣full people as are yee? but yee ne∣ver the less, will make it as your happiness to sleepe and drouse. This starr, which measureth the moments of your liues, leaveth not a whitt to run his wonted ra∣ce, his cours to traile yee to your graues. Rouse your selves vp. Remem∣ber yee not, that yee are invited to a solemne feast of marriage? I must needes waite on yee; bee it but onely to obserue your car∣riadge. Il'e take notice of your va∣nityes, and giue account vnto the world how fantasticall yee are.
Take yee your time to dress your selues; in the meane while, Il'e contemplate somwhat, and also exercise my patience. Let mee approach vnto yee nigher. To what vse are those gally potts of pomada, those bo∣xes of pouder, those violls of di∣still'd waters, and those papers of vermillion, which I see vpon your cabinets by your night dothes? Is it a part of art, which yee put in practise, to make yee seeme mo∣re faire then yee are, in despite of Heauen, and Nature? Oh! what bitter. Oh! what salt teares will these vanityes extract from yee Ladyes. Bee it, that your Ladi∣shipps haue the least leasure lent yee to repent yee. It's to be granted: that your
bodyes doe daily require the cha∣rity of pomada, of rare odour, to cover the defects of your teints. Your tresses can not hide their greasiness without pouder. Your tawny-dusky faces after they ha∣ue been made happy by the Alim∣beck, expect the vermillion; least that their dead colour appeare not at all: but yee obserue not that yee labour to fill pots, which are perced; as did the Danaides. Where shall one find Pomada, which may agree with yee, and contend with your stenches? What is that pouder, that can dry the clammy greate of your heads? What water can serue the fullness of your desires? And what ver∣million can make appeare on your cheekes, which Nature hath not
planted there? Thence yee disco∣ver plainely: that your actions containe in them solely vanityes, for their obiects. They rest vnto yee for your recompense. Oh what braue conquests! yee looke not after aught but airery toyes; your heades are full of crotchetts. Yee like nothing, but what is smoke, witness the teares disco∣ver'd on your eyes. See what'is the fruite of the course of your li∣ues, behold the guiderdon which doth attend yee at the end of your race. Oh! how pretious was the Po∣mada of Saint Elizabeth, who made vse of it to parfume the fee∣te, of whom? of the indigent! the poore! Oh! how odoriferous was the pouder, and the ashes
where Saint Marie the Egyptien∣ne covered her head, the day of her penitence! Oh! how the tea∣res of her repentance where rapt, and possess'd with Devine vertue; in so much as, her body, and her soule in an instant were embelli∣shed! Oh! how strang it is; the blush of her shame for her sinne, was farre more liuely: then what yee daily vse. Grant me this boo∣ne for my paines hither to seen, no less I beseech yee; to breake your lookinglass, which dayly flatter yee; nor ever take to yee other, then such as I deliver vn∣to yee heere. Yet; thus much say'd, yee will keepe on your wonted wayes. Now yee are dress'd. Now at the feast, and suddainly will all
varietyes of sweetmeates bee seru'd in: there is the end. What I would put into your minds, is; that all solemnityes haue but their times. On Earth, a feast is not to bee had: but of the fruits of its own garden; and as theise fruites, ha∣ue nothing proper, but their cor∣ruption: even so that aliment from day to day, doth naught else, but increase your infections; they can never satisfy your appe∣tits. The succeeding day, yee will sensibly find the vanityes of your pleasures had at table: since that they vanish with the table cloth it self. Likewise; seriously ponder, when yee are amidst your jolli∣tyes: that the self same howers which yee haue employ'd in the
pampering of your carcasses, are registred in the scrole of their rui∣ne, since that whither yee eate, or laugh, Time leadeth yee to your tombe. Theise are the banquetts of Cleopatra, which are solemnely celebrated: though in shipps even floting: hence learne wee, that each where wee chang fortune, through the perpetuall decline of our liues, all our actions tend thi∣ther, what destroyeth vs, is ours in proper. But to goe on; in conclusion; behold your retourne vnto your houses, the dance is ended, like∣wise the feast. Oh Ladyes! me∣ditate a little space, but attenti∣vely I beseech yee humbly on this passage, this phantasyes, All theise
pastimes, theise wordly pretty to∣yes symbolize, are of the like na∣ture with theise dances, and feasts, each of them flitte incessantly, it's sure that death approatcheth nigh howerly. Were all your dayes spent in the solemnityes, which frequently are found, when so that marriages are pompously ce∣lebrated. Oh! how direfull would your last day appeare vnto yee! since then must yee render ac∣count of your time past in laugh∣ter, and dance! Reflect a while how many are the dances, and feasts wherein you haue entertai∣ned your times; hence take coun∣saile secretly of your memoryes, then vse your judgments, and see, what is left vnto yee: yee shall never haue other for your plea∣sures!
And what? will it not bee reproach vnto yee: that yee sould your portions for nothing, which yee pretended for Heauen? I ha∣ue heard say, that Lysimachus did exchang his Crown for a glass of water: but when? Ladyes, obser∣ue then; it was so with him at that time, when hee was even as it were reduc'd to ashes, by the same heate of thirst, which bur∣n'd his entrailles, in so much as beeing in such plight, in rendring his dying spirit hee chang'd naught else but wind, but breath for water. But to see how remissely yee giue over your pretensions of e∣ternall consolations, of everlasting joyes for toyes, such I may truely terme them, which beare no o∣ther
titles; then of meere depra∣uations, of your phantasyes, of your imaginations. Where is that self affection whence yee seeme to become so passionate? Is it not to hate your selues: that you af∣fect not aught else: but what doth flit? it's not it? when yee dye, what will bee left yee of your passed time, but a present greif, and too late; such; whose angui∣shes will never cease? Yee never dreame of other thing: then to enquire after new pastimes, to the ruine of your ti∣mes. Alas! Nor consider yee a∣right: that Time doth ruine yee? for in seeking to pass it, yee must find death. How so? is it possi∣ble: that yee striue to pass over it, which so swiftly glideth by yee,
as doe your phantasyes, light though they bee, they can not o∣ver take it. And what more se∣riously, yee ought to ponder, is, that all the time of your liues, hath for its terme, its limit a sole moment, on wich, though such, doth depend for ever, and a day your calamityes, or your felici∣tyes; that's a misery in torment: which hath no end, this a bliss in glory: which will be permanent, beyond all ages, illimited in∣deed. Oh! how pretious are the con∣templations, of the last period of our liues! How! is it so? that thou art not as inseparable to our sou∣les: as is the shaddow to the bo∣dy? Oh! how sweet is the me∣mory of our death! Why is it so?
that our memory is not for the most part, in such sort all taken vp with thee: as that it never for∣get thee? Oh Deuine is the me∣ditation on Eternity! Art thou not as sensible of our soules, as our respiration is of the preseruation of our hearts? How Dauid liketh mee well, when hee cryed out aloud, that hee had often medi∣tated, and that seriously indeed on the dayes for ever: where God Allmighty is solely the light! Oh faire dayes! I wonder not: that yee haue no night: the Sunne which sheweth it self on yee is bright, and borroweth not it's light: no. Oh dayes most happy! say no more; or thus: I am not one whit astonished, if so bee it that yee remaine for ever: the
Planet which gaue yee a beeing, possesseth Eternity in cheif, in pro∣per. Truely, my soule is extasyed, rapt as it were, in this sweet con∣templation, with such singular content, it's in such guise as that really it hath no desire to be o∣therwise. Ladyes, in a word, it's so; that yee must arriue to the dayes end, and returne thither from whence yee came in the morning: for it's but one dayes iourney. Yee haue a fine time of it to bee lazing. The Sunne, who sendeth forth his bea∣mes for yee, will that yee goe as fast as doth hee. Dance, laugh, sleepe vntill noone day; the shippe of your li∣ues leaueth not it's cours, it say∣leth evermore, incessantly on the
sea of it's proper miseryes, onely by the wind of your respirations; it cannot stay it self: vntill it arri∣ue, at the hauen of the sepulcher: Ladyes, it's the hauen to which Doomes Trumpet doth summon yee. Take yee heed, least it bee not found a rock vnto yee: where yee may encounter too dreadfull a shock, the calamity thereby is for Eternity, and repentance vnpro∣fitable. In good earnest, at what time soever I think of Eternity: nothing that's wordly, doth please mee. I am not bold to say so much: that each parcell of the Vniuers made such by a Soveraigne power and absolute from it, having it's soule, it's beeing, it's life, is not in it self admirable, and adorable in it's Creatour: but; as there are so
many obiects of change, or of cor∣ruption; my heart not well appea∣s'd, sigheth after the fountaine of the lesser springs as after it which is onely capable to quench the thirst of my desirs. Ladyes, would yee but distast the word's pleasures, yee haue a ready way to fill your best thoughts, on the delights of Eternity: for such is the inequali∣ty: that common sense will lead yee will suffise, to make yee mis∣prise them, and earnestly desire theise.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The fift Dayes Worke. COME to my ayde, my Lord, cryed out Saint Hierome a thousand times a daye: I dye for feare at the resound of that Trumpet, which doth summon mee to thy judgment.
Ah, Ladyes; if this glorious Saint, amydst the deserts, and amydst the austerityes of a life, all devoted to pennance, found himself reduced at a bay, at a stand for feare, and dread: can yee fra∣me with the vanityes of the world: when yee doe but once meditate on the necessity of your deaths, from which there's not one e∣xempt? This innocent doth trem∣ble at it! and are yee not aught sensible of it? This harmeless qua∣kes! persist yee senseless? This just man, I say againe cryed out incessantly for help, and succour: though hee where soe pure! yet will yee not bee awakened: though infirme, by the example of his a∣stonishment? Can yee take rest in the ships of your bodyes, and on
the world's tempestuous sea's: without fore discerning that Ti∣me, who is the Pilott, puts yee one the shore of your sepulcher? Awake your selues then suddai∣nely, and as your liues are but dreames, at your waking dreame againe what trades yee intend to vse, whilst yee are in this long E∣ternity, to which yee make your howerly approatch. God hath giuen yee, and each one of yee, since the time, where∣in yee haue been of reason a pen∣cill in your hands, as to Zeuxis, that renown'd Painter, who pain∣ted according to his beleif, n'aught else but Eternity; this is a paterne for yee, such; as it sheweth yee: that all your works should haue for object, and ayme, no other
thing. In summe; all which yee meditate on, say, and doe, is pain∣ted in oile colours of Eternity. I would yee vnderstood mee aright, all approacheth nay endeth cor∣respondent, to the good, or ill, either to the glory of your happy Eternity, or to your vnhappy E∣ternity. If yee dye, as yee liue, name∣ly in bed vntill midday, what can I say? but that if so you play your time away, your laziness will de∣paint yee, and liuely express yee for Eternity: where endlesly yee shall suffer paines. Allthough each one swill as hee will; it's but for his time, his dayes course, and at his owne expense. But one judgeth not of price of the good, or ill, or default in bu∣siness,
merchandize, else where, then in the other world. Prepare your selues to vndergoe the judg∣ment. Yee will even suddainely appea∣re dress'd, and trick'd according to the fashion of the time, and court: and how is't? Your fea∣thers falling on your eares, ver∣million on your cheekes, and flyes on your chinnes. Theise are not in vaine vndoubtedly, their dessi∣gnes are to entrappe some one, or other: but at the daye's course run, it will then appeare vnto yee clearely: that yee haue made your selues whoopes, taking not the least notice of aught else, but va∣nity; as if yee had not thereof too much. I waite on yee at your sally
from dinner, to your coatch, it's to assist you tenderly, and with humble respect indeed, it's my duety, and to attend you seriously with my thoughts, in your wal∣kes, with intention to obserue, whither your times intertaine∣ments prooue more vsefull: then delightfull. It's necessary that I exercise my patience a while, vntill the hor∣ses bee harnessed, and put to the caroche: allsoe, yee must hauey our time to looke on your selues agai∣ne, while yee attire your selues with hoodes, and maskes. But oh! what simple imaginations en∣tertaine your spirits therein? There you instruct your eyes the art to tyrannize, and with strang craft, to hurt many hearts, not refle∣cting
aught; that your soules re∣ceiue a staine, through the vaine lightness, which thence remaine in them: It's there I say, where you invent new lessons to allure∣ments; so farre as to teach men, to make your selues beloved, and ferred at once, and the self same time; and covertly pretend: that yee attend no end, while therein none, alas! none. Obserue theise ra∣re dessignes; what doe yee medita∣te on oftner? Let it bee that your black eyes with their vyes doe much hurt to day; to morrow, one drop of rume indeed, will make them red, which will serue to cure the smarts, of those your former darts. How happily doe your courteous sweetness, with your graces, acquire loue, and feare
iointly. Whosoeuer they bee, that seeme to dye for yee, they loue yee not: it's; for what? for their interess, not to bee spoken of here further. Thus much yet will I say: that they who court yee as sincere lovers, ground them selues on the express ruines, the vtter destru∣ctions of your reputations; and yee take it well, to make them feare yee. They care for nothing more: then to pass their times, in that entreprise, their delights, their sports. But it seemeth no less vnto mee: then that yee take your way to the race, to the place in vse now a dayes. Oh! how vainely hunt you after toyes in this your walke, as to a publick faire where merchan∣dise is set forth for each to buy?
Would yee not say, tkat this yong simple fondling, cloth'd in green, who is like vnto tapistry, which yee haue seen frequently, hung before a doore, hath emplo∣yed about her face all her white∣ning? Shee thinketh, that in beau∣ty shee doth surpass, the Vniuers. Alas! for pitty. I speake plainely to her now, not taking any notice, that her self-loue daily putteth on a hood to see at randome her de∣fects. Shee, who would bee the beloved'st of many, in each doth mooue pitty for such her foly. My opinion of her, is no other: then that shee is a gloweworme, who giveth light to many from a dun∣ghill, the surface of which is all covered with snow. What character shall this proud
piece beare? What may one's cen∣sure bee heere of this giddy one, who beeing possessed of n'aught else but of a bosome, maketh a shameless bravado, as if the rest of her carcass, were to bee let or sould out right? Oh peace a while! what will prooue her confusion: when the daye hath run its race? when shee must needes shut vp her shopp, having not met with any customer whōsoeuer, not one admirer of her treasure? Mode∣sty is it, which hath enticements not found els where; there-in onely. I pray yee stay not a jot, co∣me hither speedily, bee the spe∣ctatours of this fond toye, this Foppe. Whose best draughts through age, are become void of
moss, and hence borrow for the stage, the artifice of so many flyes, as if they could nippe some one or other, though such bee her age; a strang passage: but commiserable: for it's even ten yeares since that beauty bid her the last adieu: and if shee daily employ all her study for it's recovery: what foly would it appeare, to weare time present, for to call time pass'd, againe: yet might shee bee happy in her disa∣sters; were it so; that though shee suffer shipwracke: yet that at lenght shee take hold of vertue, to redee∣me her self from danger, nay ra∣ther, from vtter loss. Haue yee but a little patience to view the Lady who cometh in a coatch all guilt; by her counte∣nance, and demeanour, I guess:
that shee doth esteeme her self, to bee the I dole of eache one, who behold her with attention, not re∣flecting aught on Time, her new coatch-man, who waiteth on her, it's hee, who beareth her in the same carre of triumph, to the aultar of her sepulcher, there to be offer'd vp with shame together, with all her adorers. But shee that's there, how miss∣bee-seemingly doth shee lend her eare, and attentiuely, to the pra∣tlings of a giddy humorist, who courts her, and yet; what is much more vndiscret; she believeth all the lyes the braine-sick delivereth vnto her. Mee thinkst I plainely heare him sweare: that shee hath the rarest aspect, and most admi∣redst eyes, that ever did appeare
in this hemisphere, and solely on the confidence, shee hath given to her lookinglass, she doth be∣lieue him. In the meane-while; heere are found braue assurances, rare cau∣tions indeed. Ah how is it now? doth shee not know, that the first oath of an amorous, is to obserue not one during the time of his pas∣sion? And further it's the common fashion of lover's speaches, it's their aire, to say to their Mistresses: that they are mervailously faire, even to perfection, theise are their customary wayes, now a dayes: and yet most vnhappily; it's to bee deplored truely, yee ordinarily be∣lieue them, nor reflect yee aught: that your first betrayer, is your lookinglass, it alas, for pitty!
Yet will I grant, that shee is rarely endow'd, and singulerly graced with beauty: there is the seat of her vanity. Could there bee added sense, and life vnto her counterfaite, her picture; shee would thereby by many a degree surpass the Prototype, the Origi∣nall: for that luster may bee con∣serv'd as her proper: this hath no∣thing in peculiar, but the neces∣sity of decay. In so much; that when one persuadeth her, that shee is mervailously faire, shee should take theise as ordinary dis∣courses: since her beauty passeth by, is of like nature to the prai∣ses, which are given her, meere aire. Will you haue more of her? It's true; that shee hath the fairest
eyes, that ever the world beheld: but when? when they are cleare, after dinner, and why not befo∣re? Il'e giue yee an answere; The mornings entertainment is to take care of her gummy eyes, or eye∣browes. There can not bee seen a nose better shap'd, then is hir's: I confess it: but shee must haue supplied vnto her, a cleane hand∣kercher, and that every day. I must likewise ingenuously averre; that her mouth is very little, and pretty: but it's too streight a pas∣sage for her stinking breath. Her complexion is delicate, even to perfection, it's evidently seen: but thus much is say'd, to the end, that shee might apprehend all things. The Sunne, the Fire, the Aire it self, are her enemyes, which
make a perpetuall warre against her, vntill Time hath donne his worke, whereby shee may bee hidden vnder earth. Shee hath an excellent wit, doubt yee not therof a whit: for shee vttereth rare, and curious pas∣sages; it were much better: that shee would apply her self to pie∣ty, to goodness. One doth enqui∣re of workes: rather then of words. What is it to purpose, if shee haue a faire manner, and de∣meanour in speach, the true measu∣re of her deeds shall judg her. She sing's admirably well. Had shee n'aught else but her voice; shee could not enthralle otherwise: then by the eare: they who haue not affaires wherewith to enter∣taine their times, in passing by for
their pleasure, would giue eare vn∣to her: but when shee maketh an end of her songes, they begin to meditate on something. Il'e say no more. If soe it happen, that there bee praises of her, given vnto her, they will returne the aire which she hath lent them. Iudg yee whi∣ther shee will bee well content. In summe; let her bee ritch as was Semiramis, and more faire then Hellen. The one confess'd on her Epitaph, which shee caus'd to bee engraved on her tomb-stone; that she never possessed aught in pro∣per, when shee had her treasure: but corruption, and misery. The other; after shee had entrapped insensible hearts by her subtle charmes, strook pitty vnto her greatest enemyes onely hearing
of her misfortunes. Ladyes, flatter not your selues. One sighe of re∣pentance for your vanityes, will yeild yee more glory, and more benefit: then all the teares yee can make your enthrall'd slaues poore forth. In the meane while night warneth yee to retreit: behold your dayes journey at an end; now render account vnto your lookin∣glass, of the number of your con∣quests. But in earnest how treate yee with it? It's true, that yee haue made many an one sighe; if yee bee proud thereof, the aire will remaine with yee; n'aught else haue they return'd vnto yee. They haue sayd true: that yee are very faire: it's enough for yee to shew your selues, at the window, and there to remaine a while, in
the evening's aire to giue eare to the harmonious Salute, the sere∣nade in fashion: which is offred vp vnto yee; longer yee will not bee: least your cheekes bee swol∣len by defluxion. Iudg yee then, without flattring your selues, whe∣ther one can loue yee long: since that solely your beautyes are the causes that yee are esteemed of at all. How many haue I seen of theise Idolatressess of their own beau∣tyes, who after they had made pu∣bliquely profession to enthrall the hearts of the most insensible, ha∣ue come atlenght to such distress, to such misery through their de∣formity: that they were soe farre from beeing beloved: as that they proved rather an affright to the
world, rather despis'd, then pit∣ty'd. Truely, Ladyes, if yee knew to how many accidents your beau∣tyes are subject, it would be vn∣to yee perpetually, rather the ob∣ject of your neglect, and mispri∣se: then of your wonder. I deny not, but that it's one of the mai∣ster-pieces of Nature: yet the self same is become a stepdame, gi∣ving it self over to a thousand sor∣tes of mischeifes. It's true indeed, there is not aught more Divine on Earth, nor more enchanting: but this Divinity is alike to that, which one doth attribute to Alexander the Great, whose blood trickling out of his veines, shamefully pro∣faned all the Aultars which were dedicated vnto him: such are theise charmes, they are meere illusions
which deceiue, and abuse weake soules. Verily, Ladyes, yee must come to this point; that is; to belieue, that vertue solely hath allurements, and graces, which are approv'd by Time, and Death. All the in∣ticements, and all the charmes of Nature are by degrees despoil'd, together with it self. And though it seemeth to conserue it self: yet by it's proper ruine finding it's es∣tablishment in it's decay. Time ceaseth not to abbreuiate from hower to hower the terme of the others raigne, whilst hee dooth cō∣sume himself. In such sort; that for your comfort, all that yee see, doth vanish with your sight. All what yee heare, doth disperse it self with the aire, wherewith your
eares are filld, and so for the rest, without that there bee aught found permanent on Earth. Ladyes, it's solely Eternity, which changeth not, it's it which doth remaine as long as your sou∣les, and your soules, as long as it. Wheresoever yee take your cour∣ses, it's immenisty will fill all, and it will bee the bounds of your af∣faires what soever they bee: After one hundred thousand yeares, it will not bee an instant of Time's permanence, after one hundred thousand millions of yeares, that instant of which I speake vnto yee, will not bee though expired. How! Lord, shall I persever to offend thee ever? know I not, that thou art just to all Eternity, and hence is it, that thou punishest
sinners with torments, which ha∣ue no limits. To burne eternally! Oh how the fire which brought Saint Laurence to ashes, doth in∣vite mee to meditate on eternall flames, on, to bee deprived Lord, for ever, of the pleasures had in glory! Oh! how the burthen of thy cross is sweet, and light: if it bee compared with the paines of our privation, which never will haue end: I can say no more, I can goe no further. It's necessary, that I meditate on this so serious a subiect.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The sixt Dayes Worke. IT's read; that the Tyrians were forty dayes, whithout shutting their eyes, for rest: the conti∣nuall alarum's were such vnder which they liu'd; where they saw themselues, together with their
towne become cenders. Oh! Ladies, how can yee close vp an eye, within the trenches of perpetuall feare, misery, and cala∣mity, where the direfull sound of this Trumpet for judgment, doth hold the most stout, the most bold in awe, and dread. This heere, doth not menace one sole burning to ashes: but rather; a thousand death's together. Further; the tor∣ments are to bee for ever. Then, rouse your selues; and since yee can not gainesay this eternall ne∣cessity to dye: dye valiantly with armes in your hands. The benefit thereby had, is companion of glo∣ry. Amidst all the tortures, which cruelty hath invented ever, it's e∣steemed that thereis never any of
more rigour: then that it of wat∣ching. What an vnquietness is it to sleep never? But if so bee it, that for having slept too much in this world, yee prooue condem∣ned to watch incessantly in the o∣ther: what affliction say I, is it, to bee kept awake. I meane not on your downe beds, your deli∣cate coutches well made, and in curious order: but rather on beds of fire, of flames, which by De∣vine vertue, will burne without consuming yee? I tremble for feare, yea even to horrour, each time wherein, I meditate heeron. I find not any thing of less worth in life: then is sleep; and they who haue compared it to death; therein haue found as pre∣gnant reason: as proportion. It's
true; wee daily dye; but when the new death of fleep doth sur∣surprise vs, can not wee say: that wee dye twice, at once? Our soules haue somewhat to doe, to handle in their follies, the life of dreames, wherewith they are then all taken vp, it's a kind of death vnto them as prooveth the light of reason, which doth onely rule their facultyes: in so much as that; they who sleep much, are more sottish then others, and also mo∣re subject to a suddaine death, as if so that their continuall action dying twice, did conferre vnto this heavy accident. I returne vnto yee. At lenght, God bee thank'd, yee are awakened. How meane yee to pass the rest of the dayes
journey? I am assur'd, that yee ought to haue leisure to bee dres∣s'd; atleast consider amidst theise vaine entertainements, the deplo∣rable manner of life yee liue vn∣der, day, and night, namely; to cloth, and vncloth your miserable carcasses; whilst Time hath pre∣pared each one's sepulcher. Il'e tell yee yet againe; that the trade vnder which yee are ever apprentises, is a lamentable state, and beeing. Liue yee not a stran∣ge life, to change your clothes very often? there's each day some∣what to say; for the manner of them, differ: in so much as, what is now in fashion, hardly will suite with yee, and serue your tur∣nes to morrow, so certaine is the world in it's inconstancy▪ as are
your humours. Ladyes; there are not found other clothes which change not fashion: but your winding shee∣tes; they allwayes are the same: but; as each one chooseth the co∣lour's they best like of; if your mournefull one's, agree not with your present humours, yet accusto∣me your selues therevnto, taking your measures of them each night in your beds: the ground therein to be found, and the necessity, will render vnto yee in the end, an object, which will suite with yee, not distast yee a jot. Ah, no. I neither enquire whither, nor to what places yee direct your steps, your paces in your carot∣ches; the weither is so faire: that
it inviteth yee to goe abroad, and take the aire. I will attend yee with my thoughts, according to my wonted manner; to know the subiect, and ground of your time's enternainement, what it may prooue to bee. Behould yee in a curious gar∣den, there seated nigh a foun∣taine, vnder the shaddow of ma∣ny trees, whose branches on their tops are joyned together, or very nigh. Your intentions in so doeing are to lend your gracious eares a while vnto the nightingale: but the letter's sense of her warblings, I must declare vnto yee; shee telles yee in her language, in her man∣ner, such as it is: that it's good to salute the Sunne each morning, likewise in the evening. To ten∣der
vnto the Moone some curious musick or other. Theise maling Planetts desist not by the influen∣ces of their cours, to giue a speedy end vnto her Kingdome; in such sort, that her shouts, her turnes, her divisions, her quaverings, and redoublings are so many griefes on the vnhappiness of her state: since that shee hath no voice: but to invite the world to her funerall rites, hence is shee constrain'd to dye the sooner, through the neces∣sity of her singing. Likewise the Turtell, who see∣keth in vaine her companion, la∣menteth her misfortune in an o∣ther tune: which doth shew vn∣to yee: that Time is greedily ga∣ping, after the ruine of each thing. And though that the Eccho, bee
but a sound, a voice; Time beeing vnable to make it cease, by de∣grees devoureth the rockes, which giue it a rebound. No, no Ladyes; Time doth not forbeare any thing. What though Time were decev'd once; as it is mention'd in the fa∣ble, when Orpheus requir'd of Him Euridices? Time hath had memorable reveng, as may bee seen in the Historyes of all the Poets, who to that end gaue him their counsailes. But how well are yee placed? it seemeth to mee; that it's to me∣ditate at your ease, and repose on that all, which God Allmighty hath created heere below, and that it all doth participate of the same nature that doe the flowers, and fountaines which yee see, since
that all glideth like to the swift∣ness of their waves, passages, their currants. Yes, Ladyes, the World is a garden of flowers, various in their graces, their beautyes, colours, and their odours: but all theise according to Nature, are of the same matter. Il'e declare my self more clearely. God Allmighty in the space of his Creation, planted all what soever yee admire heere below, in the garden of the Vni∣vers, namely; flowers of diuers colours, allso of valiew: but all of the same matter: for; there is not one of them exempt from cor∣ruption. Theise truely are the flo∣wers disclos'd in the morning, dis∣playd at midday, faded in the eve∣ning, and of which Time, who
is the gardener, croppeth what hee will, and then, when it best plea∣seth him. Certes, Ladyes, the world is a fountaine, and whatsoever it's com∣posed of are its waues, which pro∣perly haue nothing in their nature, but swiftness passing by. This is essentiall, to what soever that's heere below. Yee may please your selues, to cast your eyes, on all the objects, which yee find every where about yee. There is not one onely, which doth not returne yee the like adieu which yee giue them: since that yee runne the same race all together, though di∣versely, and by different wayes, and manner, into the gulphe of the tomb. For all that hitherto hath been
say'd; make vnto yee, a posy of flowers: but in gathering those flowers-deluces, those roses, those pincks, and gilly-flowers, thinck that Time likewise, is daily busy in the gardens of your faces, there cropping sometimes; the flower-deluce of your paintings; other times; the roses of your cheekes; then; the gilly-flowers of your lipps: Whereof hee compo∣seth a nosegay of your inconstan∣cyes. Yee sensibly apprehend this verity, other proofes are not re∣quisite. How now, Ladyes? All theise will fade in your sights, like a flower. All theise will glide befo∣re your selues as waues, and yee as if insensible, will not stirr a jot, no, not a jot, never, nor reflect the least on the necessity of dying:
from which, God Almighty after the delivery of the law, would not exempt himself, no, not him∣self. But if the sole thought of death amaze yee; meditate a little, how our sweete Saviour hath the first quenched, the thirst within the Chalice, which hee presented, to the end; that at once hee might take from yee both feare, and bit¦terness, acquitt yee of such like weaknesse. Death is not terrible: but to the impious. It's true; that it oftentimes astonisheth the most just, through apprehensions of Gods judgment: but by degrees, this feare becommeth weaker, through the faculty of their rea∣son, having much more hope of mercy: then feare of justice, their consciences, will them soe; in such
manner, that in their agonyes, Nature is sole Authour of the fea∣res, wherewith they are shaken. Truely; I know not where I am heerein. But what is that which I heare? it's the great bell of the town, which giveth yee notice: that the gates thereof will speedi∣ly bee shut. Ladyes, why lend yee not like∣wise the eares of your imagina∣tions to the noyse of this Trumpet of judgment, which never ceaseth, and doth advertise yee: that the gates of Paradise are at the point of beeing shut for all Eternity, and that yee shall never enter there: if yee change not your liues. Ah Eter∣nity: how thou do'st rejoice mee, and jointly astonish mee. See Ladyes at lenght, your dayes journey hath it's end, and it wlll
be found to bee well spent for your turnes: if so that yee haue made your benefits of theise important trueths, which I haue set before your eyes. Even so will pass all the other jorneys of your dayes, to your loss, and confusion: if at least, you ta∣ke noe notice of this trueth: that they runne their race they, pass by. Reflect seriously with your soules on that meditation; and it will prooue impossible: that speedily yee make not an accrew of good deedes, an amass, in favour of your soules. They haue nothing proper to them selues: but them onely. They will bee all their treasures; all their greatness, and all their felici∣ties, whereof God shall bee the ob∣ject, the end, the measure.
If yee knew, Ladyes, the true hearts content, which on enjoyeth, who hath lived well; when so one cometh to one's stand, abbay, one's last end, one's death, yee would la∣bour with all care, from this instant forward in your conversions on which yee would bee more intent. If yee doubt the least of this trueth, and yet, alas! enquire of your sel∣ues, how it was with yee, at your last sickness. The anxietyes yee had, for your offences, likely increas'd your greifs; and further; set before your eyes the joyes, and vnspeaka∣ble conforts, wherewith an inno∣cent life might haue cōsol'd hearts. Truely, I can not conceiue, that there is aught more pleasant, more delightfull, assuredly there's no∣thing in the Vniuers more deli∣cious.
AN ALARVM FOR LADYES. The Seauenth, and last Dayes Worke. LADYES, how is it with yee? I yet awa∣ken yee againe, I am the same this very day in God's name: since that hee giveth leaue that this Alarum come to your hands
to looke on, so long as your eares vvill dispose them selues to heare attentiuely the harmony therein to bee found for the benefit of your soules. I speake to day, as a day of repose, wherein yee ought to meditate of happy Eternity, vvhich is proposed vnto yee for your reward: but; as it is the last entertainement, vvhich I am to haue vvith yee; it' is expedient; that I make yee partakers of my soli∣tude; knowing through long ex∣perience the profits vvhich hence yee vvill receaue, bee it, that yee follovv my counsaile. Represent your selues, make your approatch: for God hath provided, from all Eternity; that this little booke, should fall into your hands, ei∣ther for your benefits, or for your
vtter losses for your profits; to your benefits; if yee obserue th' in∣structions which I giue, and which God himself hath inspired mee with: To your losses; if yee shall misprise, what is heerein de∣livered: this very booke doth con∣vince yee of voluntary blindness, and declare the admirable fa∣vours, which the infinit bounty shall hereby haue shewen vnto yee for your safety: it's in yee as yet to choose. Il'e tell yee then, for your instructions, how profitably yee are to pass your journey. From the time yee are awakened, let your hearts bee as sensible of the new present, which God hath gi∣ven yee this new day: as your eyes are pleased, in admiration of his light. Then; vvithout merchan∣dizing
vvith your beds, vvhat ti∣me yee vvill further assigne to your selues, for your sluggisness get out of them, and as soone as yee are on your knees before a Crucifix, make that it your loo∣kinglasses; it's there where yee may indeed become in loue with your selues, weighing your va∣liew by the price of that blood, vvhich hath bought yee: O rare miroir! Oh! lookinglass to admi∣re indeed! Render thanks vnto your Sa∣viour, that yee vvere borne, and for your instructions in the Chri∣stian, Apostolique, and Roman Faith, as the onely vvay of safety. Then; offring vp vnto Him all the cogitations, the vvords, and actions of the journey yee are now
about, beseech Him submissiuely to illuminate the one, and anima∣te the other, to governe theise, and to bee the object of them all together: so farre forth, as what yee shall think, and say, may bee received by Him gratefully. Let the end of this prayer bee, the beginning of your necessary affaires to cloth your selues: but entertaine the least time therein that yee can, without trouble, or curiosity. I forbid yee not the pouder: since yee are no other; But expressely the pomada, and vermillion: For; though theise are harmeless in themselues: yet they may prooue pernicious, in∣deed not blameless through the ills which they may produce, and; as yee shall haue been found com∣plices
of crimes: so likewise by consequence of paines. As soone as yee are dress'd, prepare your selues to goe to Mass, where yee shall persever to render thanks to God, for an in∣finity of his gratious favours con∣ferr'd on yee, nor ever let your spirits bee diverted aught from this principall, and Divine object: which yee tooke your selues vn∣to, as well by reasons: as by re∣cognizance. Present your selues in such manner; that though God bee in each place, our Sa∣viour, is both in body, and soule on the same Aultar, where yee offer vp your prayers: It ought to cause yee, to bee humbly gra∣ue, and wary, even to the not daring once to turne your heads
without necessity, nor speake one single word, vnless compulsarily. At return from Church, each one hath somewhat to entertaine their times with according to their qua∣lityes, never to bee found idle, expecting dinner time: where gormandizing, will bee remar∣ked for an offence so disgracefull in a yong Gentlewoman: as e∣normous before God. Shee, who therein can not command her self, is a slaue all her life. Are yee invited to a feast, goe thither: but so, that it prooue a banquet for yee, as neither ea∣ting, nor drinking beyond your ordinary custome: hence yee will find, that your bodyes will bee the more sound, more healthy, and your soules more innocent. If
after it, yee take a walke; divert your selues from such discourses, where no body is interess'd: but if one of the company, doth spea∣ke ill of another, all though it bee in jest, turne the discourse, in a faire manner, and to the end: that yee may never accusto∣me your eares to well-like asper∣sions, lay'd on any for defects; it beeing, that yee your selues are too much charg'd with them. If yee pass the afternoone within your doores, each one of yee, will employ your selues with your needle, or read some devout booke, to entertaine yee mo∣re profitably, during the after∣noone. I say your booke of de∣votion: as for the eloquent spea∣ches, the Romances, and for the
Comedyes; they are toyes, meere fables: which discover in the end, the vndoubted folies of them, who soe haue been their advan∣cers, and given them esteeme, therein haue they employed their times, exceeding ill. Bee it a holy day; then let this Alarum wherewith I present yee, hinder yee from sleepe, howsoe∣ver at the Sermon, and doe not yee imitate such, who are devout in fashion, who are weary on good friday, to heare of the pas∣sion, without considering: that this our Devine Saviour, who hath suffred those, for your sel∣ues, had more patience in his torments: then haue those im∣pious had, to heare onely the re∣citall, which hath been made. Oh
Lord! for what other crimes dost thou reserue the thunderbolts of thy justice. When the hower, of your rests doth call on yee, before yee bee vnclothed make your recourse to consult, to advise seriously, and most attentiuely the last time, the self same lookinglass, it's the Cru∣cifix, fix your eyes on it, and there examine your consciences, hum∣bly beseeching God's mercy's par∣don for all your trespasses, which yee haue donne, during this dayes journey, and that yee may haue grace, to retaine your selues from sinne; that yee may not fall therein againe. There are yee to resolue soe: then with the same action; offer vp vnto him, all your desi∣res, and hopes concerning the
repose, and tranquility of your liues: so that hee iustify the one through his benignity, and the other through his infinite power: but rather; humbly resigne your wills to his. Obserue it well: that hee, who knoweth to compose him felf well to God's will, is the wisest of the Vniverse. It's that onely science, Ladyes, which can seate yee in repose. Build not the height of your des∣seignes, on the greatness of your familyes, nor on the favour of your freinds. I haue seen, sayeth the Prophet, Lords of the Earth, elevated beyond the height of the Cedars of Libany; but a dread∣full story to recite, next day haue vanished from myne eyes, and hardly could I find one, who
conseru'd so much as the memo∣ry of his having been. The Fa∣vourits of the World, are of the same nature, they solely pass it by. Their fortune is a suddaine flash of lightning, which farre surpas∣seth thunder with it's inevitable fall, in sort such: that if God lay not the first stone to all your buil∣dings, all will fall; there will not bee found aught, but ruine. Desire then never aught: but what is of God; that's to say; that what soever are your affaires, yee fully referre them all to his Sovraignity, and without mur∣mur to his Devine Providence: since that the ordering of all, doth properly appertaine to him. Wish yee to bee Religious, or to bee maried? take vnto yee that
restraint of humility, and obe∣dience: my Lord, thy will bee donne. It's the prayer which hee hath taught yee; judg yee whe∣ther it ought to be acceptable vn∣to him, and whether profitable to yee: End your examinations by a prayer to the Virgin, as well for her particular merit, from whence the flash through admira∣tion of it's light so bright, daze∣leth the sight of all the quires of Angell's: as allso, for your safety; since shee is Advocate, and all puissant Mediatress, who so hath this Virgin in assistance, will ne∣ver perish.
A PARTICVLAR ADVISE For direction of a one's life. NEVER bee confident in aught but in God: all freindshipps of the World, retaine parcell of it's variable Nature: such an one to day would dye for yee, who to morrow, were yee dis∣ceased, would not so much as
honour yee, attired in morning: Interess is ever found in affections, bee they never so pure. Become yee ill favoured, poore, or old, all your great freinds, and who so were last evening your loyall lovers will even vanish this very morning, and if yee send for them, none of them, will bee found at home for yee. Ladyes, it's onely God, who is a perfect lover, and such like freind indeed. Will yee haue proofes of his goodness? Hee dyed for yee before yee were borne. Require yee testimonyes of his mercy? dayly hee confer∣red grace on yee. Loue then him onely. Ladyes, confide in none but in him, and yee shall never bee deceived. Offer vp your selues in all pla∣ces,
for God doth replenish the Vniuers. Hee is every where, in such sort, that hee is witness of your actions, to the end, that this consideration, might retaine yee in the duetye yee owe vnto so Saintly, and adorable Majesty. The most consonant prayer, which yee can offer vp to God, is for your enemyes: since hee himself hath given yee the pat∣terne, then; when hee was nay∣led on the Cross; where having nothing but His speach free, ser∣ved himself thereof, to craue par∣don for those vilains, who brought him to that beeing; that misery. Oh vnheard of charity! our sweet Saviour call'd out for mercy for them, the self-same, who gaue him gaule, and vinaiger to
squench his thirst. Even then, when in the dead of winter, yee are in your beds shelters, free from could weather, and other domages which might endanger life, set before yee, how many poore there bee at this ve∣ry instant, who haue but a little dunghill-straw, for their beds sheets, and coverlids, without hope, that to morrow they shall bee provided better. Then; consi∣der some-what further, elevate your spirits to an higher pitch; behould; that God hath given vnto yee degrees, exempt from such like miseryes, mooved by nothing else; but his goodness, and bounty conferr'd on yee. Truely they are benignityes, which justly exact eternall, and gratefull
notice; I wonder not aught that vnthankfull hence bee punished for ever. Take heed, that yee prooue not of the number. Offer vp your selues againe as having been the same from all Eternity, whom yee are now in the judgment of God Allmighty. And what yee ought to ponder more sensibly, is; that amidst the infinity of soules, his power All∣mighty doth create daily, hee hath selected your's, to bee instructed in that Religion, wherein solely yee may find your safetyes. I am confused, nay rather extased, jointly each time, I consider on such venerable truethes, and ado∣rable. What a wonder of goodness is it, that God hath loved yee wi∣thin
himself in your nothing, be∣fore all ages I say loved yee, even to the conferring on yee a thou∣sand sortes of benignityes, of which many other's of your sexe are deprived. Adore yee; adore yee, Ladyes, this Devine Provi∣dence, which in such manner hath ordained in your favour wi∣thout your retributes, without your deserts. Bee not yee proud of the ad∣mirable qualityes, which yee pos∣sess aboue your companions: least that God punnish yee, and take vengeance on yee for it. If yee bee very faire: bee yee likewise very humble, to the end, that the world may honour yee: when yee can not bee beloved more. How many haue I known, who
in one self same day, were highly pris'd, mervailously esteem'd of, and jointly admired for piety by all the world. Humility in Ladyes hath more winning grace in it self: then all the guifts of Nature join'd together. In all your good deeds; let not Paradise bee the sole object, and scope of your workes: for as interessed, and mercenary, yee would loose parcell of their me∣rits: but say with Saint Augustine; Lord, were it even so, that thou hadst not a Paradise to bestow, I would not desist to loue thee solely: for thou art perfectly amia∣ble; and further, by meanes of loving thee, I feele to my advan∣ce, the delights of the self same Paradise, which thy mercy ma∣keth
mee to hope for. My Lord, following on, also; I should not cease to feare thee, hadst thou not a Hell to punish mee: since that each time I offend thee, I find my self incessantly tormented, and I beginne to suffer the paines whe∣rewith thy justice doth menace mee. Ladyes, good is to bee be∣loved for it self, and, as God Allmighty is the fountaine there∣of, yee must forbid your hearts that they never sighe, but for the loue of him if so yee will that the very Angells bee passionate in your behalfs. Bee not yee one of those faint-hearted, who wax pale; and wanne for feare, when one tells yee of death; nay farre otherwise; like of the discours well, and the
meditations thereon, to the end that yee may accustome your sel∣ues betimes, to pass that over fai∣rely; which yee must vndergoe of necessity, namely; finish the worke, which yee haue begun, from the first moment of your li∣ues, and wherein yee goe on in∣cessantly. Oh how terrible is death to them who never haue medita∣ted thereon! Let then each of yee shew your selues oftentimes, vnto your sel∣ues in some private retire: and en∣quire where yee shall bee hence fiftie yeares to come, more, or less, and elevate your spirits on this serious subject. Yee see what it delivereth: It's true, that then the same bodyes; which now ha∣ue soules, and on which even now
set so great a valiew will become no other then hillockes of dung, where the wormes will make their seate. But what will become of your soules? wherewith will they entertaine their times during this long Eternity? Is it that they must burn in Hell in expiation of their crimes? At theise last words breake your silence, and if yee bee in a retired place, where yee can not bee heard, cry, out aloud, and boldly with Saint Augustin, say. Lord, burn, cut in pieces, and reduce into pouder, this miserable body of my∣ne, I abandon it before the fury of thy justice; so that thou pardon my soule in the other. Ladyes, Oh! what mervailes would theise words pro∣duce recited often, for the assu∣ring of your safetyes: but in it,
experience will make yee sensible of much more then can I heereon deliver. I end here with this last advise, which I offer vp vnto yee, as one of the most importants, and of most benefit: that yee take vnto yee a particular devotion to the Virgin, daily saluting her with some Hymne in her praise. On whom one of the devout cryeth out; that the Angells bow vn∣to, the Heaven humbleth it self vnto, and that all Nature trem∣bleth with honour, and feare be∣fore this incomparable Marie; sin∣ce that her womb served for a cradle to her Creatour, her brests for nouriture, and her armes for a rest. Truely; she who perfectly knoweth to honour her; is not
aught wanting, in what shee ought to vnderstand, for the good of her safety. FINIS.
