23511.5 33143347 28401
A Table concerning Christ our Aduocate, and whether remission of sinnes once obtained, can againe be made frustrate, comprised in foure propositions, and foureteene Conclusions. CHRIST is the Aduocate of the e∣lect Iohn 17. Rom. 8.onely, and (that) of all which haue been from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the end. Aug. Tract. 41. in Ioh. Euseb. Hist. Ec∣cles. lib. 4. cap. 15 2 Christ also is the propitiation onely for the sins of the elect of the whole world: therefore hee is their Aduocate onely. So the Church of Smirna to all the parishes, as Paul saith; Christ did suffer for the saluation of all the world which are to be saued; but the elect onely are saued. So Ambrose, Tom. 2. de fide ad gratia∣num, lib. 4. c. 1. If thou dost not beleeue, he descen∣ded not for thee: therefore he suffered onely for the beleeuers. Gen. 18. 22. Galat. 3. Psalm. 44. Iohn. 12. Rom. 5. 2. Cor. 5. Coloss, 1. Habet ergo po∣pulus Dei pleni∣tudinem suum. Ambros. Ibid. 3 The (world) is somtimes taken for the whole world, and all men, as well Elect as Reprobate. Sometime for the more principall part; to wit, the Elect. Sometime for the worse part of the world, that is, the Reprobate. The author also of the booke, De vocatione Gentium, lib. 1. cap. 3. doth declare by examples of many scriptures, often∣times for a part of the earth, the whole earth; for a part of the world, the whole world; for a part of men, all men to bee nominated: and this as well touching the wicked as the godly. Therefore when he saith, that Christ is the propi∣tiation for the sins of the whole world, wee are not inforced by the name of (the whole world) to vnderstand vniuersally all men. 4 There is a difference betweene the worke of our Redemption, and the force (or fruit) of our redemption: for the first is once done, the other is eternal, extending it selfe as well to them which were from the beginning of the world; euen be∣fore the work of our redemption was accompli∣shed, as to them who after the worke of our re∣demptiō effected, shal be to the end of the world.  is properly the efficacie of redemption and propitiation; nothing therefore doth let, but that Christ hath beene, and is perpetually the attone∣ment for the sinnes euen of them which were ele∣cted from the beginning of the world. The summary of questions, whether remission of sinnes once obtained, can againe be made frustrate, comprised in fourteene Conclusions. THe whole course of the Gospell is contained in this summe, that it might perswade vs with beliefe in Christ, that our saluation is firme & con∣stant Iohn 3. 5. Math. 7. & 16. Rom. 11.(that is in Christ.) If therefore any shall say, that remission of sinnes once obtained, by conse∣quent falles can be made frustrate in the Saints, hee doth ouer-turne the whole scope of the Gos∣pell. Reade Esay 38. 44. Mich. 7. 2 Only by an absolute relapse from piety to im∣piety, Nunquam in nemine ob nul∣lum peccatum sit irrita remis∣sio. Zanch.the remission of sinnes past once obtained, can be done away. But this relapse the true Saints and elect are not incident vnto: therefore in them forgiuenesse of sinnes cannot be frustrate. 3 In the Reprobate true remission of sinnes ne∣uer tooke place: therefore it can neuer in them bee frustrate; wherefore in none. Pro omnibus sufficienter, pre electis tantum efficaciter. Zanch. exscho∣lasticis. Pro omnibus il∣lis electis. ex Aug. Iohn. 17. 1, Ioh. 2. Rom. 8 4 For the blood of Christ, by which alone re∣mission is atchieued, is not according to the pur∣pose of God, and in deed shed out for the repro∣bate vnbeleeuers, but only for other many, that is, the Elect, and that for all those many. 5 Neither did Christ pray vpon earth, nor now mediate in heauen, for the reprobate; but onely for the elect beleeuers, & in time to come to beleeue in Him; but remission of sinnes is obtained by the Aliqua luce mētes illuminat, nurquam tamē penat illois corda, Zanch. Ioh. 1.intercession of Christ. 6 Likewise none but the Elect are truely endu∣ed with the Spirit of Regeneration, who are truely Christs, Rom. 8. But without the Spirit of Rege∣neration forgiuenesse of sinnes is not gotten. Titus. 1 Rom. 10. 2. Thess 3. Act. 13 Rom. 5. 7 So also true and iustifying Faith is onely pro∣per to the Elect: How then can the reprobate at∣taine remission of sinnes? 8 To the wicked reprobates there is no peace, as saith the Prophet, but of remission of sinnes doth follow true peace. 9 From remission of sinnes doth alwaies follow title to eternall life, and after title the possession it self; but the reprobate can neuer haue any title vnto life eternal, and much lesse to the possession thereof. 10 To attaine remission of sinnes, and to be iustified, are all one Rom. 4. Now none are iustifi∣ed who are not predestinated, and elect to iustifica∣tion and life eternall; and whosoeuer are iustified shall be glorified Rom. 8. Therefore the Reprobate Rom. 8shall neuer obtaine truely remission of sinnes, therefore it can neuer be frustrate in them, in whom it is not at all. Guerunt nō ederunt. Zanch. Gustant sed ox expuūt idem. discrimen inter dona spiri∣tus sancti sim∣pliciter & dona spiritus sancti regenerantis. Zanchius. 11 By that speech of the Apostle to the Hebrewes c. 6. It is impossible that they who are illuminated, and haue tasted of the heauenly gift, and haue beene made partakers of the holy Spirit, and haue tasted notwith∣standing of the good Word of God, and of the Powers of the world to come, and are fallen away, to be againe renewed to repentance: it cannot be concluded that the reprobate are endued with the true Spirit of Regeneration, with a true and iustifying Faith, and therefore with true remission of sinnes: yet that many of them are affected with a temporary faith, and some tastes of the holy Spirit, this, and other places, do plainely teach. 12 The place 2. Pet. 1. touching Hypocrites (For hee that hath not these things is blinde, which seeth nothing a farre off, forgetting that he was purged from his old sinnes) is to bee vnderstood according to the custome of the holy Scriptures, which do call Saints according to the iudgment of charity, Iust, purged from their sinnes, although they are not all so before God, so many as are Baptised into Christ, and confesse Him, all such are Sacramentally cleansed. Conditionalis propositio nihil ponit in forma. Zanch. Psalm. 1. 112. 13 That of Ezech. chap. 18. (If the Iust do auert from his Iustice) is not to be vnderstood of him who is truely iust, but of him who onely seemeth of men to be iust. For neither can he who is truely righte∣ous, finally fall from iustice to iniquity, and die therein, of which finall and perfect auersion the Prophet speaketh: Now hypocrites being iust one∣ly before men, do neuer obtaine true remission of sinnes before God, therefore it cannot bee proued by this sentence, that it is frustrate. 14 That Mat. 18. So your heauenly Father shall do to you, vnlesse you forgiue euery one to his brother from his heart their offences; doth not conclude, that sins once truly released can againe be called into iudg∣ment, but this onely, that such men are deceiued, who thinke their debts to be remitted from God vnto them, when as they do not forgiue trespasses to their brethren. Math. 12. 33. Euery tongue that speaketh against mee (that is the Holy Ghost) shall be condemned. 1. Cor. 15. 19. If in this life wee haue onely hope in Christ, wee are of all men most miserable. By Richard Swaine, Printed at London for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his Shop without Bishops-Gate. 1615.
