25233 S102771 99838535 2917
A TRVE AND AMPLE RELATION OF ALL SVCH OC∣CVRRENCES AS HAVE happened in the Palatinate since the first of Iune. 1622. Stilo Antiquo. Truely Related in a Letter, received from Doctor VVelles the tenth of Iune. 1622. And now Printed the 14 of Iune. 1622. printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Iohn Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the gilt Cup in Cheap-side, in the Gold-smiths Row. 1622.
A TRVE COPPIE OF A LETTER Sent from Doctor Welles, Relating all such Occurrences, as haue hapned in the PALATINATE of Late. Received this 10. of Iune. 1622. I Doe not write this Letter with any desire of publication, because the best Compositers are subiect to the worst censures, or willing∣nesse to traduce, and countermand such Pam∣phlets, as are rather framed out of coniecturall braynes then honest intelligence, but meerely to satisfie my Friends, especially such as are
friends of the cause of the Pallatinate, and finde their hearts affected to the true vnderstanding of the businesse. For if in supplying the Presse there is a kind of commenditory zeale and honest wellwishing manifested; much more shall the truth it selfe receiue grace and favour, and be well come to all Religious hearts; as for such as are otherwise addicted, it matters not to satisfie them, for Charmes will not moue Adders out of their holes. And Pharoahs heart was hardned, till he saw the judgements of God. To conclude this Preface, if you meane to divulge any thing I write, I pray you giue the world notice, that it is against my will; and Letters written in hast are not fit for curious over-looking, or judicious exa∣mination. As for extractions, and culling out (as I may say) the principall poynts, it will be the better, if there be way giuen, whereby the Worke may be iustifiable, and the world made acquainted with information of the Truth; and so to the purpose. Since the Kings comming into the Pallatinate, and ioyning with Count Mansfeild, there hath beene many skirmishes, I will not call them all Battailes, in all which it hath pleased God
to giue him happie successe, yea, in that vn∣fortunate Disaster of the Powder, in the Mar∣quis of Badens Campe, the issue tended to the glory of God, and the Kings eternall Honour, for he recovered more then he lost, and gaue them all a worthy testimony of his valour and Horoick Demeanor, so that if you will giue me leaue by way of Transci∣sion, to exemplifie some particulars, and I will by Gods grace speake nothing but the Truth, and so dull and abate all the sharpe and keene edges against Him, which desire to cut the life of Reputation, did not Vertue in despight, like a Sunne dispelling the va∣pours, quite dissolue and vanish the mor∣ning dew of calumniation. Know then, that in these Conflicts, his Maiestie hath still beene in person, and so forward, that he hath many times shewed sufficient testimonie of his owne particular valour, discharging his Pistoll at the very first Encounter, in the face of the Enemie; and many times Adventuring with the formost, when there was great reason and cause that he should haue beene more charie of his per∣son. Besides, He is a comely and handsome
Gentleman, and so compleat, that I know not whither I should preferre the workman∣ship of God, in his composure of bodie, or well qualifying his minde, for he is and ever hath beene, for any thing I can heare or see, of extraordinary good Demeanor in all his affayres, as both his speeches and actions doe manifest, neither deiected with Adver∣sitie, nor lifted vp with Prosperitie. Fayre and temperate, neither giuen to the common vice of the Dutch Nation, which is drunkennesse, nor yet the English, although he haue well learned the English Tongue, wherewith the most doe learne the English Oathes: He is so moderately conditioned, that there is a plea∣sure to behold Him, and a delight to con∣verse with Him; the truth is, I never heard his worth sufficiently spoken of before his comming to vs, so can I not sufficiently de∣monstrate the same, now he is amongst vs. I haue incisted the longer vpon this my poore Discovery, because Malice heretofore hath imputed the losse of Prague to his negligence, or ignorance; and wickednesse, even at this present, doth dare to lay some aspersions vpon Him: But to goe forward.
After the recouery of the Marquesse of Baden, and the taking of Laden-burge, there∣was a worke to take out the prouision there∣in, and bring it to the Kings store at Main∣hem. For it was great and much more then was expected, so that the whole Army was the better refreshed: after which another buy sinesse of great importance proposed it selfe, and the Kings Army in as great spee∣dinesse marched ouer the Rheine at Mantem bridge towards Haggenaw in Alsatia, before which Leopoldus the Emperors brother had lyen some ten dayes, as resolued to surprise and besiege the same by way of recouerie of some of his losses: but hearing of the Kings approch, and fearing the sally of the towne, which was extraordinary manned with 5000 of Mansfields souldiers, he pre∣pared to draw a way about the 8 of May by your account, and tooke an order with his army to shift for themselues, as he very fortunately made his owne escape: but the Kings army followed him so close, and pur∣sued him so farre, that they cut off most of his baggage, and seized on his carriages, where contrary to expectation was found
aboue 26000. l. weight of pouder, all his plate and much good furniture besides, ere they ended the businesse, both Colonell and Captaine, with a regiment of foote and six troupes of horse, were most of them ta∣ken, and reduced to his Maiesties seruice, for very few vvere slaine at this time: this was done when they were passing a bridge, vvhich as some say vvas broken, and others say was ouerthronged with numbers; but the former is likeliest, because two peeces of ordnance was drowned, and the King tooke two or three more; but how euer it was, or that men may vary in some pettie circumstances, vve repute it a greater de∣feate then that which they speake of, that the Marquis of Durlach had, for though he lost more ordnance, yet not halfe so many men: besides, that losse is doubled by so many troupes as are gone ouer to our side, and God be praised are most willing to serue his Maiestie. This, as we heare, is al∣ready printed amongst you, but in a rouing manner, and farre from sufficient intelli∣gence;
and therefore I thought it good, as in the rest, to certifie you in the very truth, which howsoeuer many men may sup∣pose superfluous, and that still they heare but one and the same thing, yet sure there is great contentment in ho∣nest confirmation of such businesses, or true relating the matter. So I go for∣ward. The said Marquis of Durlach named in your copies the Marquis of Baden, is againe on foote, and hath altered the manner of his sequestring himselfe in a campe alone, so that now being seuen thousand foote and 1200 horse, as vve may say, he is ioy∣ned vvith the King and Count Mansfield, being all together, to abate a little the la∣uishes of rumour 20000 in a running ar∣mie, which is continually on foote, as the cause requireth, and businesse im∣porteth; for of late they haue beene se∣uen dayes together in the Countrey of Dermstrat, hard by Frankford, the Prince whereof Lantgraue Lodowick hath alwayes
bin a straight enemy to our affaires, and a publick professed friend to his Imperial Ma∣iestie: for it was he that the last yeare la∣boured the accord between the Princes of the Vnion and Marquis Spinola, it was he that gaue way and assistance to all the Spa∣nish marches, it was he that hath so much extolled and magnified the house of Austria, it was he that hath taken great paines all this Winter to disswade the Marquis of Durlach and other Princes from taking vp armes in our assistance, vnder pretence of desire of peace, and auoiding effusion of Christian blood: it was he that gaue eare to the Iesuites and Priests in their blasphemous railings and filthy calumniations against God, his Church, and the King of Bohemiaes businesse. To conclude, it was he (Gods holy name be praised) that the King tooke priso∣ner in his owne country, and keeps him still in his custody. His country hath neither strong townes nor fortifications, but is soon subiect to a violent enforcement, and so was as soone ouercome by our armies affoording a great supply of prouision, the hungry soul∣dier was wel cheered, and our distressed gar∣risons
wonderfully relieued with good mut∣tons and beeues, that all this Winter haue bin afflicted with great scarcitie and wants, hunger and cold: but now there is a new face of comfort and contentment appeareth on euery side. For my Lord Chichester is safe∣ly and opportunely ariued at Manheim, to our hearts reioycing and the Kings satisfac∣tion. For although Monsieur Tilly our grand enemy be againe strengthened from Bohe∣mia, Bauaria, and Leopoldus, yet whether war or peace, the King is able to enounter with him, and prepareth with resolution to op∣pose all his enemies, let them increase neuer so fast, as I must confesse they are many; Tilly of himselfe is esteemed 14000 strong, and as our intelligence is, hath 6000 more from the Duke of Bauaria in his passages and Gon saloes as he cā spare from his garisons, so that in the end of May he marched full 20000. towards the King, whose transcendent name with me is predominant. After my Lord of Belfast or Chichester was welcomed and entertained of all sides, the King and Count Mansfield departed to the army, and as we had certaine intelligence
vpon Munday the 27 of May he marched to a towne of the Bishop of Ments aboue Frankford, called Ausburge, to meete with the Duke of Brunswick there, vvho vvas now marching into Franconia; but before he could get to the Maine, a riuer ouer vvhich he must be transported, Generall Tilly vvith his great strength and vvhole army vvas got before him, so that he must of necessitie fight or retire, for Brunswick vvas not yet come vp to the riuer, nor had any notice of the Kings being so neare, more then that he vvould come to meete him. In breife, to fight vpon so great disadvan∣tages, was not thought conuenient. For the Countrey being spoyled, and vittailes scarce could afford them no releife: the enemy be∣ing strong and prouided of purpose, might hazard the Army. For you must consider, besides Tillyes owne forces, he had Gensalers horse which came to him from Openham, from the Archduches horse, so extraordina∣rily armed; that they exceeded the Dutch far and may well be compared to those strong
Cataphracts of the Romaines, which were armed from head to foote; therefore it was thought conuenient to make a Retreate, which was done in so good order, that to his euerlasting prayse, the King must be re∣membred: for not with standing, all they could doe, the enemy followed so hard that he ouer tooke them, and the horse gort such way through & about the woods that skir∣mish they must, and skirmish they did, so that the King returned from the Van, to be an actor in the same. This fight lasted in a maner two dayes, May 30. 31. and was at last ended so well, that while the Horse encountred on both sides: the foote retreated towards Manheym, wherein was lost not aboue on 100. of ei∣ther side, but the Horse had a sorer conflict and a sorer continuance, wherein the King as he had done in his first battaile with Ge∣nerall Tilly, demeaned himselfe so couragi∣ously well, that his example drew on others to noble performances and remarkable en∣counters: for amongst many Gent. whose names did not at this time fall to my
proportion of knowledge, among those that were noted to fight most brauely were Colonell Ouertront Commander of the Pals∣graues horse, one Sir Iohn Maynard of Kent Captaine of a troupe of Count Mansfields horse, were worthy and remarkable. Count Mansfield had one of his kinsmen, called Count Philip, of Mansfield taken prisoner, as ouercharged with numbers; diuers others might be remēbred to their perpetuall fame. Many were slain, wounded, and taken priso∣ners on both sides. The report goeth, ye losse was 200 on both sides, the losse being equal keepeth rumor from too lauish boasting of peuailing, only the King returning to Man∣heim that might be said he was glad it was no worse, considering the accident or chance of warre. God had dealt mercifully with him in affoording him so good an es∣cape and deliuerance from such eminent perill. On our side was Colonell Galstein Ge∣nerall of the Marquis of Durlacks horse slaine, a vvorthy braue souldier, and a Rinegraue taken prisoner. On the Emperours part a Collonell
in compleate armour, was shot into the face, as he lifted vp his beauer to take the ayre: and sundry other officers were sub∣iect to the ouer-mastering forces of their Aduersaries; some killed, some wounded, some suppressed, and they were glad at the last to part vpon equall termes; and (as we heare) Monsieur Tilly had no great cause too much to reioyce: for the horse that escaped left much Armour, and the men were brused exceedingly. But con∣cerning our selues we esteemed it a bles∣sing, exceeding Report, that in a retreite of thirty or forty miles wee haue lost no baggage at all, nor more men than the enemy, although their ioy exceeded, and Report had made the matter amongest the Bishops so famous; yet there is but one trueth, and as neare as euer I can, you haue it: and therefore spare not to tell to both your friends and foes, that our businesse doth thriue well, and by Gods gracious assistance, we shall make a happy progression, though I must con∣fesse, the enemy is very strong, and loo∣keth
for great supplies from out of diuers Countries. The same night his Maiestie retur∣ned to Maynheim, and supped cheareful∣ly with Generall Vere; assuring that the Duke of Brunswicke is twenty thousand strong, and encreaseth his Army daily in his marches. Now if any aske where were the skouts on al sides, where was the mistaking, either of the Rendezuous, or the day of Brunswickes approaches? where was the ouer-sight that Monsieur Tilly did lodge himselfe without any feare (as it were) betweene the Armies? for if Brunswicke had come forward, how could a dangerous battel haue beene pre∣uented? I answere for all as well as my poore vnderstanding will serue me, these things might bee without impeachment of martiall Policies, or true Discipline. For, concerning the King of Bohemia, he was resolued to fight, and carelesse of any forces his enemy could haue, so far forth as he might ioyne with Brunswicke, who had formerly sent him Letters of
assurance, hee would come to the riuer of Mayne such a day. Besides, it was a probable coniecture, that Tilly could not so sodainly be so strong, considering his former defeature, and Leopoldus ray∣sing his Campe; but the truth is, most of the Arch-duke Leopoldus forces meant directly to ioyne with Tilly: and hee tooke aduice with Gonsales de Cordua with what expedition to goe forward: Con∣cerning Tilly himselfe, hee had reason to preuent the mischiefes, apprehending an irrecouerable danger, if the King of Bo∣hemia and Brunswicke did meete: besides, he tooke notice that Brunswicke and more Carriages and ordnance mounted which must be the cause of slowe marches, and bring along with him some impedimēts: last of all, that hee must passe ouer the Riuer, and whether by boate or bridge, if hee could get thither afore him, hee was sure to hinder his landing, and pro∣crastinate his iourny. Concerning Bruns∣wicke, he could not be so confident to li∣mit his time to a certaine day, because
an army in long marches are many times pulled backe from speed and celerity by circumstances, accidents and casuall e∣uents, as hath formerly beene apparent in memorable Expeditions, where the breaking of a carriage, or the dismoun∣ting of a Cannon hath hindered an Ar∣my from a whole dayes march. To con∣clude, let there be no impeachment of a Souldiers credite in the businesse of the warre, except apparent cowardice, follie and treason steppe in; but let euery man endeauour to do his best, and when disa∣sters happen, be ready rather absolutely to say, It was the will and pleasure of God; or with modesty to conclude as the common Prouerb is, It was the for∣tune of warre. Thus farre haue my Letters extended in the businesse of the Pallatinate, and if you long now to heare of the King and Brunswickes meeting, or of Mansfields forward marching, I assure you I long as much to giue you notice of the same
and make no question, but my next Let∣ters shall not only aduertise you how my Lord of Belsaft or Chichester proceedes in his Commission, but send you the hap∣py tydings of some worthy exployt or o∣ther, eyther tending to the discharging the Pallatinate of her intollerable bur∣thens and grieuous enemies or the thri∣ving of the cause in a farre better manner than many hollow-hearted would haue it, but because things are dubitable, and the secrets which belong to God vnsear∣chable, I leaue it to his direction and preseruation that knoweth what is best for his owne glory, and the propagation of true Religion. Iust now as I am rea∣dy to seale vp my Letter, comes a Letter from Collonell Golsteme his owne hand, whom we tooke to haue been slaine, that hee is yet liuing a prisoner, which made much ioy. FINIS.
