26061 S106616 99842329 6974
SELECTED SENTENCES OVT OF SACRED ANTIQVITIE, CONDVCING TO the establishment of Faith and good Manners. Gathered by W. WYNNE. LONDON. Printed by E. A. for Nathaniell Butter. 1624.
TO The Right Honorable, Sir HENRY HOWARD Knight of the Hon: Order of the Bath, Lord Matrauers, Sonne and Heyre apparant of the most Hon: the Earle of Arundell, Lord High Marshall of England. Right Hon: YOVR Thrice∣noble Brother and my most honored Lord and Patron, be∣ing now a Celestiall Cour∣tier, and crowned with im∣mortall Glory among the
Princes in Paradise, hath left your Lordship behind him, not onely to enioy his Honourable titles and for∣tunes heere vpon earth, but withall, to tread the pathes of his exemplar Virtue and Noblenesse, where through you may finally arriue to the height of his felicitie in Heauen. My true deuoti∣on beeing tyed to the per∣petuall memory of his Ho∣norable name, and therein also to your Lordship as the succeeding heyre to all his most worthy attributes and rights, doth justly ex∣act from mee some tribute,
or token of my bounden Dutie; which I thus hum∣bly present vnder these few memorials gathered out of Sacred Antiquitie; not presuming thereby, to adde any thing by way of supply to those perfections you haue already attained, but rather very humbly cra∣uing your fauorable Coun∣tenance & Honorable pro∣tection of them, to the be∣nefit of some others mean∣lier instructed, who there∣upon, may peraduenture bee the easilier induced to peruse them: For if your Lordship deigne to patro∣nize
them, who will alto∣gether dispise them? Such therefore as they are, I de∣dicate and consecrate, to∣gether with my selfe, to be for euer: Humbly at your Lordships seruice and command∣ment: William Wynne.
To all my beneuolent Friends and fauoura∣ble Readers. GReat Workes of Penne, proceed from much rea∣ding & like ex∣perience: yet the greatest are ea∣sily brought to pithie abridgement, contayning the sinewes and mar∣row of that bigge Body, and by compendious regularity, are fitter for memory, easier for price, and more portable for vse: This briefe Collection, aymes at no outward practice, not comming from in∣ward vertue to enable religious Constancy of minde, that in con∣uersation of life, it may bring forth fruits of Pietie and Ciuilitie:
There is no Sentence without waight; Exercise of one will draw on an easie habit to the rest: which as I wish to all, so I commend to all; desiring that the endeauour may passe with good Construction, and the vse to both issues of inward Deuotion and outward Practise. W. W.
SELECTED SENTENCES OVT of Sacred Antiquitie, con∣ducing to the establish∣ment of Faith and good Manners. A loue principium. GOD is all in all to you: If you hunger, hee is Bread; if you thirst, hee is Drinke; if you sit in dark∣nesse, hee is Light; if you be na∣ked,
hee is a garment of Immor∣talitie. August. 2. God is the true and chiefest life; in whom, from whom, and by whom, all thinges created are blessed and made good. Ibid. 3. It is God from whom to bee auerted is to fall; to whom to bee conuerted is to arise; in whom to abide, is to stand fast; from whom to depart, is to dye; to whom to returne, is to re∣uiue; It is God whom no man leeseth, but he that is deceiued; no man seeketh but hee that is taught; no man findeth but hee that is cleane. August. 4. There is no refuge from God
displeased, but to God plea∣sed. Ibid. 5. God is neuer wanting; yet farre from his Enemies thoughts: neither when he is farre off is hee wanting: for where hee is not by Grace, he is there by Iustice; God is euery where present and can hardly be found; we pursue him standing, but are vnable to apprehend him. Greg. 6. As there is no Time, wherein wee enioy not the benefits of Gods mercy and goodnesse, so should there bee no moment without remembrance of his presence: for all Time wherein God is not remembred, wee must reckon as vtterly lost. August.
7. God is all an eye, for he seeth all: hee is all a hand, for he wor∣keth all: hee is all a foote, for he is euery where. 8. Whatsoeuer is besides GOD, is neither sweet nor sauory: whatsoeuer my Lord God will giue mee, let him take it all a∣gaine from me, and giue mee himselfe. Aug. 9. Farre bee it from thee (O LORD) that in thy Tabernacle the Rich should be preferred be∣fore the Poore, or the Noble be∣fore the Ignoble; seeing thou madest chorse of the worlds weaklings, to confound the strong and potent.
10. Affection makes vs doe many thinges with respect to bodily neerenesse: But to offend the Creator of body and soule with∣out respect, wee sticke not. 11. I had rather bee blamed of a∣ny, then praised of a Flatterer; for a louer of Truth is neuer a∣fraid of a fault-finder; but a Flatterer, both erres himselfe, and confirmes others in their er∣rours. Aug. 12. Nothing so easily Corrupts the minde, as Flatterie; yea, more hurt doth the tongue of a Flatterer, then the sword of a Persecutor. Hier. 13. Ambition is a foolish Disease,
a secret Poyson, a lurking Plague, a worker of Deceit; the mother of Hypocrisie, the begetter of Enuy, the spring of Vice, the moath of Holinesse, the blinder of Hearts; breeding diseases of remedies, and turning medicines into malladies. Ibid. 14. The Ambition of power, de∣priued an Angell of his Felici∣tie; the appetite of knowledge robbed Man of his Immorta∣litie. Ibid. 15. Eus was not beguiled with the Apple, nor did shee forget the Commandement, but the Ambition of promised Honour beguiled her. Ibid. 16. Ambition is the Ape of Cha∣ritie;
Charitie suffreth for Eter∣nall thinges, Ambition for Earth∣ly; Charitie is benigne to the poore, Ambition to the rich; Charitie sustaines all for veritie, Ambition for vanitie; both of them beleeue all, but after a farre different manner. Pet. Rauen. 17. That is euer lost with much Lament, which is possest with much Loue. 18. There bee two Loues which build vp two Cities: the loue of God builds vp Hierusalem, the loue of the world, Babilon; Let euery one aske but of himselfe, what hee loues, and hee shall soone finde of which Citie hee is. August.
19. The labours of Louers are neuer painefull, but pleasant; as those of Huntsmen, Faulconers, Fishers; for in that wee loue, ei∣ther we labour not at all, or wee loue our Labour. Ibid. 20. They are happy that haue all they would haue, and wish for no more then what they should haue. 21. Peace is not sought that Warre may come thereof, but warre is made that peace may ensue: Bee you therefore peace∣able in Warre, that you may the better reduce those to Peace, a∣gainst whom you haue gotten victorie.
22. If the cause of Combate bee good, the end can neuer bee ill. Bern. 23. To bee a Souldier is no fault, but to bee a Souldier for booties sake, is a sinne. Aug. 24. No lesse doe they sinne who blaspheme CHRIST raigning in Heauen, then did they, who Crucified him walking vpon Earth. 25. The roote of all good is Cha∣ritie, the roote of all euill Cupi∣ditie, these two can neuer be to∣gether; for vnlesse the one bee rooted out, the other will neuer be planted.
26. Hee verily is a Christian, that worketh Mercy to all; that is mooued with no Iniury; that feeles the griefe of others as his owne; to whose Table the Poore is no stranger; who is reckoned inglorious before men, that hee may be glorious before GOD and his Angels; who de∣spiseth Transitory thinges to en∣ioy Eternall; who suffereth not the poore to bee oppressed if he can helpe; and to conclude, who weepes with them that weepe: which was well obserued by St. Paul, Quis (saith hee) infirma∣tur, & ego non infirmor? Who is infirme or grieued, and I not so too? 27. In vaine takes hee vpon him
the name of a Christian, that doth not imitate the life of Christ: for (alasse) what is it for you to bee called that you are not, or to vsurpe anothers name? 28. A Christian is hee that thinkes himselfe a Stranger in his owne house; our Countrey being a∣boue, our home at Heauen. 29. Will you walke? Christ saith I am the way; will you not bee deceiued? I am the Truth; will you not dye? I am the life. Aug. 30. As the many branches of a Tree doe grow from the roote onely, so many virtues spring from Charitie alone: nor hath the branch of a good worke any life, or greennesse, if it abide not
in the roote of Charitie. Greg. 31. Say not that you carry chaste mindes, when you haue wanton eyes; for a wanton eye is the messenger of a wanton heart. Hierom. 32. Among all Christian conflicts those of Chastitie are the shar∣pest; for there is continuall bat∣terie, and rare victorie; Beautie and Chastitie seldome lodge to∣gether. Ibid. 33. Confession is the health of Soules, the destroyer of Vices, the scourge of Deuils; briefely, it stops the mouth of Hell, and opens the gates of Paradice. 34. A cleere Conscience is that
which can neither bee justly ac∣cused with what is past, nor vn∣iustly delighted with what is present. Aug. 35 Gold is Caesars Coyne, Man is GODS: Caesar is seene in his Gold, GOD in Man. Therefore offer your wealth to Caesar, but reserue your Conscience for GOD. Chrysost. 36. You should rather thinke of what you want, then of that you haue; what you haue beware you leese not, and that you want pray God for: Consider in what you are lesser, not in how much you are greater; for if you compute onely wherein you are, or haue beene excellent, that may ingen∣der
vanitie and pride in you, which is to be feared; but if you reckon wherein you are or haue beene lesse, or defectiue, this will breed humilitie and teares in you which are to be wished: And doubtlesse if you striue to bee humble, you shall walke more safely, you shall not runne headlong, your foote shall not slippe. 37. God is aboue you, the Beasts are vnder you: acknowledge him that is aboue you, that they may acknowledge you, which are vnder you: Therefore when Daniel acknowledged God a∣boue himselfe, the Lyons ac∣knowledged him aboue them. 38. O Man! if thou didst consi∣der
what comes frō thee by thy mouth, by thine eares, by thy no∣strils, by thy pores, & other eua∣cuations of thy body; Thou wouldest confesse neuer to haue seene a more vile and loathsome dunghill, then thy selfe. Aug. 39. To giue a simple man Coun∣sell is Charitie; to a Wise man Presumption: but to giue it in case of peruersitie, or necessitie is Wisedome. Greg. 40. Among the Sages, one was wont to say, that a good Cu∣stome is neuer diswonted with∣out shame, and that good Com∣munication runnes into affectu∣all habit: according to that; who fore-goeth Vertue being young, shall not know how
to forbeare Vice beeing olde. Basil. 41. Let not your heart vary from your face or Countenance: car∣ry not a face vpward and a heart downward. The heart is little, and desireth much; it is scarse e∣nough to giue a Kite his break∣fast, and yet the whole world is not able to satisfie it. Bern. 42. Open Sinne before all, requi∣reth open Punishment for example of all. Aug. 43. Impunitie is the of-spring of negligence, the mother of Inso∣lence, the roote of vnshamefast∣nesse, the Nurse of Sinne. 44. Couetousnesse is the roote of
all mischiefe; it commits Sacri∣ledge and Theft; it rauins and deuoures; it makes warre and murther; it buyes and fels by Symonie; it asketh and recei∣ueth wrongfully; it negotiates and floords vp vniustly; it is at hand with all fraud and deceit; it dissolues pacts and violates oathes; it corrupts Witnesse and peruerts Iustice. 45. Three thinges are most affe∣cted; Wealth, Pleasure, and Honour; of Wealth comes wickednesse, of Pleasure turpi∣tude, of Honour vanitie; for wealth breeds Cupiditie and A∣uarice; Pleasure breeds Lust and Gluttony, Honour fostereth Pride and Ostentation. Innoc.
46. The Thiefe confessed Christ, Peter denyed him; in Peter the Iust are taught not to pre∣sume, in the Thiefe: a Sinner conuerted not to despaire. Therefore let the Iust be off aid of falling through Pride, and the Sinner of despairing through malice. 47. Let no man distrust, nor any sinner despaire of Gods mercy: for God knowes how to change his Iudgment, if you know how to change your life. Aug. 48. Desperation holts the gates of the Eternall Citie, Hope vn∣bolts them; but Faith sets them wide open. Chrysost.
49. Not onely they are guiltie that vtter falshood, but such al∣so as easily hearken thereunto. Ibid. 50. The heart lifted vp to God corrupteth not; if your Corne were layde in vnder-romes, to saue it from moulding, you would remoue it higher: you raise your graine to higher losts, so lift vp your hearts to Hea∣uen. But now should this bee done say you; what strong Cords, what Ladders, what En∣gines will bee required to this? Isay, the first step is your affe∣ction, the lest of your labour is your will: by Loue you ascend, by neglect you descend, and when you loue God, you are in
Heauen vpon Earth. 51. The Deuill is euery where ready to hurt euery one, but that his power is restrained by a greater power; for if he could but what hee would, there should not a Iust soule bee left to breath. Aug. 52. The DEuils office is to sug∣gest; ours not to consent: as oft as wee resist euill; so oft wee o∣uer come it; wee glad and glori∣fie the Angels; wee honour God, who visites vs that wee may fight, helpeth vs that wee may conquer, and aydes vs that we may not shrinke. Bern. 53. O wretch that I am how much am I bound to loue my
God, who Created me when I was not, and redeemed me be∣ing lost; for I was not, and hee made me of nothing; yet hee made me not a stone, not a tree, not a meere Animal, but a Man: hee gaue mee to liue, to feed, to vnderstand; hee deliuered me from bondage, redeemed mee from seruitude, and called mee by his Name, that I might re∣member him for euer. 54. CHRIST annoynted mee with the Oyle of gladnesse, wherewith himselfe was an∣noynted; that of the annoynted I might bee annoynted, and of Christ bee called a Christian. August. 55. To learne that which is fit, no
time is to late; and though it become feare Age rather to teach, then to learne, yet it is better to Learne then to beelg∣norant. August. 56. I wish, and thinke nothing more fit for mee, then to learne to the last houre of my old age: for no Age was euer long e∣nough to learne. Greg. 57. By all meanes auoyd chiding or contention in wordes; for with your equall it is dange∣rous, with your better it is madnesse; and with your infe∣riour especially with a Foole, it is base: and to fall out with him that is Drunke, is to fall out with him that is absent.
58. Virtue vndiscreetly possest, is often lost; discreetly forborne, it is better retayned. Greg. 59. Whatsoeuer you doe well with discretion, is Virtue; what∣soeuer without discretion, is Vice; for vndiscreet virtue, is of no better account then Vice. Ibid. 60. If worldly wealth bee wan∣ting, yet seeke it not by any ill meanes in the world; but if you liue in aboundance heere, then lay vp by good workes for your selfe else-where, in Heauen. 61. A manly Christian minde, should nener shew higher for Wealth, nor lower for Want.
62. Gold is liue matter; of vn∣quietest danger to them that haue it, a bad Lord, and a false Seruant. 63. The rich man begging in Hell was not heard, because hee heard not the poore man beg∣ging on Earth. 64. Earthly riches compared to Heauenly guifts, are rather trouble some then comfortable: Temporall life in respect of E∣ternall, sin rather Death then Life. 65. When Diues was a dying, he had taken all his wealth with him, had hee but giuen to him that asked when he was liuing;
for all earthly thinges which may bee lost by keeping, are preserued by giuing. Greg. 66. Gold and Siluer, in respect of the soule, are thinges indifferent, neither good nor bad: yet the vse of them may be good; the abuse is naught, the Care worse, the vnlawfull gaine of them worst of all. 67. If Art and vse bee seperated, Vse is better without Art, then Art without vse; for Art in vn∣profitable without vse, and Vse vnaduised without Art. Greg. 68. If Doctors Preach the Faith, and deale themselues vnfaith∣fUlly; they giue peace to others, but none to themselues; they
praise the truth and practice falshood; Let vs receiue their Doctrine, not their ill manners: The Bees gather not vpon Weedes, but vpon sweet Flow∣ers; so let vs gather the flowers of their Doctrine, and leaue the weedes of their Conuersation. 69. Drankennesse is the mother of all mischiefe, the matter of offence, the roote of vice; it is the Heads perturbation, the Senses subuersion, the Tongues tempost, the Bodies storme, shipwracke of Chastitie, and losse of Time; it is a voluntary madnesse, a disgracefull diseafe, a filthy fashion, a shamelesse life, the infamy of Honour and Honestie, the Soules corrupti∣on.
70. Drunkennesse is a flattering Deuill, a sweet Poyson; a plea∣sing Sinne; hee that hath it hath not himselfe: he that is Drunke, is not onely a sinner, but all sinne himselfe. 71. A Drunkard whilst he soakes in Wine; the Wine soakes him: hee is of God abhorred, of An∣gels despised, of Wertue forsa∣ken, of Men derided, of Deuils confounded, and scorned of all. 72. A Drunkard destroyeth Na∣ture, leeseth Grace, escapeth Glory, and incurreth eternall Darnnation. August. 73. Noah in one houres Drun∣kennesse, discouered his secret
parts, which hee had couered sixe hundred yeares together. Hierom. 74. The Church hath this pro∣pertie; to flourish when it is persecuted, to grow being op∣pressed, to profit being despi∣sed; being beaten it ouercom∣meth, being blamed it vnder∣standeth; and stands fast when it seemes to fall. Hillar. 75. If you can giue, giue; if you cannot, yet make your selfe af∣fable and willing; for God Crowneth inward willingnesse; where he findes not out ward a∣blenesse: Let no man answer I haue not for you; Charitie comes not alwayes out of a bagge. Aug.
76. If you would bee a good Marchant and an excellent Vsu∣ter indeed, giue what you can∣not keepe, that you may receiue what you can be leese; giue a little to hand much, part with something to gaine an hundred fold, giue a Temporall commo∣ditise to receiue an Eternall pa∣trimonie. August. 77. Who layeth vp his treasure in Earth, hath nothing to looke for in Heauen. 78. The hand of the Poore is the treasury of CHRIST; what the Poore receiueth, CHRIST accepteth. Therefore giue your Land to the Poore, that you may get a Kingdome to
your selfe; giue a Crumme to haue a Crowne; I say giue that you may recoine, for whatsoe∣uer you giue to the poore, you shall bee sune to haue againe, and that which you will not giue, another shall beceine. Pet. Rouen. 79. It is great impietie to deshone the goods of the Poore upon the Rich, and to curry fauour with the mightie at the poores cost; It is to drayne water from the dry ground, and to bestow it where is no need. Isid. 80. I aske you if you beleeue? and you answer Crede, I doe beleeue: doe as you say, and it is beliefe.
81. Labour not to vnderstand, that you may beleeue; but be∣leeue, that you may vnder∣stand; for vnderstanding is the fruit and reward of Faith. 82. Lay arguments aside where Faith is required: Logicke is now at rest, and silent, in the Schooles, where Fishermen are beleeued, not Logicians. Am∣brose. 83. Great is that Glory which increaseth by no praise, and di∣minisheth by no dispraise. Cass. 84. The vaine glory of this world is sweet and deceiptfull; a fruit∣lesse paine, a perpecuall feare, a perilous Throne; it begins with
improuidence, and ends with impenitence. 85. The glory is not so great of sitting high, as the griefe is ex∣treame in falling lowe; nor so much the triumph which at∣tends vpon Victory, as the shame and reproach that fol∣loweth Destruction. 86. If you loue Wealth, lay it vp where it cannot perish; if Ho∣nour, esteeme it where none are vnworthily honoured; if health, speake to enioy it, where nothing is feared; if Life, then loue it where it cannot end with Death. 87. If GOD haue giuen you Grace because hee would giue
it freely; then Loue you God freely, not for reward, but for himselfe. 88. Why Gods grace is bestow∣ed vpon one and not vpon ano∣ther, the Cause may bee vn∣knowne, but it cannot bee vn∣iust. Aug. 89. All that is done is lost, if Hu∣militie bed wanting. Greg. 90. Humilitie is a Virtue, by which in knowing, wee learne age esteeme our selues. Bern. 91. Fasting is knowne to bee the Tower of God, the Castle of Christ, the wall of the Holy Ghost, the shield of Faith, the tryumph of Sanctitie.
92. Of that manner of Fasting God well alloweth, by which you take out of your owne mouth, to put into anothers; or by which you afflict your owne Carkasse, to relieue your poore Neighbours. 93. Though Fasting expell the sicknesse of Vice and Sinne, cuts off Passions, and driues a∣way the causes of offence; yet without the oyntment of pittie, without the streame of  and the cost of Almes, it brings no perfect health to the Soule: Fasting cureth the wounds of the soule, but without mercy, it leaues the scarres behinde. Pet. Rouan.
94. The blessed shall first be cal∣led to their prepared Kingdome, before the accursed bee cast into their burning Lake, that their sorrowes may bee the sharper by seeing what they haue lost, and the lust haue more joy by considering what they haue e∣scaped. Bern. 95. It is laudable to bee patient in our owne wrongs, but to dis∣semble the iniuries of God is im∣pious. Chrysost. 96. Enuy is the Daughter of Pride, and that mother Pride is neuer barren, but euer bearing: strangle that mother, and there will bee no more such Daugh∣ter. August.
97. Not to bee sory after you haue finned, makes God more angry and displeased, then the sinne you committed. 98. The ignorance of Iudges for the most part, is the misery of Innocents. 99. I say vnto you Sweare not at all; least Swearing breed a faci∣litie of swearing; facilitie Cu∣stome, and custome lead you to Periurie. August. 100. As that Tree hath no fruit which first had no blossome; so that Age hath no honour, whose Youth had no Disci∣pline. Cyprian.
101. It is no true bountie that pro∣ceeds more from vaine Glory, then from the occasion of mer∣cy; for your worke takes it name from your affection. Am∣brose. 102. Very many haue I seene fall into sinne by speaking, but sel∣dome any by silence; and doubtlesse, it is harder to learne how to bee silent, then how to speake. Ambrose. 103. O Infernall wantonnesse of the Flesh, whose matter is Glut∣tony, whose flame is Pride, whose sparkles are lewd Spea∣ches, whose smoake is Infamie, whose end is Hell fire. Hier.
104. O extreame filthinesse of lust; which not onely effeminateth the minde, but enfeebleth the body: not onely spotteth the soule but polluteth the person: All other sinne which a man committeth, is besides his body but the Fornicator sinneth a∣gainst his owne body. Heat and wantonnesse march before it: vncleannesse and pollution accompany it; Sorrow and re∣pentance doe alwayes follow it. Hier. 105. It is great vertue not to hurt, him that hurts you; it is no lesse fortitude when you are hurt to forgiue; but to spare him whom you may hurt, is great glory, Ibid.
106. To search the reason of Gods secret councell, is no other thing then proudly to vaunt against his Councell. Greg. 107. I remember not to haue read of any that dyed an ill death, who had freely vsed the workes of mercy in his life; such a one surely hath many intercessors, and impossible it is, that the prayers of many should not bee heard. Hier. 108. Good men are called away betimes, that they may no lon∣ger bee vexed of the wicked; and wicked persons are cut off, that they may persecute the iust no further.
109. In such estate as euery mans last houre leaues him, in the like will the worlds last day finde him; for as hee dyeth in the one, so shall hee bee iudged in the other. 110. Hee cannot Dye ill, that hath Liued well; and hardly can hee dye well, that hath liued ill. August. 111. A Sinner should be astonisht with this note; that when hee dyeth, hee may forget himselfe, who whilest hee liued forgot God. Caesarius. 112. To maintaine a poore wife is very hard, to endure a rich one is a torment: what booteth a
diligent watch? seeing a disho∣nest woman will not bee kept in, an honest should not: Ne∣cessitie is but a false keeper of Chastitie, and shee onely is tru∣ly to bee reputed chaste, that might haue sinned and would not. Hier. 113. If it bee a sinne to put away a Wife, and a torment to keepe her, then of necessitie wee shall incurre danger of Adulteries by the one, and suffer continuall brawles by the other. Chrys. 114. The Fetters of this world are truely rough and troublesome, the Pleasures false, the Sorrowes certayne, the Ioyes inconstant, the Labours hard, the Rest doubtfull, the Wealth accom∣panied
with Care, and the hopes of Earthly happinesse vaine. August. 115. The World proclaimes, I will fayle you: The Flesh cryes out, I will infest you: The Deuill roares, I will betray you: But CHRIST saith, I will refresh you. Bern. 116. Who would not be ashamed to say, What will you giue mee that I may doe you Iustice? Is it not as much as to say, what will you giue mee to deny my selfe, to forget my place, and to sell God Almighty? Chrys. 117. A Christians chiefest libertie to God-ward, is to bee no ser∣uant to sinne; his chiefest No∣blenesse,
to excell in Vertues. Hierom. 118. Prayer is talking to GOD: when you read, God speakes to you; and when you pray, you speake to God; Therefore pray with attention; for the prayer which man intendeth not, God heareth not. 119. God is neither forced nor mooued by a crying voyce, but pleased and appeased by an vp∣right Conscience; for hee is a hearer not of the voyce, but of the heart. 120. Many there are whom God heareth not to their intentions, that he may heare them to their saluations. Chrysost.
121. Whether it bee Man or Wo∣man, that vseth wanton attyre to prouoke and tempt others, though no hurt should come thereof, yet hee, or shee shall a∣bide the eternall Iudgement, be∣cause they proffered Poyson, if any would haue drunke of it. 122. The onely perfection of any, is the knowledge of their owne imperfection. Hier. 123. Seeing that Sinne must not scape vnpunished, punish you it, least it punish you: euer let your sinne finde you a Iudge o∣uer it, not a Patron for it. 124. Vaine is that Repentance which is spotted with ensuing
sinne; Laments auayle nothing where sinne is doubled: It is to no purpose to aske forgiuenesse, and fall into the same sinne a∣fresh. 125. The practice of right Con∣uersation, is not to presume to Command, before wee haue learned to obey; nor to impose that vpon our Inferiours, which wee yeeld not to our Superi∣ours. 126. So farre should a Prelates be∣hauiour transcend the Peoples, as a Shepheard transcends his Flocke. 127. If hee shall bee cast into the Fire, that giueth not of his owne, what may wee thinke
will become of him that robbes another? If hee burne with the Deuill, that cloathed not the na∣ked, where shall hee burne that strippeth the Poore? 128. What you haue found, and not restored, you haue carryed away by force; for what you could doe, you did; and you did no more, because you could not; hee also that denyeth to another his owne, as much as in him lyes, robbes him. 129. Sinne is not remitted, vnlesse debt bee restored, if it may bee. August. 130. Wee that liue vpon the obla∣tions of the Faithfull, which they offered for their sinnes,
doubtlesse if wee eate and bee silent, we feed vpon their sinne. 131. Consider (O Brethren) how damnable a thing it is, to receiue wage for no worke? what a crime to take the price of sinne, and to Preach nothing against sinne. Greg. 132. Whatsoeuer yee retayne of the Altars, besides simple Food and Cloathing; it is rapine, it is Sacriledge. Bern. 133. Who affirmeth to haue knowledge being ignorant, is rash; who denyes that know∣ledge hee hath, is vnthankfull. 134. An Olde mans discourse should not onely bee weightie
and graue, but withall short or not very long. Aug. 135. An Old man heareth the mes∣sengers of Death, and will not beleeue them; the messengers are three; Casualtie, Sicknesse, and old Age it selfe: Casualtie propounds thinges vncertaine; Sicknesse thinges sorrowfull; old Age thinges certaine: Casu∣altie shewes death lurking; Sicknesse death appearing; old Age death present: From vn∣certaintie of Death proceeds feare; from paine of Sicknesse, griefe; and from the certaintie of old Age, should come not obstinacy and stiffenesse, but Mortification and Humilitie. Hug.
136. The patience to say nothing, the oportunitie of speaking, and the contempt of worldly wealth, are the chiefe foundati∣ons of Vertue. 137. As it becomes not a Bishop to sell that hand hee layeth vpon others, so the ordayned Mini∣ster, must neither set his Tongue nor his Pen to sale. 138. When a Bishop purchaseth vndue Order with money, whereby his inward man is cast off; his Body receiueth honour, and his Soule loseth honestie. Ambrose. 139. Euery one is so much the more vnwise inwardly, as hee
striueth to bee thought wise outwardly. Greg. 140. If a Rich man proud, bee scarce tollerable, who will suf∣fer an insolent Begger? Aug. 141. Pride precipitateth from the highest Heauen, to the deepest pit of Hell: Humilitie exalteth from below to aboue: an An∣gell fell from Heauen into Hell; Man from Earth ascendeth to Heauen. Bern. 142. The vicious for the most part, loue such as are like them∣selues; onely one proud body, can neuer indure another. Inno. 143. Present feare, begets eternall securitie; now feare God aboue
all thinges, that you need not be affraid of Man. 144. Let Man vnderstand, that GOD is a Physitian, and tribu∣lation a Medicine to Saluation, not a preparatiue to Damna∣tion. 145. In the Furnace, Strawe bur∣neth, Gold purifieth; the one consumeth to ashes, the other is purged of drosse and corrupti∣on: the Furnace is the World; the Gold is the lust; the Fire is Tribulation; the cunning work∣man is GOD: What the work∣man willeth I doe; where and when hee appoints I suffer: hee that appoints mee to endure, knowes when I shall bee pure: though the strawe burne and set
mee on fire, yet when it is tur∣ned to ashes, I shall bee cleane without spot or staine. 146. Our LORD saith Forgiue, and you shall bee forgiuen: say not with your tongue you for∣giue, and differ with your heart; for God knowes what you say and thinke together; Man heares what you say, but GOD sees what you thinke: It is much better to forgiue heartily and say nothing, then to carry a faire golden mouth, and a false froward heart. Aug. 147. So mercifull is our Lord IESVS, that hee would haue pardoned Iudas, if hee had but craued pardon and hoped for CHRISTS mercy. Ambr.
148. O Man! thou canst not bee without sinne; and if alwayes thou wilt bee forgiuen all, then forgiue alwayes; how much thou wilt bee forgiuen, so much forgiue; how often thou wilt bee forgiuen, so often forgiue: yea, and because thou wouldest bee forgiuen all, forgiue all: I say O man conceiue, that in for∣giuing others, thou forgiuest thy selfe. Chrysost. 149. Truth is both sweet and bit∣ter; sweet when it spareth, bit∣ter when it cureth. Aug. 150. What booteth a cleane Body with a corrupt Minde? an hum∣ble Wife is better then a proud Virgin.
151. What is the Mindes virgini∣tie? entire Faith, strong Hope, and perfect Charitie. Aug. 152. Virginitie surpasseth the con∣dition of humane nature, by which men are made like vnto Angels: yet greater is the vi∣ctory of Virgins then of An∣gels; for Angels liue without Flesh, but Virgins triumph in Flesh. 153. Virginitie is the Sister of An∣gels, the Conquest of Lusts, the Queene of Vertues, the Trea∣sure of Goodnesse. Cyprian. 154. Vertue, the more it con∣temneth, the more it is estee∣med. It is great Vertue to striue
with Prosperitie, and great Prosperitie not to bee ouercome by it. 155. The minde can neuer enioy the kingdome of Vertue, vnlesse it first shake off the yoake of Vice. Aug. 156. There is no such persuasion, to Vertue, as often to remember the vglinesse of Sinne. Chrys. 157. There is nothing well-done, vnwillingly, though the thing done bee neuer so good. 158. If you steale not because you are affraid to bee seene, yet in∣wardly in your heart you haue stolne, and are to bee held guil∣tie thereof, though you take
nothing away. Bern. 159. When you will you cannot, because when you might you would not; so as through an ill will past, you haue lost a good beeing present. Aug. 160. With GOD (who knoweth all thinges before they be done) a resolued will to doe well, or ill, is reckoned for the deed done. Aug. 161. His braine is taken away whom GOD intendeth to pu∣nish, least hee should by pro∣uidence auert the intended plague. 162. He that makes an vndiscreet Vow is foolish, and hee that
keepes it is impious. Hier. 163. Alwayes breake vnlawfull Promises, and change vngodly Vowes. 164. What good you haue vowed freely, that you are bound to performe justly. Bern. 165. A greedy Couetous man who deuoureth all like Hell, would haue none left aliue but himselfe, that hee might pos∣sesse all. Aug. 166. When God rewardeth Me∣rites, hee crowneth nothing but his owne Guifts: in the merite you doe nothing; in the worke, you worke alone; your Crowne is of God, your worke of your
selfe, yet not without Gods as∣sistance. Aug. 167. Many good things doth God in Man, which man doth not; for Man doth nothing which God doth not, that Man may doe it. Ibid. 168. All our merites are in such manner the guifts of God, that Man is for the same more in∣debted to God, then God to Man. Bern. 169. Merite and Grace are at this oddes; that Grace will neuer enter, where Merite takes the vpperhand. Bern. 170. I know well, that by no ver∣tue, no merite, he shall euer bee
saued, who by the Passion of CHRIST is neuer moued. Aug. 184. Whensoeuer Ideuoutly re∣member and meditate the Passi∣on of CHRIST, I shall be safe. Ibid. 172. Not any one vpon earth is so rich, as hee desireth nothing but God: and he is the Almes∣man of CHRIST, that is out of loue with the world. Aug. 173. Among thirtie thousand men, scarse one of those shall repent truly, who driue of Repentance to the last cast. 174. Hee is farre enough from Faith, that deferreth his repen∣tance till his Death. Greg.
175. Repentance should not bee late, not compelled, not fained, not desperate. 176. In a sound man Penance is sound, in a sicke man it is sicke, and in a dead man it is dead. 177. Reckon from Adam to the last Iust man, and you shall find none to bee saued, but by very hard and rough wayes. 178. Alwayes in your heart eschew ill Company, and when you cannot auoyde them, conuerse very warily amongst them. 179. The vertue of the Sacraments, is not abated by the viciousnesse of the Priest.
180. I had rather vndergoe the torments of Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate, then of a Priest that ce∣lebrates vnworthily. Aug. 181. Hee that tels a Lye, and hee that concealeth Truth, are both culpable, and guilty before God, the one for desiring to doe hurt, and the other for not doing good. Hier. 182. If scandall arise from truth, it is rather to bee permitted, the truth pretermitted. Greg. 183. If I doe good with a good intention, though euill come thereof, yet it shall not bee im∣puted to mee for sinne. Ambr.
184. Certainely hee cannot bee good, that would not bee bet∣ter: For where hee begins not to be made better, there hee leaues off being good. 185. No man is more incurable, then hee that thinkes himselfe sound when hee is truly sicke, August. 186. To stand and not to fall into sinne, is Angelicall; to fall and rise againe, is Humane; but to fall and arise, is Diabolicall. 187. The Deuill hurteth by per∣swasion, not by compulsion. Hug. 188. The Deuill neuer tempts or
assaults those, that are in his quiet possession. 189. That sinne which is not con∣sented to, is no sinne, but in at∣ter of exercise to vertue. Greg. 190. The worlds Mirth is vnpu∣nisht Wantomesse. Aug. 191. He that taketh vniustly, sel∣dome restoreth iustly. Isid. 192. He that is proud of his owne vertue, killeth himselfe; not with a Sword, but with a Salue. 193. Who often with their good∣will fall into offence, must sometimes against their will a∣bide the smart of punishment. Greg.
194. God neuer forsakes man, be∣fore man forsakes God. Hier. 195. It is monstrous to behold, an eminent state with a base minde; a high seate with a meane life; a nimble tongue with an idle hand; many wordes with no deeds; graue lookes with light actions; great authoritie with little constancie. Bern. 196. Bee alwayes doing of some good worke, that the Deuill may neuer finde you at leysure for him. Hier. 197. God deferres the giuing of that wee aske, that we may aske more often, and more feruently.
198. Hee that made you without you, will neuer saue you, or iu∣stifie you without you. Aug. 199. Doe not that euill your selfe, which you would not haue an∣other to doe. Greg. 200. As Iustice without Mercy, is not Iustice but Crueltie, so fa∣uour without Iustice, is not fa∣uour but folly. 201. Correction without instru∣ction, is Tirannie. 202. The last thinges euermore to bee remembred are Death, Iudgement, Hell, Glory; what is more horrible then Death? what more terrible then Iudge∣ment?
what more intollerable then Hell? and what more joy∣full then Glory. Bernardus. Deo Gratias.
Short Prayers or Medi∣tations vpon the last thinges, viz. Death, Iudgement, Hell, Glorie. Vpon DEATH. OEternall GOD in whose hands the soules of the Iustare, and vnder whose pro∣tection the torment of Death doth not touch them; take from my foule the disordinate
loue of all visible thinges, that in departing from them, it may haue no feeling of torment. O my Soule, if thou desirest that the bitternesse of Death should not touch thee, loue not those thinges that Death can take from thee; for if thou possesse them not with loue, thou shalt leaue them in Death and Do∣lour. Vpon IVDGEMENT. O How afflicted shall my poore Soule finde it felfe, with so straight and rigorous an examination? O how astonied shall it bee with the euidence of
so certaine and cleere proofe? O Eternall GOD, enter not in∣to Iudgement with thy Ser∣uant; for none that liue, shall be justified in thy presence. Feare O my Soule, although thou fin∣dest no great sinnes in thy selfe; for hee that is to examine and Iudge thee, is GOD, that seeth more then thou, and can finde them. Examine thy selfe with the greatest rigour thou canst, and judge seuerely thy selfe for the sinnes thou shalt finde; for if thou judgest thy selfe with Dolour, thou shalt no more bee judged to Damnation.
Vpon HELL. O Good IESVS, ayde mee to bewaile bitterly my sinnes, that I may not goe to that tenebrous Land couered with the shadow of Death, the Land of those that are in De∣spaire, O touch mee with thy mercy, that being freed from the feares of Hell, I may euer enioy thee world without end.
Vpon GLORY. O Infinite GOD, center of my Soule, conuert mee to thee, that on thy eternall Sab∣both, I may partake of thy Glory; for thou madest mee for thee, and my heart is vnquiet till it come neere thee. O Eter∣nall Father, seeing thou Crea∣tedst mee, that I might Loue thee as a Sonne; giue me Grace for thine owne sake, that I may loue thee as a Father. O onely begotten Sonne of the Father, and Redeemer of the world, seeing thou Createdst mee and Redeemedst mee, that I might
obey and imitate thee, ayde me that I may alwayes obey thee and imitate thee in all thinges. O most Holy Ghost, seeing that of thy goodnesse thou diddest Create me to bee Sanctified, grant that it may bee for thine owne Glory, world without end. Amen.
FINIS.
