4073 99844541 9365
Looke from Adam, And behold THE PROTESTANTS FAITH AND RELIGION, EVIDENTLY PROVED OVT OF the holy Scriptures against all Atheists, Papists, loose Libertines, and Carnall Gospellers: and that the Faith which they professe, hath conti∣nued from the beginning of the world, and so is the true and ancient Faith. HEREIN HAST THOU ALSO A SHORT SVMME OF THE WHOLE BIBLE, and a plaine manifestation, that all holy men who have pleased God, have beene saved through this Christian Faith alone. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Haviland, for Thomas Pavier, and are to be sold at his shop in Ivie Lane. 1624.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. HAving divers times observed with my selfe (most Christian Reader) that the doctrine of the Gospell, which hath beene now freely preached these many yeeres amongst us, in this our flouri∣shing Common-wealth, is yet daily and ordinarily, by sundry persons, charged with noveltie, as which being an upstart, were not of sufficient standing or antiqui∣tie: I thought it not amisse in this respect, either for the confutation of the obstinate adversarie, or for the com∣fort of the weake and simple professour of religion, to publish and set forth this little worke of Mr. Miles Coverdale, who for his integritie of life, and fame in learning, and other excellent gifts, was so renowmed in the Church of Christ in his age, that I doubt not, but that his onely name will be a sufficient credit, (with any man, that is not maliciously disposed) for the full allowance, and well-liking of any such monument of his, as he of pure zeale, and good affection, hath commen∣ded to us his posteritie. By which travels of his, as hee
hath generally shewed himselfe a notable member in the Church of God: so hath he thereby especially well deser∣ved of this his native Countrey. Wherefore not willing to detain thee from better matter, I wish thee to use this booke to thy profit, and with mee to give thanks to our mercifull Father, for this valiant Souldier, as also for other worthie Martyrs of his time, which after the battell by themselves fought, have (by Gods provi∣dence) left spirituall children, (I meane their good bookes) to make a supply, that Christs Church may bee encreased, to the utter confusion and overthrow of An∣tichrist. Farewell in the Lord.
Miles Coverdale, TO ALL CHRISTIAN Readers, wisheth grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, through our Lord and onely Saviour IESVS CHRIST. LIke as the Almighty eternall God, three in per∣sons, and one in substance, of his tender mercy and love, not only created man at the begin∣ning after his owne similitude and likenesse, but also when he was lost, most graciously re∣deemed him, and brought him out of bond age: Even so when man (neither regarding his won∣derfull creation, nor his most deare redemption) gropeth in dark∣nesse, in vice and blindnesse, lieth in the Devils prison,The accustomed good∣nesse of God. and goeth in the way of damnation; God alway setteth up his light before him, sendeth the message of his word unto him, sheweth him what case he is in, giveth him warning, openeth the prison doore, calleth him out of the Devils service, telleth him what danger it is to be his bondman, or servant unto sinne. This doth God alway afore he pu∣nish and plague the world. This (I say) hath ever beene the worke of God since the beginning, as the stories and prophesies of all the holy Bible doe testifie. And though we had no writing of Gods acts in times past, yet hath he practised this same his wonderfull worke of mercy upon us. So that like as we must needs confesse,God hath shewed no lesse kindnesse to us than he did to the old world. that we are created of God, and redeemed by his only mercy in his deare Sonne Iesus Christ: So can we not denie, but we have heard his holy message, had no lesse preachings and warnings of dangers to come, than other have had afore our daies. Yea even the same mercifull God that sent Noe to preach righteousnesse unto the wicked world, and converted the Ninivites by his word in the mi∣nistration of the Prophet Ionas, hath done even so with us in every condition. And some (thanks be unto him therefore) hath bee brought out of darknesse into his wonderfull light, and out of the devils service, into the kingdome of his deare Sonne. But alas and woe to this unthankfull world. For like as a great number that be in prison of Satan, will not come forth when they
are called and the doore set open, but goe on still stumbling in dark∣nesse,They that follow Gods word are laughed to scorne. when the lanterne of light is offered them: Even so if any play a wise mans part, and doe as he is warned by Gods word, hee shall have a sort of apish people, a number of dizerds and scornfull mockers, which (because the man will not dance in the devils mor∣rys with them, nor keepe their company in the bondage of sinne and vice, neither runne with them unto like confusion (as S. Peter calleth it) laugh him to scorne, and bleare out their tongues at him, even like fooles and cockscombs of the world. And like as when a poore wretch commeth out of prison, he shall have moe to stand gasing and gaping upon him, than to doe him good, or to helpe him to his fees: Even so now that God of his mercy hath called us out of Satans prison, and from the schoole of false doctrine, my Lords foole with his companions standeth staring upon us, and mocketh us, because we sit not still with other prisoners. There go∣eth a fellow of the new learning (saith one) there is one of these new-fangled Gospellers (saith another) that is one of the new bre∣thren (saith the third) he followeth the new faith, &c. The doctrine of Christ his faith is no new thing.Wherefore, in consideration hereof I have here set forth this booke: partly because it sheweth the antiquitie and ancient age of our holy Christian faith, and partly to give occasion unto all such as have received it, not to be ashamed of it, nor to shrinke from it, for any opprobrious mockage or scornfull derision in this world. The Apostle saith,1 Cor. 1.18. that the preaching or word of Christs crosse, is foo∣lishnesse to them that perish, and that the thing which appertaineth to the spirit of God,1 Cor. 1.14. is foolishnesse to a carnall minded man. Where∣by like as we may learne that it is no new thing to be mocked and stared upon for holding with the doctrine that maketh so much of Christ his death, and the true worshipping of God in the spirit: even so may we see (to the singular comfort of our conscience) that no man mocketh us for it,None but reprobates deride the truth of Gods Gospell. but such as perish and are carnally min∣ded: and that for all their derision and scorning, it is yet the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.18. and belongeth to his holy spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. and is not our owne doctrine,To us which are saved, it is the power of God. neither of any other mans making. This is now to us a comfort and consolation. But because the world is angry with us for our faith, and giveth us so euill report for teaching it, it shall be expedient for us to de∣clare what faith is, and what faith we meane, when we make men∣tion thereof. First, because we may not describe it after our owne judgement, we will rehearse the words of the Apostle, which writing to the Hebrewes,What faith is. Hebr. 11.1. saith after this manner: Faith is a substance of things to be hoped for, an evidence or certaintie of things which doe not appeare. By the which definition, it is manifest, that when we set forth or teach this faith, we meane no vaine faith, no false opinion of faith, no fond imagination of faith, no dead faith, no
idle faith; but a substantiall thing, even a sure beleefe of things that are to be hoped for, and a proofe, experience, or knowledge of things that are not seene. This faith then is the instrument, whereby we feele and are certaine of heavenly things, that our cor∣porall eye cannot see. Now because none other vertue can so ap∣prehend the mercy of God, nor certifie us so effectually of our sal∣vation, as this living faith doth, therefore hath the Scripture impu∣ted our justification before God, only unto faith among all other vertues: not without other vertues following, but without any other worke or deed justifying. This is the faith of Christ,Rom. 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Ephes. 2.8. Phil. 3.9. Iaco. 2.14. which all the Scripture speaketh of. This is the faith that S. Paul preach∣eth to justifie in the sight of God: as S. Iames teacheth, that works justifie in the sight of men, and that it is but a dead faith which hath no works. This is the faith, without the which it is impossible to please God, and of the which whatsoever proceedeth not, is sinne. This is the faith whereby God purifieth our hearts,Heb. 11.6. Rom. 14.23. Act. 15.9. 1 Pet. 1.9. Gala. 5.6. 1 Cor. 10.3. Heb. 11.4. and whose end is salvation. This is the faith that worketh by charitie or godly love, & is of value before God. This is the faith whereby the holy fathers which were afore Christs incarnation did in spirit eat and drinke & enjoy the same mercy of God in Christ, that we are partakers of. To be short, this is the same faith, whereby God saved those his elect, of whō S. Paul maketh mention in the foresaid epistle to the Hebrewes, and rehearseth many godly fruits of the same in their conversation. This then is no new-fangled faith, no strange faith, no faith in∣vented by mans braine, but even the same that Gods holy spirit teacheth in the infallible truth of his Scripture, and that Adam, Abel, Enoch, and all the other servants of God were saved in. Why doe men therefore either call it a new-fangled faith, or report evill of us, for setting it forth? Why? I feare me this is one cause: The old faith that all those servants of God had, whom the Apostle na∣meth in the eleventh to the Hebrewes,Heb. 11.4, 5. had a life and conversation joyned unto it, which was rich and full of all good works. There∣fore seeing there be so many bablers and pratlers of faith, and so few that bring forth the worthy fruits of repentance, it giveth the world occasion to report of us, that our faith is but new-fangled. They see us not fall to labour and taking of paines, as Adam did: They see not the righteousnesse and thankfulnesse in us, that was in Abel: They see us not walke after the word and will of God, as Enoch did: They see us not take Gods warning so earnestly as Noe did: They see us not so obedient to the voice of God, nor so well willing and content to leave our friends, to forsake our owne wils, our owne lands and goods at Gods calling, and dwell in a strange country, to doe Gods pleasure, as Abraham did: they see that wee chuse not rather to suffer adversitie with the people of God, than to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season: They see us not esteeme
the rebuke of Christ, or trouble for his sake, to be greater riches than all the treasures of this world, as Moses did: To be short, they see not in our garden those sweet flowers and fruits of Gods holy Spirit, which were in them that had the old faith. Ashamed may wee be therefore, as many of us as either write, teach, preach, speake or talke of the old faith, if wee endevour not our selves to have those old heavenly vertues that were ever plenti∣full in all Gods true servants, in every one (I meane) according to his calling. Not that it is evill, to teach or talke of the true old faith, but this I say,Iames 1▪21 because that (according to the doctrine of S. Iames) they are but deceivers of themselves, that are not doers of Gods word, as well as hearers thereof. And through such slender recei∣ving of Christs holy Gospell, it is now come to passe, that like as we haue need of such an Apostle as was holy S. Paul, to rebuke this vaine confidence that men put in their workes, and to tell us that no worke of our doing (but faith of Gods working, doth justifie us in his sight. Even so have wee no lesse need of such another Apostle (as was holy S.Would to God we had many such as Iames the Apostle was. Iames) to rebuke this horrible unthankfulnesse of men, that professing themselves to bee Christians, and to hold of Christs old faith, are yet dead unto all good workes, receive not the word of God in meekenesse, cast not away all uncleannesse and ma∣litiousnesse, are swift to speake, to talke, to jangle, and to take dis∣pleasure; are forgetfull hearers of the Word, and not livers thereaf∣ter, boasting themselves to be of Gods pure and undefiled Religion, and yet refraine nor their tongues from evill, visit not the poore, the friendlesse, and the desolate in their trouble, neither keepe them∣selves undefiled from this world. Reade the first chapter of his E∣pistle.Iames 1. What an occasion might such an Apostle (as holy Iames was) have, to write another, yea a sharper Epistle, seeing so many pretending to be of Iesus Christs old faith, are yet so partiall, have such a carnall respect of persons, are not rich in faith, despise the poore, practise not the law of godly love, talke and jangle of faith, not having the workes thereof,O unthankefull world. clothe not the naked, helpe not the poore to their living, regard not their necessitie, have but a dead faith, declare not by good and godly workes, the true and old faith of Christ, are but vaine beleevers, have not the eflectuous, the working and living faith,Iames 2.25. that Abraham and Rahab had. Reade the second chapter of his Epistle. How would holy Iames reprove these bringers up of strange do∣ctrines,Saint Iames would not spare to rebuke such. blasphemers, backbiters, belies of good men, false teachers against Gods truth, dissemblers with the same, cary fire (as they say) with the one hand, and water in the other: pretend to be learned, and yet bring not forth the workes of good conversation in meeke∣nesse out of Gods wisdome, but in frowardnesse, and out of carnall
doctrine. How would he take up these, that delight in malice and strife, belie Gods truth, are given to earthly, fleshly, and devillish wisdome, are unstable, full of all evill workes, are not in the schoole of Gods wisdome and learning, are not given to unfainednesse of heart, are not peaceable, are churlish, uneasie to be intreated, &c. Reade the third chapter of his Epistle.Iames 3 17. What would such an holy Apostle say to this wicked world,Iames 4.1. where∣in a great number (pretending to be Christian men) are given so to quarelling and fighting, to voluptuousnesse and inordinate lusts,Against such grosse vices would not Saint Iames spare to speake. to envie and indignation, to unlawfull spending and consuming of that they may get, to advoutrie, to the despising of holy wedlocke, to shamefull uncleannesse, either not willing to marry, or else putting away their wives for light occasions, and for satisfying of their owne trifling lusts, falling in love with the vaine friendship of this world, taking part against God: yea whereas by their profession, oath, and allegiance (which they owe to their most high Soveraigne the King of heaven) they should in a vertuous conversation maintaine all god∣linesse, are become even enemies, suppressours and overthrowers thereof, as well through their obstinate and cruell resisting of Gods word, as by other wicked examples of their vicious and filthy living? What would holy S. Iames say to such unthankfull bellies, that know∣ing the truth, live after such a sort? Would he spare them though they were never so rich and wealthie? Reade the fourth chapter of his Epistle, and the first part of his fifth chapter,Iames 4. and yee will judge the contrarie. Wherefore, most deare Readers, whosoever of you hath beene slacke to follow the good life and godly conversation that S. Iames, and all the other Scripture beside requireth to be in them, which professe the old faith, let them take better hold, turne againe to the truth, and follow that loving exhortation, which holy S.Iames 5.19. Iames ma∣keth in the latter end of his Epistle. And if he hath at the first not enclined to Gods word, nor received it unfainedly in meekenesse,Let every man take the paines to rebuke his owne fault. nor submitted himselfe to be ordered thereby, and to cast away all uncleannesse, &c. But hath haply suffered it, promoted it, set it forth, or taken a pretence of favour and love to it, for some other purpose to obtaine any carnall profit, gaines or libertie by it; let him not put holy S. Iames, or any other true messenger of God, to the paines of rebuking him for so doing: let him rather enter into himselfe, re∣prove his owne fault and abuse in that behalfe, abhorre it in any wise, be angry, displeased and discontent with himselfe, sorie and repen∣tant for it, shame not to aske God mercie, and by good workes from hence forward to labour, that the glory of God, and worship of his truth, may be preferred and set up, which he by such his unchristian living, hath in times past caused to be hindred. In conclusion: Though there be never so many that recant and
deny Gods holy word, either in their living and conversation, or in their words, writing or preaching, yet as many of us as are entered into the schoole of that wisdome which is from aboue, let us be true scholers of the same, and practise it both in our thought, word and deed: let us even enter into the nature and kinde thereof: which (as S.Iames 3.17. We must put on the nature of Gods do∣ctrine. Iames saith, Iam. 3.) is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easie to be intreated, full of mercie and good fruits, without judging and dissi∣mulation. Which thing if we doe, then shall we follow no filthy do∣ctrine nor counterfeited wisdome, then shall we be no breakers of peace, then shall we be as glad to forgive, as we would be forgiven, glad to be reformed, rich and plentifull in the workes of mercie and good fruits of the old faith: then shall we be no quarrell-pickers or dissemblers with any man: Then shall wee not only be found the maintainers of peace and all good order, but peaceably also, and in all gentle manner shall we (both in word and deed) sow, spread a∣broad, and shew the fruit of that righteousnesse, which commeth only of God through Iesus Christ. If any of them that are gone (of high or low estate, pretending to be maintainers, favourers, setters forth, or scholers of Christs do∣ctrine) hath in any condition dissembled therewith, fallen from God, misbehaved himselfe in the affaires of his Prince, misgoverned his houshold, maintained riot, vice and sinne, or brought the good word of God into any evill report by his ungodly conversation (as I feare me, it be too true) let us beware by such mens fall. Let us not receive the grace of God in vaine. For like as they that harden their hearts at Gods word, and spurne wilfully against it, are sure of their damnation,Let the workes of God, which are past, be a warning to us. except they repent; Even so they that dissemble withall, shall finde their judgement. Wherefore let us that have received the old true faith of Christ, not only be content to abide any storme or trouble for it (yea to be mocked, scorned, persecuted, and put to death therefore, if it so please God) but also unfainedly every man to his power, in his heart by fervent prayer, in his mouth by good words, and in all his bodie by vertuous conversation and good Chri∣stian workes, helpe and labour, that the blessed word of God may have the due honour belonging thereunto, and that the same which it hath lost through ungodly behaviour of some, may through the grace and goodnesse of God bee wonne againe in our good living: That God may have of us better servants, our Prince truer subjects, and our neighbours more unfained lovers, than many have been before us. Amen.
AN EVIDENT DE∣CLARATION OVT of the Holy Scriptures, that the Christian faith hath endured since the beginning of the world, and that through it only all vertuous men plea∣sed God and were saved. CHAP. I. I SVPPOSE plainly that many sim∣ple Christian men will not a lit∣tle wonder at this mine enter∣prise, they are so perswaded,The Christian faith is elder than 1600. yeeres. and thinke, the Christian faith did first beginne under Tiberius the Empe∣rour: for as much as out of the Gospell of Luke it is certaine, that in the fifteenth yeere of Tiberius, Iohn Baptist beganne to preach the Gospell, and
all histories say with one accord, that in the xviij. yeare of Tiberius Iesus Christ did suffer. Now it is true that all the Prophecies were then first fulfilled, and the true salvation performed; yea from that time forth were all the glorious trea∣sures of Christ so richly declared and powred out among all people, as they never were afore. Not∣withstanding the same salvation in Christ Iesus was promised long afore, and so opened to the holy old Fathers, that they have no lesse sight of Christ Iesus in the spirit than we, and put their trust in him as well as we: though among us it be cleere and open, or performed and fulfilled, that among them was somewhat darker, and therefore looked for with hearts desire, as a thing for to come. More∣over it is not I that first bring forth this meaning concerning the antiquitie or oldnesse of our Chri∣stian faith: for the holy Bishop Eusebius Cesariens. which lived above eleven hundred yeeres agoe, (and likewise many other Christian Doctors) hath also taught and written the same more cleerely be∣fore me.Eusebius. For Eusebius in the first booke De Ecclesi∣astica historia, saith plainly: All they that in their estate are noted according to their generations, to reckon backward from Abraham unto the first man, though they had not the name of Christian men, (for at Antioch certaine yeeres after the a∣scension of Christ, was that name given to the faithfull,Acts 11.26. Acts 11.) yet as pertaining to the religi∣on and substance, they were all Christians. For if this word Christian, be as much to say, as one that putteth his trust in Christ, and through his
doctrine fastned unto faith, unto the grace and righteousnesse of God, doth cleave with all dili∣gence to Gods doctrine, and exerciseth himselfe in every thing that is vertuous; then verily those ho∣ly men whom we spake of first, were even the same that Christian men boast themselves now to be. All these are the words of the foresaid old Christian Doctors. But to the intent that no man shall thinke that we build upon men, and upon a strange foundation, therefore wee will first declare our minds out of the Scriptures, and alleage somewhat more for the better understanding of the matter. CHAP. II. Of the goodnesse of God, and wickednesse of man. GOd which hath ever beene sufficient to all perfection, and needeth nothing of the creatures to his perfectnesse, onely of his owne kinde and nature, which is good, (that is to say, of his owne grace and mercy, yea even be∣cause he would doe good) created man for him∣selfe: But before he created him,The first creation of heaven and earth. he provided first for him wonderfully, and furnished him with un∣speakable riches of his goodnesse. For when he devised the creation of man, and the time was now come, which his godly wisdome and providence had ordained, he first of all appointed a wonder∣full lodging for man, and garnished the same yet much more wonderfully. At the beginning (when the goodly and cleere light was made) the Lord
prepared the instruments, which he afterward sun∣dred one from another, and ordained every one to some purpose. Over the deepe, that is, over the water and earth (which yet was in the water) made he a firmament, and spread out the heaven above as a pavilion. Afterward out of the water he cal∣led and brought forth the earth, (as much as ser∣ved for the habitation of men) and appointed the water his bounds and markes, which it may not overpasse. And these three things, the water, the earth, and the firmament, (that is to say, the aire and clearenesse above us unto the height of hea∣ven) are the essentiall and substantiall parcels of the world, and serve as an house for the habitation of men: Neverthelesse as yet all this was but rough and unfinished, and nothing garnished at all: Therefore did the wise and faithfull master put forth his hand wider,The garnishing of heaven and earth. to performe and pleasantly to garnish that wonderfull worke; yea not onely to garnish it, but also to make it fruitfull and profi∣table for man, which was the guest and inhabiter for to come. And first, in as much as man should inhabit the earth, he garnished it aforehand, and cloathed it with a goodly greene garment, that is, with a sub∣stance, which hee deckt first with flowers and all manner of herbes, which not onely are pleasant to looke upon, and wonderfully beautified, of a pleasant taste and goodly colour, but also profita∣ble for food and all manner of medicine. To the same also did he first adde sundry trees and plants. Then watered hee the earth with faire springs, ri∣vers
and running waters. And the ground made he not like on every side, but in many places set it up pleasantly: And hereof have wee the vallies, plaines, mountains and hills: which things all have their due operation, fruit, and pleasantnesse. After this also began he to garnish the heaven and firmament, and set therein the Sunne and the Moone, the Planets and Starres: which things all are goodlier and more wonderfull than mans tongue can expresse. As for their office,The office of te creatures in t fir∣mament. and the cause why they are set in the heaven, it is to give us light, and (with their up and downe going, or motion) to declare the times, yeares, moneths, and daies, dividing the daies and nights asunder. Thirdly, he laid his hand likewise in the water,Fishes. in the which hee had wrought no lesse wonders, than in heaven and upon earth. For in the water (and especially in the sea) doe the wonderfull workes of God appeare in the fishes and marvels of the sea, if a man consider the nature and dispo∣sition of them.Fowles. And in the aire also hath hee crea∣ted and ordained great tokens of his goodnesse, power, and wisdome, even the fowles that plea∣santly (according to divers commodities) doe sing unto man, and refresh him. At the last endued he the earth yet more richly,Beasts. and filled it with all kinde of profitable and goodly beasts, and sundred one from another pleasantly. When the Lord now had prepared this goodly and rich pleasure, then first after these hee made man, that he might bee Lord of all these things.
Him also endued he above all other creatures,The creation of man. and created him after his owne image. He made him of body and soule, which should have endured for ever, if he had not fallen into sinne. Now hath he a fraile bodie, and an immortall everlasting soule. But the first man made he altogether perfect and without blemish, so that verily he was called the image of God not without cause. The Lord also was not sufficed in garnishing the earth goodly, but first also builded upon the earth a speciall gar∣den of pleasure, even a Paradise: and therein set he man his deare beloved creature.The creation of the woman. And for as much as he being solitary and alone, could not conveniently dwell without a mate, he appointed him first to plant and keepe the Garden of plea∣sure, and provided for him a wife, even out of the bones of his owne body, that she might bee the mans helpe. Thus would the goodnesse of God finish and make man perfect, to the intent that he should lacke nothing which served to a right, wholesome, and perfect life. Therefore was it equall, that man, which was en∣dued with reason and high understanding, should shew thankfulnesse and obedience unto God, for such high gifts. Yea, God himselfe (which is not onely good, but also righteous) requireth the same of him, and that by the meanes of the com∣mandement, That he might eat of all the trees of the Garden of pleasure: Only he should eschew the fruit of knowing good and evill.The request of the commandement. And this com∣mandement was not grievous nor unreasonable: Onely it required obedience and love of God the
maker, unto whom only the creature (even man) should have respect, and looke for all good at his hand, and not to take the forme of good and evill out of himselfe, but onely to hold that for evill and forbidden, which God inhibiteth as evill; and to account that as good and righteous, which God alloweth or forbiddeth not. For a representation, visible token, and sacrament, God shewed him a right visible and fruitfull tree in the Garden of pleasure, and forbade him with earnest threatning, that in what houre soever he did eat of the same tree, he should die an everlasting death.The unthankeful∣nesse nd wcked∣nesse of man. But untru∣ly dealt man with his faithfull God, transgressed his commandement, and gave more credit to the perswasion of the woman and of the serpent, than to the true word of God: which was nothing else, but even as much as to take the forme of good and evill out of themselves, or elsewhere, rather than of God, and not to cleave and be obe∣dient onely unto him, as to such an one as wish∣eth good unto every man. For man being decei∣ved through the woman and the Serpent, did be∣leeve that God was not indifferent, and that hee had withdrawne from him some of his godly wis∣dome. And for as much as the minde now was departed from God through infidelity▪ and looked not for all good at his hand, therefore tooke the hand the noisome apple, and the mouth did eat the forbidden meat. And thus thought hee to helpe himselfe to Gods Majesty, by another meanes, rather than by God, and so to repaire his necessi∣tie which he thought hee had. And so with infide∣lity,
unfaithfulnesse, disobedience and unthank∣fulnesse, he wrought life, and died the death; that is, he offended against God, and fell into the pu∣nishment of everlasting damnation: Yea he made himselfe bound unto the devill, whom he was so diligent, to beleeve, to follow, and to serve: Con∣trariwise he forsooke God, and so came he utter∣ly into the bondage of the devill and darknesse. And thus have we now the goodnesse and faith∣fulnesse of God. Againe, the wickednesse and great unfaithfulnesse of man. CHAP. III. The first and right foundation of our holy Christian faith. The righteousnesse and mercy of God.HEre now had the just God occasion and right to expell man, to destroy him, to damne him, and to leave him utterly to the devill: And the same also did his righteous∣nesse and truth require.Gen. 2.17. For he had said, In what day soever thou eatest of the fruit, thou shalt die the death. Contrariwise, the goodnesse and mercy of God required, not utterly to suppresse man a poore and naked creature. In the meane season was there found a way,The way of satisfa∣ction before God is Christ. whereby the righteousnesse and truth of God should be satisfied, and in the which the mercy of God should specially be ex∣ercised and declare it selfe: that is to say, Christ Iesus, which is given us by the manifest grace of God, was offered for our sinnes, satisfied and re∣compenced
the righteousnesse of God, and so de∣livered us out of the bonds of the Devill. For hee died for us all, in as much as God said: In what day soever thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die the death. Therefore died Christ for us all, that through his death we might live, and be taken out of the king∣dome of darknesse, and be set in the kingdome of the deare beloved Sonne of God. This device of Gods wisdome (which no doubt was determinate from everlasting) was also direct∣ly opened unto Adam, after the fall, in manner fol∣lowing: When man had eaten of the fruit of the forbidden tree, immediatly his eyes were opened; in so much that he was ashamed, when he saw that he was naked. Hitherto had hee lived in innocen∣cie, therefore began he now to cover himselfe, but with simple clothing, which they trusted not much to (like as it is all unprofitable, that man of himselfe will cover his sinne withall) saving that they fled from the Lord, and hid themselves from him.Sinne. But the Lord followed upon the fugitive, put him in minde of his decay, miserie, and the life that hee was fallen from, and said; Adam, where art thou? Or knowest thou what miserie thou art fallen into from great felicitie? Now should man have ac∣knowledged his fault, but hee shewed himselfe stiffe-necked. And the Lord moveth him still, to see if he will acknowledge his sinne, and said: Who told thee that thou art naked? Yea, to helpe him in the matter, and to make him confesse his sinne, hee saith moreover; Hast thou not eaten of the tree of the which I forbad thee that thou shouldest not eat?
But man was loth to knowledge his sinne, and laid it first upon the woman his companion; and the same did he with so froward and unadvised words,The frowardnesse of man. that a man may easily see, that secretly in his heart, he wickedly and unreasonably laid the fault upon God. For hee said not onely, The woman gave me of the tree to eat; but added proudly thereto, The woman which thou gavest me, &c. As though he should say; Thou thy selfe art in the fault; if thou haddest not given mee the woman, I had not beene deceived.Why God gave the woman unto man. And yet the righteous God gave him not the woman to deceive him, but to bee an helpe to him. Therefore appeareth it here againe, that the sinne of man was the more wilfull & grie∣vous.Grace. Yet for all this did the gracious God pro∣ceed further, and would prove whether hee might finde any knowledge of the sinne with the woman, the beginning and occasion of the sinne. But no∣thing at all could he finde. The one person was as the other,We all are loth to knowledge our selves guiltie. and they both had no power. There∣fore like as Adam put all the fault to the woman, even so laid the woman all the fault upon the Ser∣pent, that is, upon the Devill. Which nature doth yet, to this day, cleave in man. But what man (which hath well considered this foresaid matter by himselfe) would now say, or durst thinke, that any part of the promise of righteousnesse and sal∣vation of man were to bee ascribed to his owne power and deserving? For as much as it is so ma∣nifest, how unable and lost a creature man is of himselfe, which doth nothing but heape sinne up∣on sinne, and disobedience upon disobedience.
Againe, who is so blinde, but he seeth, that all sal∣vation is to be ascribed to the onely meere grace and mercie of God? For now followeth it first how God handled this matter. Now when all the complaint was made upon the Serpent,Punishment. the Lord asketh and examineth the Serpent nothing at all, for the deed was open, nei∣ther was the Serpent created of God to speake, and with the Devill was there no truth. Therefore doth the Lord righteously curse the Serpent the Devill. Unto the bodily serpent also (whom the Devill used as an instrument) he giveth a sore curse, and saith; Vpon thy belly shalt thou goe,Genes. 3.14. and earth shalt thou eat all the dayes of thy life: When this was done, it was ordained now first for man, that (ac∣cording to the righteousnesse and truth of God) he should bee punished also with the curse and with eternall death: but for the causes expressed in the beginning of this chapter, the curse was directed unto Christ, who also with cleare words was pro∣mised, and so was life in him promised likewise. Therefore saith not the Lord now; And cursed bee thou man, because thou hast done against my Commandement; but, And I will put enmitie be∣tweene thee and the woman,The promise. Genes. 3.15. betweene thy seed and her seed: the same shall tread thee on the head, and thou shalt tread him on the heele. Which is thus much to say; Thou hast used the woman to the destruction of men, so that from henceforth they bring death, and by kinde and nature are damned when they are borne. Therefore will I also use the woman, but to salvation: for of the woman shall a seed or
childe bee borne,The Serpents head. which shall breake thy head, power and kingdome, sinne, damnation and death: howbeit in his manhood he shall be trodden down and bitten. That is, Man with his transgression hath deserved eternall death, so that (after the ri∣gour of my justice) hee should perish and belong to the Devill for ever: neverthelesse I Will have mercie upon him, and receive him to grace againe. But to the intent that my truth and righteousnesse may be satisfied, I will cause my Sonne to take the verie nature of man upon him. Then will I, that hee take upon himselfe the curse and damnation, and die, and with his innocent death to take away that noisome death and curse, and so to set the ge∣neration of man out of death into life, out of the dominion of the Devill into his owne kingdome, out of darknesse into light.The re foundation of our faith. Thus the right foun∣dation or ground of our holy faith continueth fast and unmoved: in so much as all the generation of man is whole and cleansed from sinne, and delive¦red from the curse, from the Devill and everlasting damnation, onely through the mercie and meere grace of God by Iesus Christ. Rom. 8.3.As touching this, Paul said when hee wrote to the Romans in the 8. Chapter; God sent his Sonne in the similitude of sinfull flesh, and through sinne, (that is to say, through the sinne-offering and wil∣ling death of Christ) he condemned sin in the flesh. And in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the first Chapter,1 Cor. 1.30. the same Paul saith, Christ Iesus is appoin∣ted of God to be our wisdome, and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redemption: that as it is written,
who so glorieth and rejoyceth, let him glorie and rejoyce in the Lord. But for as much as this is the first promise, and the first sure Evangelion, I will now speake of eve∣rie word in especiall. First, God calleth his Sonne our Lord Iesus, the seed of the woman. A seed, because of the verie nature of man, and because that our Lord should not take upon him a fanta∣sticall, but a verie true bodie. But to these words there is added,The Gospell of Iesus. Genes. 3.15. Of the wo∣man. For our Lord was not conceived and borne of mans seed, but of the Holy Ghost out of the Virgine Marie. Therefore cannot this sentence be understood of Eve, but of the Virgine Marie. Now whereas she is called a woman, it is done because of the kinred: For even the daughters also and maidens are reckoned in the womens kinred, and yet continue undefiled virgins. God also hath spo∣ken here distinctly, and said not; I will put enmi∣tie betweene thee and this woman, but betweene thee and (haischah) the woman, understanding some speciall woman, no doubt even such an one as he afterward set forth cleerely by Esay, saying;Esay 7.14. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and beare a sonne, &c. And this word (seed) was alway afterward in eve∣rie renewing of this promise concerning Christ Iesu among all the Patriarks and Prophets, rehear∣sed, used, and expressed, untill the time of David. Of whom the Lord afterward was called a flower, the root, sprowting, or blossome of David. The holy Apostle Paul expoundeth this word (seed) clearely and plainly, and saith it is Christ, Gal. 3.Gal. 3.16.
Moreover,A praise of the vir∣gin Marie. it serveth to the praise of the Lords mo∣ther, that God saith, I will put enmitie betweene the woman and thee: for he meaneth the difference of both their natures. The Devill is proud, sub∣till, wicked, false, and untrue: but the mother of Christ is lowly, simple, vertuous, faithfull and up∣right, chaste and cleane. And the same pure virgin and gracious mother hath borne unto us him that trod downe the Serpents head. The head of the Serpent is the power and kingdome of the Devill, even sinne, the curse and damnation. All this hath that blessed seed broken for his faithfull. All which things the holy Apostle Paul also hath taught with these words:Heb. 2.14. The Lord is become parta∣ker of our flesh and bloud, that he through death might take away the power from him, which had the Lordship over death, that is to say, the Devill; and to deliver them which through feare of death, were all their life time in bondage. For hee tooke not upon him the An∣gels, but the seed of Abraham tooke hee upon him, &c. And to the same meaning doth this also serve that followeth;Genes. 2.15. Christs heele. And thou shalt tread him on the heele. The heele is the lowest part in man, and here it sig∣nifieth the most inferiour thing in Christ, even his flesh. This hath the old Serpent the Devill perse∣cuted and trodden downe by his members Caiphas, Annas, Herod, and Pontius Pilate. For Peter saith, Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh:1 Pet. 4.1. The God∣head is impassible, and the soule immortall. But by this treading downe of the Lord, hath God trodden downe the kingdome of the Devill, that is to say, by his death hath he destroyed death, and
brought life againe to all them that beleeve. Here∣of commeth it that Christ saith himselfe, Ioh. 12. Now is the judgement of the world,Ioh. 12.31, 32. now shall the Prince of this world be thrust out. And I when I am lift up (that is to say, crucified) from the earth, will draw all things to me. At the last saith the Lord, that he will put enmi∣tie betweene the Serpent and the womans seed. This may wee see in the Devill, and his members and acts, how they are contrarie to Christ and his members and deeds. But how strong soever the Serpent is, yet shall he be trodden downe through Christ and his faithfull. Hereof commeth it, that Paul spake so comfortably to the Romans, Rom. 16.Rom. 16.20. The God of peace shall shortly tread downe the Devill under your feet. And herewithall is the du∣tie also of the faithfull in Christ shortly compre∣hended. For as touching them that say,Object. Is it enough then, and is all well, when I knowledge that I am a sinner, and saved through the blessed seed only? To them it is here answered and cleer∣ly given to understand,Answ. that all they which put their trust in the blessed seed, take upon them the kinde of the seed, and hate the kinde of the Serpent, that is to say, sinne and blasphemie, and fight alway more and more against the world and the Devill as long as they live, yea and occupie themselves most faithfully about that which is Gods will. And hereto now serveth it that followeth after. For when the Lord had taken away the everlasting death, he laid upon man a temporall punishment, correction and discipline, in the which hee should
be exercised as long as hee lived upon earth. And upon the woman he laid trouble, sorrow, and paine, when she should beare and bring forth children: Subjection also and service with feare and obedi∣ence, which she oweth to the man. To man, hee enjoyneth labour, for the Lord cursed the earth, and said;Gen. 3.17. With sorrow shalt thou get thy living all the dayes of thy life. Yea, in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread. Moreover, he layeth temporall death upon them both,Gen. 3.19. and saith; Earth thou art, and to earth shalt thou returne. Of the first doth Paul speake also,1 Tim. 2.15. 1 Tim. 2. The woman shall be saved by bearing of children, if she continue in faith, and in love, and in holinesse, or cleannesse, and nurture. Of the second speaketh the same Paul likewise to the Ephesians and Thessalonians;1 Thessal. 4.6. Ephes. 4.25. Let no man under∣mine or deceive his brother in occupying: and who so hath used falshood and deceit, let him doe it no more, but let him rather labour with his hands some honest thing, that he may have to distribute unto such as have need.Heb. 5.17. And as touching death, Paul also saith to the Hebrewes in the ninth Chapter, How that it is ap∣pointed unto men, once to die, and that even so Christ Iesus was offered up and died once for all.
CHAP. IIII. Of the first faithfull Christians, ADAM and EVE. ANd hitherto I trust we have had in the first promise of God the foundation, and the whole summe of our holy Christian faith; namely, that the whole generation of man was but lost through his owne fault and wickednesse, and fallen into death and damnation, so that there re∣maineth nothing in man but it is displeasant to God: Hereof commeth it that there is nothing to be ascribed unto the power and deserving of man, save sinne and malediction. But God of his abun∣dant mercy had compassion on us, and of very grace promised he life unto us againe in his Sonne our Lord Iesus, whom he would to become man, and to suffer death in his flesh, that thereby hee might tread downe the devill, death, sinne and hell. Item, he would put enmitie betweene the womans seed and the serpent, that is, he would endue us (which are the seed, that is to say, the children of Adam, if wee beleeve) with another heart and power, that we might become enemies unto the devils workes, resist his suggestion, and hold our selves fast by the blessed seed, labouring and suffe∣ring whatsoever God enjoyneth us to worke and suffer. Who is it now, which seeth not herein, all that is written in the whole Scripture, of beleefe, of love and innocencie, that is to say, of a Christian life and faith? Who so is disposed, let him looke
upon the 2.3. and 4. chapters of Paul to the Ro∣manes, the first and second to the Ephesians: let him compare those chapters toward this summe, and he shall finde it none otherwise. For as much then as Adam and Eve had faith in God, and stood so toward God, that they know∣ledged themselves to be sinners, and trusted to be saved only through the blessed seed, giving them∣selves over willingly into the discipline and nur∣ture, travell and trouble of this time. No man can say contrary, but it followeth, that our first elders were Christians. Neverthelesse we will declare the same yet more clearely, by Moyses words follow∣ing:Gen. 3.20. Adams faith. And Adam called his wife Heva, because shee should be the mother of all living. For as soone as he was now strengthned through the promise of God, and beleeved that hee and his posteritie (which else were children of wrath, of the devill, and of death) should live through the blessed seed, he turned his wives name, and called her Heva, for the remembrance of the matter, and practising of his faith: for he beleeved, that shee now living in the power of the blessed seed, should bring forth, not only quicke men temporally as pertaining to this naturall life; (like as we call other creatures living) but living, that is to say, children of salva∣tion. For Adam had lost eternall life from himselfe, and from us his posteritie: but the same is given unto us againe through Iesus Christ our Lord. Adam for as much as he beleeved, changed his wives name, like as we finde that for great weighty causes the names of certaine places, cities and men
were changed: Thus was Iacob called Israel; Simon, Peter; Luthz, Bethel. Eve had now a name of life, for Haiah in Hebrew is as much to say, as Life. Afore was shee called Ischa, that is to say, Wo∣man, because shee was taken from out of the man,Gen 2.23. which in the Hebrew is called Isch, Gen. 2. And thus it is manifest, what faith Adam had, whereby we may well suppose, that Eve had none other faith. But God used his mercy and loving kindnesse yet furthermore,Comfort, helpe and loving kindnesse in the mids of corre∣ction. even in the mids of all correcti∣on: for when he would now expell man out of paradise into miserie, he doth unto him in every condition, even as a faithfull father, which for some misdeed putteth his sonne away from him, notwithstanding leaveth him not utterly comfort∣lesse, but provideth him a garment, and comfor∣teth him with friendly words, and then first sen∣deth him away from him. Even thus doth God the father of heaven also. For first he cloatheth Adam and Eve against the frost and tempest of weather, in as much as (by the meanes of sinne) the weather, the earth, the aire, and all creatures, were no more so subject, tame and obedient unto man, as they were afore the fall. Therefore even now at this present time whatsoever inconveni∣ence and harme is in the good creatures of God, it commeth by the meanes of our sinnes. After∣ward doth the Lord comfort the miserable wretch∣ed man with very loving words after this manner:Gen. 3.22. Behold, Adam is become like one of us: or, Loe, Adam shall be as one of us, and it shall happen unto him, as to
one of us, and he shall know good and evill. This doth God speake which is one in substance, and three in persons: he prophesieth here unto Adam, that he shall know or have experience of good and evill, that is to say, that upon earth he must feele prosperitie and adversitie, miserie and trouble, sowre and sweet, and must suffer necessitie, paine and affliction.Comfort and pati∣ence in Christ. Yet in all this must he be constant and patient, forasmuch as nothing shall happen unto him, save even the same that shall happen to one of them. And he meaneth the Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ the second person in the holy Trinitie. With this his passion, and through the same doth he comfort Adam. As though he would say: let the paine, sorrow and trouble which thou must suffer upon earth, not vex thee, and consider that one of us also shall take upon him the kinde and nature of man, and that the serpent (as it is said afore) shall tread him on the heele, that is to say, he shall die, he shall be opprest and have much affli∣ction and trouble all the daies of his life. In the same meaning also did the holy Apostle Peter say:1 Pet. 2.21. Christ suffered for our sakes, and gave us an exam∣ple, that we should follow him, and goe in his foot∣steps. Adams faith.Out of all this is it easie to understand, what faith and knowledge Adam had of our Lord Christ: namely, that he knew in him very Godhead and manhood, and that he saw in faith his Passion and Crosse a farre off. Moreover, that the passion of Christ once done for all, breaketh the kingdome of the devill, and bringeth life againe to such as
faithfully beleeve. Secondly, that it is to our li∣ving, an example, at the which wee ought to learne patience in adversitie, and daily to die from all evill. And hereto now serve all doctrines of patience, of bearing the crosse, of despising the world, and mortifying or putting off the old Adam, which thing is contained and with many and goodly words handled thorowout the Pro∣phets and Apostles. As for Adam and Eve, they lacked none of these things, though they had not the matter in writing. For God spake it all to them himselfe, and wrote it in their hearts. Moreover, our first Elders had no Church, rites, nor ceremo∣nies, save only the bodily offering, a representation of the sacrificing of Christ, and exercises or to∣kens of thankfulnesse. For how should Cain and Abel else have knowne any thing of sacrifice, if they had not received the same at the custome of their father? who with his wife Eva the mother of us all, was saved by none other worke or merit of man, but only through and in the blessed seed our Lord Iesus Christ. CHAP. V. That the holy Patriarks also were Christians, and saved by Christ. SUch faith in Christ Iesus as we now have spo∣ken of, did the holy father Adam (no doubt) teach his children: that they also might plant in their children the promise of God, his mercy
and device concerning the Messias or Saviour, that was for to come. And truly Abel had such a nota∣ble faith in God, that the holy Apostle Paul wrote of him after this manner:Heb. 11.4. Through faith did Abel offer a greater sacrifice than did Cain, and thereby ob∣tained he witnesse that he was righteous. For God bare record to his gifts. In as much then as it cannot be denied, but that all they which are just and righte∣ous, be made righteous through the blessed seed. And Abel was justified.Outward sacrifice was a token of thankfulnesse. It followeth that he was made righteous through faith in Iesus Christ. In that he did sacrifice, it is a token and fruit of a heart that was thankfull, and feared God. It was no such enterprise, that he would clense and make himselfe acceptable unto God through that outward sacri∣fice. For certaine it is, that no outward oblation purifieth man within: But the grace of God gran∣ted unto us through Jesus Christ, purifieth us aright. And the outward sacrifices of the old fa∣thers, beside that they were tokens of thankful∣nesse, praise, and magnifying of God, (as it is said afore) were figures of the only perpetuall sacrifice of our Saviour Christ. And in this behalfe they were even as much as sacraments of things to come. Thus also, and in like understanding have our first fathers done sacrifice, as hereafter it shall follow more largely. Now like as in Abel there is set forth unto us an example of Gods seed, and of a regenerate true faithfull Christian man.Cain the father of wickednesse. So is Cain a seed of the Serpent, a childe of the Devill, which despised the inspiration of God, and harkened to the deceitfull
Serpent. And in these two brethren wee may see what God meaned, when he said: I will put enmitie betweene the seed of the woman and thy seed. As though he would say: There shall be two manner of people, the one shall cleave unto Christ, the bles∣sed seed, the other shall cleave unto the Devill. And these two generations shall in no wise agree, but be at variance in faith and religion. I will endue my seed, that they shall cleave only unto me, feare me, honour and worship mee, seeke all salvation in me through the blessed seed, live vertuously, honestly, and soberly. Then shall the Serpent tempt their seed with hypocrisie, not to love me nor serve mee aright, not to hold of mee as they should, not to trust in me, but to love the world, and to follow the lusts and temptations thereof: All this finde wee here in these two brethren, in whom beginneth the first difference of true and false beleevers.The first division in relgion, when it began. For Abel was simple, godly, and of a constant faith in God. And in as much as he tooke God for his refuge, he brought him gifts of his best substance, no doubt because he had first given over his soule and all his power unto God, at whom alone hee sought all good without any hypocrisie. He was also inno∣cent, vertuous and friendly, and followed not his owne tentations. And for this faiths sake did his sa∣crifice please God: but Cains pleased him not, for his heart was not right with God: he was a dissem∣bler, greedie and vnfaithfull person, which set his heart and minde upon earthly things, alway despi∣sing Gods word, and following his owne tentati∣on. Which thing was evident in this, that he ha∣ving
no cause (only of a wilfull heart, and through the temptation of the serpent) murthered his owne brother: Whereby hee hath obtained to be the Arch-father of all murtherers, which persecute and murther the seed of God (that is to say, the true be∣leevers) only for their faiths sake. Thus became Abel the first martyr and instrument of God and of Christ in the holy Church.Abel the first Martyr. The world the citie of the Devill. For these two brethren have set forth before us, the whole battell and strife, which the world, the citie of the devill, the chil∣dren and citizens of the cursed citie (wherein the Serpent is head and master, and hath the dominion) shall make against the citie and citizens in whom Christ is the head, unto the end of the world. The freemen of the citie of God and of Christ, doe cleave only unto God,The difference of true and false faith. serve him with all their heart, build only upon Christ. The citizens of the Serpent despise God, and yet they boast of God, to whom also they offer and doe service, but not as they ought to doe. Now when they perceive that their faith is not right, and that their hypocrisie is espied and misliked, then fall they to murthering, to the which God is an enemie, and forbiddeth it with his word. For Cain also exhorted hee from his purpose, and said, Thou needest not to arme thee because of thy brother, for thou hast none oc∣casion to be angrie with him. For if thou doest right, thou shalt finde it, and have joy thereof: but if thou dost not right, then is thy misfortune, sinne and trespasse open, and thou shalt shame and de∣stroy thy selfe. Thy brother goeth on without fault, he shall doe thee no hurt nor harme: he shall also
not be Lord over thee, nor minish thy right: Yea he shall have respect unto thee, and thou shalt have dominion over him, and so keepe thy birth-right, and still remaine the first borne, although his sacri∣fice be acceptable unto mee and not thine. Cease therefore from thy wicked purpose, and offend not against thy brother. But Cain did as all ungodly doe: For he went forth, and slew his innocent brother. And after∣ward when the Lord would have brought him into the knowledge of his great sinne, and pardon him, he despised the voice of the Lord with craking and facing.The first decay of the faith was by cursed Cain. For the which cause the Lord was wroth with him, and cursed him. Then despaired he first, and went forth and became yet more wic∣ked, dealt altogether ungodly, set first his minde upon earthly things, thought to exalt his name up∣on earth, and builded the first citie, which he cal∣led Hanoch: hee begat sonnes and daughters, but little feare of God was before their eyes, in so much that the Scripture saith,Genes. 4.25. Adam lay with his wife a∣gaine, and shee bare a sonne, whom shee called Seth. For God (said shee) hath given me another seed for Abel, whom Cain slew. Seth also had a sonne, and he called him Enos. And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. Out of the which words it is easie to understand, that as touching holy Adam,Adam was not of the faith of Cain. hee held no more of Cain, than as though he never had had childe. For Adam feared God: Cain with his pro∣genie despised God, and became the Serpents ge∣neration. Wherefore when Adam had gotten ano∣ther sonne, he was of a good hope, that in Abels
stead God had given him another sonne, which should doe right, and of whom the root of the bles∣sed seed should spread out afterward. For the which cause also he called him Seth, which by vs is called a plant,Seth the fir re∣e of the true faith. meaning, that God had set and plan∣ted him as a branch, out of which the Messias should be borne. For as for Cain, hee doubted of him. And from the same Seth proceeded the ge∣neration of the righteous untill Noe, and from him to Abraham, and so unto David, and from thence forth unto Christ. This Seth repaired our holy faith, which received great hurt at the death of A∣bel.The reparation of our fath. This did Seth (I say) for as much as he being taught inwardly of God, and by mouth or out∣wardly of Adam, learned his children and their seed, to put their trust in God, and to comfort them∣selves in the blessed seed, and to cleave unto the same.Gen. 4.26. For it is written manifestly: And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. Till this time was Adam with Heva his wife only a true friend and server of God.Adams life. The generation of Cain was now well spread abroad, and come to two hun∣dred and fiftie yeeres and aboue, but the more part lived without the feare of God, unrepentant and ungodly. Wherefore in as much as the generation of Seth now increased, and the feare of God and right beleefe was among them, the Scripture faith well:To call upon the name of God, what it is. And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. And by this calling upon, doth the Scripture meane the true right beleefe and Gods service, that he most alloweth. Of the progenie therefore of righteous Seth sprang the servants of God, and
presidents of our Christian faith. As for the cur∣sed generation of Cain, and of the ungodly, it was destroyed and drowned with the Floud. To the holy genealogie of the true beleevers, pertaineth the Patriarke Enoch, of whom it is writ∣ten, that he walked before God, that is, he ordered his life and conversation altogether after the will of God, being constant and upright (no doubt) in all that, which God had spoken unto Adam. There∣fore became he also an example of the immortali∣tie of the soule, and resurrection of the bodie, and that all Gods servants shall be saved after this life. For thus saith the Scripture; And in as much as hee applied himselfe to walke after God, God tooke him a∣way, and he was no more seene.Hebr. 11.5. The holy Apostle Paul also in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrewes speaketh very excellently of Enochs faith, so that no man may doubt, but that hee had respect to the blessed seed, and pleased God through Christ. Moreover, the enmitie betweene the children of God and of man (that is, the issue of the Serpent) grew ever more and more: so that on the one side the multitude of God increased, and on the other side the multitude of the devill:The number of the wicked ever grea∣test. Yet at the last the multitude of the wicked was greatest. For when the children of God withheld not themselves from the children of the world, but tooke wives and hus∣bands among them, they begat rough people, which had no faith at all, and lived only after their owne lust and temptation, forgat God utterly, and regarded not the hundred and twentie yeeres which God gave them to amend. Therefore was
God constrained, so to punish the unfaithful world once,The wrath of God upon the wicked. that all posterities unto the end of the world might have a terrible example of the just wrath of God: whereby they might learne, how ungodli∣nesse and unrighteousnesse displeaseth God. Thus the Lord brought the floud upon all the earth,Noes Floud. o∣verthrew all that stood up, and destroyed every thing that had life, when the world had stood now a thousand six hundred and six and fiftie yeeres. For so many yeeres finde wee in the fifth and se∣venth of Genesis, where it is written, that Noe was six hundred yeeres old, when the floud came upon the earth. Now if wee reckon the yeeres of the old Fathers in the fifth chapter untill Adam, wee shall finde the foresaid summe. And thus the issue of the Serpent had an end, and all ungodly and unrighteous living was mightily supprest and de∣stroyed of God. And in this horrible destruction of the ungodly, was faithfull Noe saved (he being the eighth) and preserved in the Arke through the grace and mer∣cie of God.The first triumph of faith in Noe. Here our holy true Christian faith had the victorie, and triumphed. For Noe was of our faith▪ even of the seed of God, and put his trust in the blessed seed our Lord Jesus. Yea, the Arke or ship of Noe was a figure of Christ, as we may easily understand by the words of S.1 Pet. 3.21. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. Seeing then that Noe was preserved through the Arke, it followeth that hee was saved by Iesus Christ, therefore is it manifest, that hee first belee∣ved in Christ. Noe also was hee, with whom God first renued the covenant made with Adam. For
it is but one covenant onely even the foresaid pro∣mise and end made by God unto Adam. Howbeit the same covenant was afterward at certaine times renued by reason of certaine occasions. Here might Noe have thought that all the world, and all men, should utterly have beene undone, for as much as the Lord said, I am determined to de∣stroy all flesh. Therefore immediately he addeth moreover, and saith,Genes. 6.18. But with thee will I set up my covenant, that is to say, whatsoever pertaineth to my covenant, and what I have promised Adam al∣readie, the same will I surely and constantly make good: and though I now destroy the world, yet will I performe my truth through thee. For I will preserve thee alive, that the blessed seed promised afore, may hereafter be borne of thee in his gene∣ration. To this did Noe trust,The sacrifice of Noe. and was preserved of God through Christ. Moreover, when he was come out of the Arke he did sacrifice, and thereby declared the thankfulnesse of his heart, and belee∣ved, how that he knew that he had all good of God, which should also give him a seed, that with sacri∣ficing of himselfe should reconcile and pacific God. For thus saith the Scripture,Genes. 8.20. Noe builded an Altar unto the Lord, and tooke of all manner of cleane beasts and fowles, and offered burnt sacrifice unto the Lord: and the Lord smelled the sweet savour, and said in his heart, I will no more curse the earth for mans sake, &c. So saith Paul in the fifth to the Ephesians,Ephes. 5.2. Walke yee in love, like as Christ hath loved us, and gaue himselfe for us an offering sacrifice of a sweet savour unto God. Whereby every man may learne and see,
that the sweet smell of the outward sacrifice of Noe did not chiefly pacifie God,Outward sacrifice the figure of Christs oblation. and was pleasant; but rather that through the bodily sacrifice, was fi∣gured the sacrifice of Christ, and for his sake he was mercifull unto the world. For over Christ he said at Iordan when Christ was baptised:Matth 3.17. This is my deare beloved Sonne in whom I am pacified or recon∣ciled. The Commande∣ments given unto Noe.Besides this, the Lord gave unto Noe certaine lawes, but none other than even such as he had gi∣ven to his fore-fathers, and written in their hearts. The first pertaineth to mariage and bringing up of children, in the which is comprehended all that is written concerning nurture, cleanlinesse and tem∣perance, of care and bringing up of children in the feare of God, vertue, obedience and learning. The second forbiddeth violence and deceit, namely, that no man shall eat bloud. For it is a figurative precept commanding, that no man get his living by murther, by oppressing the poore, by usurie, by ex∣tortion, by falshood and deceit. Moreover, all things living were subdued unto him, and all meats were permitted him. In conclusion, whatsoever concerned the love of God and their neighbour, the same is here renued unto Noe and his children, and required of them. Through Noe was the world repleni∣shed.Of Noe came afterward all people, yea among his three sonnes Iaphet, Sem and Cham, he had both the seed of God and of the froward serpent, that is, such as had respect unto God, and them also that regarded the devill.Cham the first Idolater after the Floud. Of Cham came the Aegyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, by and from whom sprang
idolatry, offering to images, and from whom false religion came up first, and was brought in among other nations by the helpe of the old serpent, as among the Greekes, Romanes, and other people. By this it is good to understand, that our holy Christian faith is elder than any other. For here may we see clearely, that after a thousand and cer∣taine hundred yeeres (almost in the eight hundreth or nine hundreth yeere) came up the first beginning of the Heathens beleefe and offering to Images,The fath f Heathen s idolatry  Gen. 10.. and yet came it of wicked cursed men. For cursed Cham was the beginning of the Egyptians, and Nimroth the ungodly extortioner and tyrant was the first founder of the kingdom of Babylon, which kingdome with the building of a mighty tower, set forth his pride. Neverthelesse the hand of God declared it selfe immediatly,Gen. 11 ▪ as it is read in the eleventh chapter of Genesis. Finally, in the gene∣ration of Cham had the serpent great power: how∣beit in the posteritie of Iaphet also (of whom the Almaines come) and in the posteritie of Sem, he had his issue likewise. Of the progenie of Sem were borne Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, Gen. 11. And as it is said afore,Gen▪ 11.10.27. Faith dkned after the floud. the sincere faith was somewhat darkned in Chal∣dea: therefore did God call Abraham out from the idolatrie, and renued with him the old true Chri∣stian faith begun with Adam, and said, Gen. 12.Gen. 12.1. Get thee out of thy country and from thy kinred, and from thy fathers house unto the land that I will shew thee, and I will blesse thee, and make a great nation of thee. And in thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
Item in the 22. chapter speaketh God yet more clearely,Genes. 22.18. and saith, In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. This doth Paul declare in the third to the Galathians, and saith, In thy seed which is Christ.Galath. 3.8. Therefore was the same now ano∣ther renewing of the promise of Christ the blessed seed.The promise re∣newed to Abra∣ham. For first was he promised unto Adam, after∣ward was the promise renewed with Noe, and now with Abraham. And all this now is but one pro∣mise,Abrahams faith. one Saviour, and one faith. Abraham also be∣leeved in Iesus Christ, and was saved by faith. For Iesus Christ saith himselfe in the eighth chapter of Iohn,Iohn 8.56. Abraham saw my day, and rejoyced. What is now the day of Christ but the clearnesse of the holy Gospell? This light had he not bodily, but saw it with the eyes of faith, and the same made him joy∣full and saved him. For Christ is the true joy of troubled consciences. Thus became Abraham the Father of all faithfull beleevers,Rom. 4.16. Rom. 4. And if we beleeve and doe as Abraham did, then are we Abra∣hams children, and shall rest with him in his bo∣some, even in the kingdome of God, Luke 13.28.16.22.19. Mat. 8.11. Paul also to the Galathians in the third chapter saith,Galath. 3.29. If ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seed and heires according to the promise. Out of this faith in Christ,Abrahams Chri∣stian workes. did Abraham Christian workes; for with a good will left he his owne na∣tive country, all Idols and all Images: all misfor∣tune, hunger and miserie tooke he patiently: he was not hard against Loth his nephew, but did jeo∣pard his body and life for the oppressed: he was li∣berall, mercifull, and harborous: he praied fervent∣ly
unto God for the poore sinners: he suffred op∣pression, violence and wrong, and for Gods sake also he thought to sacrifice and offer up his owne most dearely beloved sonne Isaac. Finally, there is no reasonable good christian worke, but thou seest it in the life of Abraham. Therefore to us also for an example of our faith and conversation, he is set forth of the Lord himselfe & his Apostles through∣out the New Testament. Here also is it manifest,The fi of the Iewe that our holy faith is el∣der than the Iewish faith. For the Iewes doe boast themselves of the Circumcision, and because they are called Iewes and Israel, and that the Law, the Priesthood and Gods service was given unto them: And yet, Gen. 15.6. and 17.1. and Rom. 4.18. it is evident, that Abraham was Gods friend and ju∣stified or made righteous, or ever he was circum∣cised. For when he was circumcised, he was 99. yeere old, Gen. 17.Gen. 17▪24. Now was the promise made unto him many yeeres afore. The Scripture also saith plainly: Abraham beleeved God,Gen. 15.6. and the same was counted unto him for righteousnesse, Gen. 15. So was it many yeeres after, or ever Israel and Iuda was borne, of whom they have taken their name. The Law also was given 430. yeeres after the pro∣mise, as Paul made the reckoning, Gal. 3. It fol∣loweth therefore that our Christian faith is 2048.Gal. 3.17. H wold the Chri∣stian faith i. yeeres elder than the Circumcision, and 2449. yeeres elder than the Law, the Priesthood and ce∣remonies of the Iewes. For from Adam unto the Floud, were 1656. yeeres. And from the Floud untill the departing of Abraham out of Caldea
363. yeeres. From that time are reckoned 430. yeeres untill the departing of Israel out of Aegypt. And on the 50. day after the departing, was the Law given unto Israel upon Mount Sin,Exod. 19.20. Exod. 19.20. And after certaine daies was the Priesthood and ceremonies appointed them. Whereas God then made a covenant with Abraham, when he or∣dained the Circumcision, it serveth more to the confirmation of our holy Christian faith, than to the maintenance of the Iewish ceremonies. Isaac and Iacob were Abrahams children, not only after the flesh, but also after the spirit. For they had the saith of their father and grandfather Abraham, put their trust only in God through Iesus Christ, and lived a sober and vertuous life. Of this doth the Scripture beare them record thorowout: Yea Iacob,Gen. 32.28. O Israel came the Israes. whom the Lord also called otherwise Israel, (of whom afterward all the people of God received the name Israel) had many visions of the Lord Christ,Gen. 28. as with the ladder that stood upon the earth, the top reaching to heaven, on the which the An∣gels of God went up and downe.Iacob saw that Christ onely is the way to heaven. For herewith was represented unto him the Lord Iesus, which is the way unto heaven, the truth and life, without whom no man commeth unto the Father. Upon the vision of Iacob, saith he also himselfe, Iohn 1. Verily I say unto you,Iohn 1.51. henceforth shall yee see the heaven open, and the Angels of God going up and downe upon the sonne of man. And so constant was Iacob in remembring the same, that afterward at the commandement of the Lord, he set up in the same place an Altar, no doubt (as it is said before) for
a figure of the crosse and sacrifice of Christ, and there honoured he and worshipped the Lord:Gen. 35.2. he commanded all his people also, that they should forsake strange gods, and give him the Idols that they had brought with them out of Mesopotamia, and he buried them under an Oke that stood beside Sichem, Gen. 35. And when he would now die, he prophesied very clearely of the Lord Christ, how he should be borne out of the kinred of Iuda, and that hee should be borne the same time that the kingdome should be taken from Iuda. Which thing also came to passe in Herods time. For in the 32. yeere of the reigne of Herod, was CHRIST borne at Bethleem in Iewry. Whereof the words of Iacob are these:Gen. 49.10. The scepter shall not be taken away from Iuda, nor a Ruler from his fet, till Schilo come (that is to say, the Saviour, and he in whom all nations shall be blessed) and the people shall fall unto him. This stedfast faith of Iacob did Ioseph follow also,The faith of Ioseph. which mortified his owne flesh, declared patience in adversitie and prison, and exercised great justice and equitie in his governance.Ioseph a figure of Iesus. He was a figure of our Lord Iesus Christ, who also being sold of his owne unto the Heathen,The continuance of faith before the Law. preserved his brethren alive. So that from the beginning of the world untill the death of Ioseph, the right Christian faith endured 2300. yeeres. And thus all holy Patriarks before the Law, were sawed, not through the Law, nor by their owne strength and deserving, but through the blessed seed our Lord Iesus Christ.
CHAP. VI. The law of God given by Moses, leadeth unto Christ, and maketh mention of all his doings. THe Israelites after the death of Ioseph un∣till their departing and deliverance out of Aegypt, were in the land 140. yeeres. And like as before in the time of Noe the dwelling among the wicked became occasion of falling un∣to the righteous: Even so now did the Israelites learne idolatry and all unhappinesse of the Aegyp∣tians. For the which cause also they were sore op∣pressed a long season, howbeit there remained yet many excellent men which kept still the old faith, and hated the abhominations of the Aegyptians. For of Moses (which was borne 60. yeeres after the death of Ioseph) saith Paul:Heb 11▪ 24. Moses through faith when he grew up and was great, refused to bee called the sonne of Pharaos daughter: and chose rather to suf∣fer adversity with the people of God, than to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Aegypt,The faith of Moses. for he had respect to the reward, Heb. 11. Now can no man desire to suffer with Christ, ex∣cept hee have knowledge of Christs suffering. Therefore Moses in the midds of all persecution had knowledge of Christ, and the faith in Christ. So is there no doubt, but more vertuous people had this true faith, which were all oppressed and vexed in Aegypt, like as afterward the right faith∣full
beleevers were somewhat more persecuted: as among the heathen in the time of the Iudges and Kings of Iuda and Israel: under king Antio∣chus: under the Emperors Nero, Trans, Domiti¦anus, Maximianus, Iulianus and other. As for the unbeleevers, they in such miserable times received the reward of their unthankfulnesse, disobedience, idolatry, and blasphemie. But when the appointed time came which God had foreseene & opened unto Abraham, Gen. 15.Gen. 15.13. he brought the people of Israel by Moses out of Aegypt, with and through great wonders and to∣kens. By the which he first declared his power, then his loving kindnesse, and mercy toward his owne, and his terrible justice and vengeance against his enemies: whereby all the world might know, that there was none other just and true God save the God of Israel, in whose hand only con∣sisteth all things, which also of his meere mercie preserveth his owne, and with right judgement rewardeth his enemies. Specially this is most won∣derfull, that in this great businesse and worke hee hath so mightily set forth the redemption perfor∣med by our Lord Iesus Christ, yea and expressed it to be a very mighty redemption. For the same night (when they should depart away and be dis∣patched in the morning) the Lord commanded them to kill a lambe,The Easter lambe. and with the bloud thereof to sprinkle the doores and posts of the house: So when the Angell that in the same night slew the first borne of the Aegyptians saw the bloud, hee should doe no harme, and slay no man therein,
Exod. 12.3. Now testifieth Paul, 1 Cor. 5.7. that Christ Iesus is our Easter Lambe and Passeover. So saith Saint Iohn,Iohn 1.29. Behold the Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world. Therefore were not the Israelites spared, because of the bloud of beasts,The delverance out of Aegypt a figu of our re∣demption by Christ. but for the blouds sake of the blessed seed that was promised for to come. And thus the whole deliverance out of Aegypt was a figure of the true redemption, by the which we are delive∣red from the power of the devill and from ever∣lasting death through Iesus Christ, and brought in∣to the land of promise, even to eternall joy and salvation, which God promised unto our fathers Adam, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob. Now when the Lord had caried his people out of Aegypt, and brought them thorow the red sea drie shod, and had drowned Pharao with all his people, he commanded his folke to prepare and cleanse themselues at mount Sina. For he would binde himselfe unto them, receive them as his owne people, and give them his law and ordi∣nance.The giing of the law. Which thing he also did, and appointed his law himselfe, spake it with his owne mouth, and wrote it with his owne fingers in two tables of stone. In the one and first table hee ordained foure commandements, concerning the worship and love of God;The first table. namely, that wee should take him only for the true and right God, and none else beside or except him: That wee should worship and honour him only, and in no wise to have any other God, comfort, or hope. Item, that we should in no wise make any image or picture of any
things, and neither to worship them nor serve them. Moreover, that wee should not take the name of God in vaine, or lightly. And that wee should hallow the Sabboth day. In the other table ordained he six commandements concerning man. And like as the foure first are comprehended in these words:Matth. 22.37.39 Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c. Euen so are the six contained in these words following:The second Table. Thou shalt love thy neigh¦bour as thy selfe. The commandements are these: Thou shalt honour father and mother. Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not breake wedlocke. Thou shalt not steale. Thou shalt beare no false witnesse. Thou shalt not lst. In all these commandements is comprehended all that serveth for a godly life, and that any where is written of God, of true serving of God, and of right vertue towards this world. Who so now doth well ponder these ten chap∣ters or commandements,The law written in stone  no nw thing. and compareth them to the doings and workes of the holy Patriarks and old Fathers which had no law in writing, he shall finde, that the Lord now with this his written law began no new thing, neither ought that was not afore in the world, but rather renewed the old: and the law that he hitherto had written in the hearts of holy men, now when the people had gotten them stony hearts, he wrote the same in tables of stone.The first Comman∣dement. For that wee ought to worship and serve God onely, and to have none other Gods, the same did the holy fathers so beleeve and keepe, that all their conversation and doing beareth re∣cord
2.thereof. Concerning images or idols, it is evi∣dent, that Iacob buried the Idols of Mesopotamia 3.under an Oke beside Sichem, Gen. 35.4. We may perceive also by the oathes of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, how the name of God was had in reverence 4.among them of old, and not taken in vaine. The Sabbath did not the Lord ordaine here first, but on the seventh day of the Creation, Gen. 2.3. The same did the fathers keepe aright no doubt, Iohn 5.7.22. Whereas Cham had not his father Noe in re∣verence, 6.he was cursed for it, Gen. 9.25. Advoutry did the heathen rulers forbid under paine of death, 7.as we may see, Gen. 26.10, 11. Whereby it is ea∣sie to understand, how the blessed friends of God kept holy wedlocke. 8.How contrary the holy men were unto theft and deceit, it appeareth in the parting of Abraham and Loth, Gen. 13.6, 8, 9. And in Iacobs faithful∣nesse and handling with Laban his father in law, Gen 29.37, 30, 33, 31.6. Lying and false dealing was so farre from the holy fathers, that for kee∣ping their credit and truth, they obtained very great commendation. Notwithstanding they were tempted with evill as all men be, but they resisted the wicked lusts. For manifest is the chaste act of Ioseph,Gen. 39.8. which would not touch his masters wife, nor desire her.The law written in stone was ful∣filled afore. Wherefore in these commande∣ments is nothing written or required, that was not also required of the fathers afore the law, and per∣formed through true faith in Christ. The Lord therefore began no new thing with his people, when hee delivered them the tables of the law:
Only he would bring into a short summe and set in writing all the law that the Fathers had (but not together, nor comprehended in a summe) to the in∣tent that they should the lesse be forgotten of the people, which through their dwelling in Aegypt a∣mong Idolaters and false beleevers, were brought into sore offence and slander. This must now be rectified againe after this manner.The Lawes given after the ten Com∣mandements were by-Lawes. As for all the lawes and ordinances which afterward were ad∣ded unto these two tables, they were not joyned thereunto as principall lawes, but as by-lawes, for the declaration and better understanding of the ten Chapters or Commandements. For the perfect summe of all lawes, the very right rule of godli∣nesse, of Gods service, of righteousnesse, of good and evill conversation, is comprehended alreadie in the two tables. But here might some men make objection and say:Objection. If all truth be contained in these ten Com∣mandements, how happeneth it, that by no token there is mention made of the blessed seed promised unto the Fathers? Hitherto is it declared and pro∣mised unto the holy Fathers, that they shall be sa∣ved through the blessed seed out of the very grace of God, and for none of their owne deservings: but now are written lawes which command and forbid us, as though we through our owne workes and deserving (as namely if we keepe these Com∣mandements) should be saved and acceptable un∣to God. Where is now Christ? Where is the faith of the Patriarkes? Here is nothing heard of faith, but much, yea only of workes?
Answer.Answer. This objection hath deceived many, that they have had no right opinion and faith of the grace of God and our righteous making. There∣fore will we now give no answer out of our selves, but set forth holy Paul, and let him answer, that the answer may be the more sure, and the better esteemed. Paul in the third chapter to the Ga∣lathians writeth after this manner:Galath 3▪15 Deare brethren, I will speake after the manner of men; When a mans Te∣stament is confirmed, no man doth lightly regard or de∣spise it, nor addeth ought thereto. Now were the promises made unto Abraham and to his seed. He saith not, In the seeds, as in many, but as in one: And in thy seed, which is Christ. All these are Pauls words, and the meaning of them is; For as much as the Testaments or workes of men are of such reputation in the world, that when they are made, ordained and confirmed, no man dare adde ought to them, or minish any thing from them, but every man must let them be as they are of them∣selves:Gods Testament. It is much more reason that Gods Testa∣ment or bequest remaine still, and that nothing be added to it, or taken from it. Now did God make a Testament or bequest with Abraham, and promi∣sed him therein, that he would give him a seed, in whom he and his children should be saved. And the same salvation did he expresly appoint in one, and not in many. Wherefore wee must adde nothing unto Gods bequest, seeing he hath promised vs sal∣vation in Christ only, and not in many (that is to say, in no creature, not in our owne power and workes of the Law) neither must wee thinke, that
the Law was afterward added to the intent as though Christ were not able to save us, or as though we might obtaine salvation by our owne workes out of the Law. For thus followeth it in Paul word to word:Galath. 3.17. This Testament (I say) which afore was con∣firmed to Christward, is not disanulled or made of none effect by the Law (which was given beyond foure hun∣dred yeeres thereafter.) For if the inheritance begot∣ten by the Law, then is it not given by the promise. But God gave it freely unto Abraham by promise. These are Pauls words, out of the which every man may understand, that to the generation of man,Salvation by grace, not by desert or workes. salvati∣on is given only of the grace of God through the promise, and through no deserving at all: and that the law of the promise (that is to say, the bequest and Testament of God) is nothing minished, but that the summe remaineth without blemish, name∣ly, that salvation is given us freely. But here might one aske;Objection. Seeing that the salva∣tion is clearely enough expressed afore the Law, and is ascribed only unto the grace of God, why would God then adde the Law? why was he not content with the Testament alone?Answer. Therefore fol∣loweth it now in Paul: Why then serveth the Law?Galath. 3.19. It was added because of transgressions, till the seed came that was promised. These are Pauls words, which are thus to be understood: The Law was not given because of the promise, to make it of none effect, and to teach that men are saved by workes, and not through the grace and free liberty of God:Why the Law was given. but it was given because of transgression, that is to say, because that the people of God in Aegypt had
transgressed the way and truth of their Fathers, and knew no more what was sinne, right or unright, wherein stood salvation or damnation: for they were corrupt through the long dwelling among the Idolaters of Aegypt. Therefore did God or∣daine them the Law, out of the which they might learne the will of God, what sinne, right or unright is, and to know themselves, to goe into themselves, and to consider how that the holy workes which God requireth, are not in their owne power; for the which cause all the world have great need of a Mediator.The Law was gi∣ven to further the promise. And thus the Law was given to further the promise, namely, that wee through the Law might be led only unto Christ. For thus followeth it in Pauls words:Gal. 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And it was given of Angels by the hand of a Mediator. A Mediatour is not a Mediatour of one only: but God is one. Is the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid. Howbeit, if there had beene given a law, which could have given life, then no doubt righteousnesse should come of the Law. But the Scripture hath shut up all under sinne, that the pro∣mise should come by the faith on Iesus Christ, given un∣to them that beleeve. Before faith came (that is to say, Iesus Christ in whom we beleeve) we were kept and shut up under the Law, unto the faith which should af∣terward be declared. Thus was the Law our Schoole-master unto Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith, &c. By these words of Paul may every man understand now for what cause the Law was given, and how it is not contrary to the promise of the foresaid seed, but rather bringeth us from our selves, and from all creatures, only unto Iesus
Christ. The Law therefore confirmeth the first pro∣mise concerning the blessed seed, and teacheth that wee obtaine all salvation in him only.The Law is the rule to live by. Howbeit it is also a rule of our life, informing us what wee ought to doe, and what we ought to leave undone. Yet on our side is all unfruitfull, where faith is not. But where faith is, it ceaseth not through love to worke good according to the Law: all honour and praise being referred unto God, to men no∣thing but unperfectnesse. God also among his people wrought many things, whereby hee set the cause of Iesus Christ clearely afore the eies of the people, as it is expres∣sed afore by the Lambe of the Passeover. Like∣wise is it where as Moses hanged up a Serpent in the wildernesse, that all they which were stung and poi∣soned of serpents, should behold the brasen ser∣pent hanging, and not die, but be saved alive. Wher∣as doubtlesse the outward beholding of the brasen serpent, saved not them that were poisoned: but it was God, which would so declare, that his Sonne should be hanged upon a crosse, to the intent that every one which were poisoned and defiled by the old serpent and sinne, should beleeve in the Sonne of God, and live in him. For so is it written, Sap.Wisdom. 16.6, 7. The brasen Serpent a figure of Christ. 16. They had a token of health according to the com∣mandement. For who so converted, was not made whole by the outward thing which he saw, but by thee which art the restorer of health, and Saviour of all. And yet saith Christ more clearely, Ioh. 3.Iohn 3.14, 15. And like as Moses set up the serpent in the wildernesse, even so must the Sonne of man be lift up, that whosoever be∣leeveth
in him, should not perish, but have eternall life. And as touching this, the holy Apostle Paul bringeth in another sentence,1 Cor. 10.1, 2. 1 Cor. 10. and saith: Brethren, I would not haue you ignorant of this, that our Fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed thorow the sea,Christ is the rocke. and were all baptised under Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat one spirituall meat, and drinke of one spirituall drinke. But they dranke all of the spirituall rocke that followed them, which rocke was Christ. Besides this, if we consider the declaration of the lawes of the first Table (which teacheth how we shall behave our selves right toward God, to love, worship and honour him, to serve him and to cleave only unto him) we shall finde in the same first Table, the whole cause of Christ. For all that afterward was ordained and appointed concerning the Tabernacle, the Priesthood, and the Oblati∣ons, pertaineth to the summe of the first Table, for as much as the Scripture and the mouth of God calleth it his law, precept, commandement, use and statute, ordinance and service. Question.And if thou aske, How can God which is a spi∣rit, be served with outward, visible, and fleshly things, as the foresaid ceremonies of the Iewes are? Answer.I answer; Such outward rites of the people of God were sacraments and tokens of heavenly in∣visible good things, and were not the heavenly riches themselves. Wherefore they neither served nor pleased God, that used and did such service without faith and lifting up of the minde. But they that put their trust in God, cleaving only unto
him, and lifting up their hearts higher, and re∣mained not in the visible thing, those pleased God. Whereas they had but one Altar and one place ap∣pointed where they should doe sacrifice;One altar wat i signified. it signi∣fied the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that he should be offered up but once, (and that in one place) for the sinne of the world. Therefore where∣as the high Priest also every yeere went into the in∣ward Tabernacle with bloud; it signified, that our Lord Iesus should come into this world, and shed his bloud once for all, to forgive and cleanse our sinnes, and so to ascend unto heaven. Yea all oblations and all sheddings of bloud in the sacrifi∣ces of the old fathers, signified the death of our Lord Iesus Christ. Nothing was cleansed among them without bloud; which signifieth,Note this well. that all the purging of our uncleannesse is done by the bloud of Iesus Christ. And all the Priesthood which was ordained for to teach, to pray, and make inter∣cession, to offer and doe sacrifice, represented the office of our Lord Christ, which came into this world, to teach us the truth and righteousnesse: then to offer himselfe to the Father for our sinnes, and after the sacrifice done, to rise up againe from death, to ascend unto heaven, there to sit at the right hand of God, and even there as a true high Bishop to appeare alway in the presence of God, and to pray for us. This is the summe of the rites and ceremonies of the old fathers, the understan∣ding of the figures, and the spirit of the letter: whereof holy Paul hath written much in the most excellent epistle to the Hebrewes.
Why the ceremo∣nies of the Law were given.Out of all this is it easie to understand, how that these rites and ceremonies of the fathers were sa∣craments, and given to the people of God. Not that they with the letter and outward visible and corporal thing should sufficiently serve God which is a spirit, but that they should lift up their mindes above the same to the spirituall things, pondering the mercy of God; out of the which hee being moved, is become gracious unto us. And when he might have damned us for our sins and misdeeds, he spared us for his Sons sake, whom he gave unto death, and his innocent death hath he accepted for our sinnes. Such a faithfull consideration (which is the true beleefe) pleaseth God, and with such a faith is God served, and such a faith would the Lord have taught and planted in us, with the fore∣said rites and ceremonies. Therefore all they that pleased God among the old fathers, pleased him not for the letters sake, but by reason of the spirit. When the sacrifice also and ceremonie was exe∣cuted after the ordinance of God in the congrega∣tion, the beloved friends of God had not only re∣spect unto the outward thing, but much rather be∣held they Christ with the eyes of faith, and thought thus:The godly conside∣ration of the fa∣thers. Behold the will of God hath ordained to do sacrifice for sinne: now are we all sinners and debtors unto God, in so much that he hath power and right over us, that like as the beast which is now slaine and offred, dieth, and hath his bloud shed: Even so might God now also kill us all, and condemne us for ever. Neverthelesse he hath taken
us to his mercy, and promised us a seed, which should thus die on the Crosse, and cleanse us with his bloud, and with his death restore us unto life: which thing no doubt shall as surely come to passe, as this beast is slaine and offered now afore our eyes. And like as the bloud is sprinkled over the people, for the bodily cleansing: so shall the bloud of Christ be sprinkled upon our soules, &c. And out of such a thought and faithfull con∣sideration of the sacrifices, grew repentance and sorrow for their sinnes, a gladnesse, praise, com∣fort and thanks-giving unto God the mercifull Fa∣ther. And to this doe serve certaine Psalmes, which were made concerning the sacrifices. To this also serve all the rebukings of the holy Prophets, and the refusing of the oblations. For the externall pompe and shew of the offerings, without faith in God and the blessed seed, is nothing worth; yea it is rather abominable unto God, as thou seest in the first chapter of Esay. Thou wilt aske:Question. Might not God have taught and shewed his people the cause of Iesus Christ & of true beleefe, none other way than through and with such cost, pompe and glory of sacrifices and other gorgeousnesse of the Church? I answer:Answer. If the people had not fallen to more wickednesse in Egypt through their dwelling a∣mong the Idolaters, but had constantly and sted∣fastly remained, as did their fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, then might they well have continued by the old short simple forme, as it was among the holy fathers. But now had they seene in Egypt an
outward costly Gods service, with temples, altars, sacrifices, priesthood, holy daies, ornaments, &c. Likewise the idolatry increased daily in all the world, so that now there was utterly no people, which had not their owne outward ceremonies, wherewith they served God. To the intent then that God might retaine his people within the compasse of faith in one God, and in the blessed seed promised afore: to the in∣tent also that they should shew no outward service to any other gods,Wy G  among the . or take upon them to serve God after the manner of the Egyptians or of other hea∣then, he appointed an outward Gods service, and commanded to doe the same unto him, and else to none, and in the same pleased it him to set forth all the cause of the foresaid seed, till he came and per∣formed all things in deed, that they had figurative∣ly in their sacrifices. Moreover, God (according to his wisdome) of his speciall mercy and good heart that he hath un∣to mans generation, would with these outward to∣kens tender our weaknesse, which of spirituall heavenly things hath better understanding, when they are shewed unto it by corporall visible things. God therefore through such corporall represen∣tations,God tendreth our weaknesse. laboured to shew unto that grosse and fleshly people, the heavenly cause of his Sonne. Neverthelesse the corporall visible things were gi∣ven for no longer, but untill the time of the fulfil∣ling. But now that Christ hath appeared, and ful∣filled and performed all that was written and figu∣red of him in the Law and the Prophets, the figure
ceaseth, and the outward sacraments of Moses law are of no more value to be exercised and used. Thus much be said of the ceremonies. Whereas beside the ceremonies,Lawes iudiciall. there is much written also in the Law concerning civill policie, ordinance, judgement, to live peaceably and well in citie and land: of buying and selling, of warre and peace, of inheritance and proprieties, of lawes matrimoniall, of punishment of the wicked, of the judgement and counsell, of lending and borrow∣ing, &c. It is no newes at all, and serveth altoge∣ther for the declaration of the six commandements of the second Table, and is comprehended in the words of Paul, Rom. 13. Love thy neighbour as thy selfe: And in the words of Christ,Rom. 13.9. Matth. 7.12. That thou wouldest not have done unto thee, doe not thou to another, Matth. 7. Such lawes and rules to live in peace, in a civill order and in vertue, have also the good holy fathers had from the beginning of the world, written in their hearts by God himselfe. Now hath God also caused all to be compre∣hended in writing by Moses, to the intent that the world might have all more clearely and per∣fectly, and that no man might excuse himselfe of ignorance.
CHAP. VII. The originall of the holy Scripture and faith thereof. The five originall bkes of holy Scrip∣ture written by Moses.THis matter which I have hitherto treated upon, have I not fained of my selfe, but ta∣ken it out of the mouth and word of God. For God stirred up Moses to write, and leave be∣hinde him all the matter, for our learning and knowledge. This did now Moses with great faith∣fulnesse, and comprehended all in foure bookes. The first is called the booke of the creation,The first boke of Moses. from the beginning of the world unto his time, of the creation of the world, beginning of all nations, and of the Patriarks and old righteous servants of God, of their faith and conversation, of the promi∣ses and works of God. The same wrote hee as hee was inspired of the Holy Ghost, and as he had re∣ceived of old fathers, and somewhat as he found in the bookes of the Aegyptians.Acts 7.22. For Moses was ex∣cellently well learned in all wisdome of the Aegyp∣tians, as Steven doth witnesse of him, Act. 7. The other three bookes wrote he of his owne time, ac∣cording as he himselfe was present, saw, and knew. And specially the second booke,The second booke of Moses. concerning the departing out of Aegypt, how the people of God were oppressed in Aegypt, how the Aegyptians were punished, how Israel was delivered, received the Law, and set up a Tabernacle with a gorgeous serving of God.The third booke. In the third booke, which is called
Leviticus, are written the spirituall Lawes, namely such as concerne the Priests and the Priesthood, their office, living, knowledge, sacrifices, solemne feast dayes, rites, ceremonies, and such like.The fourth booke. In the fourth, which is called Numeri, hee writeth at length, how they went thorow the wildernesse, and came to Iordan, with a rehearsall of their order and number, of their murmuring also and punishment, and of certaine victories, with a remembrance of certaine lawes and statutes. Beside all this,The fifth booke. hee made yet an Enchiridion and summe of all the acts of his time, and of the Law of God, which is called Deuteronomium: the same commanded hee to bee laid in the Arke at the motion of God, and that it should be read unto all the people, as it is mentio∣ned, Deut. 31. And in these five bookes,The originall Scrip∣ture of our faith. given us of God by Moses, is the whole ground of our holy faith. For all the Prophets afterward grounded themselves upon the same, and wrote thereout, like as afterward our Lord Iesus and the Apostles point unto Moses. Neither did ever any righteous man of understanding, and that feared God, doubt any thing, or blaspheme such Scriptures. And from such true servants of God, have wee hitherto recei∣ved our matters in writing. Thus much have I said concerning the Law,The Law written is no new thing. how it is no new thing, but even the onely will of God, but now comprehended in writing: More∣over, that all the Law pointeth unto Christ, and that all men of right understanding which lived under the Law, were Christians. For manifest is it that Paul said, Rom. 10. Christ is the end of the Law,Rom. 10.4.
to justifie everie one that beleeveth. And Galat. 3. Or ever faith (that is to say,Gal. 3.23. Christ) came, we were kept and shut up under the Law, unto the faith which should afterward be declared. Thus was the Law our schoole-master unto Christ, that wee might bee made righteous by faith. All this, I suppose, will bee new and strange in many hearts; neverthelesse, I trust that all they which have understanding, doe see and knowledge, that this is the true, old, right, and godly Divinitie and Theologie, which ascri∣beth all honour unto God the Father, through our Lord Iesus Christ in the Holy Ghost. To whom be glorie and praise for ever. Amen. CHAP. VIII. All vertuous Kings, and the people of Israel, trusted unto Christ, and not to the Law. The death of Moses.AFter that the Law was given, and Gods ser∣vice set up, Moses the servant of God died, being an hundred and twentie yeeres old: and at the commandement and commission of God, he left Gods people to bee ruled and guided by the faithfull valiant Iosue,Iosue was a figure of Christ. which also was a fi∣gure of our Lord Iesus. For like as it was not Moses, but Iosue, that brought the people into the land of promise: Even so are we brought into the eternall rest, not by the works of the Law, nor through our owne deserving, but by grace through Iesus Christ:
like as it is also with many words expressed of holy Paul, Heb. 4.3. &c. This Iosue, no doubt, did keepe, maintaine and defend Gods faith and reli∣gion, with the spirit and understanding thereof, and taught other to keepe the same, like as he through Gods inspiration received it of the fathers by Mo∣ses. Which thing, though it bee evident in many points, yet is it manifest specially by this, that hee would not suffer the children of Ruben and Gad, and the halfe Tribe of Manasse, to set up and have another altar, beside the onely altar that the Lord had appointed them. For herein (as it is mentio∣ned afore) was figured the vertue and perfectnesse of the onely crosse, death, and sacrificing of Iesus Christ. Therefore would not Iosue that any thing should be set cheeke-mate with the crosse and ob∣lation of Iesus Christ, but that all honour of clean∣sing and forgivenesse of sinnes should bee ascribed onely unto him. Whereas Iosue now, and other Iudges, Rulers, Princes and Kings of Israel after him, used sore and great warre, stroke many horrible battels,Iosue fought at Gods commande∣ment. destroyed much land and people, and shed mens bloud with∣out measure, he did it as a chiefe head, and as an in∣strument and vessell of God, at the commande∣ment of God, which would so punish the Idola∣trie, the great sinne and blasphemie of the ungod∣ly, which he had long suffered, and exhorted them to amendment, but for all his patient abiding, they would not convert: Those now did hee root out through the sword of his beloved friends: some∣time delivered he his people with the sword of the
righteous, and saved them from the hand of their enemies. For because of the sinnes of his people, he gave them over sometime into the hand of their enemies, to nurture and correct them with the rod: then fell the people of God, and fled before their enemies, and were subdued and opprest of the un∣godly, till they knowledged their sinnes, called up∣on God and amended, putting their trust in God onely, through the blessed seed, worshipping him onely, calling upon him, and honouring him ac∣cording to his word, casting away strange worship∣ping of God, service of Idols, that shamefull, bla∣sphemous and ungodly living. Then sent he them his helpe, and delivered them in his power, by the ministration of his appointed Captaines. And such warring, delivering and punishing was no fleshly unfaithfull worke, whom no man ought to follow, as some, being wrapped with the unstedfast spirit of the Maniches and Anabaptists,An heresie of the Anabaptists. Heb. 11.32. doe meane. For Paul expresseth cleerely; And what shall I say of Gedeon, Barach, Sampson, and Iephtha, David, and Samuel, and the Prophets? which through faith sub∣dued Kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weake were made strong, became valiant in battell, turned to flight the armies of the Aliants, Heb. 11. All which works the holy Apostle praiseth and commen∣deth as excellent works of faith. Therefore are they no works of the flesh, neither is it now con∣trarie to the holy faith, if Christian rulers deliver their innocent people (whom God hath subdued
unto them) from wrongfull violence, and defend their libertie, righteousnesse, house and land, or punish the shamefull blasphemers, Idolaters, and persecuters of the holy faith, and not suffer them to have all their malicious will. Neverthelesse,Rulers must punish. this must be done by them, to whom God hath com∣mitted the sword. For thus saith the Lord:Matth. 26.52. Who so taketh away the sword, shall perish through the sword, Matth. 26. But specially in the battels of Gods people and of the unfaithfull, it commeth to passe, and is expressely set before our eyes, that God said to the serpent at the beginning, Gen. 3.Gen. 3.15 I will put enmitie betweene thy seed and the womans seed. For the righteous are the seed of Christ, the unrighteous and unfaithfull are the seed of the De∣vill. Betweene these now see we great discord; but specially this, that the faithfull doe alway tread the serpent on the head, though they themselves also be bitten in the heele. For the right faithfull beleevers afore the birth of Christ in the time of the promise, had no lesse trouble and persecution, not onely be∣cause of sinne, but also for righteousnesse and faiths sake, than the faithfull after Christs birth in the time of grace and perfectnesse.An errou. Therefore have they small knowledge of the doings of the faithfull, which say, that the people of old were a victorious people, and governed corporally, but that the peo∣ple after Christs comming are borne to suffer, and to no victorie or governance. Neverthelesse in these wonderfull times (in the which Gods people had no victorie, and anon were subdued and op∣pressed) the true faith continued upright and un∣blemished
from Iosue forth throughout all the Iudges, untill the time and reigne of David. Of King David.David also was a man that suffred much through divers and long trouble, through miserable distresse and vexation, and through sore persecution, with∣out ceasing, being proved, tried and provoked, a∣fore he was King. Whereof the bookes of Samuel and the more part of the Psalmes beareth record. But after that he was promoted unto the kingdom, by God (which said,Acts 15.22. I have found a man after mine own heart) he advanced, set forth, and magnified the true faith right diligently. Here also to the honour of our Lord Iesus Christ, will I shortly and by the way declare, what knowledge and faith this noble King and Prophet had of our Lord Iesus. This will I doe with the declaration of the 110. Psalme, whose words are these:Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot-stoole. In the first verse David knowledgeth the persons in the holy Trinitie,The holy Trinitie. the God-head also and the eternall kingdome of Christ. Thus like∣wise did our Lord Jesus Christ understand and al∣leage this verse in the Gospell, Matth. 22. know∣ledging two of the Persons in the one only God∣head,Matth. 22.44. for he saith, The Lord said unto my Lord. Now is it certaine and undeniable, that hee which spea∣keth, and he to whom ought is spoken, are not one, but two Persons. Yet is there but one Lord and God, and they both (the Father that speaketh, and the Sonne to whom is spoken) are the Lord, there∣fore are they one, of one substance and being, the very true God. Neither is the Sonne lesse than the
Father. There can also none be a father, except he have a sonne or a childe. Now is the everlasting Fa∣ther God, therefore is the Sonne also everlasting. There is also but one only everlasting without be∣ginning. Both the Father and the Sonne are eter∣nall without beginning, therefore are they one on∣ly true God with the holy Ghost. Like as Iohn also saith, In the beginning, (that is to say, from everla∣sting) was the Word, and the Word was with God,Iohn 1.1. and the Word was God. And immediatly thereafter, saith he, that the Word is Jesus Christ our Lord. For it followeth: The Word became flesh.Iohn 1.14. Therefore doth David also call the Son of God specially his Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord.Matth. 22.24. The faith of David in Christ. And therefore calleth he Christ his Lord, because hee confesseth and beleeveth, that he is his very naturall Lord and God, as Thomas also did knowledge:Iohn 20.20. My Lord and my God, Ioh. 20. Afterward calleth he him his Lord, because that after the nature of man, he should be borne out of his loynes. For thorowout all the Scripture is our Lord Iesus called the Sonne of David: And thus doth David knowledge two na∣tures in Christ, the nature of God, and the nature of man. That the kingdome of Christ shall last for ever, and that the kinde and nature of man shall be ex∣alted aboue all heavens (as Paul saith, Hebr. 2.) Da∣vid testifieth with these words: Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot-stoole.Psalm. 110.1. For Marke saith in the sixteenth chapter:Marke 16.19. The Lord was taken up into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God. Of this also finde we 1 Cor. 15.15. Now must
he needs be very God indeed, which reigneth for e∣ver, and to whom all enemies must be subdued, yea cast utterly unto his feet. Now followeth the se∣cond verse:Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall send thy mightie staffe out of Sion: thou shalt be Lord, even in the middest among thine enemies. Here speaketh he of the preaching of the holy Gospell, and how the world should be converted unto Christ, and Christ to reigne in the middest of the world. In the first verse is spoken of the eternall kingdome, that he is very God, living and reigning for ever,The spirituall king∣dome of Christ. not only in this time, but al∣so after this time eternally. But here speaketh hee specially of the kingdome, whereas hee reig∣neth here beneath through the Gospell. For the Staffe, the Scepter, the Rod of Christ is the holy Gospell, even the power of God, which saveth all that beleeve, Rom. 1.16. Which maketh Christs enemies friends, and smiteth them downe that will not convert: so that Christ hath dominion and vi∣ctorie even in the middest among his enemies. It is he, that with the spirit of his mouth slayeth the An∣tichrists. This his word also and preachings of the Gospell,Acts 1.8.12. came forth first from Sion or Hierusalem, as Esay,Psalm. 110.3. Micheas, and Luke doe testifie. Now fol∣loweth the third verse: In the day of thy battell (or armie) shall thy people be well willing: the dew of thy birth is unto thee in an holy maiestie, out of the wombe of the cleare morning. Herewith doth David de∣scribe the glorious and victorious faith of the Chri∣stian.A battell. For when the Gospell is preached, there ari∣seth a conflict betweene faith and infidelitie, be∣tweene the seed of Christ and the Serpent, between
idolatrie and true godlinesse. And the unbeleevers persecute the Lord Christ in his members, that is to say, the faithfull: but they are well content utter∣ly to give over bodie, honour and goods, their bloud and life for Gods truths sake. For the mar∣tyrs and they in the Primitive Church, being gathe∣red together of the Apostles, and after the Apostles time, have thus kept truth and faith toward the Lord Christ, and were willing to die for knowled∣ging him. Afterward describeth he also in the fore∣said verse, the pure and holy conception and birth of our Lord Iesus Christ. And this doth he with a goodly similitude, and saith:The birth of Christ. Psalm. 110.3. Thy birth shall be ho∣ly and very excellent, not uncleane as the birth of other men: For like as the dew out of the cleare heaven, and out of the faire morning, is borne as it were out of a mothers wombe: even so also shalt thou be borne holy and cleane, of an undefiled vir∣gin. Whereof thou findest more instruction, Luk 1.31. The Lord hath sworne, and it shall not repent him:Psalm. 110.4. thou-art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchise∣dech.The office of Christ. In this fourth verse describeth he the office of Iesus Christ, how that he is ordained of God to be one only Priest for ever, which should offer up himselfe for the sinne of the world, and alway ap∣peare in the sight of God the Father, and to pray for us. All this doth holy Paul declare at large to the Hebrewes in the 5.7.8·9. and 10. chapters. And specially in this verse is grounded all that is read thorowout the Scripture, of the merits of Christ, of the forgiving of sinnes, of righteous ma∣king, of being Mediatour, and that he alone is the
only Salvation, Advocate, Satisfaction and Righ∣teousnesse of the faithfull.Psalm. 110.5. The Lord is at thy right hand: he in the time of his wrath shall wound even Kings.Christs cause shall forth. This fifth verse teacheth, how God will ever more and more stand on his Sonnes side, fur∣ther his cause, and bring downe and destroy those Kings, Princes, and Lords, that will not amend and beleeve in Christ, but will rather provoke his wrath, than desire his grace. Which thing Herod, Nero, Domician, Maximine and Iulian have pro∣ved. Yet followeth the sixt verse declaring the fifth: He shal iudge among the Heathen, and fill all full of dead bodies,Psalm. 110.6. and smite the head on the wide ground. Christ is also preached unto the Heathen, and reigneth a∣mong them: but many withstand Christ, and them doth he judge. And like as a King overcommeth his enemies with a battell, and covereth the whole plaine with dead bodies, visiteth also and smiteth the head of the warre, and the head citie of the ene∣mies:Christ shall destroy his enemies. Even so doth Christ to his enemies, and de∣stroyeth their power and kingdome. All which things wee have seene in the old unchristian Em∣pire of Rome, and in many other potentates and powers. But specially he breaketh the head of the old Serpent, according to the promise, Gen. 3.15. And at the last shall he come to judge the quicke and dead,Psalm. 110.7. and destroy his enemies for ever. Out of the brooke in the way shall he drinke, therefore shall hee also lift up the head. Finally and in the seventh verse, he describeth the passion of Christ and his glorie. In the way (saith he) that is, in his life while he is in this misery, He shall drinke out of the brooke, that is,
he shall suffer and be overcome. For to drinke out of the cup, is as much as to suffer. But to drinke out of the brooke, is to be altogether full of trou∣ble, to be vexed and tormented without victorie, and utterly to be overwhelmed with a brooke and strong streame of troubles. Thus was it his minde to declare the Passion of Christ. After the Passion, followeth the glory with the Resurrection and As∣cension. Paul, Philip. 2. speaketh of both, and saith,Philip. 2.8. Christ humbled himselfe, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse. Wherefore God hath exalted him, and given him a name, which is a∣boue all names, &c. Thus much be spoken of this Psalme, and of Davids understanding, which hee had of Christ Iesus and of the Christian faith. Upon this I marvell, if (after so evident testimo∣nies) there be yet any man, which perceiveth not, that Davids faith and understanding of Christ, was even one faith and understanding, with the faith that we knowledge and say: I beleeve in one God Father almightie, &c. as it is in the twelve Arti∣cles of the Christian faith. For the holy Trinitie in one God-head doth he knowledge, not only here, but also in the 33. Psalme, saying,Psalm. 133.6. The article of the holy Trinitie. Through the word of God were the heavens made, and all their power through the spirit of his mouth. For certaine it is, that there is but one only God, maker of hea∣ven and of earth: but here is the Trinitie called Lord or God, Word and Spirit. Neither is there any thing in the Articles of the Beleefe concerning the God-head and Man-hood of Christ, of his con∣ception, birth, passion, crosse and death, of the re∣surrection,
ascension and judgement, but it is cleerely comprehended here in this Psalme. The articles of the holy Church, of forgiving of sinnes, resurrection of the flesh, and an everlasting life, are contained in this Psalme, and are treated upon yet more clearely, and with many mo words very sub∣stantially in other Psalmes of David.David was called Christs father. Matth. 9.27. Therefore had he our holy faith, and knowledged the same, was saved therein, and of all holy men was called the Father of Christ with high commendation, be∣cause of the promise that was made unto him. Moreover, all the holy Prophets following, had re∣spect unto David, as to another Moses, and tooke many things out of his writings. For there is scarce any other, that so clearely wrote of the cause of Christ as this Prophet David, and therefore hath he honour and praise aboue other in Israel: Of whom thou readest also, Eccles. 47.2. Such faith and con∣fidence in God through Iesus Christ, had David out of the holy Ghost, and out of the doctrine of his Prophets Samuel, Nathan and Gad, and of other his Priests, which also had the same of God, and of the holy Fathers, specially of Moses. And no doubt, hee desired the honour of God and of his Sonne, not to keepe it only himselfe, but also much rather to require it of all his people. Wherefore no doubt he set up and furthered this his faith and religion among all his men of warre, kinsfolke in all his court, dominion, before the whole congre∣gation, and all his kingdome: so diligently, earnest∣ly, and fervently, that afterward certaine hundred yeeres, they which beleeved right and lived well,
were praised for walking in the waies of David their Father. They also that did evill, & set not forth the true faith, of them is it written:The waies of Da∣vid. they walked not in the waies of David their Father. Of this hast thou many examples in the bookes of the Kings, and in the Chronicles. Many things also were for∣given the Kings and all the people of Iuda, for Da∣vids sake, that is, for the promise sake made unto David, even for Iesus Christs sake, whom Ezechiel calleth David. In the first booke of the Kings,1 Kings 15.3, 4, 5. King Abia. the fifteenth chapter, it is written thus: The heart of A∣bia was not right toward his Lord God, as was the heart of David his father. And for Davids sake did the Lord give him a light at Hierusalem, so that at Hie∣rusalem he set up his sonne, and preserved him. For David did that, that was right in the fight of the Lord, and all the daies of his life did not he shrinke from any thing that he commanded him, except in the matter of Vrias the Hethite. Thus readest thou also of Eze∣chias, 2 Reg. 18. Afore Iosias was there no King,2 Kings 18.5, 6. that was like him, which turned himselfe so unto the Lord with all his heart, with all his soule, and with all his power, according to all the law of Moses. And after∣ward came there none like him. But in the second booke of the Chronicles,2 Chro. 34.1, 2, 3. the 34. chapter, standeth the declaration of the fore∣said place after this manner: Iosias reigned at Hie∣rusalem one and thirtie yeeres, and did that which plea∣sed the Lord, and walked in the waies of his Father Da∣vid, and declined neither to the right hand nor to the left. For in the eighth yeere of his reigne while he was yet but young (even sixteene yeeres old) hee began to
seeke the God of his Father David. Thus much be spoken concerning this, that Is∣rael and all the vertuous Kings of Iuda trusted un∣to Christ, and not to the Law of Moses. Who so de∣sireth the number of the yeeres,1 Kings 6.1. he findeth 1 Reg. 6. even 480. yeeres, from the departing out of Aegypt untill the fourth yeere of the reigne of Salomon. And from that time untill the captivitie of Baby∣lon, are reckoned 419. yeeres, or thereabouts. All together make 899. yeeres. CHAP. IX. All holy Prophets doe point unto Christ, and preach salvation only in him. SOmewhat yet will we now declare further, concerning the times of the Kings of Iuda and Israel, which in a manner were even as the times of the Iudges of Israel. For like as in the first yeeres of Iosue, God gave great victorie and honour, and afterward rest and peace: Even so were the Israelites very victorious and triumphant under David, and had great rest and peace under Salomon.The departing of Is∣rael from Iuda. But like as after the death of Iosue the honour of Israel decreased, and the departing away from God followed with one persecution upon an∣other (though in the meane time they had peace and deliverers, as Othoniel, Ehud, Barack, Gedeon, Iephtha, Sampson, &c.) Even so did the worship of Israel decrease after Salomons time. For the ten
Tribes of Israel fell away from the house of David, only Iuda and Bejamin held Salomons sonne Roboam for their King: the other made Hieroboam King. And so of one kingdome were made two, the king∣dome of Israel, and the kingdome of Iuda. The kingdome of Israel (through the perswasion of Hieroboam) chose them another manner of ser∣ving God. Not that they utterly denied and refu∣sed the God of their Fathers, but they served him after a strange heathenish manner of their owne imagining. But afterward they fell the longer the more and further into grosse idolatrie, so long, till the Lord suffered them to be rooted out, and car∣ried away by the King of the Assyrians, and scat∣tered abroad among all the Heathen. The king∣dome and the Kings of Iuda were somewhat bet∣ter, howbeit they had some also which excelled the Kings of Israel and of the Heathen in ungod∣linesse. For they likewise went forth so long in un∣righteousnesse, till Nabuchodonosor the King rooted them out, and caried them away unto Babylon. But afore, we see that there was a wonderfull com∣brance in the civill policie, and in the religion. Sometime was all righteousnesse and true religion opprest, and violence and idolatrie used. Some∣time gat righteousnesse up againe, and the right true faith had the victorie, all unright and idolatrie being put downe. This came to passe also in Israel under Helias and King Iehu.King Iehu. Yet was the idolatrie and wrong rather punished, than any amendment following. Like as it came also to passe after the birth of Christ, that there were vertuous Kings and
Emperours, which (according to the prophecie of Esay in the 49. chapter, verse 23.) did all righteous∣nesse, set up the faith of Christ, and put downe all idolatrie. Againe, there came other, that set up all unrighteousnesse and idolatry, persecuted the truth, and at the last receiued their reward conve∣nient. So weightie a matter is it to have good or evill Rulers. God alwaies  PphetsBut in these wonderfull alterations, and thorow∣out all the time of these governances of both the kingdomes, God alway sent his servants the holy Prophets, to rebuke wrong and idolatry, and to teach all righteousnesse and true serving of God. And first after the time of David and Salomon (un∣der whom there was a great multitude of learned and holy Prophets; for David also and Salomon were excellently endued with the spirit of wis∣dome and prophecie above other men) these were the chiefe,The oldest Pro∣phets. most famous, and oldest Prophets, of whom the Bible maketh mention with worship: Semeias, which lived under Roboam King of Iuda: Ahias the Silonite under Hieroboam. Azarias the sonne of Obed, which lived under Asa King of Iuda, and Iehu the sonne of Anani, whom Baasa the King of Israel slew: Helias the great Prophet, and Mi∣cheas the sonne of Iema, lived under Achab and Iosaphat. Now like as in the time of David there was a great number of learned men; even so testifieth the second booke of the Chronicles in the 17. chapter, that in the time of Iosaphat there were many learned Levites and Prophets. Heliseus was
in the time of King Iehu, and Zacharias the sonne of Ioiada, was under Ioas, under whom also he was stoned. Neverthelesse we have no bookes written and set forth by these: only we have the prophecie of Abdias, which wrote his prophecie under Achab. Afterward under Vzzia, Iothan, Achas and Ezechias Kings of Iuda, lived the most part of them, whose bookes are abroad. For under these preached and wrote Ionas, Oseas, Isaias, Ioel, Nahum, Amos and Micheas. Afterward under King Manasses wrote Abacuck. Vnder the holy King Iosias, wrote Sopho∣nias, Baruch and Hieremie, in whose daies Israel had such misfortune, that Hierusalem with the Temple was destroyed, and the people that remai∣ned over and perished not, were caried away cap∣tive into Babylon. In the same captivitie did Eze∣chiel and Daniel write their prophecies. And after the captivitie when Israel was delivered againe, and came home to Hierusalem, then preached and wrote Esdras, Haggeus, Zacharias, Malachias and Nehemias. Beside these Prophets no doubt there were other moe, of whom no mention is made. But these are the chiefe, by whom it pleased God to open unto us all that appertaineth to our salva∣tion. And though we had also the writings of the other, yet should we reade no other thing in them, than we finde in our owne Prophets, for as much as these whom we have, agree so together all in one. Now whether they be our own Prophets,The Prophets preached the old faith. whose writings we have, or the other whose writings we have not, yet have they all preached the summe of the doctrine and knowledged the faith that wee
spake of afore, and wrote in one summe, which faith Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moses and David had: And this did they the more evidently, because they applied themselves to open the Law, and to drive away the misunderstanding, which was risen up among and in the people: therefore point they every where from the letter unto the spirit, from the outward sacrifice unto Christ Iesus, from all idolatry unto the onely God, which saveth us through his mercy onely in the blessed seed, and through none of our deservings. This did Paul see,Rom. 3.20, 21, 22. and therefore said he, Rom. 3. Through the workes of the law shall no man be iustified in the sight of God. For through the law commeth the knowledge of sinne. But now is the righteousnesse of God declared without the law,The Law and the Prophets allow the righteousnesse of God that commeth by faith. Act. 3.24. for as much as it is allowed by the testimonie of the Law and the Prophets. The righteousnesse of God commeth by the faith of Ie∣sus Christ unto all, and upon all them that beleeve. So saith Peter also in the third of the Acts: All the Prophets from Samuel, and thenceforth (as many as have spoken) have told of these daies. And in the 10.Act. 10.2, 3. chapter: To this Iesus Christ give all the Pro∣phets witnesse, that whosoever beleeveth in him, shall through his name receive forgivenesse of sinnes. Who so now is learned in the writings of the Prophets, knoweth well, that there is nothing read concerning the Lord in the New Testament, which the Prophets have not prophesied of afore. He that is then any thing instructed in the Prophets, hath no doubt considered this in the New Testa∣ment, that the Apostles prove all their doctrine of
the Lord Iesus, out of the Law and the Prophets: yea that the Lord himselfe confirmeth his owne doings with the Scriptures of the Prophets, and that the Euangelists thorowout the holy Gospell, set unto the doctrine and miracles of Christ, these words: And this was done, that it might be fulfilled,Matth. 21.4. which was spoken by the Prophets. Neverthelesse for their sakes that are not yet instructed, I will now declare the principall articles of our Lord Iesus Christ, out of the holy Prophets. As touching the true Godhead and manhood of our Lord Iesus Christ,The godhead and manhood of Christ▪ and that he should be borne at Bethlehem, in the land of Iewry, of a pure virgin and maid, out of the kinred of Da∣vid, the Prophets testifie after this manner. Esay in the seventh chapter saith; Behold,Esay 7.14. a virgin shall conceive and beare a sonne, and shall call his name Emanuel (that is to say, God with us.Mich. 5.2.) Mi∣cheas saith in the fifth chapter: Though thou Beth∣lehem Ephrata art too small to be reckoned among the principall cities of Iuda, yet out of thee shall there come one unto me, which shall be ruler in Israel, whose forth∣going is from everlasting.Esay 9.▪ In the ninth chapter of Esay it is written: Vnto us is a childe borne, and to us is given a sonne, upon whose shoulders the kingdome shall lie, and he shall be called after his owne name; even the wonderfull counsell-giver, the mighty one of Israel, the eternall father, the prince of peace, his king∣dome shall increase, and of his peace there shall be no end, and he shall reigne upon the seat of David his father. In the 23. of Hieremie it is written thus:Ierem. 23.5, 6. The righteous blossome. Behold, the time commeth (saith the Lord) that I will
raise up the righteous blossome of David: he shall be king and reigne, and prosper: iudgement and righteous∣nesse shall he execute upon earth. In his time shall Iuda be saved, and Israel shall dwell without feare: and this is the name wherewith he shall be named, even God our righteousnesse. Concerning the comming of Iohn the Baptist, which was the forerunner of our Lord Christ, and prepared the people for him, hath Malachy written in the third chapter after this manner:Mala. 3.1. Iohn Baptist. Behold, I will send my messenger, which shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom yee long for, shall shortly come to his temple, and the messenger of the covenant whom yee would have. Behold, he commeth, saith the Lord zabaoth. And afterward: Behold, I will send Helias the Prophet afore the comming of the great and fearefull day of the Lord.Mala. 4.5. Of Christs preaching, of the grace of God, of the forgiving of sinnes, of the wonders also and to∣kens of the Lord,Esay 61.1. The office of Christ. speaketh Esay in the 61. chapter, after this manner: The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, and therefore hath the Lord anointed me, to preach the Gospell to the meeke hearted hath he sent me, to heale the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captive, to open the prison to such as are in bonds, to proclaime the yeere of Gods gratious will, and to bring consolation to all them that are in heavinesse. In the 34.Ezech. 34. Christ is called David. chapter of Ezechiel it is written thus: Over my sheepe will I raise up one onely shepherd, which shall feed them, even David my servant, which shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. I the Lord also will be their God, and David shall be their Prince,
even I the Lord have spoken it. In the 35. chap. of Esay it is written thus: Say unto them that are of a feeble heart: Be strong and feare not, behold,The miracles of Christ. our God commeth to take vengeance, and to reward: God commeth him∣selfe, and will deliver you. Then shall the eies of the blinde be opened, &c. Then shall the lame man leape as an Hart, and the tongue of the dumbe shall give praise. Of the kingdome of Christ, in the which he him∣selfe alone is king, all the world being subject unto him, declaring his dominion and royall majestie, writeth Esay thus in the second chapter:Esay 2.2. And it shall come to passe in the last time, that the hill of the house of the Lord shall be exalted upon the height of mountaines above all little hils, and all nations shall come together unto him, the people shall goe to him and say: Come, let us goe up to the mount of the Lord, even to the house of the God of Iacob, that he may shew us his way, and we will walke in his paths. For the Law shall come forth from Sion, and the word of God from Hierusalem. In the 7. of Daniel it is written thus:Dan. 7.13. I saw a vision in the night, and behold there came one in the clouds of heaven like the sonne of man, which came to the old aged, and they brought him before his presence. And he gave him power, glory,The kingdome of Christ. and the king∣dome, and all people, nations and tongues must serve him: his power is an everlasting power, which shall not be taken from him, and his kingdome shall not pe∣rish. Esay saith in the 62. chapter: And the heathen shall see thy righteousnesse, and all kings thine honour,Esa. 62.2. and he shall call thee by a new name (O Sion) and the mouth of God shall give thee the name. And thou shalt be a crowne of glory in the hand of the Lord, ad
a royall crowne of the kingdome in the hand of thy God. And soone after it followeth:Esay 62.10. Make ready, make ready the way, gather up the stones out of the street, and hang out the banner unto the people: behold the Lord hath caused it to be proclaimed unto the end of the world. Tell the daughter Sion: behold the Saviour commeth, loe, his treasure and his reward bringeth he with him, and his deeds goe before him. And they that are redeemed of the Lord, shall be called the holy peo∣ple.Zach 9.9. Zacharie saith in the ninth chapter: Reioyce O daughter Sion, be glad O daughter Hierusalem: be∣hold thy king commeth unto thee, even the righteous and Saviour: meeke and simple is he, he rideth upon an asse, and upon a young colt of the shee asse. He shall preach peace unto the heathen, his kingdome also shall reach from the one sea to the other, and from the river unto the uttermost part of the earth. The death of Christ. Dan. 9.26.Of the death and passion of Christ speaketh Da∣niel in the ninth chapter after this manner: And after two and sixtie weekes shall Christ be slaine and put to death, and yet shall they have no true testimony, that he is guilty of death. Esay in the 50. chapter saith thus:Esay 50.5, &c. The Lord God opened mine eare, and I refused it not, neither went I backward: I gave my bodie to the smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers, and my face have I not turned from their shamefull intrea∣ting and spitting upon me. The Lord God also shall helpe me, therefore shall I not be confounded. And therefore have I hardned my face like a flint stone, and am sure that I shall not be confounded.Esay 53.2, &c. In the 53. chapter there is written of Christ after this manner: He shall have neither beauty nor fairenesse, we shall looke upon
him, but we shall have no desire unto him. He is despi∣sed and contemned of men, a man of trouble, and one that hath had experience of infirmitie. He is so despi∣sed, that we shall hide our faces from him, and have him in no estimation. And yet hath he borne our un∣perfectnesse, and felt our sorrowes. We also thought, that he should be wounded, smitten, and punished of God. But he was wounded for our sinnes, and slaine for our wickednesse sake. And the punishment where∣by we have peace, is laid upon him, and through his wounds are we made whole. All we have gone astray like sheepe, every one of us hath had respect unto his owne way, and the Lord hath laid all our sinnes upon him. Violence and wrong was done unto him, he hath beene evill intreated, and yet opened he not his mouth. He shall be lead as a beast to be slaine, and as a sheepe dumbe before the shearers, so shall he not open his mouth, &c. The whole chapter describeth all the cause of Christ so clearely, that holy Hierom said not in vaine: Esay is not only a Prophet, but also an Euangelist. Zacharie describeth the Priesthood and sacrifice of Christ, and testifieth,The sacrifice of Christ. that with the same only oblation he hath obtained grace for all sinne; and therefore seven (that is to say, all) eyes shall have respect unto him, and shall seeke peace and rest of their consciences in him, and shall finde it. Heare now O Iosue thou high Priest,Zacha. 3.8. thou and thy com∣panions, that sit before thee, seeing yee are men of ex∣amples. For loe, I will bring my servant, even the blossome. For behold the stone which I have laid be∣fore Iosue, will I bring, To the same only stone shall seven eyes looke. Behold, I will digge it up and dis∣close
it, saith the Lord Zabaoth, and the sinne of the earth will I take away in one day. And in that day shall every man call his neighbour under his vine and figge tree. The buriall and resurrection of Chrit. Matth. 12.40.The buriall and resurrection of our Lord Iesus Christ, hath the Prophet Ionas figured very excel∣lently. For thus saith our Lord Christ himselfe: Like as Ionas was three daies and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the sonne of man be three daies and three nights in the heart of the earth. The Ascension.Of the ascension of Iesus Christ and sending of the Holy Ghost, hath Ioel also written in the se∣cond chapter, and it is alleaged of S. Peter, Act. 2. Of the calling and gathering together the Heathen,The vocation of the Heathen. and of every thing pertaining to the holy Church, doth Esay write in the 49. chapter, and so forth to the end of his prophecie. 1 Pet. 1.9, &c.Thus hast thou, that the Prophets also in their time, did preach Iesus Christ, and pointed not the people to trust unto the works of the law and their owne deserving, but unto Christ, of whom they prophesied every thing that followed after. There∣fore did Peter speake right, 1 Pet. 1. saying: Ye shall receive the end of your faith, even the salvation of your soules.The Prophets sought salvation in Christ. After which salvation have the Prophets inquired and searched, which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, searching when or what time the spirit of Christ (which was in them) should signifie: which spirit testified before, the passions that should happen unto Christ, and the glory that should follow after. Vnto the which Prophets it was also de∣clared, that not unto themselves only, but unto us they
should minister the things, which are now shewed unto you, by them which have preached unto you the Gospell through the Holy Ghost, that was sent unto them from heaven, &c. In the which testimonie the holy Apo∣stle Peter had a speciall respect to the prophecie of Daniel; which did not only record the passion and glory of Christ, but also pointed to the time, in the which Christ should come. For like as God in grea∣test perils, dangers and alterations, hath alway re∣nued and more clearely expressed his promise con∣cerning the blessed seed: as in the time of Noe when the world was destroyed: in the time of Abraham, when God would prepare himselfe a new people: in the time of Moses, when God re∣ceived his people and caried them out of Egypt, to bring them into the land of Canaan: in the time of David, when all things stood so well, and it must needs be avoided, lest any man should thinke Da∣vid were the blessed seed: before the captivitie of Babylon also, and in the time of the Prophets, which (as it is said afore) preached and wrote, that no man should doubt in Gods promise, as who say they were given up and cast away, though the Temple were broken, the Citie burnt, and though the people (of whom Christ should be borne) were led into captivitie. Even so now also in the capti∣vitie, when the faithfull might almost have thought, that the promise of God concerning the Messias, were cleane gone, even then did God shew his ser∣vant Daniel a more cleare vision of Christ, after this manner: The people shall be let goe againe out of captivitie, and shall come home to Hierusalem,A prophesie told unto Daniel. build
the Temple and Citie againe, but with a sore time. And after that the Citie is builded, unto the time of Christ, shall be 62. weekes, that is, 483. yeeres. And even so was it from the third yeere of Darius Histaspes or Artaxerxes, in the which the Citie was builded, Nehemie 15. untill the 42. yeere of the Empire of Augustus, under whom Christ was borne, Luke 1. The Angell also gave Daniel farther information of Christ, how that his owne people should slay him, and finde no fault in him, and how that the sacrifice with the ceremonie should cease. And a strange people (saith he) shall come from farre, and make the Temple with the Citie an horrible abomina∣tion, yea they shall destroy and breake downe all toge∣ther. All which things were afterward fulfilled in the last weekes, that is, within 70. yeeres, or there∣about. For within 30. yeeres did the Lord grow to teach and to suffer. For when he was 30. yeere old, Iohn baptised him. Afterward within three yeeres was he put to death, and within 40. yeeres followed the destruction of Hierusalem by Titus and Vespasian.The number of the yeeres. All the time now and yeeres from the captivitie of Babylon to Christs birth are 616. yeeres. For the captivitie of Babylon endured 70. yeeres. In the first yeere of Cyrus were they deli∣vered, in the second yeere began they to build the Temple, and builded 46. yeeres, even untill the 6. yeere of Darius. In the 32. yeere of Darius was the Citie finished, which maketh 143. yeeres: Adde now hereto the 483. yeeres out of Daniel, and thou hast the foresaid summe even 626. yeeres. In the said yeeres had our holy faith sore con∣flicts,
and the seed of the Serpent pressed sore upon the seed of God, as the Babylonians at Babylon,Faith assailed and religion sup∣pressed. and the Persians, when the people of God was come home againe. Neverthelesse the truth had ever the victorie, and was the more clearely testi∣fied by Daniel, Haggeus, Zacharie, Esdras, Nehemias, and Malachy. Afterward were they specially op∣prest by the ungodly king Antiochus in the time of the Machabees.Antiochus. When as the times were ever the longer, the more full of perils and adversitie, untill Aulus Gabinus, Pompeius and Crassus, Captaines of Rome conquered the land, and the true old reli∣gion was utterly gone; in so much that out of the old serpent there arose in Israel all manner of sects and symonie, whom our Lord Iesus Christ with his comming in the world resisted, and called them the Serpents generation, as the holy Euangelists te∣stifie. Notwithstanding,God had eve some vertuous men. in the middest of such mis∣chiefes in Israel, there were also godly vertuous people, which sought God and his anointed (though the errour was great) Among whom no doubt was specially the Priest Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptist, Elizabeth his wife, and godly Si∣meon. When Zacharias had knowledge of the Lords comming, hee sayd with a joyfull heart: Praised be the Lord God of Israel,Zacharie. Luk. 1.68. for he hath visited and delivered his people, and set up the horne of salva∣tion in the house of David his servant, according as he had promised afore by the mouth of holy Prophets, &c. For his words are read. Luc. 1. Simeon when he saw the child Iesus in the Temple, and had taken him in his armes, he sayd:Simeon. Luk. 1.29. Now Lord let me dye in peace ac∣cording
to thy word. For mine eyes have seene thy Sa∣viour, whom thou hast prepared before the face of all people, that he might be a light to give light unto the Heathen, and the glorie of thy people Israel, Luke 1. Loe, thus the hearts of all righteous in the old Te∣stament from Adam unto Christ (even 3974 yeers) have stood onely upon Christ, in him was their comfort, upon him they trusted, it was hee whom they longed for, and in Christ Iesus were they sa∣ved. Therefore hath our Christian faith endured since the beginning of the world, and is, and con∣tinueth still the onely true, old, undoubted and fast grounded faith. CHAP. X. Of the time of the grace of Christ, and how that he himselfe testifieth, that the salvation of all the world standeth only in him. HItherto have I set forth the time of the promises, in the which God (through the promised seed our Lord Iesus Christ) comforted, cleansed, and preserved all his servants and deare friends. There have wee learned and seene, that the Christian faith, which hath endured since the beginning of the world, is the eldest, un∣doubted, right and true faith, which all holy Patri∣arks had, and in the which they served God, and pleased him, as Adam Seth, Enoch, and Noe: Item Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob: Likewise the excellent and highly endued Prophet, yea the Father and
foregoer of all Prophets, even great Moses his bro∣ther Aaron, the holy Priest Eleazar, and Phinees: The excellent Dukes and Iudges, Iosue, Gedeon, and other moe: Even so likewise the Kings, David, Ezechias, Iosaphat, and Iosias: The dearely belo∣ved of God, and excellent Prophets, Samuel, He∣lias, Isaias, Daniel, Zacharias, and all the other. This holy faith also had all righteous, and such as were of godly understanding in all the congregations of Israel from the beginning:All Gods elect were saved by Christ. In this were saved all they that from the beginning were preserved and ordained to salvation: wherefore, whatsoever they can alleage against this faith (whether it be concer∣ning holy men, old age, multitudes, learned men, generall Councels, Convocations of Parliaments, Fathers, Acts, Statutes, tokens and wonders:) it is all nothing worth, and is not to be reputed in comparison of our holy faith, as every one that hath understanding may see in this Treatise be∣fore. And though my purpose be now finished, even declared out of the Scripture, that the Chri∣stian faith hath endured since the beginning of the world, yet will I adde a short instruction concer∣ning the time of grace, and performing of all pro∣mises, and I will declare, that God now also through the appearing of his Sonne, would bring into the world and set forth none other religion, none other faith, neither any other salvation, than even the same which was shewed to the old Fa∣thers: saving that now all things are more evident, more clearely practised, accomplished, fulfilled and performed: for the which cause also all fi∣gures,
sacrifices and ceremonies doe cease. For in Christ is all perfection.The old Testament is not to be refused. Yet shall we not therefore cast away the old Testament (as some ignorant, unlearned and foolish people doe) but have it in greater reputation, for as much as wee know now through Christ, what every thing signifieth, and wherefore every thing was thus and thus ordained, used, and spoken: Now shall every man first have a courage to reade the Law and the Prophets, when he seeth whereupon every thing goeth. And thus also at the beginning did the holy Apostles preach Christ unto the Iewes, out of the Law and the Pro∣phets, as it is oftentimes mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. And our Lord himselfe, when hee went with the two Disciples toward Emaus,Luke 24.13. and preached so unto them, that their hearts burnt within them, he began at Moses, and went thorow all the Prophets, and opened unto them the old Scriptures, and shewed them, that so it behoved Christ to suffer, and to enter into his glory. This is the cause also that the Scriptures of the New Te∣stament hang altogether, and referre themselves to the Scriptures of the old Testament: so that these cannot be rightly understood without the other, no more than the glosse without the text. The text is the Law and the Prophets,The new Testament declareth the old. the exposition are the Euangelists and the Apostles. Now will wee see what the worke of grace of the new Testament is. The birth of Christ.In the two and fortieth yeere of the Empire of Augustus, after the beginning of the world 3974. yeeres, was Iesus Christ the blessed and promised seed, borne of the undefiled Virgin and Maid
Mary, at Bethleem in the Land of Jewrie. And though he as a very man was wrapped in cloathes, and laid in the crib, yet appeareth the Angell of the Lord in great clearenesse unto the Shepherds, and saith, Feare yee not, behold,Luke 2.10. I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall happen unto all people. For this day is borne unto you the Saviour, even Christ the Lord in the Citie of David.Tidings of Christs birth. The first newes and ti∣dings of the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, must the Angell bring and give, to the intent that it might be the more accepted of all the world. All the holy men from the beginning of the world, did hitherto long sore after the promised Seed. Therefore saith the Angell now, that he bringeth them tidings of great joy: no doubt to them that were gone, dead and past, to them also that now lived, and to them that were to come afterward. The joy is this, that Iesus Christ the Saviour is borne, even the promised Seed, which should save all the world from the power of the Devill, cleanse them from sinne, and deliver them from damnati∣on. Therefore saith the Angell moreover:Luke 2.10. Which shall happen unto all people. For unto Abraham it was said,Genes. 12.3. In thy seed shall all Nations of the earth be bles∣sed. The same (saith the Angell) is borne in the Citie of David, even out of Davids kindred, out of the which the Prophets testified that he should be borne; which Prophets also, for the same cause, cal∣led him David, and the blossome of David.The grace of God. And this is now the grace of God, that whereas wee poore sinners belonged unto death, and were in the Devils bonds, hee sent his Sonne to loose and
deliver us out of captivitie. This is the new Testa∣ment. For Hieremie also testifieth hereof, and saith, This is the Testament that I will make,Ierem. 31.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my people, I will be mercifull to their unrighteousnesse and sinnes, and will thinke upon them no more,Note well. Hier. 31. This full and perfect for∣givenesse is not therefore called the new Testa∣ment, as though there had beene no remission of sinnes among the old Fathers, but because the pro∣mise made long before unto the Fathers, is now confirmed and renewed: and the old figures that represented the same are abrogate.Chrst the only sal∣vaio of all the wrd. Thus the Lord Iesus alone is set forth for the only salvation of all the world, so that not only we, but all they which before or after his appearance or incarnation be∣leeved on him, were saved. And at the birth of Christ there commeth to the foresaid Angell, the whole heavenly hoste, which praised God, and said,Luke 2. Glory and praise be unto God in the height, and peace upon earth, to men a good will. And by this they teach us what the dutie, thankfulnesse, and know∣ledge of men is or ought to be in this behalfe, that God hath done so great good for man: Namely, how that they ought to praise God,The dutie of us. to have a sure trust in him, and to be friendly and loving one to another.1 Tim. 1.5. And the fulfilling of the Law, is love from a pure heart, out of a good conscience, and of an undissembled or unfained faith, 1 Tim. 1. In the fifteenth yeere of the Empire of Tiberius (from the beginning of the world 4004. yeeres) came the word of the Lord to Iohn,Iohn Baptist. the sonne of the Priest Zachary, in the wildernesse, and he went
and preached unto the people of Israel, amend∣ment of life, and forgivenesse of sinnes in Iesus Christ: To whom he bare record, that he was the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, very God and Man, the only and ever-living Saviour, which with the sacrifice of his own bodie, should cleanse the world from sinne; yea hee pointed unto him with his finger, and said, Behold,Iohn 1.29. this is the Lambe of God, that taketh away the sinne of the world: And so perfectly and wholly hangeth hee all salvation only on Christ Iesus, that he saith plainly,Iohn 1.26. Out of his fulnesse have all we received grace, &c. Ioh. 1. Item,1 Iohn 3.36. who so beleeveth in the Sonne of God, hath ever∣lasting life: who so beleeveth not in the Sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth upon him.Matth. 11.2. Therefore did he also send all his Disciples from him, and commanded them to cleave unto Christ. He maketh no mention at all of any ceremonies, figures or oblations, as necessarie points to salvati∣on, but preacheth Christ purely and clearely. This is manifest, Ioh. 1. and 3. Matth. 3. and Luk. 3. The Lord himselfe also came unto Iohn,Matth. 3.13. and was baptised▪ And when hee had received Bap∣tisme, the heaven opened, and the Holy Ghost ap∣peared in the forme of a Dove, and there was a voice heard from heaven, saying,Matth. 3.17. This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am pacified: to the intent that all the world should have witnesse of Christ the true Saviour, not only now by the Angels, and by Iohn the holiest man of all, but also from heaven, and of God himselfe: and that we might be the bolder to commit our selves wholly unto him. When hee
had received the testimonie, he went into the wil∣dernesse:Note this simili∣tude. And like as our disease began in Para∣dise by temptation; even so at the temptation in the wildernesse began the Lord our health: And like as the Father of us all did eat the forbidden meat;Matth. 4.1, 2. so did the Lord not eat the meat that hee might have eaten, but fasted fortie daies and for∣tie nights. Afterward came hee among the peo∣ple, and began to preach salvation, saying, The time is fulfilled,Matth. 4.17. and the kingdome of God is at hand; repent, and beleeve the Gospell. Herewith hath he healed all sores, driven out Devils, and raised up the dead, testifying so by his acts, that he is Lord of all things, and the true Saviour: And of them whom hee healeth, asketh he nothing: hee com∣mandeth them not to build him a Temple, nei∣ther to give him blocke or stocke: hee requi∣reth no bodily thing, but onely stedfast faith and confidence. And to them whom hee hath hea∣led, hee saith, Goe thy way, and sinne no more, take heed that a worse thing happen not unto thee. And herewithall doth hee teach,The substance of true religion. in what thing the substance of true Religion lieth, even in a right true faith, and in an innocent life, that in all our conversation wee keepe our selves from all filthinesse: Yea the thing that some man ta∣keth for Gods service, refuseth hee, as long bab∣ling prayers, vaine-glorious fasting, and like almes giving. Hee nothing regardeth mens traditions, diversities of sects, long garments, outward ap∣pearance, their cleansing, nor all their hypocri∣sie. He goeth into the Temple, overthroweth,
casteth downe, powreth out every thing that is to bee sold in the Temple: he driveth the buy∣ers and sellers out of the Temple with a whip. For the Temple was ordained for generall prayer, thanksgiving and preaching, and not for chop∣ping and changing, or other such like things. These three points doth hee teach vs diligently to observe: First,The speciall points of Christs doctrine. that wee obtaine remission of sinnes, true righteousnesse, and everlasting life, onely through him, and by his Passion and death, and else by none other meane. For hee is the onely Mediatour, Priest, Intercessour, Comfor∣ter, the onely Righteousnesse, Satisfaction, Ran∣some, Sanctifying, the onely perpetuall Sacri∣fice, the Suretie of grace and salvation. Speciall testimonies hereof hast thou Iohn 3.6.14. and 16. Secondly, that wee cannot serve and please God with exteriour sacrifices or any outward pompe▪ but with such workes as proceed of love, and mercie. And thirdly, that all the children of God are bound to keepe themselves from the workes of darknesse, and to apply them to live in righteousnesse, and in the light. And herein also is comprehended all godlinesse, that is, all right good Christian workes. So when hee had taught all righteousnesse,The patient suffe∣ring of Christ. and disclosed and overthrowen all hypocrisie in religi∣on, he offered up himselfe upon the crosse for the remission of all our sinnes. For willingly and pati∣ently put he himselfe into the hands of his enemies and of his betrayer, suffered himselfe to be taken, to be bound, to be led from one Iudge to another,
to be laughed to scorne, cried out upon, to be spit∣ted on, and at the last to be adjudged unto death, to be scourged, and to be crowned with a crowne of thorne. Hee himselfe bare his owne crosse to the place of execution, where hee was crucified, and hanged up betweene two murtherers. Then lived hee in great paine from the sixth houre untill the ninth.Iohn 29 30. Luke 13.46. At the last he cried; It is finished, Father, into thy hands commend I my spirit: thus offered he him∣selfe for our sinnes, and died,The fruit of Christs death. that wee might live. But soone after followed the things whereby the fruit of Christs passion might bee perceived. For the vaile, which in the Temple separated the ho∣ly from the most holy, did rent from the top to the bottome; whereby Christ testified, that now with his death, all ceremonies and figurative things were at an end, and no more of value: that the way to eternall salvation was opened: that all things significative in the Tabernacle, in sacrifices, rites, and observances, were now fulfilled and abrogate: that now the bare and onely crosse of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, is altogether unto the faithfull: that the heele of the Virgins seed is well trodden upon, and his flesh well rent and slaine: but that yet also in the meane season he hath trodden the serpent upon the head. Therefore did the dead also arise, and appeared vnto certaine at Hierusalem. For the death of Christ is our life. The earth quaked, the stones burst asunder. For the preaching of the death of the Sonne of God hath altered the whole world, and many hard stonie hearts are moved to repentance, faith and good works. But when the
side of the dead bodie of Christ was opened with the speare, and the rocke (as Zacharie saith) was digged up, there ran out water and bloud,Water and bloud. decla∣ring manifestly thereby, that unto us out of the death of Christ, followeth life and purifying. For water cleanseth, in the bloud is the life of man. And with the bloud of Christ is all bloud stanched, and now is Christs bloud only available, being sprink∣led through faith in our hearts.The time of Christs Passion. This oblation and passion of Christ (the ransome for the sinne of the whole world) was done in the 18. yeere of the Em∣pire of Tiberius, reckoning from the beginning of the world 4007. yeeres, the 25. day of March. So the whole bodie of Iesus was taken downe from the crosse, and honourably buried,The buriall of Christ. and on the third day after hee rose up againe: so that his soule came againe to the bodie, and his verie flesh was raised up from death, howbeit now no more mortall and passible, but glorified. For hee is the first in the resurrection of the dead. For like as by one man came death, so by one man must come the resurrect on of the dead. And like as in Adam wee all died in bodie and soule, so shall wee be all toge∣ther restored againe to life in Christ Iesus. This hope unto life, would the Lord print substantially in us with the resurrection. And therefore after his resurrection, hee continued fortie dayes with his Disciples, that hee might well instruct them of his resurrection, and that they should haue no doubt therein. So when he had shewed and declared un∣to them his verie resurrection divers wayes, and had performed al that the Father commanded him
to finish, hee ascended up unto heaven with bodie and soule from mount Olivet in the sight of his Disciples, and is set at the right hand of God, there to remaine corporally untill the last day, in the which hee shall come againe bodily, to judge the quicke and dead: And all such as have walked in faith, shall he take to him with bodie and soule in∣to heaven, like as hee himselfe is received into hea∣ven: And shall with bodie and soule condemne all them, that have walked in the way of the old serpent, and have no converted from unrighteous∣nesse to the righteousnesse in Christ. And thus shall salvation bee perfectly finished, and Gods children shall live eternally with God, through Ie∣sus Christ. To whom be praise for ever. Amen. CHAP. XI. That also the elect Apostles preached this old faith▪ and declared that all salva∣tion is onely in Christ. THus through Christ Iesus is all fulfilled, that the Prophets prophesied of him be∣fore,The power of Christ saveth all. thus to become the salvation of all faithfull beleevers, even the Lambe of God, which hath beene sacrificed since the beginning of the world; that is, this is he, whose power and delive∣rance hath cleansed all them that ever put their trust in God through the blessed seed. Herein now is the right true salvation, this is the summe of the right and perfect religion. Who so perverteth this,
from him shall God turne himselfe: who so addeth ought unto this, to him shall God adde his wrath∣full hand: who so taketh therefrō, his life shall God minish. But blessed are they, which walk in this sim∣plicitie & cleannesse, and continue so unto the end; even they that heare Gods word, and doe there∣after, whose onely hope is Iesus Christ. This only true and ever during salvation would hee to bee shewed and declared to all nations, which came to save all nations: but he would it should be decla∣red by the preaching of the holy Gospell, and through the ministration of the holy Sacraments: And therefore by his life time hee did chuse Apo∣stles, whom he received to bee witnesses of all his doctrine and miracles, informing them diligently, and held nothing backe from them. For hee saith unto them; Yee are my friends,Iohn 15.14, 15. if yee doe all that I command you, I will henceforth call you no more ser∣vants, for a servant woteth not what his Lord doth.Christ held nothing back from his A∣postles. But I have called you my friends, for all that I have heard of my Father, have I opened unto you, Ioh. 15. But for as much as they yet lacked understanding, and were forgetfull, and had ever strange imagina∣tions of the kingdome of Christ, therefore when hee now ascended unto heaven, hee charged them not to depart from Hierusalem, but to wait for the Holy Ghost: whom he also gave unto them upon the fiftieth day after his resurrection; that is, upon the tenth day after his ascension, even the fifteenth day of May:The Holy Ghost bough no new do∣ctrine. by the which Holy Ghost they be∣ing illuminate, spake with all manner of languages, and were mindfull of all that the Lord had com∣manded
them afore. For the Holy Ghost did not endue them with a new doctrine, but it that the Lord had taught them out of the Law and the Prophets, the same did hee bring to their remem∣brance, and illucidate all things, and printed them more clearly in their hearts. For so saith the Lord in the Gospell:Iohn 14.26. The Comforter, even the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remem∣brance, that I have said unto you. Therefore so long as the Lord was with them, and told them all the matter of his passion, they were sorrie, and could not beare away all that he said unto them. But af∣ter that he was taken up from the earth into heaven, he sent the Holy Ghost, even him, whom the Pro∣phets also had before, and that led them into all Christian veritie. So when they were endued with the Holy Ghost, they began (according to the Lords commande∣ment) to preach in all the world the foresaid matter of salvation purchased and obtained onely by Christ, and gotten by true faith. For hee had said; Goe your way into all the world,Marke 16.15. and preach the Gospell unto all creatures, Whoso beleeveth and is baptized, shall be saved, &c. And therewith comprehendeth he both the points, which the Apostles used and practised, even the preaching of the faith in Iesus Christ, and of the ministration of the Sacraments. And how the Apostles doctrine was, it is manifest out of the Acts of the Apostles. But shortly and in a summe, they preached amendment of life, and remission of sinnes through Iesus Christ: That is
to say, how that the whole generation of man lay in the dominion of the Devill, and in the bonds of sinne, cursed, and damned: but God had mercie on us all, and sent his Sonne into this world to die, and with his death to restore us unto life, and to wash us with his bloud, that whosoever beleeveth in him, should not perish, but have eternall life. All this declared they out of the Law and the Pro∣phets, and proved, that Iesus Christ whom they preached, is the blessed seed promised unto the fa∣thers. Whoso is desirous to have a perfect exam∣ple of this declaration, he findeth two Sermons of the famous Apostles Peter and Paul, the one in the Acts of the Apostles, the second chapter, vers. 14. the other in the 13. chapter, vers. 16. There doth the holy Apostle open the mysterie of our holy faith, verie excellently, declaring it from the time of Abraham unto David, and from him unto Iohn the Baptist. Thereupon sheweth he, how Christ suffe∣red, died, was buried, and rose againe from death. All this confirmeth hee with the Scriptures of the Prophets. At the last he concludeth the Sermon after this manner; Be it knowne unto you therefore,Acts 13.38. ye men and brethren, that through Iesus is preached un∣to to you forgivenesse of sinnes, and that by him all they that beleeve, are justified from all things, from the which yee could not bee justified by the Law of Moses. To this agreeth now also the sermon of Peter: Yea, all the Scriptures of the Apostles doe finally accord to the same effect: Hereout also bring they the doctrine of repentance and amendment of life, the rebuking of sinne, consolations, exhortations,
and drawing to all manner of good works, that fol∣low out of faith. The speciall Sacraments, which the Lord did chiefly institute, and command the Apostles to practise in the Church,Baptisme. are holy Baptisme and the blessed Supper of our Lord Iesus Christ. Con∣cerning the first,Matth. 28.18, 19. hee saith thus, To mee is given all power in heaven and in earth: therefore goe your way, and teach all people, and baptize them in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, and teach them to keepe all that I have commanded you. The other did hee institute at the last Supper.The Supper of the Lord. Matth. 26.26. For thus is it written in the holy Gospell: When they were eating hee tooke bread, and when hee had given thanks, he brake it, and gave them saying; Take, eat, this is my bodie, which shall be given for you: this doe in the remembrnce of mee. So tooke hee also the cup when hey had supt, and said; Drinke yee all out of this, this is my bloud of the new Testament, which shall be shed for the remission of sinnes. With such Sacra∣ments, through outward visible formes (for our infirmities sake) pleased it the Lord to shew and set before our eyes, his heavenly and invisible grace: not that we should continue still hanging in the visible thing, but that wee should lift up our mindes, and with a true beleefe to hold fast, to print sure in our mindes, to worship, and to enjoy the things that faith sheweth us by the outward Sacra∣ments. With these outward Sacraments also hath it pleased him to open, declare and shew unto us his grace and loving kindnesse: Namely, how that he giveth unto us himselfe and all his riches, clean∣seth
us, feedeth and moystureth our soules with his flesh and bloud, that he is at one with us, and wee with him, so that wee use and practise the Sacra∣ments with a true faith. For the outward enjoying of the Sacraments of it selfe alone, doth not recon∣cile us with God: but if they bee used with faith, then (as S. Peter saith, Acts 15.Acts 15.9.) through faith doth God purifie the hearts.The frut of the Sa∣craments. With the Sacraments plea∣sed it him, to leave behinde him a remembrance of his gifts and benefits, to the intent that wee should never forget them, but praise and thanke him ther∣fore. Moreover, with visible Sacraments was it his will to gather us together, and to marke us in his Church and people, and to put us in remem∣brance of our dutie, how we are one bodie toge∣ther, and ought to apply our selves to all righteous∣nsse: All which things are found at length in the Scriptures of the Apostles. As for the Apostles, they ministred the Sacra∣ments diligently, purely, and simply; and so (with∣out any addition) distributed them unto the peo∣ple of God. Touching Baptisme, there are many examples in the Acts of the Apostles. The Supper of Iesus Christ had the Corinthians somewhat alte∣red.1 Cor. 11.17. And when Paul pointed them againe to the true ordinance and right use, he taketh the simple words and institution of Iesus Christ without any more addition, and layeth those before them, com∣mandeth them to follow the same, and holdeth him therewith well content, 1 Cor. 11. And thus did the holy▪ Apostles gather together all the Hea∣then people, through the preaching of the Gospell,
and ministration of the Sacraments in the Church, whose head is Christ,Acts 15 28. The Apostles did not overcharge the people with Ceremo∣nies. Acts 2.1. in whom they are builded and preserved. Moreover, they did not load them sore with any ceremonies. For in the Acts of the Apostles the second chapter, where as a perfect shape of a right Christian Congregation is descri∣bed, wee have first the sending of the Apostles, among whom Peter did first preach the Gospell, that is to say, repentance and forgivenesse of sins in Christ Iesus. Then baptized hee them that were become the people of God. Afterward followeth it, that they which were become Christians, conti∣nued in the doctrine of the Apostles, in prayer, in breaking of the bread, & in the fellowship: Here are the right substantial points of the Christian Church sufficiently expressed: the doctrine of amendment of life, and remission of sinnes, Baptisme, the con∣tinuing and increasing in Christs doctrine, prayer, the holy Supper of the Lord, and the fellowship, that is, love, kindnesse, and workes of mercie. Acts 15.20.29.Now whereas Acts 15. it is ordained that the Heathen should eat no blood nor strangled, it en∣dured but for a time,The Apostles would not offend the weake. & their meaning was thereby to avoid offending of the weake. Otherwise have the Apostles everie where (especially Paul) verie earnestly exhorted men, to continue by the do∣ctrine that was shewed and delivered them, and to be at a point in themselves, to avoid such learning as was new and brought up by men, because they lead men farre from the truth, as we finde, Col. 2.6. Philip. 3.15. 1 Tim 4.6. and 6.2. and Tit. 1.9. And thus it is manifest, that the Apostles taught all
nations no new nor strange thing, but even the same that they had received of the Lord. CHAP. XII. A conclusion, that this faith is the right true old faith, which alway shall stand sure. THis holy undefiled faith which the Lord planted and set up in all nations by the Apostles, immediatly after the Apostles decease, was sore attempted by sundry uncleane persons, which brought up false customes and mis∣beleefes, and made perillous sects. Beside this also was it sore persecuted with the sword of tyrants. But in all such dangers the truth overcame and had the victory. For though the citizens of the devils citie (according to the disposition of their Pa∣triarke Cain) did murder, and although false Pro∣phets brought up evill counsell, yet the citie of God triumpheth, and the bloud of innocent Abel and his brethren speaketh yet. But after that the persecution was somewhat ceased, and the perse∣cutors sore and horribly punished for their bloud∣shedding (the heresies also being well brought downe by faithfull shepherds) in the same rest also was our holy faith not a little hurt. For rest put away feare, brought idle felicitie, voluptuousnesse, and fleshly seeking of riches and dominion: and so through covetousnesse and ambition,Note. The decay of Christs religion. there was powred great poyson into the Church, whereby
religion sore decaied. For while the Ministers of the word laboured more after riches, than to per∣forme their ofce and charge, and to edifie the Church, they were pleased with superstitiousnesse in stead of true religion. Of this then followed it farther, that the singlenesse of faith was forgotten, new lawes made, the old rites and customes either perverted, or else utterly overthrowne and abused: whereby men came farre from the doctrine and Christian ceremonies, from the way of truth into errour foolishly, and partly into ceremonies of idolatry.What inconveni∣ence followed. Hereof commeth it, that we have now the abomination of the Popes power, of Pardons, of Masses for the dead and quicke, of merits, power and intercession of Saints in heaven, of worship∣ping their bones upon earth, of Idols, and vaine ornaments, pompe and pride of the Church, of hired singing and praying in the Temple, and of the whole swarme of idle religions. All which things, with other moe like fondnesse, are nothing but new alterations, pervertings, and contrary to all old ordinances, having no ground in Gods word, and are cleane against God, though many hardnecked people are yet in a fury and brawle for such things, and will make all the world beleeve, that this their foolishnesse, alteration, and perver∣ting of Gods ordinance, is the old faith. And yet wote they, or will not know, that their babling hath very little ground, and that they (if they conside∣red the matter as it is) are very naked and miserable. And though this papisticall religion hath endu∣red, prevailed, and triumphed now certaine hun∣dred
yeares, yet hath God alway sent his faithfull servants, and had a little holy flocke of his owne, like as afore-time in the dayes of the iudges, of the Kings of Iuda and Israel, and in the captivity of Babylon, though it was almost at the worst afore, and at the comming of Christ.Note. Like as it is also with us, the nigher the second comming of Christ, the worse it is in the world. Neverthelesse (as I said afore) God alway set forth his word, and doth yet. Contrarywise, the Pope with his multitude,The Pope and Ma∣humet strive against Christ. and Mahumet with his (as it seemeth and becommeth very Antichrists) have hitherto undertaken to sup∣presse the old religion, and to set up his owne or∣dinance (unknowne to our fathers of old time) to bring it into possession, and under the name of God and his holy Church, to spread it upon all Christendome. For out of the acts and statutes of the Pope and his wanton spiritualty, and out of the lawes of Mahumet, it is manifest what the one hath taken in hand and done now more than 600. yeeres, and the other upon a 900. yeeres. It is evi∣dent yet also even now, whereto his generall coun∣cels and parlamenrs doe extend. But not regarding how he threatneth and faceth, and how he garni∣sheth his new and wanton religions with false (but dissembling) titles, boasting of many hundred yeeres, many generall Councels, Fathers, holy men, Doctors, Vniversities, Cloisters, singing, praying, fasting, almes-giving, displying, and telleth such like: All his bragging set aside,Let us doe as our odest fathers have done long bfore us. let us cast his reli∣gion from us, and take upon us unfainedly the true old religion, which hath endured since the begin∣ning
of the world, by the which all holy men have ever loved, worshipped and served God, and knew nothing utterly of the Popes religion. And if we must for this cause be hated and persecuted of the world, well, it hapned even so unto all holy Pro∣phets before us likewise, and specially unto Iesus Christ our Lord: which shall come shortly to judgement, and utterly destroy the kingdome of Antichrist, whom he now killeth with the spirit of his mouth. Our possession is not here upon earth, the kingdome of heaven is our native country: From thence looke we for the Saviour Iesus Christ our Lord,Philip. 3.20, 21. which shall raise up our mortall and mi∣serable body, that he may make it like his excellent and glorified body, according to the power, whereby he may subdue all things unto himselfe. To him be honour and praise for ever and ever. AMEN. FINIS.
