4293.2 99842782 7470
THE CONTINVATION OF THE ACTIONS, Passages, and Occurrences, both Politike and Polemicall, in the upper GERMANIE. HISTORICALLY BROVGHT downe, from the Period of the last Relation, till Aprill. Together With a various and intermixed Historie, of what hath been done in Turky, Italy, France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere. Faithfully collected out of good and creditable ori∣ginals and digested Methodically, by the Times, Places, and Actions. LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nathanael Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1637.
THE PRINCIPALL HEADS of the Things contained in this Historie. CHAP. I. 1 THe States of Sweden resolve to continue the Warre. p. 1 2 The Saxons preparation for Warre with the Swedes. p. 3 3 The Swedes counsell for managing the Warre. p. 3 4 The Fort of Mansfeld besieged. p. 4 5 Dehne sent to relieve it. p. 5 6 Three hundred Saxons slaine, and taken priso∣ners. The Siege raised, and the Fort relieved. p. 5 7 Two Imperiall Regiments defeated and routed by Banniere at Helmstat. p. 6 8 Banniere marcheth into Thuringen. p. 6 9 Banniere sends to Ertford, for reliefe for his Ar∣mie. The Magistrates answer. p. 8 10 The Swedish Armie removeth. p. 9 11 The Imperialists march towards Franconia. p. 10 12 Foure Imperiall Regiments defeated. Goetz his flight. Hatzfeldt plundereth the Countrey as he go∣eth. p. 11
13 Mellerstat and Newstat, in Franconia, taken by Stathanse. Paderborne and Wartzburg, in Westphalia, taken. p. 12 14 The Landgrave of Darmstat molested. p. 13 15 Elfeld taken and the Suburbs burned. p. 13 16 A Regiment of Crabats surprized, neere Wormbs, and their Colonell taken prisoner by Ram∣sey. p. 14 17 A Convoy of fortie Tunnes of Wine taken by be Hanawers. p. 15 18 A foure moneths Truce concluded betwixt Darmstat and Ramsey. p. 15 19 A new King of Romans elected. p. 16 20 The Elector of Tryers, and Land-grave of Cas∣sell disavow the election. p. 17 21 The manner and Ceremonies of the Election. p. 18 22 The Syndick of Cologne murthered at Regen∣spurgh. p. 20 23 The King of Romans Crowned. 21 24 The Queenes Coronation. 22 25 New Knights of the Empire made. 23 26 Strange Prodigies. 24 CHAP. II. 27 The death of the Emperour Ferdinand the se∣cond. p. 25 28 Ertford summoned. p. 27 29 Besieged by the Swedes. p. 29 30 Surrendred upon composition. p. 30 31 The Articles. p. 30 32 Foure Imperiall Regiments defeated by Stal∣ans. p. 31
33 Seven hundred of them slaine, and two Colonels taken prisoners. p. 32 34 Leipsick summoned. p. 32 35 The Governour resolved to defend it. p. 33 Colonell Dehne routed. 34 CHAP. III. 36 Torgaw taken by Banniere. p. 35 37 The Saxon Garrison taketh pay of the Swedes. p. 35 38 The Colonell Dehne beheaded. p. 36 39 A Troope of Swedish Horse surprised. p. 37 40 Leipsich victualled and fortified. p. 37 41 Leipsich againe summoned. p. 38 42 Besieged by the Swedes. p. 39 43 Holdeth out for the Elector of Saxony. p. 40 44 The defence made by the Garrison, and the offence done by the Swedes. p. 41 45 The siege raised. p. 43 46 Thanksgiving for the Cities deliverance. p. 44 47 The Imperiall Armie re-united and re-inforced, marcheth towards Misnia. p. 45 48 A Conflict betwixt Stalhanse, and the Imperia∣lists at Sala, wherein foure Imperiall Regiments were ruinated. p. 45 49 The Crabats under Isolani oppresse the Hassians. p. 46 50 Budiani raised, and his Regiment routed by the Land-grave William. p. 49 51 Eleven hundred Pollacks mutinying for pay, take service under Wrangle. p. 50 52 Truchses arrested, and sent to Vienna, p. 50
CHAP. IV. 53 The death of Bodislaus Duke of Pomerania. p. 51 54 The Swedish Regiment under Colonell Poye rou∣ted. p. 52 55 The Vauntguard of some Imperiall Troopes de∣feated upon the Mulda. p. 53 56 Two Caesarian Regiments surprised neere great Hahn. p. 53 57 The Fort of Hermestein necessitated. p. 54 58 The Landgrave attempteth to relieve it. p. 55 59 Ramsey relieveth it by a Stratageme. p. 55 60 Lemford taken by the Imperialists. p. 57 61 The Presidiaries of Minden and Osnabrugge de∣feated at Depshold. p. 58 62 Surprise Hagell, and put foure Companies of Cae∣sareans to the sword. p. 58 63 The miserable condition of the Dukedome of Sa∣xony. p. 58 64 Kustrin beleaguered by the Swedes. p. 59 65 The siege intermitted. p. 61 66 Berlin regained by the Marquesse Elector. p. 62 67 Brandenburg taken from the Swedes. p. 62 68 Drussen blocked up by the Swedes, and the siege relinquished. p. 62 69 Lantzberg surrendred to Wrangell. p. 63 70 Colonell Arnheim surprised by the Swedes and prisoner to Stetin. p. 63 71 Wrangell marcheth into Silesia. p. 63 72 A strange prodigie at Isenach. p. 64 73 Stralen burnt by the Swedes. p. 64 74 Two Imperiall Regiments defeated at Weurtzen by Colonell Slangh. p. 65
75 Two hundred Imperiall Horse defeated by Ban∣niere at Pegaw. p. 65 76 Three Regiments of Imperiall Horse routed by the Swede. p. 66 77 The head Watch of the Imperiall Armie forced to a confused flight. p. 66 78 The Emperours Funerall. p. 67 79 The Citizens of Liege complaine to the Pope against their Bishops. p. 68 80 The Count of Warfusee his treason at Leige. p. 69 81 Ruelle the Burger-master murthered. p. 71 82 The Abbot of Mousson and others strangely de∣livered. p. 73 83 The rage of the Cittizens, and the end of the Assassinates. p. 73 84 Warfusee his counterfeited Letters. p. 75 The Table of the Title of Historia Ʋaria. 1 The cause of the Turkes invading Transylva∣nia. p. 77 2 The King of France his order for provision for his Souldiers, and ease of his subjects. p. 80 3 John de Werths flight. p. 81 4 Three hundred Wallon Horse defeated, and sur∣prised by Gassion, neere Neuf-maison. p. 82 5 The Spanish and French preparations for war. p. 101 6 Crequy sent to the King of France, by the Duke of Savoye. p. 101
7 The French project discovered at Diettenhofen, and their Forces defeated. p. 102 8 The Duke of Rohan his goods arrested by the Gri∣sons. p. 103 9 Commeth to Capitulation. p. 103 10 The conditions agreed upon betwixt the Grisons and the Duke of Rohan. p. 104 11 Switz besieged and taken by the French. p. 104 12 Honorata recovered by the French▪ p. 105 13 Preparations for Warre by the Cardinall Infant, and the Ʋnited States. p. 105 14 A bloody fight betwixt a Partie of the Spanish and another of the States Souldiers. p. 106 15 The Statists get the victory. p. 106 16 The Prince of Orance his designe against Hulst prevented. p. 107 17 The Bassa in Morea rebelleth against the Turke. p. 107 18 The Vezier Bassa imployed lately against the Per∣sian, fleeth to the Sophie. p. 107
CHAP. I. The Historie of the Actions and Passages in the upper Germanie, since Novemb. 1636. Continued and brought downe to this present. THE Parliamentarie Councell of the Swedish States at Stockhohne, was not then dissolved, when the ti∣dings of their victorie at Witstock, were confirmed by two expresses, sent from the Generall Banniere to the Queene and Diet there as∣sembled. His Letters gave such life to their counsels, that they which formerly tottered in their opinions (feare of the Emperours and the united Princes Forces, and suspition of their owne weaknesse projecting many doubts of ill successe) tooke heart againe, and resolved to have the Warre continued in the Empire, but especially against the House of Au∣stria. The state of the German Protestant Princes,The States of Sweden resolve to continue the Warre. which had forsaken the Crowne of Sweden, and adhered to Caesar, rather moved pitie then anger; and the Rix-Chancellor, by the advice of the whole Senate, conclu∣ded it fitter, to treat with them first as friends, then to fight against them as enemies; hoping by arguments,
to perswade them to breake off their late alliance with Caesar, and renew the offensive and defensive League, which they had formerly made with the Crowne of Sweden. The Duke of Mecklenburg (who since the Treatie of Prague had laboured, though vainely, with the Lunenburger, to disclaime the Articles of Prague) was againe desired to treat with the Elector of Saxonie to the same effect; and he, according to his instructi∣ons, first putting the Elector in remembrance of the benefits he had received by the late King, of his slight forsaking the Confederacie, which he made to his de∣ceased Majestie; of the happie successe of the Crowne of Sweden, in the late battaile against him; and the danger he exposed himselfe and his subjects unto, by provoking his faithfull friends to enmitie; advised him to renew his alliance with the Swedes, promising on their parts, an Amnestie of what was past, and rea∣dinesse to complie with him in all mutuall offices of love. The Message was delivered bluntly, without much Courtship, and answered in the same accent; neither did the Duke expect a pleasing answer, neither could the Saxon (without shame, and note of incon∣stancie) fall off from Caesar, and give one: as hee found it, so hee returned it to the Generall Banniere, whose Commission was, to proceede with the Elector accordingly. Each unkinde office done by a friend, wounds true affection; but the iterating and reiterating of injuries, murthereth that amitie, which had its life from hu∣mane politie; and it is more easie to stop the streame of a quicke Current, then to restraine the irascible ap∣petite, if it be thus provoked to wrath, and armed (though but in opinion) with power to execute re∣venge. The Elector, who till hee had made his peace with his Imperiall Majestie, had made good use of the
Swedes, for protecting of his Countrey; having now attained his owne ends,The Saxons preparation for Warre with the Swedes. would faine be rid of them: and though his losse at Witstock had much weakened his power, yet himselfe raysed some fresh forces; im∣ployed all the Smiths and Carpenters in his Domini∣ons, to prepare a new Artillerie, and their Carriages; commanded his subjects to fortifie his Townes, against invasion by the Swedes; whilest the Imperiall succours (rallyed by Hatzfield, and supplyed with the Regi∣ments, under the command of the Field-Marshall Goetz) might come in, to their reliefe; either by stopping the Swedes, in their victorious March; or, if haply it might be, by an happie Victorie to drive them quite out of Germanie. The Swedes againe were become formidable to the Empire; and the feare of those strangers, strengthe∣ned the new band of alliance betwixt Caesar and the native Princes of that Territorie. The Imperiall Bands sent to the Saxon; under Marazim and Hatzfield, before the late Victorie, were but small, to what was now intended for them. The Colonels, Wartenburg-Wahil, and Flanz, were designed to continue the Warre in Hessen, whilest Goetz with the maine Body of the Army, was deputed to joyne with Hatzfield; and the Baron of Dona, Generall Major for the Elector of Saxonie, to make head against Banniere and Lesle; and the Duke of Lignitz, the Colonels, Truchses, and Knowbeldorfe, were appointed to raise forces in Silesia, and consigne them over to the Generalate of Count Mansfeld, to withstand Wrangell,The Swedes counsell for managing the Warre. who threatned to Winter in Silesia. The Swedish Generals not ignorant of these preparations, endeavoured first, with some part of their forces, to hinder these forces from mee∣ting; Lesle undertaking Goetz, in Westphalià; Ban∣niere, Hatzfield, about Fulda; Wrangell, the Imperia∣lists,
about the Oder; and then, with the other part, under the command of Stalhanse, to invade Misnia, the upper Saxonie, and the other Territories, which either then actually did, or might afterwards, con∣veniently accommodate or appertaine to the Elector of Saxonie. The meeting of the two Imperiall Generals, was of as much difficultie as consequence; neither of them, single, was able to stand before the Swedes; which fleshed with their late Conquest, carryed all before them; nor could they come together, without danger; the one being to make his way with the Sword to the other, through the Swedish Armies, and their forces yet every way inferiour to their adversaries. Hatz∣field, which by flight from Pomerland saved himselfe in Misnia, being pursued by Banniere, was constrained more Southward still; and had not (in probabilitie) beene able to have re-enforced his Armie at all, had not the Swedish Generall stayed a while by the way, in the Countie of Mansfeld, to subject it to the obe∣dience of his Armie, either by a willing submission, or necessitie. And yet, his stay there was not long; the timerous people being readie to submit, and the Townes generally comming in, save onely the strong Fort of Mansfeld:The Fort of Mansfeld be∣sieged. which (not yeelding to his first summons) the Garrison being confident, that their owne, and the Castles strength, was able to hold out, till they might haply be relieved; hee first block'd up, and then began to batter, though vainely; his desire to reach Hatzfield (as soone as might be) prompting him on, to depart thence with his maine Body, and to leave foure Regiments onely, before the Fort: which, though they performed as much as so small a number could, were forced to rise within few dayes, by Adolphus Dehne, the Saxon Colonell;
who knowing the weakenesse of the Campe, by or∣der from the Elector, marched thither-ward Novemb. 4.14. with seven Regiments of Horse and Foot,Dehne sent to relieve it. to relieve the necessitated Garrison. The Saxons march was discovered to the Campe the next day following; and the Armie (not yet intrenched) to avoid the danger of being compassed in, resolved to meet the Saxon upon the way, and to give him battell betwixt Cracow and Seburg, about twentie English miles from the Fort:Three hun∣dred Saxons slaine, and ta∣ken prisoners. The Swedish Armie fell upon the Saxons avantguard, consisting of three hundred Horse, envi∣roned them round about, put the greater part to the sword, and tooke the rest, both officers and common souldiers, prisoners. This beginning was of a faire aspect, and promised a better issue, then attended it: the undanted Saxon Commander (for this small defeat not dejecting his courage, but raising it to a higher pitch,) went on with his Battalia, and in a well ordered fight,The siege rai∣sed, and the Fort relieved. charged upon the Swedish Armie, which consisting meerely of Horse, without any Infanterie, being galled with the Muske∣tiers, was compelled to retire to Ascherleben, in the Bishopricke of Halberstat, where Bannieres Forces were lately inquartered for safety, leaving the Fort to be releeved by the Saxon Commander; and hee Novemb. 11.21. furnished it with fresh Men. Victu∣als, and Ammunition, according to the Electors di∣rection. Those accidents, which to the eye of reason, seeme fortunate; doe sometimes prove unhappy beyond ex∣pectation: The departure of the Swedish Generall from Mansfeld, gave liberty to the place, and plained the way for the Colonels present honour, yet the suc∣cesse in fine, was pernicious to the Saxons, being fa∣tall to the Commanders person, and of dangerous con∣sequence
to the Electors Territories. The Generall Banniere, mustering his Forces at Aschlerben and Eglen,Two Imperiall Regiments de∣feated and routed by Ban∣niere, at Helm∣stat. received avisoes of two Imperiall Regiments inquartered at Helmstat, not farre from thence, made up to them, defeated and routed them totally, and pursuing his conquest, marched with all speede into Thuringen, (where Hatzfield and the Saxon Armie appointed to meete,) to prevent their forming of a Reall Armie, which being conjoyned, might have some power to make head against him, and his speedy removall, made those Saxon Troupes, which the Ele∣ctor had raised for the safeguard of his Countrie, to leave the Elve, and repaire towards Sala, to the great affrightment of the Misnians, that Territorie, being by this meanes, destitute of defence, and open to the Swedish invading Armies. But the storme which threatned Misnia, was for a time turned to Thuringen. The Swede held it fitter as yet, to chase the Imperiall Armie under Hatzfield in open field, which must either flie before him, or fight desperatly, and upon disadvantage; then to sit downe before any fortified Townes; where a Winters Siedge might consume him, and continu∣ance there, give the Caesareans opportunity to re-en∣force their weake Armie. Notice was given him, that the Generall Gleene,Banniere mar∣cheth into Thu∣ringen. had received commandment from Caesar (then at Regenspurgh) to muster up the Imperiall Troopes, which then lay in the Dukedome of Wertemberg, and to carry them through Franconia, to the generall Rendezvous at North-ausen; that Goetz had made his way as farre as Osterode, in the Territory of Grubenhagen in Brunswick-land, to the same intent, though hee suffered much by Lesle, who stopped his journey, and slew some of his men in con∣tinuall skirmishes; that the Lantgraviate of Thuringen,
upon which (in regard of the late alliance, betwixt it and the Crowne of Sweden) hee tooke much compas∣sion, indured much violence, by reason of the Impe∣riall Army, which first exacted great contributions of the Imperiall Cities, North-ausen, and Mulhansen, and afterward pillaged them, though yet they were of the same party, and burned the villages as farre as to Ertford, and as well to preserve the Country from further spoile, as to prevent the Caesarians in their de∣signe of meeting, hee removed his Campe out of the Bishopricke of Halberstat, sending before him the Generall Major Stalhanse, with ten Regiments, and fol∣lowing himselfe with the grosse body of the Army. The presence of the Swedish Forces removed the Imperiall Generall from his quarter, but not out of that Country, his intention was, to abide about the River of Werra, where the Field-Marshall Goetz had order to meete him, and though pursued by the Swedes, flitted onely from place to place, fled not, being assured that Goetz, though danger threatned him in the prosecution of his designe, would leave no stone unmoved, that might hinder his journey towards him. His first sta∣tion was at Crewtzberg, a Towne appertaining to the Duke of Eisenack, where being reinforced, by some Saxon Regiments, hee fortified the passage, by which the Swedes must passe, if they marched after him, re∣solving not to stirre from thence, till his partner was arrived with his Forces to assist him. And now began the time of action, Lesle having much wasted Goetz his Army by sundry Skirmishes, still wayted upon him, expecting more opportunity to fight, the Imperiall Commander still marching warily, and not exposing his Army to any disadvantage; and now, like two pa∣rallell lines, which alwayes observing an equall distance, though neere each other, never meete, both made
their way towards Thuringen, to joyne with their se∣verall confederates. The Swedish Army in all, thirty thousand strong, Horse and Foot, joyned together Novemb. 5.15. in the Bayliwick of Ringleben, and the Towne of Gebe∣zen. Banniere having his head Quarter at Werninhau∣sen three English miles from Gebezen, and sixe from Ertford, and the Imperiall Army the ninth of the same month at Trefort, nothing having passed betwixt them memorable, save onely the defeature of some Imperiall Companies at Sommerda, a passage betwixt Gebezen, and Werninghausen, since the first day of the Swedes arrivall thither, and a little scuffling betwixt some parties of both the Armies, which met together in the Territorie of Eischfeld, Novemb. 8.18. being sent abroad by their Commanders for Forrage, and other Provisions. Banniere sends to Ertford, for reliefe for his Army.Banniere, in this time of his rest, sent a Trumpet to the Citty of Ertford, (which hitherto stood as a neutrall, and had flatly denyed the entertainement of the Saxon Garrison, though the Elector had few dayes before sent thither an agent to that purpose,) desiring food for his Army, and their best assistance for his expedi∣tion, according to the Capitulation of the deceased King his Master, and the Magistrate of that Citty in the yeere 1631. The Magistrate desirous to continue the neutrality,The Magi∣strats answer. and unwilling to provoke the Swede to doe the Citty any act of hostility, denyed neither, but ex∣cused himselfe for not complying to his desire in both requests, the last being expressely against the Treaty of Prague, which he said, was not accepted by the Citty, without consent of the Rix-Chancellour, who drew out the Swedish Garrison, which they had formerly en∣tertained, and the first such as might provoke the Cae∣sareans, with whom they had yet good termes and
correspondence, to be their professed enemies. Ne∣verthelesse, that the Generall might know, that their former alliance could not be forgotten, hee would give free ingresse and egresse for the Officers of his Armie into the Citie, for their refreshing: but against the common souldiers, whose rudenesse and multi∣tude might oppresse him, hee would keepe the Gates shut; not for any ill affection towards them, but the preservation of the estates of the Citizens. The Officers, for the present, were not displeased with his answer, but used the libertie granted them: but the enraged common souldiers, without the Ge∣nerals knowledge, pillaged the bordering Villages; till complaint being made by the Peasants to the Generall, he made a search, to finde out the Ring∣leaders in those disorders; and by a publike Pro∣clamation through the Armie, commanded his soul∣diers to doe no more detriment to the Territorie of Ertford: of which, he professed that he was as care∣full, as of the Duchie of Weymar, into which he had layd safe guards, for D. Bernhards sake; whose former service, and present faithfulnesse to the Crowne of Sweden, had deserved that and many farre greater favours. Novemb. 11.21. the Swedish Armie was ordered by the Generall, to meete at their common Rande∣vous, in the Bayliwike of Ringleben: the safe guards, which had beene layd abroad the Countrey,The Swedish Armie remo∣veth. being summoned the day before to returne to the grosse Body of the Armie at Hensleben, a Citie upon the River of Vnstrut, about seven English miles West∣ward from Gebezen: from whence, the Armie that day marched forward, toward the Imperiall Campel the Cavallarie, by the way of Langen-salsa; and
the Foot, by Tonna, towards Creutzburg, upon the River of Werra: The designe of the Comman∣der, being first to assault the then joyned Impe∣rialists, before any new accreut could be brought unto them; and afterward, to invade the Electors Territories. His directions were obeyed punctually; and what hee had advised discreetly, was put in execution as speedily; and his fortune still attending him, the counsell and action were seconded with a prospe∣rous issue. Guntrad, Field-Marshall to the Lant∣grave of Cassell, had much impeached Goetz in his march, before hee came to Trefurt, as well as Lesle, and for his part, slaine and taken prisoners eight hundred of his men: and now the Generals as well wanting men, as foode for those they had, knowing themselves unable to encounter the Swedes Brigades, being advertised by their Spyes of Ban∣nieres designe; marched speedily by the Abbyes of Fulda and Hirzfield, towards the Bishopricke of Wirtzburg,The Imperi∣alist, march towards Fran∣conia. and Franconia, to joyne with Gleene, be∣fore they would adventure to put their fortunes to the hazard of a Battell; being still followed by Banniere, who hasted to overtake them. It might have staggered the Swedes designe, could they have reached thither; but there fell out a Rub by the way: The Count of Eberstein, Lieutenant Generall to the Lantgrave William, lay then in Cassell: and hee hearing of the Imperials march, and the Swedes pursuit after them, seconded by the Governour in the Fort of Zigenheim; made all the haste hee could, to stop their journey; but the Vant-guard, under Hatzfeld, was passed, before hee could reach them: Onely the Rere-guard, commanded by
Goetz, was stayed by the Hessian Forces, neere Rotemburg, upon the River of Fulda: where,Foure Imperi∣al Regiments defeated. be∣ing compassed in behinde and before, by the Swedes and Hassians, foure of his Regiments were utterly defeated; three Peeces of Canon, thirteene En∣signes, three hundred Horse, and two hundred Pri∣soners, being taken by the Swedes and Hassians: all which were sent immediately to Cassell himselfe,Goetz his flight. and the other part of his Armie hardly escaping by flight, through the Countie of Waldeck, into West∣phalia. The Earle of Hatzfeldt having escaped this Brush, still made on towards Wirtzburg,Hatzfeldt plun∣dereth the Countrey, as he goeth. but not without plundering the Countrey-Villages of the Lantgra∣vate as hee went, (Bannieres stay, to take order with his Armie, giving him opportututie to doe violence to the unarmed Peasants) though not without en∣dangering the lives of many his friends, Prisoners at Zigenhaim, whom the enraged Governour once resolved, (and was hardly disswaded from that re∣solution) to deliver up into the hands of the Boores, that by the losse of their lives, by those (then fu∣riously mad, and mercilesse men) they might give them some satisfaction for their goods, and houses, which the Imperiall Generals so hostilely had con∣sumed. The separation of the Imperiall Armies, caused the Swedes also to divide theirs: and Stalhanse was ordered, with six thousand Horse, and some Regiments of Foot, to pursue Hatzfeldt into Franconia; Lesle, with foure thousand foot, and twelve hundred Has∣sian Horse, to follow Goetz: Banniere reserving the rest of his Armie, to prosecute his designes against the Electorate.
Stalhanse strucke the Franconians into such a ter∣rour, that like distracted men, distrustfull of preser∣ving their lives, and livelyhoods otherwise, they conveyed their goods into Wirtzburg, and some other fortified Townes, and retyred themselves into the Woods, leaving the Territorie to the mercie of the Invaders:Mellerflat and Newflat in Franconia taken by Stalhanse. who tooke and plundeted Mel∣lerstat, and Newstat; and had done more there, had they not beene restrained, by order from the Generall, from engaging himselfe too farre; and had not the care of the Bishop of Wirtzburg, arming some thou∣sands of men speedily, with the Garrisons of Swine∣furd, consisting of eight hundred, and that of Kizin∣guen, of five hundred men, made some head against them, Lesle, assisted with his Hassian Forces, not be∣ing able to reach Goetz, who shifted from place to place, declining any encounter with his Enemie, in respect of his much weakened Armie; that he might not returne to the Generall, without some tokens of his actions,Paderborne and Wartzburg in Westphalia ta∣ken. first assaulted Paderborne, and tooke it by Onslat: then summoned Wartzburg (a Towne of note still in Westphalia, though something eclipsed of her first splendour, as having beene the head of a Countie, stiled by that name, and now a Minor Citie, in the Diocesse of Paderborne, situate upon the Northerne Banke of Dimula) and tooke it in by composition; the Citizens prefering the safe∣guard of their persons, and families, before a little Money; and so purchasing their quiet, rather then hazarding all to the fortune of Warre. And now both these Commanders, being ruled by Com∣mission, returned to the grosse of the Armie, in Thuringen; giving leave to the Imperiall Gene∣rals to meete againe in Westphalia, and to re∣enforce
their Armies, with the Troupes belong∣ing to the Marquesse of Darmstat, the Generall Wahle, the Major Fehle, and the Count of War∣temburg: All which, wee must leave a little time in the Bishopricke of Cologne, and about Dortmund: doing more dammage to their friends, by lying still, and consuming the Victuals of the Countrey, then to their Enemies, by any Hostile action. The beginning of December was the time when the Swedish Commanders were repairing backe to∣wards Saxonie, and then began that horrid con∣fusion, which hapned upon the Elector and his Allyes, in his owne and Confederates adjacent Territories. The Lant-gravate belonging to George of Darmstat, was not onely threatned with a storme, as bad as a West-Indian Hericano, but a skirt of the cloud fell upon it; Giesen, where the Lantgrave himselfe was in person,The Lant-gra∣vate of Darm∣stat molested. for his better security having sent his wife and chil∣dren into East-Frizeland was menaced. The In∣habitants of Marpurg (the Metropolis of Hassia, and an University famoused by Hyperius the Di∣vine, Eohanus Hessus the Poet, and Johannes Oldendorpius the Civilian) both Students and, Op∣pidans, betooke themselves to flight; Smalkalden surprized and pillaged, the Cittie of Elfeld was ta∣ken by assault, and the Suburbs burnt downe to the ground,Elfeld taken and the Sub∣urbs burned. and this distresse caused the Lant-grave to write a dolefull Letter to the Elector of Saxo∣nie his father-in-law, desiring him to take com∣miseration of his Subjects, who was able to pitie him onely, but not for the present to releeve him.
But the mayne tempest fell not in that Pro∣vince, it steered more North-easterly, into Mis∣nia and Thuringen, where what spoyle it made, shall be related afterwards. The Lant-grave-George thus distressed by the Swedes, of the one side, and receiving divers by-blowes by the Garrison of Hanaw, at the same time hasted to treat with them of a Truce, and cessation of Armes for a time to be prescribed and agreed upon, fearing that if the Swedes should thrive, and come neerer the Wete∣raw, there would neither be time, nor place for any Compromitters to mediate betwixt him, and our Noble Countrie-man, (as wise in his dire∣ctions, as nimble and valiant in the executi∣on,) Ramsey Governour of the Militarie men there. A Regiment of Crabats sur∣prised neere Wormbs, and their Colonell taken prisoner by Ramsey.About the tenth of December, stilo vetere, some selected Troopes being drawne out of the Presidiarie Souldiers, to scoure the Countrie there∣about, passed the Rivers of Mayne, and the Rhine, and at Dirmsteim, a village neere Wormbs, lighted upon a Regiment of Crabats, and their Colonell Dishchlier with them. The Crabats see∣ing how they were surprized, prepared at once, (according to their custome, borrowed from the Parthians) both for fight and flight; but being surrounded by the Hanawers, and forced to their Tackling, they fought till the major part of them being slaine, the Colonell and the rest, submit∣ting themselves as prisoners of Warre, they were carryed thence to Hanaw, with five Cornets, store of money, and other good booty. One Prize prepareth the way for another; upon their returne homeward, intelligence was brought them, that
forty Tunnes of Wine were to be transported the next day from Franck-ford to Giessen,A Convoy for forty tunnes of Wine, taken by the Hana∣wer. for the use of the Lant-grave of Darmstat. The Comman∣der was made acquainted with the businesse, and hee instantly arming foure hundred men, sent out to attend the Convoy, which they met with∣all fortunately, before they had passed a quarter of the journey, and in a short conflict, having subdued the Waggoners which drove it, and Soul∣diers which guarded it, brought it home to the Garrison, with the Lieutenant which commanded it. This small losse incensed the Lant-grave a∣gainst the Frank-forders, (whom hee accused as conspiring with the Hanawers against him, though five of their men were slaine in seeking to pre∣serve the charge committed to their trust, pressing them to make it good, otherwise menacing to confiscate their goods which were in his Domi∣nions) but hastned the Treatie with Ramsey,A foure mo∣neths Truce concluded be∣twixt Darmstat and Ramsay. to prevent any further detriment, which he follow∣ed so closely, that by the fourth of the month en∣suing a Truce was concluded on, to indure till May, with conditions of free trade and com∣merce betwixt both parties, and that the Lant-grave should furnish the City with some thou∣sands Malders of Corne, at sixe Rixe-dollers the Malder, and if so much could not be obtained in the publike Markets, it should then be taken out of his private Granaries. And this conclusion was joyfully received of all parties: however the premises were displeasing, the Frank-forders, ho∣ping by this meanes to enjoy the benefit of those Musarum Nundinae, their Mart, the Hanawers a time of breathing, and the Lant-grave more
liberty to arme himselfe for the assistance of the Saxon and Imperialists his Confederates. The Electorall Diet convented and commenced at Regenspurgh the last Summer, went on all this hurly-burly notwithstanding; Many and severall dayes were appointed for the Election of a King of the Romanes,A new King of Romans elected. and at the last, the twelfth of December old stile, was resolved for the time, when without further delay the choyse should be. The Circumstances required by the Golden Bull of Charles the fourth were all observed, save onely in the time of consultation, the place of Election, and the persons of the Electors. The time of consultation prescribed was bounded formerly with 30. dayes, and if in that space the Electors could not agree, omnibus aliis detractis cibariis, praeter panem, & a∣quam, nihil aliud illis detur, The Electors were to be fed with bread, and water, and nothing else till their votes were given up; yet here had beene a consultation above foure moneths space. The Ele∣ction was confined to Frank-ford, and there to the Church of Saint Bartholomew, this was made at Ratisbone. The power of Election was given to three German Prelates, Mentz the Arch-chan∣cellour of Germanie, Cologne Arch-chancellour of Italy, Triers Arch-chancellour of France; and three temporall Princes; the Prince Palatine of the Rhine Arch-sewer, the Duke of Saxony Sword-bearer, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh High Chamberlane, these sixe being all to be summo∣ned by the Elector of Mentz, and not to lose their suffrages, unlesse by a will-full default of absence; yet here the Elector of Triers was ex∣pressely denyed admittance, and the Elector Pa∣latine
never called, but another thrust into his place, by the Title of the Elector of Bavaria;The Elector of Triers and Lant-grave of Cassell. to the just greevance of some German Princes, who questioned the Justice of this Election, and not without some ground protested against it, not in respect of the person elected by the Se∣nate, being reported an hopefull Prince, of a good nature, and promising condition, but the indirect meanes of that Election. But disputes were vaine, the Gowne-Law could not proove the Course illegall, and what-ever objection could be made to the contrary, the Electorall Col∣lege proceeded, according to their first determi∣nation. To this end the Magistrate of Ratisbone attended with the Burgesses and the Governour, the Colonell Nidrun, wayted upon by the men of Armes assembled in the Towne-house, and by an oath of Allegiance confirmed the assurance of their loyalty to the Electors. The Bull required a privacie, that the Electors might conferre toge∣ther freely, without interruption by the Embas∣sadors of Forraine Princes, or the Nobilitie of the Empire, by whose sollicitation in behalfe of their particular friends, their Consultation might be disturbed, and a worke of this high consequence be hindred. The same Evening therefore, dili∣gent search was made throughout the Citie for all strangers and such as had no dependance upon the Emperour or the Electors, that they might be warned to depart the Citty, and not to returne thither, till the King of Romans was chosen, and this inquisition was done so effectually, that the Spanish Embassadour, and his retinew retired the same night to Straubinguen, to abide there, till
hee might without offence to their proceedings returne to Ratisbone. The day following the Duke of Bavaria and his Lady, arrived at the City in great state, and the next day December 11.21. about nine in the morning, the Electors having before that fathomed each other, and designed the person privately whom they meant that day to proclaime publikely, repayred first to the State-house, the place appointed for their meeting, and thence marched magnificently towards the Ca∣thedrall Church, where they were to give in their suffrages. The processe of all was thus: the present Electors and the Deputies of them which were absent, having used the State-house as a Vestry for putting on their Electorall Robes, went thence to the Thumb (or Cathedrall Church) in this order. They were divided into three rankes, which in State observing an equall distance, each from other, were thus marshalled. First went the Electors of Ments and Cologne;The manner and Ceremo∣nies of the E∣lection. Mentz ha∣ving the right-hand File, and Cologne the left; The next to these were the King of Bohemia on the right-hand, and the Duke of Bavaria on the left, and last Frederick of Metsch, representing the Duke of Saxonie, who had on his left-hand the Count of Swartzemburg, as Deputie in the present Diet for the Marquesse of Brandenburg. Before them was carryed a Sword in its scabberd, but as soone as they came to the Cathedrall, the Sword-bearer retired, the Church doores were made fast, a Masse sung by the Elector of Co∣logne, and then, after some few other Ceremo∣nies, which lasted till about twelve of the clocke,
FERDINAND the Third, King of Hun∣garie, and Bohemia, eldest Sonne to Caesar, was proclaimed the Elected King of the Ro∣manes. These Ceremonies past, the Emperour adorned with his Imperiall Habite was brought in a chaire to the Church, and Te Deum being sung, inter∣mingled with many great thunderclaps from the great Ordnance and Musquets, the Electors tooke horse, twenty foure Trumpets and a Kettle-drum sounding before them, the Duke of Bavaria car∣rying the Ball of the Empire, Metsch and Swart∣zenburg the Scepter, and the Marshall Pappen∣heim, a naked Sword immediatly before Caesar, who followed in a Chaire of State, with the Im∣periall Crowne upon his head attended by the King of the Romanes, both of them being under a starry Canopy, guarded with the Elector of Mentz on the right hand, and the Elector of Cologne on the left, and so passed upon a Galle∣rie addressed for that purpose to the Emperours Pa∣lace, where they were entertained the next day with a sumptuous Feast, the Confectioners shew∣ing all their Art to set forth a Banquet, and his Imperiall Majestie desiring to expresse his grate∣full heart for their willingnesse to suffragate so unani∣mously for the Kings election. Nothing was then wanting, which could be expected at a dayes preparation, but the Corona∣tion of the new King, December 19.29 was with much more solemnity then his Election, and the Coronation of the Queene, though celebra∣ted more privately, was nothing inferiour to the Kings in glory. The time betwixt his Majesties
Election and Coronation, was spent in ordering of things required for such a day, and admini∣stration of Civill Justice. The dignitie of State required the first, the safety which by impunity of offenders must needs be endangered, prescri∣bed the other. The Royall Vestiments which from the time of Charle-Magne, were customa∣rily used at such Solemnities, were then at No∣remberg, and thither a Currier was dispached to the Magistrate and Governour for them, who upon sight of the Letters, attended with them per∣sonally to Regenspurgh. Thus this order was obser∣ved faithfully; but the designe for execution of Ju∣stice fell not out so happily; Vschius a Doctor of Lawes,The Syndick of Cologne mur∣dered at Re∣genspurgh. and Advocate for the Elector of Cologne, was murdered in his owne lodging by some malitios assassinates, who either sought his life, or treasure, of which though they were seized, yet fearing it seemes to be discovered, (Quinam hominum est, quem tu contentum videris uno Flagitio? One sin never comes unattended) they deprived him also of the other, and remaining still unknowne, the Magistrate propounded great rewards to them, or him that could reveale them, whether parties in the crime or not, and to the first a pardon for their trespasse, besides the pecuniary guerdon, upon condition onely, to descrie their, or his complices, but all was frivolous; the nigh-birds kept still close together, and all they which once had so farre exceeded the bounds of honesty, were resolved to continue in their course and not reveale the villany. Yet, though the course of Justice was thus impe∣dited, the Pompe of State went on: The prefixed
day, for setting the Crowne upon the Kings head, was observed; and then the King,The King of Romans crow∣ned. to shew his Mag∣nificence scattered some Medalls of Gold and Silver amongst the people, whereon his Armes, Name, the day and yeere of his Coronation, were engra∣ven. An Oxe roasted whole, larded with Partridges, and stuffed with a Calfe, and two Muttons, was ex∣posed to the spoyle of the common people: The great Conduit ranne White and Claret Wine. The Marshall of the Empire, having brought a great heape of Oates into the open street, carryed away a small Measure, and left the rest, not to be shared amongst the people by measure, but caught up and carryed away by as many as would and could catch it; tore the Cloth in pieces, with which the Bridge was covered that day, for the passage of Caesar, and the Grand States of the Empire, and distributed it amongst the common people. And thus the Mag∣nificent Ceremonies, for that day, were accom∣plished. The Queene as yet remained uncrowned: for hough the King and shee made but one Body, and it might be supposed, that in him shee had seisure of that Character of Royall Dignitie, yet her tem∣ples were to bee impaled also with a materiall Crowne, according to the custome of the Empire; and Decemb. 29. Jan. 7. was designed, for that Rituall transaction. Three dayes before, were spent in revelling; the Queene giving entertainment to the Empresse, the Duchesse of Bavaria, and the La∣dies of the Court, with Feasts, Musicke, Maskes, and what-ever else could be thought of, requisite for the Bien-venu of such great Personages. This time thus expired, the solemne day for the Queenes in∣auguration
was come: and then shee in State being brought into the Church, after a Masle chaunted by the Arch-Bishop of Mentz,The Queenes Coronation. was carried in a Chaire to the high Altar, close to the King her Husbands side, and had the Crowne put upon her head; which, though weightie, shee wore by the space of a quarter of an houre, and returned to his Impe∣riall Majesties Palace. It was a day of much joy to the Spaniards then at Ratisbone; and they, to expresse the content re∣ceived by this Solemnitie, made the Night aemulate the Day, shining as bright with Piles of artificiall Fires, raysed before their Doores, as the Sunne in his glory. But the Embassadour, as in dignitie of place alone, so in expence there, exceeded all the rest joyntly; the night did not terminate his acti∣ons. The next day, hee invited the new King and Queene, and the personages of qualitie in the Im∣periall Court, to his house, entertained them with a stately Banquet; during the which, tenne Hogges-heads of Wine being brought, one after another, into a great Bay-Window, were rapped, and let runne into a Cisterne below, for the use of the peo∣ple; who shared therein, and in many pieces of Gold and Silver, halfe Pistolets, Ryals of eight, and lesser Money, which hee scrambled amongst the people, to be divided by fortune, not his owne arbi∣trement. The former Magnificence, was in expence of Mo∣ney; but another sort followed it, by advancement of some persons of qualitie to some Titles of Ho∣nour. The Kings comming to the Crowne, was not in all points like the Sunnes appearing in the Ho∣rizon, to eclipse the glory of the Minor Starres,
and burie their splendour in his owne; his promo∣tion to the height of Majestie, was the exaltation of certaine Peeres to more Honour: Sixteene Noblemen were created Knights of the Empire; namely, the Lord Maximilian Williband,New Knights of the Empire made. Earle of Wollfseck; the Earle Adam Budiani; John Jacob, Earle of Zyll; Peter, Earle of Goetsen; John Anthony, Earle of Cratz; Henry Ernes∣kerpen, Earle of Toringe; Ladislaus Schechii; William Voight, Lord of Maxwein; John Ru∣dolph, and George Rudolph, of Haslang; the Baron William Dieterick, of Runen; John Ja∣cob, of Startzhausen; George, of Seibolsdorff; Stephen Esterhasi; John Philip Gunter; and Henry Christopher, of Flaus: The Duke of New∣burg attending upon the King, in the qualitie of a Cup-bearer; and the Prince of Anhalt perfor∣ming the Office of his Carver, during the time of feasting at this Solemnitie. THE Astrologians benigne Starre, Iupiter, seemed now to smile upon the Court at Ratisbone, with a sweet aspect, but Mars and Saturne reigned abroad; Prodigies terrifying the hearts of the peo∣ple, while the Princes and Peeres were in this jollitie; and Warre, with his grim atten∣dants, Famine, Pest, Feare, and Distraction, raging abroad in the Empire. What might happen, by the fault of a carelesse or unskil∣full
Mason, not well bedding or cementing the Stones,Strange Pro∣digies. at the building of a new Steeple at Vienna, was by the construction of the vulgar sort counted ominous: The Spire of S. Shotten, lately built, fell downe suddenly, about the time of the Coronation, and de∣molished the Church, and that was made portentous; the rather, being accompanied with another of the same time at Rome; where, a great blazing Starre, called by the Naturalists Cometa Crinitus, appeared for a space, and then vanished away sud∣denly, over S. Pauls Church, with a noyse; And diverse Monuments, placed in the Church, fell downe, and were defaced ut∣terly.
CHAPTER II. The death of the Emperour Ferdinand the second: with the siege and taking of Erford by the Swedes, and other things. IT would relish of over-much boldnesse to peepe into the Arke of the divine se∣crets, nor dare I, nor can I conclude any particular consequences to haue been portended by the accidentary fall of the Pyramis, yet doubtlesse the Comet though caused by the meeting of secondary and naturall causes, was the significator of what ensued about that time, and not long after. Within the space of a moneth a titular God of the world, and one that claimed a superi∣oritie aboue the rest (though all absolute and undependant Princes, which hold the Scepter by inheritance, not ele∣ction, may justly vie with him for eminency of place) Ferdinand the second, who had long been sickly at Re∣genspurgh, and then removed to Ʋienna,The death of the Emperor Ferdinand the second. gaue a testimonie of his mortalitie, by subscribing to the lawes of Nature, and exhaling his last spirit, Feb. 2/15. betwixt 8. and 9. of the clock in the morning, to the great griefe of the Court and City, which had prepared triumphs, and tournaments, and in much bravery determined to receiue the new King of Romanes, but by this occasion laid aside their gallantrie, put on the face and weeds of sorrow, and by their dejected lookes and mourning apparell, shewed their anxietie for his losse, who so long had steered the ship of State, to their
content, and was then taken from them when the tottering Empire, freshly assaulted and ransackt by strangers, requi∣red such a Nestor, as by sage directions, grounded upon mature deliberations might preserue it from feare of ut∣ter ruine. The same afternoone his bodie was embalmed, and two dayes after he was laid in the Antecamerâ, to the sight of all that came in: and Feb. 8/18. his corps was car∣ried into his own Chappell at the Palace, to be kept there till the King of Hungarie (who was then upon the Da∣nubie, returning with his Queene from Ratisbone by wa∣ter) was come thither to giue order and instructions for the manner of his interrment. About the same time, abroad, the Swedes growne eve∣ry where Masters of the field, began againe to take in Townes, giue Lawes to the Citizens, sweare the Ma∣gistrates to alleageance to the Crowne of Sweden, take Hostages for performance of Conditions, plunder the Countrey, where they enquartered, to furnish their Ar∣mies with necessaries, and force the Cities which stood in faire tearmes of agreement with Caesar, the Elector of Saxony, and the other Princes, which either sided with the Emperour, before the treatie of Prague, or came in to him thereupon, to renounce their alliance, and take in their Swedish Garrisons. Leslie the Feeldmarshall, being come back from West∣phalia, from pursuit of the Caesarean Generall Goetz, was come back to the Lantgravate of Hessē Cassell wher mee∣ting with the Swedish Generall, he received a new Com∣mission, to returne towards the Weser, to haue an eye upon the mperialists, and the League, Bannier supposing that bodie of an Armie which himselfe commanded, sufficient for performance of his own designes in the upper Saxo∣nie, there yet appearing no adverse Armie which was a∣ble to stand against him. Leslie conformed him to his Generalls Command, and Bannier without further stay marched with his forces towards Misnia. But Ertford, that goodly Citie of Thu∣ringen
againe presented it selfe to his fancy, as he was upon the way; somewhat he resolved to doe there, yet what or how he made a pause on; to leaue it behind him, he concluded to be no part of policie, the place being of great receit, and well fortified, both with a Moat, good walls, and the strong Castle of Ziriacksburg, and so, if once furnished by his enemies but with fifteene hundred presidiaries, might molest his Armie; to attempt it by force, or a long Siege, might waste his forces, and con∣sume much time: These doubts stumbled him, yet in fine he resolved to take it by a finenesse (if it might be) and if that way thrived not, to worke otherwise. And take it in the end he did, nor was the designe any remora to his further proceedings, being but a whet to sharpen the courage of his Souldiers, no stop or let to his pur∣poses. Decemb. ½ 1/1. Bannier tooke up his head-quarter at Deberstead, a village not farre from Ertford, and the same Evening, to lose no time, first presented part of his Forces in a small Battalia before the Fort of Ziriacks∣burg, and then rode in person to the gates of the Citie, demanding of the Governour,Ertford sum∣moned. whether he would declare himselfe a friend or enemy to the Crowne of Sweden? The former passage, and treatie before his pursuit of the confederate Imperiall Generalls, made him confident, that the Governour would answer his demand modestly, without any rude expression of hostilitie: and modestly he answered indeed, that he had no order from the Ma∣gistrate to declare himselfe an enemie, when the Swede catching the words from his mouth, before he could make an end, replyed mildly, Nor am I yours. The Governour intended to tell him, that he would conferre with the Ma∣gistrate, and follow the order which he should prescribe, but Bannier unwilling to admit any demurre in the busi∣nesse, stayed not to attend their conference, but instantly having before hand expressed himselfe by writing, called for a Trumpetter and sent him into the Citie with Let∣ters, requiring the Magistrate to send his Deputies to the
Campe, with whom he would parlee for the benefit and preservation of that Citie. The Magistrate regarding the safetie of the Citizens, and conceiving that the Swede would demand nothing but a supply of necessaries, as cloaths and victualls for his Armie; sent some of the gra∣ver Burghesses the next day to deale according to the di∣rections, which himselfe by advise of the Senate the night before had concluded on, and confined them to. Early in the morning the Swede roade about the Citie, viewed the fortificatio s, and before the Deputies came, was returned to his tent. Yet at last they came, were entertained kind∣ly, and with many protestations of his affection to their State, which he desired, that they would answer againe with a Remonstrance of the like loue to him, by renoun∣cing the treatie, and conclusions at Prague, by remaining constant to the Crowne of Sweden, as they had been for∣merly, by surrendring unto him the Fort of Ziriacksburg, and accepting of a Swedish Garrison; which conditions if they liked of, he promised to protect them, and would neither desire any supply of money, or other necessaries from the Citizens. The Burghesses perceived, that his Oration which at first was smoothed with oylie words, came off with a sharpe twang, that a bitter pill was tendered them, though covered with gold, and though they might haue answe∣red him without pausing, being instructed by their Com∣mission, yet desired leaue to goe backe to the Senate, promising faithfully to returne an answer the next mor∣ning. Their desire was granted by the Swede, and the pro∣mised answer was sent by a Trumpeter according to the set time by them; but not suiting to the demand, saue onely in flat deniall, the Citizens having resolved to stand upon their defence, and rather endure the inconve∣niences which attend a Siege, than subscribe to those pro∣positions. The Generall was the same day invited to dinner by Duke William of Wymar, and had appointed to meete
him, that their alliance might be renewed, and by a good correspondence, they might be assistant, each to other; and this occasion hindered the Swede from planting his battery against the Citie that day, conceiving that unlesse his eye was over the worke, it would not be done to the best ad∣vantage: onely for that present, he gaue order to some Troopes of Horse, to scoure the tetritorie about the Ri∣ver of Saal; which was done, and at night they returned to the Campe,Besieged by the Swedes. bringing with them some Saxon Officers prisoners. The next morning very early the Generall commanded his Canons to be planted upon an hill neere Daberstead, and then the Gunnes played their parts so well, that fiftie great shot in a small space were discharged against the Citie, and more were readie, but that a Fire∣ball cast into the Towne, having fired two Barnes, and a dwelling house, the Generall gaue order to giue off shoo∣ting, till he had againe felt the pulse of the Magistrate, by sending a Drumme unto the Citie, to wish the Inhabi∣tants to treate with him fairely, and not hasten their own ruine, promising that whatsoever was past notwithstan∣ding, he would use them with all lenitie, and lay no un∣supportable burdens upon them. The Senate gaue audi∣ence to the Messenger, and sent two selected men of qualitie, to conferre againe with the Generall, yet first re∣ceiving Hostages for the safetie of the Senators (Colo∣nell Goltz, and his Lievtenant) a cessation of Armes for twenty-foure houres was the first proposition made by the Agents for the Citie, and that obtained, they craved leaue to depart, shewing a contentednesse in their coun∣tenances, that they could so easily prevaile for what they desired with him, which not many houres before seemed an implacalbe Enemie. But the Campe made better use of this time of forbearing offensiue Armes, than the Ci∣tie did; defences were not prohibited, it was lawfull for either partie to doe any thing in that short time of truce, for their owne defence and safetie; though not to the de∣triment of the other: and Bannier used not his men as
Souldiers, but pioners, their weapons that day were mat∣tock and spade, and those proved as serviceable for his purpose, as the thundering Ordnance. The Briarean hands of the labouring men, not hindered by any adversa∣rie, made a quick dispatch of much worke; by the Eve∣ning, the approaches were brought to the very gates of the Citie, and the Castle-walls, and then both the Com∣mander of the Militarie men,Surrendred upon com∣polition. and the civill Magistrate, perceiving how the Swede had over-reached them by a finenesse, feared his force, and yeelded themselues and the place upon these ensuing Conditions. First, That the sort of Ziriacksburg should receiue for a Garrison,The Articles a hundred of the Swedish Souldiers, and a hun∣dred of the Citie, all to be commanded by a Swede, who should giue an oath of loyaltie, both to the Crowne of Sweden, and the Citie. Secondly, The Citie shall not be charged with enter∣tainment of any Souldiers, but its owne, and which shall be governed by a particular Commander, and both the Souldiers and their Chieftaine shall sweare as well to the Crowne of Sweden, as the Citie. Thirdly, The Keyes of the gates shall be kept by the Se∣nate. Fourthly, The Citizens shall abide true and faithfull to the Crowne of Sweden, till a firme and constant peace be setled in the Empire, &c. that the Citie at all times when necessitie requireth it, shall giue free passe and repasse to the Swedes, according to the occasion. Fiftly, The Citie shall pay the Souldiers in the Armie 36000. Rix-dollars, whereof 10000. shall be paid imme∣diately in readie money, and 16000. in wares, and the rest within the space of six weekes. Lastly, In this agreement shall be comprehended all the Nobilitie, Gentry, and Saxon Officers, which are fled to the Citie for refuge and protection, with their moveables, and other goods. These Articles were sealed on both sides Decemb. 16/26.
the gates of the Citie set open for the Swedes entry, the Castle delivered, and a Swedish Commander put into it. Gleen according to the order received from Caesar, was then upon his march towards Westphalia to unite his Wirtembergers to Goetz and Hatzfie dt; when Banner thus thrived in Thuringen. The depth of winter could not stay his journey, nor the cold of the season congeale the burning desire the Imperiall Commanders had generally, to inable themselues to meete and fight with the Swedish Armie: but succours came in slowly else-where, the Duke of Lunenburgh stood a while as a newter, nor de∣claring himselfe till the Spring approached: onely Gleen the most forward for the present, proved most unfortu∣nate. Foure compleate Regiments by the assistance of the Land-grave of Darmstad he had drawen together,4. Imperial Regiments defeated by Stalhaus. and knowing where the grosse of Banniers Army was, thought to finde a way from Franconia to Westphalia by Hessen-land, or if any stragling Swedes should happen by the way; able to encounter with them, and chase them, and so cleare the passage by his power. Some Swedish troopes appeared in Franconia upon the river of Sala, and they descrying the Caesarean Commander upon his march, re∣tyred as afraid of him, into the Forest of Thuringen. It is the condition of an ambitious man to thinke all others stand in awe of him, and he that concludeth of colours by a false glasse, apprehendeth things otherwise then they are; The Caesarean tooke their retirement, for a plaine flight, and thinking to over-reach and surprise them, spurred up after them; when suddenly himselfe was o∣vertaken being encountred by Stalhause, (whom till then they had nor discovered) unexpectedly. There were in that Army some men of qualitie, and of a spirit trans∣cending the condition they were then in; the Count of Furstemburg, the Colonels Princk, Mantenfell, and Ramsdorff, all daring men, and as able for service, as da∣ring, though now they were unhappily over-weighed. These great hearts saw the present danger, yet undaun∣ted
with it they rather armed for battel, then either to run or yeeld,700 of them slaine, and 2 Colonels ta∣ken prisoners and fight they did valiantly, but not fortunate∣ly, and the Wirtemberger Regiment encouraged by the example of their Leaders, followed on as resolutely, holding out almost to the last man. The horse onely play∣ed the jades, for the Cavalliers seeing the Swedes come on impetuously and finding themselues a little galled by the Swedish Musketiers, instead of fighting against them ranne unto them, leaving the foote to the mercie, or furie of their enemie, who slew 700. upon the place, tooke neere as many prisoners, and amongst the rest, the two last-na∣med Colonells, gained three peeces of Ordnance mar∣ked with the armes of Gleen, and pursued the rest al∣most to Wertzburg where Princk who had his horse slaine under him in the battell, and Gleen, and Furstem∣berg saved themselues with much difficultie. Bannier having ordered things at Ertford, marched thence with his Armie consisting of sixteene Regiments of horse, and two thousand foote Decemb. 21. old-stile, when taking up his head quarter at Eckersburg, and Schult-porten, he first summoned Naumburg, the first Ci∣tie in Misnia, on the west side of Sala, and the Com∣mander there refusing to come in upon his summons, hee planted a batterie, and without much expense of powder and shot, the Citizens carefull to preserue their owne e∣states, dissenting from the Praesidiarie Souldiers, he en∣tertained the Burgesses friendly, but forced the men of Armes to come in upon discretion; and the Saxon Lieu∣tenant Colonell which commanded there, the Major and two Captaines he detained as prisoners of warre, yet the common Souldiers, 150. in number, obtained their lives and liberties by taking service under him. Thence hee re∣moved his Campe towards Moersburg, an Episcopall Citie upon the same River, which submitting it selfe to the Swede upon the sighf of his Army,Leipsich sum∣moned. he conducted his forces immediately towards Leipsich, where finding two resolute Commanders the Earles of Transdorff, arming
themselues and fortifying the place against the furie of his ordnance, and danger by the granadoes, vessels of wa∣ter being placed in the streetes, the houses covered with wet skinnes, and nothing omitted which the case of a be∣sieged place required for its conservation. Ian. 1. old stile he summoned the Citie, and the Castle of Pleisemburg ad∣joyning to it, and receiving a joynt answer of refusall to surrender, from the brethren which commanded several∣ly in the Fort and Citie, he threatned to enforce it, yet for the present onely blocked it up, and before he had spent a shot against ir, or received one from it, marched thence with the other part of his Army towards Eulen∣burg, whither he had sent Stalhause before him,The Gover∣nour resolved to defend it. with the greater part of his Cavallarie to discover the power and posture of the Generall Major Dehne, whose purpose by intercepted letters directed to the Governour of Leip∣sich, being to bring 2000. men which he had then at Eu∣lenburg in foure Regiments for his assistance, was by this meanes prevented, and way made for the Swedes further conquests. The Saxon Commander had notice of the Swedes before hand, and halfe an houre before that Stal∣hause his Avantguard could reach to his late quarter, was risen and rode upon the spurre toward Torgaw, the care of that Citie being committed to his trust by the Elector, who himselfe being secure no where, went from Leip∣sich to Torgaw, upon the first report of the Swedes being at Ertfort, and thence to Dresden, every where as hee passed giving a great charge to the Commanders and Go∣vernours, and taking oathes of them, to stand to him faith∣fully, and not deliver up his townes, unlesse by necessitie into the hands of his enemies. Yet the fate of the Generall Major depending upon that dayes service, though he had gotten the advantage of way, and was upon the speed, could not preserue the Ci∣tie, nor his forces. Stalhause seeing him gone made after a-maine, and though he could nor overtake the Avant∣guard of the Saxons, wherein Dehne, and Wilsdorffe, his
aequall in militarie dignitie was, he overtooke the Reere conducted by the Colonell Shletonitz,Colonel De∣hne rowted. and after a small battell, wherein he had slaine 200. of his men, tooke the Colonell himselfe, and 200. others prisoners, deprived them of foure Standards and Ensignes, and pursued the Generall Major to the gates of the Citie, which though it held out that night, was surrendered the next day to the Generall Bannier, as soone as he appeared before it with his Army, the season favouring his attempt, glazing up the Elve, and exposing the Fort before the Bridge, and the Bridge too, to his obedience, upon conditions to spare the lives and liberties of the Praesidiarie Souldiers, both Commanders and ordinarie men, they againe condescen∣ding to depart without weapons, & to deliver the Swedes the Ensignes, and 32. Standards which were then in the Citie.
CHAPTER III. Torgaw taken from the Saxon, the Garrison turne to the Swedes, with the siege of Leip∣sich, and the abandoning of it againe by the Swedes, and other things. THis Conquest was of no small conse∣quence, the Saxons losse was greater in the conclusion,Torgaw taken by Bannier. then in the begin∣ning, and the Swedes advantage much more. Besides 1200. foote which were garrisond in the Citie, there were at the same present also 2500. men be∣longing to severall Regiments fled thither for their secu∣ritie, and these upon the surrender of the place, thinking to have had libertie to depart, with their Armes and bag∣gage, as being none of the Garrison, were upon their march in a fayre aequipage, with 12. Ensignes, & 5. peeces of Canon, which the Electour had saved from the Swedes at the battell of Witstocke. But upon them too the Swede seized, and giving libertie to the Commanders to be gone but not without a checke, and some reproaches for their perfidious dealing with the Crowne of Sweden (to which they had once sworne fealtie and sincere alliance) and surprisall of their baggage,The Saxon Garrison ta∣keth pay of the Swedes. he dismounted and disarmed the under-officers and common Souldiers, who percei∣ving their nakednesse of a sudden tendered him their ser∣vice,
and tooke pay under him, hoping of better wages from him, then they could expect from the Elector; Ban∣nier having lately taken from him the most part of his treasurie at Leichtenburg, and now enriched with a new bootie, valued at above one million, 16000. Rix-dollers whereof lately appertained to the Generall Major Deh∣ne. Some men haue got wealth by their losses, like Pompo∣nius Laetus in Sabellicus, who having his house pillaged, received double so much as he lost by the bountie of his friends. But the Saxon Generalls case was otherwise, with the Citie,The Colo∣nell Dehne beheaded. (to the Government whereof he was re∣commended by the Elector for his good service in relie∣ving the Fort of Mansfeldt) he lost his estate, and life, the Swedes having got his treasure, and the Elector soone after cutting off his head, for surrendring the Citie; and the Elector himselfe, with that particular place, lost more, Meissen, the chiefe Citie of Misnia, Eulemburg, Grim, Borne, Debitz, Bitterfeldt, Belgeren, and Hall, yeelding instantly to the Conquerour, having no hope of reliefe by any confederate Armie; Onely Dresden of all the umbi∣licall Cities of Saxonie held out still, yet not without feare of being made the spoyle of strangers, the Imperi∣all Armies, being so farre from their succours, that their march and places of rest, were unknowne to the Citi∣zens. But the losse of Torgaw, was no small meanes for the libertie and deliverance of Leipsich; the vigilant Com∣mander there, slipt no opportunitie, which presented it selfe unto him, and perceiving the Swedish Armie, both horse and foote discamping Ian. 4. old stile, and upon their march towards Torgaw, the same night sent forth three hundred Musketiers and two hundred horse, to search for the stragling Swedes, which were lurking about the Villages neere Eulenburg, and were not gone with the maine body of the Armie. The Saxon Souldiers went on with as little noyse as might be, and covering the de∣signe
with the darknesse of the night, fell unexpectedly upon a small Troope of Swedish horse,A Troope of Swedish horse surprized. which had taken up their nights lodging in one of the Villages, and surpri∣zed them. The Swedish Ritmaster, whose courage sur∣mounted his present power, began to make some resi∣stance, yet opprest with a farre superiour number of Sax∣ons, and dangerously wounded, was forced to yeeld, and himselfe and the most part of that Cavallary, some few onely saving themselues by flight with a Preacher to the Swedish Armie, were made prisoners, and carried to Leipsich. This prosperous designe, gaue the Souldiers and Inha∣bitants a small assurance of speedie deliverance; some concluded, that the Swedes had received notice of the Im∣periall succours, which the Leipzickers expected daily; others, that Mansfeild with his Silesian Armie, had in∣vaded the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and was too strong for Wrangell, to whose care that Province was left, and that Bannier was enforced to march backe againe to re∣lieue him; others, (it is common with men to beleeue what they desire) that Bannier and his Armies discamping,Leipsich victu∣aled and for∣tified. was rather a flight for their owne preservation, than a warlike March for further execution, and with confidence fed with ayerie hopes, proclaimed their owne deliverie. But the provident, and valiant Commander, fore-casted what might ensue, and as one not fearing any present danger, opened the Grimmer, or South gate, yet as not secure, kept the rest locked up, and knowing, that besides offen∣siue and defensiue Armes, Victualls, and other provisions necessarie for life, were required to hold out a Siege, in the absence of the Swedes, which continued the space of seaven dayes, sent into the Countrey, for Cattell, Corne, Hay, Oats, and Wood, which he bestowed in the Zim∣mer house, and Baarfuper Church, (necessitie causing him to turne that consecrated ground to a prophane use) as in two Magasines: armed two thousand lustie young Pren∣tices,
and Journeymen, to serue as Souldiers, strengthe∣ned the fortifications, and omitted nothing which might seeme needfull to preserue the Citie, suspecting the re∣turne of the Swedish Forces thither. His conjecture was not misplaced, Ian. 12. old stile, the avantguard of the Swedes was discovered upon Gods∣aker, early in the morning, and were saluted with some Volleyes of Canon-shot, from the Fort of Pleissenburg, and Saint Peters Bulwarke, yet without any offence done, (the Ordnance not answerable to the Commanders de∣sire,Leipsich again summoned. could not reach them) the whole Hoast, designed for that service, with their Waggons and baggage were descryed, comming over Schoenfeldt, under their Gene∣rall the Earle of Brandesteine. The Swedes observed the methode of a faire Enemie, sending word first by a Trum∣peter to the Citie of their purpose, intending to pre∣pare for the blow, if the answer did not suite with their demand: The instructions given the Messenger, were in round and peremptorie words, to tell the Commander, that his Generall desired to know, whether he would surrender the Citie upon a faire Composition, or see it become a pillar of fire, and smoke; and though delive∣red rudely, was answered as roundly: the Commander replying, that he could not, nor would complie himselfe to his desire; and that, whatsoever the Swede had promi∣sed to himselfe, it was not in his owne abilitie to per∣forme; but must be referred to the fortune of warre. Words were bootlesse, the Swede prepared presently for the Siege, and the next morning was strongly entren∣ched before the Grimmer gate, upon the stone way, and planted himselfe in the New, and Back streets, and other houses neare the Citie. And the Earle of Transdorff, a∣gaine, neglected not to make his defences, armed the Col∣ledges, which were neare the wall, namely, Saint Pauls Colledge, the Great, and New Colledges, and St Thomas his Schoole, with Souldiers and Artillerie, making a vaca∣tion
for the Students, by converting those Nurseries of pietie, and policie, into Blockhouses, Bulwarkes, and Cit∣tadels, replenished with militarie men, and instruments of war; the present adversary being not to be repelled with scientificall demonstrations, or probable arguments out of Topicks, but with fire and sword, shot and powder, from the throats of the roaring Ordnance. Besieged by the Swedes.Now the confusion which attends upon warre, began to appeare attired in her proper dresse; houses flaming and set on fire, not by the enemie, but their proper ow∣ners, that they might be no shelter for the adversaries. Churches, Altars, and the dwelling places of the Muses battered by the Canon, endangered by the fire Morterers, and Granadoes; the Ports boared on the one side with shot from the Campe; and stuffed againe with wood and dung by the defendants, to keepe their owne people from going forth, and excluding their foes; Sallies made out desperately, Mines wrought with difficultie, and where force avayled not, for the assaylants; threats and fiery menacing Letters sent to the defendants, and by them answered as spightfully. It is almost beyond be∣liefe, that in so small a space, as this Siege endured, which was but from the twelfth of Ianuary till the se∣venth of February, such, and so many things should be done. But thus I finde them set downe in a Journall by one which was engaged in the action, and therefore to be credited. Ianuary 13. Old stile, from about eight in the morning till nine at night, the Swedes played upon the Citie, with their Canon, fire-workes, and Granadoes; and the Gar∣rison upon the Campe, with their great Ordnance, duble∣haukes, and Muskets, yet without much detriment to ei∣ther side, the Commander within, having well provided to prevent the mischiefe, which might be done by the Granadoes, and the Swedes without, being so strongly earthed, that they could not easily receiue damage.
Holdeth out for the Ele∣ctour of Sax∣onie.They who stayed in their trenches, were secure, but some few others which ranged abroad, to please their genius, became the spoyle of the Garrison, which sally∣ing out in the Evening, found eight men of the Armie in an house without the Rhanish gate, which had former∣ly beene a Taverne, and put them all to the sword. Thus that day was spent in thunder, which was not a∣gaine so violent, till about seaven dayes following, the Souldiers on both sides in the meane time, being employ∣ed rather to strengthen their defences, than otherwise. The Commander within, first gaue order, that from that day, till the Siege was done, no clock should strike, no bell be tolld, thereby teaching the people, that the busi∣nesse of the time was such, as required all their hands, men, women, and children, and would not giue leaue to listen after what's a clock? And the next day having re∣ceived Letters from the Elector, to doe his endeavour for preservation of the place faithfully, and to perswade the Inhabitants to constancy, imployed as many as were ser∣viceable in raising of Pallisadoes, stuffing of packs with wooll, and bringing them into the severall streets neare the wall, to be in a readinesse, to fill up such breaches as might be made in the wall; and the Generall without, imployed his Souldiers, in raysing of batteries, digging of Mines about the Grimmer-gate, and other fortificati∣ons, not omitting sometimes to send a Salute by shot to the Citie, and seldome fayling of an answer: yet the adventure of some of the Garrison, Ian. 18/28. is worth a re∣membrance, for seeing the Swedes intended to make use of a Glasse-makers house for a battery, they sallyed forth, and after a sharpe Skirmish, which endured the space of an houre, burned the house to the ground, and returned to the Citie; and the day following, perceiving the Swedes to begin to plant many Canon-baskets, upon the foundation of the same house, which was of stone, and so escaped the fire; cut off the Damme betwixt the
Pleissenburg, and the Towne Moat, without Saint Thomas gate, and by that meanes drowned the foun∣dation under water, and prevented the designe. The defence made by the Garrison, and the offence done by the Swedes.But the 20/30. of that moneth, and from thence for∣wards to the time of the Swedes rising, were each remarkeable dayes. A great peece of Ordnance cal∣led the Lazie maid, and three Morterers placed on the Grimmer gate by the Garrison, were then im∣ployed against the Campe, without any more inter∣mission, than was necessary to coole them, and make them serviceable againe. Sallies were made daily by the praesidiarie Souldiers, and to keepe the Swedes from the Castle, fired the Suburbs without St. Pe∣ters gate, and the Water-arch, as farre as to the Sand-streete, thinking it better to demolish those ragged buildings, which in time of peace had beene of some use, for the meaner sort of people, no orna∣ment to the Citie, than to haue them imployed by the Swedes, for execution of their hostile purposes. The Swedes, againe imployed all their diligence to bring the Citie to obedience, battered and boared the Grimmer-gate with three Demi-Canons, and other great Pieces, slung massie stones into the Citie, by helpe of the Morterers, threw in fire bals and gra∣nadoes, and Ian. 22. Old stile, sent a Drumme againe to require the Governour to surrender, threatning that if it was taken by assault, no person of what con∣dition or sex so ever, should finde mercy; and recei∣ving a scornefull answer by the Commander, who had received new Letters from the Electour, with a promise of the Imperiall succours, very speedily be∣tooke themselues againe to their tackling, blew up a Mine neere the Grimmer-gate, and having dressed themselues with plaited strawe about their hats and armes, the same cognisance by which they were di∣stinguished from the Saxons in their day neere Wit∣stocke,
(thinking thereby to dishearten the defen∣dants) stood in battellaray, as if they intended a pre∣sent assault. A threatning countenance may daunt a Coward, and the representing of those Instruments to a dege∣nerous spirit▪ which haue beene formidable unto him formerly, may strike him into an amazement, though there be no cause for it: They were but the Corin∣thian slaues, which having beate their Masters with Martiall weapons, yeelded upon sight of the whip, the Commander was of another mould, and answe∣red them in their owne tearmes, from the mouthes of the tall and Lazie Maids, two great Gunnes, and smaller Pieces, and that so inraged the Swedes (who by this were supplyed with some thousands of fresh men, from the Campe neere Torgaw, and twelue new Pieces from Ertford) that to worke they fall againe, as not meaning to parlee any more, and followed the designe so hard till the beginning of Februarie, that (although they could not conquer the Citie, they did much deface, and ruine it, the wind-mill streete being burned to the earth, some Churches, especially that of Saint Nicholas, and that of St. Paul (the first having his roofe broke downe, and the other the Steeple battered with the Canon, and falling upon the roofe, utterly demolishing it, to the greaterrour of the people, who were more rerrified by another shot from a Demi-canon, which smote the Altar, the Organs, and carried away one moytie of the Apostles Statues) and the Colledges being much ruined by the violence of those stormes, attended with artificiall thunder. A smart resistance was made by the defendants, which sometimes visited the Swedes in their trenches, yet that had ocene truitlesse, had not the succours come in maturely; but thei estate being growne
almost desperate, newes was brought to them, and the Campe, of the comming of the Imperiall Ar∣mie. The Campe was lesse disheartened by the re∣port, than the Citie incouraged, and to make it ap∣peare, that they played not in jest, but earnest, resol∣ved to attempt some-thing againe, before the Im∣periall Hoast could march unto them. To this end, February the sixt Old stile being Saint Dorotheas day, they played afresh upon the Citie, with foure Demi-canons, eight great field Pieces, and some lesser Gunnes, and in the space of fiue houres, by force of the Ordnance, which had vomi∣ted three hundred thirtie and fiue times upon the wall, and vertue of their Mines, made two breaches, one upon the East, another upon the West▪side of the Grimmer-gate, (like Sampson in the sacred Storie▪ doing the Saxons more mischiefe at the last conclusi∣on, than in the whole time of their continuance there) and stood in Battalia againe, as if they meant to assault it. The Commander, a man never enough to be pray∣sed for his undaunted courage, (vertue where ever it is found is amiable) drew out foure Companies of selected foote, armed them with short Pikes, two-handed-swords, Morning starres, (a deadly wea∣pon where it falls) and Musquets, and marched him∣selfe in the head of them to the breach, to encounter the Swedes, if they adventured to enter by those breaches forcibly; It was done carefully, but need∣lesly; an expresse was brought to the Campe, that the untied Forces under Hatzfield, and Goetz, were within a dayes march, and the Swedes thought it fit∣ter to retire with their unbroken Forces safely, than to expose them to a double hazard,The Siege raysed. and goe on de∣sperately: and February the sixt, Old stile, betwixt seaven and eight at night, while the Morterers cast
great stones and Granadoes into the Citie, and the Garrison was busie to prevent the mischiefe which might ensue thereby, the Canons were drawne from the batteries, the Armie began to march and the Swe∣dish Generall tooke up his head Quarter at Stote∣ritz. For the space of almost six weekes, since the first summons, Ian. the first, New stile, the Citie was thus troubled with an uncouth Feaver, neither alwayes intermittent, nor continuall; but the seaventh of Fe∣bruarie the malice of the disease appeared to be a∣bated, though some grudgings thereof, like the af∣ter-drops of a violent shower, were still remaining. The Arriere of the Swedes, that day set the Superin∣tendents Gaden-house on fire; and the day ensuing, the Villages neighbouring unto it, inferious mini∣string members to that more worthy body, were sa∣crificed to Ʋulcan; fifteene severall Hamlets were seene from Leipsich, flaming at once, and at Grolz∣schoker, a Dorpe exceeding any of the other in great∣nesse, the fire appeared biggest. The ninth day brought with it an happie crisis, the fag end of the Swedes, was not to be discovered, the Auantguard of the Imperiall succours appeared to the view of the almost distracted Citizens; the clocks were permitted againe to giue notice of the houre, the Bells were rung to congregate the people to di∣vine service; and the tenth day, the Rhanish gate be∣ing opened, the Countrey people and Souldiers brought in greatstore of wood, straw, and hay, into the Citie: in fine, upon the twelth day was a so∣lemne assembly,Thankesgi∣ving for the Cities deli∣verance. and the people were summoned to∣gether, in all the Parishes, to render thankes to him, who had watched over the Citie, for its preservation and deliverance, and to joyne in prayers, for a firme, honourable, and generall peace.
Hazardous adventures are not surpassed vithout dif∣ficultie; yet industrie and diligence perfecteth any Her∣culian enterprize. Famine, and extreame danger at∣tended the Imperialls march, yet but a Citie in Thu∣ringen, famoused of old for excellent wine, the name being thence derived, as Stigelius probably conje∣ctures. Quippe vocat Iaijn, solymae pius Incola terrae Hoc, quod nos Latio dicimus ore merum. The Imperi∣all Armie re∣united, and re-enforced march to∣wards Mis∣nia.And of late for their Theriacall Antidote, relieved the first; and their valour overcame the later; 200000. pound of bread, was extorted by the Imperiall Gene∣ralls, from the Citie, and the Armie thus refreshed, intended to march, with all possible speed, toward Leipsich, but was hindred in the speed by the Gene∣rall Major Stalhause, who having passed the River before them, cut off the bridges behind him,A Conflict betwixt Stal∣hause, and tho Imperialists at Saba, wherein foure Imperi∣all regiments▪ were ruina∣ted. guarded the advemies with his Canon, and in three severall skirmishes with Hatzfieldt, wholed the Avantguard, consisting of ten Regiments, ruinated foure of them, without much losse of his owne partie; and then see∣ing Goetz was come with the rest of the hoast, in an orderly Retreat, marched up to Bannier, and the maine of the Swedish Armie. The Forces on both sides, like so many lines drawne from severall points of the Circumference, began to tend to one Center; and as if both parties had set up their rest, and were concluded to venture all at once, summoned their associates from their se∣verall stations, to the generall Randevouz in Misnia. The Crabats under Isolani, and Budiani, were called out of the Dukedome of Burgundy, to assist Hatz∣fielde in his designe against the Swedes in Saxonie; and were by the end of Februarie advanced as farre
as Hessen Cassell, where they not onely pressed the Lantgraues Subjects which lived in undefenced pla∣ces,The Crabats under Isolani oppresse the Hessians. and oppressed them with mightie exactions for reliefe, but required Contributions of the great Citie it selfe, as deeming it to be under their Command, and threatned Ertford in Thuringen with a Siege and hostile Armes, presuming that they were able to master it, with as much ease, as Bannier had lately done. But the Swedish Colonell Goltz, who com∣manded in the Citie, prepared to entertaine them; and fortified the place, as much as might be; not o∣mitting the hill Daver, (the place of advantage, where the Swedish Generall planted his Ordnance, when he had surrounded it) amongst his preparati∣ons for defence; knowing that the prepossessing of that hill, was almost sufficient alone, to secure the Ci∣tie from the Crabats violence. This his labour shew∣ed his care, to maintaine the place committed to his charge; no man can conclude certainly of contingent futures; nor could he, but upon probabilities, haue a∣ny assurance of what successe, these bands of Crabats, might haue in Hessen-land; or what forces they might bring against him. Otherwise, that labour might haue beene spared, those forces being dispersed, the stings of those Serpents being taken away, before they could reach the Thuringer forest, by the Lantgraue William, who had formed a new Army of his owne, consisting of ten Regiments, and was then assisted with seaven Swedish Regiments sent unto him from the Campe by Bannier, under the Command of Colonell King, to that purpose. This true professor of the Evangelicall faith, thought it unbeseeming his dignitie, to recede a jot from the promise of alliance, which he had made and confirmed by oath, to the Crowne of Sweden, and being at that time courted by the Imperialists, to re∣linquish their partie, coyned some new Rix-dollars, with these German words upon them;
Es ist besser land, vnd leut verlobren, Den, eyu. en falchen eydt geshworen: Which may be Enlished thus, It's better Life and Land forsake, Then to a-null one Oath I make. Not so much, to nippe the Saxon for his perfidiousnesse, as some have judged it, as to testifie his owne integritie, and loyal∣ty; and ayded by the Swedes, March 1/11. visited Budia∣ni in his Quarter at Skenkanfeldt,Budiani rai∣sed, & his Re∣giments routed by the Land∣grave William. where after a sharpe conflict, in which the Crabat saw 300 of his Souldi∣ers put to the Sword, himselfe was forced to slight, and that too, so full of horrour and confusion, that to save his life, he was faine to cast away his Coat, Saddle, Sable, & to leave his Horse & gajētie, for feare of being discovered and exposed to danger personally, sheltring himselfe in the Woods to preserve him from the rage of the Victor who by this action gained 300 Horse and their furniture, carried with him to Cassel 26 Pri∣soners, all or most of them men of note, and eminent Commanders in the Army, cleared his Countrey of those Caterpillers and marched up towards the Weser and Westphalia, where hee doubted not to inlarge his Victory, there being then no Imperiall Army to op∣pose him. Isolani in the interim, taking his way tho∣row Voidlandt, to attaine to the Caesareans Campe, un∣der whose protection, hee promised himselfe more se∣curitie, as being joyned with Confederates, and no lon∣ger building upon his owne power. Wrangell, who at that time was marched 10 leagues up into Silesiae, to invade that Province, and make head against the Forces under Maerazini, and the Count of Mansfeldt, both which, with a new leavied Army there were putting forward towards Pegaw, where Hatzfield, and Goetz expected their comming, recei∣ved
instructions from Banniere to doe his best endea∣vour, to cut them off in their march, or otherwise to hasten thence to the Swedish Campe, and joyne with him against the whole Caesarean united power. It was more then probable at the first, that the Swedish Field-Marshall might have encountred them (at least) upon equall tearmes, 10000 brave old Souldiers atten∣ded him when he first passed the Oder at Franck-fordt. 1100. Polacks,1100 Pollacks mutinying for pay, take service under Wran∣gell. which had mutinied for want of pay, and vowed to pillage Mòravia, (a rich Countrey an∣nexed to the Crowne of Bohemia, and abounding with Corne, being generally so full of Tillage, that there was scarce any place of Pasture, and hitherto, untou∣ched in these present warres) to make up their sti∣pend, seeing the Imperialists threatned to pay them with Swords, and bullets, revolted, and tooke service under him; The Imperialists Army was but on rai∣sing, Colonell Truchses who had promised the decea∣sed Emperour to supply him with many thousands of able men out of that Province, fayled of performance, and laying strange impositions upon the people grew odious; only Glgawe, and some other few places were left to withstand him; and who would not hence con∣clude a doubtlesse happie issue? The change of Coun∣cels often turneth the present state of things; to see a supposed Favorite brought to disgrace, infatuates the Common people, with a dotage of new affection to their Commanders. Truchses was arrested as an abuser of the Caesarean grace and mercy, sent a Prisoner to Vien∣na; Mansfeildt authorised to supply his charge,Truchses ar∣restd and sent to Vienna. and he complying with the peoples humour, soone raised a sufficient strength to deale with Wrangell, who grown weaker by this time then hee was at his first going to the Field, having left 4000 of his men in severall Gar∣risons, and scarce confident of the Polish Cossacks,
(discrees Commanders will hardly give credit to a revol∣ting Fee. He which alloweth the act will not easily trust the actor) retreated thence towards Misnia to joyne with his associate and fellow in Armes Banniere, and with their united forces, to give battell to the Army of the Caesareans. CHAP. IV. The Death of BODISLAUS, D. of Pomerania. SOme remora's there were which hindered his expedition; one an act of humanity, or rather pi∣ety, the other an effect of necessity; and though the first might seeme a Nullity, to the over-cu∣rious inquisitors into each mans comportment, yet the last is beyond all exception, and requires no apology for it, nor admits argument against it. What Plow-jog∣ger will not forbeare one day in Harvest to bury his de∣ceased Father; though the Corne be ripe and ready to shake? what Merchant will not stay a little to give his friends the Foy, though the wind fill his sayles, and in∣viteth forth to sea? An occasion of more consequence in Ethicks then a common farewell, and of more im∣portance in humanity then the interrement of a pri∣vate-man, though a parent, policy attending and play∣ing the handmaid to his piety, stayed him. The gol∣den Bough of Pomerania, was then cropped, and — isthoc avulso deficit alter Aureus et simili non frondet virga metallo. Bodislaus the 14 aged 57 yeares, who had sate at the Helme of Pomerania by the space of 17 yeares perso∣nally,
whose auncestors had governed that Province for 700 yeares, March  deceased childlesse, and with∣out issue; to the great griese of his subjects and confe∣derates, who were the more sensible of his losse by their knowne assurance of his integrity: and this Prince his Funerals together with a provident care, for preservation of the Dukedome, were one cause of such a stay there, as might shew his affection to the memory of that good Prince, but not indanger his confederates. But this was not all, his way was intercepted, and there was no passage through the Imperiall Army to his freinds, unlesse the way was cut out with the sword; The Caesarcans had blocked up his way, and unlesse he would fight desperately, and upon extreame disadvantage, it was vaine as yet to attempt it. The adverse armies lay then encamped within one German league each of other, both severally seeking to gaine, neither willing to give occasion to the other. The Cae∣sareans, & Saxons surmounted the Swedes in number, the Swedes had the odds of them in ammunition for warre, and provisions of viands. Banniere thinking to consume his adversaries by famine, lay still in his fast∣nesse without striving, and the Imperialists supposing at the length to catch him upon the hanck, observed the same order; nothing was done for many dayes to the prejudice of the other: the Imperialists at the end impatient of idlenesse, and releeved with Ordnance from Dresden, and victuals out of Bohemia, gave the first onset upon the regiment under Colonell Poye,The Swedish regiment un∣der Colonel Poye colected. consisting of 400. horse, and rooted it, then fleshed with this petit victory, fell foule upon the Earle of Hoditz, and came thence conquerours; and growen more confident by that successe, devided their army into two parts, whereof one was to passe the river of
Mulda neere Dresden, and the other to abide in their former statiō. The Swede whose watchful eye attended upon this division, prepared some selected Troopes to watch the Caesareans as they crossed the water,The Vnt∣guard of some Imperiall troops defeated upon the Mul∣da. and they so faithfully performed their trust, that with a sud∣den volly of shot discharged upon the enemies as they were passing over, they were so amazed, that in a strange confusion, they crouded so thicke upon the Bridge of Boates, which was made for their transpor∣tation, that the Bridge sunke, and broke under their weight, many men and horses were drowned in the water, the Standards of those which were passed the River became a spoyle to the undertakers, and the rest of the Army was forced in a confused retreat to hasten backward to the Campe, which resided about Stralen, Rissa, and Oshatz. Two Caesarean Regiments sur∣prised neere great Hahin.Two Caesarean Regiments, were quartered at the same time neere great Hahin, under the Commands of the Colonels Shierstets, and Barkersdorff, and under a pretence to surprize them as it was after given out, Banniere who was strongly entrenched about Tor∣gaw, and had an Army of 12000 Horse, and 8 Brigads of Foote, sent 8 Regiments, which fired the Suburbes of that small City, raysed the Imperialists from theyr lodging, routed them by a short but smart charge, pur∣sued them to the very gates of Dresden, and possessed themselves of their baggage; the Caesareans prizing their lives above that pelfe, willingly leaving that Boo∣tie to the victors, to secure their persons by an expe∣ditious flight. But the designe tended to a further scope: Marazines Forces lay in Lusatia to keepe the passages against Wrangell, who (as they supposed) in∣tended to march that way to his confederates in his Colleagues Army, and to guard him. Those Forces were commanded abroad by the Swedish Generall,
whose intent being suspected by Hatzfield, the Ser∣jeant Major Generall Bretta March 10/30. Was sent out with 5000 Horse to oppose them. Hitherto Bannier's Forces are upon the winning at least not on the loosing hand, the Caesarcans saved a great stake at Leipsick, but drew very few, and those of small value; but his Confederates were sometimes loosers, failing of their owne intendments, and some∣times vanquished, or overtaken by the adversarie. Nothing is sure under the Sunne, the Moone hath a blemish in the middle of her glorious Orbe, the Rivers which sometimes enlarge themselves into Lakes, and seeming Oceans of fresh waters are againe contracted into narrow Channels, yet the Macula of the Moone, makes the glory of her illuminated body more illustri∣ous, the straightning of the current makes it more vio∣lent, and the losse which his Allyes and Friends recei∣ved did not derogate from their glory, nor brought any prejudice (certainely) to their enterprizes. The Ro∣mans Honour and Empire was not lost, though adven∣tured desperately, upon the valour of three noble Bre∣thren against a like number of Enemies, when two of their Champions were slaine, the third by a politike stratagem, and his manhood performing alone what they had all undertaken joyntly; and so purchasing a name to his family, and victory to his Nation; it may be paralleld by this moderne story. Hermanstein a Fort of consequence upon the Rhine neere Coblentz,The Fort of Hermanstein necessitated. which yet held out for the King of France, was straightly beleaguered by Iohn de Werth and reduced to extreame necessity; it was not to bee undermiend being seated on a Hill, nor to bee forced otherwise then by Famine; the place being so fortified by Nature and Art, that it was, and is not undeserved∣ly esteemed impregnable; the Imperiall Commander
lay before it, and hindered all supplyes of reliefe.The Landt∣grave attemp∣teth to releeve it, but is defea∣ted twice. The Lantgrave twice adventured to supply it ith neces∣saries, and was twice beaten backe by the asseegers with much losse. The neighbouring Boores, thought to steale thither with Hennes, and such like viands through the hedges and backe wayes, but were ap∣prehended by the way, and hanged for their labour. The Cittadell was so much distressed, that the Com∣mander (a man of singular wisdome and fortitude) was compelled to divide his provisions amongst the peo∣ple by weight, and the Baron of Werth knowing their necessity, and how improbable it was that they should be releeved by and land auxiliaries (his army having stopped that way) or by succours from the Rhine all the Forts upon the Streame, being under the Austrians power) concluded, that the Fort must yeeld, and had in a manner assured himselfe, to take it in upon what tearmes he himselfe should be pleased to prescribe to the besieged: But the River yeelded a passage, though the earth denyed one, for conveyance of victuals, and other necessaries unto the Castle. The Story is thus related, by the Dutch from Hamburg. A Spanish Don being sent Embassadour from his Catholicke Majestie to the King of Hungarie then at Weene, to condole with him for the deceased Empe∣rour and congratulate his accumulated dignities;Ramsey relee∣veth it by a stratagem. ha∣ving dispatched his legation; was ready for his jour∣ney towards Bruxcls to visite the Cardinall Infant, in∣tending to goe by shipping from Mentz to Colin, and thence to Brabandt. The desolation of the upper Pala∣tinate and a great part of Franconia, through which he was to passe from the Danubie to the Rhine, moved him to send some of his Servants five or sixe dayes be∣fore to prepare his lodgings, and necessaries for him, selfe, and the rest of his retinew. This was revealed to
Ramsey Governour of Hanaw, who aswell to preserve that City from the Siege, which Iohn de Werth threat∣ned it, as soone as Hermenstein should bee surrendred, as also for to shew his good affection to his Confede∣rates, had long beene plotting to releeve them: and now conceited, that if he could but surprize the Spanish Harbengers the businesse was halfe done, sent out seve∣rall parties to watch the high wayes, with instructions that if they chanced to meet with those Spanish ad∣venturers, they should doe them no other violence, then to bring them into the City. His order was ob∣served, and it fell out in all things according to his wish, the Soldiers met with the Gentlemen, brought them to Hanaw, and presented them to the Comman∣der, who entertained them with all gentlenesse, and by kindnesse screwed out of them, the time and day of the Embassadors comming to the Rhine, the number of vessels designed to attend him, their description by their colours, the number of his owne attendants which wayted upon him, their habits, and the habit, and favour of the Embassador himselfe: And beeing thus acquainted with each particular circumstance, trimmed up two ships of the like burthen, and condi∣tion, selected some chosen men out of the Garrison, to personate the Spanish Embassadours followers, and one well versed in his Sibboleth the Spanish tongue and garbe to represent his person, all which being attired in the Spanish dresse, with their haire cut close (accor∣ding to the Catholick Kings late edict, of which they seemed strict observers) and in long mourning clokes were brought to the Vessels, loaden with necessaries for the releefe of the Castle, and appearing upon the Decks, sayled downe the Rhine in the face of the Im∣periall Garrisons, who taking, and mistaking them for Spaniards, not onely suffered them to Sayle quietly,
but saluted them friendly with many Musquetadoes and Canonadoes from the Garrisons; the new Am∣phitruo, not sparing to complement with them in a Spanish posture from shipboord, till having reached to Hermenstein, the subtle Sosia's turned in thither, to the vexation of the Spaniards allyes, who were ready to bite their fingers, to see themselves thus deluded. It was a neate stratagem well carryed, and of great consequence. Hanaw which alone of all the Cities in the Weteraw, yet held out, had bin much indangered otherwise. The Caesareans began to appeare strong a∣gaine in the Empire, and had done much damage to the Swedes and their allyes in the Bishopricke of Mun∣ster, the Marke of Brandenburg, and about the Weser, and had certainly resolved to plunder the Weteraw, if the designe at Hermenstein had succeeded fortu∣nately. Lemford in Westphalia, a Fort of a pretty strength out great consequence,Lemford ta∣ken by the Im∣perialists. as being one of the inlets of the Territorie about it, was kept and possessed by a com∣pany of Swedish Dragoons, which did much spoyle in the Bishopricke of Munster, and were therefore com∣plained of by the Country people, to the Baron of Lut∣tersheim who commanded in Dieps-hold, and he with a Regiment of men sate downe before it, and forced the Swedes in the Castle to yeeld upon discretion, and to take Service under him. The Praesidiaries in Min∣den and Osnabrugge made out sixe troopes of Horse, and 4. Companies of Dragoons, to bee revenged for this losse, thinking to have taken Dieps-hold by O∣slat, and surprized the Baron and his Regiment which was lodged there. And to this purpose February 4/4. marched thitherwards, covering their intention with the darknesse and silence of the night. But the Baron had received some intention of their purpose, and
having prepared for thē,The Praesidia∣ries of Minde & Osnabrugge, dfeated at Di∣eps hold. charged upon the avantgard, before they expected it, and had then surprised it, had not the whole band come in sodainely to their rescue. But those old Souldiers practised in the handling and managing of their armes, needed no word of direction from the mouth of their Commander, the present state of their freinds assaulted by the enemy, taught them both the what, and the how, in their action. The bat∣tell grew hot, and the Swedes being compelled by dark∣nesse to sticke close together, and not to sever for feare of ambuscadoes sought manfully, frō 2. of the clock til 5. in the morning, & then perceiving that Luttershem surmounted them in strength, and advantage, betook themselves to plaine fight, and were pursued to Osna∣brugge, but without great losse, their horses being good and speedy, and their flight well ordered, and not in confusion. But this losse was soone after regained, both in point of honour and benefit by the same Swe∣dish garrisons; Feb: 10/2 when they surprised suddainly 4. companies of Imperiall-souldiers, which lay in the the small City of Hagell,Surprise Hagell and put 4 com∣panies of Caesa∣reas to the sword. put them to the sword, and returned home with 150 horse, and other good boo∣tie, and baggage of which they had spoyled the Impe∣rialists. These were the checks which were given to the Swedes associates, in those parts of the Empire, which the Generall valued the lesse in respect of the dam∣mage he had done to the Saxon, with whom, above any particular Prince of the Empire the Crowne of Sweden was most offended; which detriment is ex∣pressed particularly by letters from Dresden,The miserable coniin of the Dukedome of Saxony. March 18/2 wherein with words delivered with an accēt of griefa the whole Dukedome of Saxony is said to be totally ruinated, except the Cities of Leipzick, Wittemberge, and Dresden, the Churches lying desolate, the woods
being out downe, the earth untilled and lying waste, and the villages, and lesser Cities, made pillars of fire and smoake, not onely by the Swedes the enemies, but also by the seeming friends the Caesarians, who spare not to burne those places to the ground, where they finde not as much provision as they demaund for their armies, as the Duke Frederick of Saxon Alten∣berg complained to Hatzfieldt, desiring him to order his rude souldiers by a better discipline, that such acts of inhumanity might be prohibited, and the offenders punished accordingly. Thus far we have followed Bannier, and Hatzfield, both yet abiding in their fastnesse, expecting their ad∣vantageous opportunity to sight. And now wee must looke backe to the Elector of Brandenburgh, and Wran∣gell the Swedish Field-marshall, whom our last disco∣very left in that Marquisate. Berlin the Electors seate of residence, Brandenburgh the Metropolis of the middle Mark, Tangermund, once the seate of Charles 4. Emperour, and most pla∣ces of note were brought by Wrangells army either to entertaine Swedish garrisons, or contribute to the maintenance of his forces; onely the Forts of Span∣daw and Kustrin held out for the Elector,Kustrin belea∣guered by the Swedes. whom the Swedes courted with faire language sometimes, and sometimes summoned in the language of a souldier, to surrender those places of strength to him as a surety of his good affection and love to the crowne of Sweden, or as a token that he would stand as a neutrall, and not shew himselfe an enemy. But both his courtshippe and summons were frivolous; the El answered that those places were Forts of the E that hee could not deliver them up to a strange owne with∣out prejudice to his honour and credit: and as for the Swedes menaces, that perhaps it might be in their
power to deale with his territories in what manner they pleased, but they should never be able to force him from his first resolution. His answer not onely displeased, but inraged the Field-marshall, who where∣upon immediately (being then Master of the Field) plundered the Countrie as far as Boeskah & Cotbutz, a towne in the lower Lusatia, tooke away sixe wagons loaden with baggage belonging to the Electour, as they were going to Kustrin, and sent them to Frank∣fort upon the Oder; blocked up Kustrin, broke downe one of the bridges, and conveyed the Oder two Eng∣lish miles from the Fort, by a new artificiall channell; the garrison all this time defending themselves vali∣antly, and though fayling of victuals, not fainting in their courages. The Electour who was gone from Berlin to Peitz, to raise such forces as might be able to make head a∣gainst the Swedes, sent private instructions to Cracht the Commander in Kustrin to fortifie himselfe as much as might be, promising faithfully to relieve him, as speedily as might be. The Colonell carefull to per∣forme his charge spared not cost; and seeing the sub∣urbs about the Fort were rather serviceable for the E∣nemy then himselfe, burned them downe, so making good use of this consuming element of fire for his safe∣ty; while the other unmercifull destroyer water offe∣red it selfe to his service: the Oder swelling above the banks of the new channell, and breaking out violent∣ly, drowning some Swedish Souldiers, and overflow∣ing the low land, in which the Fort is scituated; and this accident caused them to consent with the Com∣mander for a cessation of armes for certaine doves, the Commander againe promising to requite them with a competent summe of money, if they would give o∣ver the seege. It was but a small part of the Swedes
which were sate downe before the Cittadell, the maine body was then with the Field-marshall at Franck ford, one part thereof was imployed to fetch in victuals, and money from the tributary townes to pay, and refresh the Army: another to plunder that part of the Coun∣trey which had not submitted, and granted to pay contribution. And these last, ranging as farre as to Peitz, lighted upon sixe wagons loaden with provisi∣on for the Electours houshould; seyzed upon them, and presented them to Wrangell, who being himselfe ufficiently stored, and knowing the scarcity of the sCountrey, & desirous rather to vanquish the Electour by curtesie, then violence, sent them back by the E∣lectours owne wagoners, and convoy, neither light∣ning the carriages, nor offering any injury to their persons. And now the winter beginning to be in his strength,The siege inter∣mitted. having well refreshed his Army at Frank∣ford, after he had utterly demolished the bridge, and sent away all the Cities ammunition, and burnt downe all the bridges neere about the fortresse of Kustrin, save onely one, which he could not safely come to, it being within lesse then a musket-shot of the Castle. He divided his whole Army, which was then 3000. horse, and 7000. foote, and appointed them to their winter-quarters, the new Mark being appointed for the Ca∣vallary, and the Veker and middle markes for the In∣fantery, himselfe in the meane time retiring to Stetin, to be present at the Dyet then held by the States of Po∣merania. The Marquis Electour made good use of the Swedes absence, the Count of Mansfield had supplied him with some forces out of Silesia, Arnheim a Colonell of his owne, and kinsman to the late Generall, had raysed up some others in Lusatia, and the Marquisate; and armed with those forces one of his Colonels, and the
Swedes not expecting it, came first with his like Regiment (December 18/3.) of 300 Horse to Ber∣lin, forced open the Southeast or Copenicker Gate, pressed in with drawne Swords and Pistols,Berlyn regai∣ned by the Mar∣quesse Elector. set a Watch upon the severall Ports, (the Citizens beeing ready to receive their naturall Prince) and tooke Pri∣soners about 70 Swedish Souldiers, which were Billi∣ted in the City, and some prime Officers. In the Evening about 5 of the clocke, the Elector himselfe attended with 600 Dragoons and light Hors∣men,Branderburg taken from the Swedes. came into the City; the three Regiments of Horse under the commands of young Buckersdorf. Duke Francis Charles, and Shierstett, beeing lodged that night in the Suburbs, whose apparition the next morning, made those few Swedes which lodged at Bernaw, and were severed from their company, to re∣tire towards Newstadt, for their more security. A pro∣pitious starre did then attend the Brandenburgher, his happy Fortune was not thus bounded, part of his Army was dispatched for Brandenburgh, and the Frost having then contracted the Elve into a more solid body of Ice, those Soldiers tooke that City also by a sudden Scalado and put the Garrison to the Sword. Newes of the Brandenburgers Progresse, was brought to the Field-Marshall at Stetin,Drussen block'd up by the Swedes, & the siege relin∣quished. who instantly gave order to the Commander of that City, to blocke up the Fort, and passage of Drussen, which he did accor∣dingly. At the expiration of 8. dayes a rumour was spread in that small Swedish Campe, that the Imperiall Generall Marazini, with 6000 men, was comming out of Silesia to releeve that Garrison; and then the Commander left that siege, and returned homeward, plundring the inhabitants houses upon the way. The Field-Marshall himselfe began to muster up his disper∣sed Regiments, which then lay about Shiffelbeane, A∣renswald,
Solden, and Lantzberg, intending againe to put into the Field, though the Winter Season did in a manner prohibite him. With these Forces hee first marched against Lantzberg, a frontier City of the Mar∣quisat,Lantzberg surrendred to Wrangell. and forced that to yeeld upon composition, and thence unto the Vekermarck, where the Vangard of the Army encountred with Colonell Arncheim a Kinsman of the late Generall of the same name,Colonell Arnheim sur∣prised by the Swedes and sent Prisoner to Stetin. whom after a short conflict, they tooke Prisoner with 400 Dragoons, and sent to Stetin, from whence againe, by the direction of the Lord Steno Biclke who in the ab∣sence, and instead of the Rix-Chancellor is there resi∣ding for the direction of affaires, he was transported to Stockholme in Swedland, to be used according to the discretion of the States. Drussen was still in the Field-Marshals eye, as being a convenient place for the egresse and regresse of his Forces, and this againe he intended to besiege, and had provided much amunition, and other provisions, to effect it, intending to assault it by force, if he could not reduce it to a friendly composition; but then the said Embassadour of the Crowne of Sweden interpo∣sed; being sent to treate of Peace betwixt the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Queene of Sweden his Necce, the Elector himselfe giving a willing eare to a friendly treatie, having appointed the Marques Sigismund, with a pleni-potentiary Commission to conferre with the Swedish Embassadour, at the little City of Shwed, distant 7 leagues Southwards from Stetin, and this de∣tained the Field-Marshall from that siege. Wrangell mar∣cheth into Si∣lesia.There was now a kinde of cessation of Armes be∣twixt the Elector and Field-Marshall, in those Terri∣tories: and Wrangel having plundered the lands and goods belonging to the Count of Swartzenburg, and taken Prisoners the chiefest of his Officers, garrisoned
the Towns in Pomerania and the Dukedome of Meck∣lenburg, marched into Silesia, to oppose the Imperiall Forces which were raised there, and there he received instructions from Banniere, to come and joyne with his Army, or otherwise to hinder Mansfield from comming to Hatzfield, as it hath beene related for∣merly. It was still a bloudy time in the Electorate of Sax∣ony, and a generall feare was conceived by the adjoy∣ning Provinces, that the Fury of warre, would not be confined there: the hearts of the people, were terri∣fied by a strange Prodigie, which though it admits no particular interpretation — — Deus omen in Hostes Convertat;A strange Pro∣digy at Ise∣nach. was as terrible, as portentous. The Conduit at Isenach scituated in the midst of the Marketsted, so∣dainly instead of Water powred out Bloud, and so con∣tinued for the space of two houres, before it yeelded a∣gaine that Element, for which that Aqueduct was ordained. A bloudy time ensued it, betwixt the Im∣periall Generals, and Banniers Forces, though they kept their Fastnesse neere Targaw, yet few dayes pas∣sed without blowes. The Imperialists prepared two Ship-bridges over the Elve for the transportation of their Forces, one at Dresden, by the South-east or Pirner-gate, the other at Stralen. To the last of these places,Stralen burnt by the Swedes. the Swedes advanced with sixe full Regiments, burned downe the City and the Castle to the ground, planted their Horsemen on the other side of the Ri∣ver, to hinder the Imperialists march over the Brid∣ges; surprised one of the Caesarean quarters neere Wurtzen, carryed away 300 Wagons laden with bag∣gage, and made havock of the Country Villages, for∣cing the Imperiall Safeguards, burning the Townes to the ground: the Caesareans herein not being behinde
the Swedes, Friends and Enemies (as it were) both conspiring, so to ruine that Country, that March 11/21, 44 severall fires within two Leagues compasse, might have at once beene discovered to the eye. The defeat at Wurtzen was given by the Colonell Slangh,2. Imperiall Regiments de∣feated at Wurt¦zen by Colo∣nell Slangh. whom Banniere had sent with 1500 Horse, toward the City Leisnick, Golditz and Eylenburg; the Colonell re∣turned March 23, Aprill 2, giving this accompt of his action: That at Wurtzen he had defeated two Impe∣riall Regiments, carried away their Baggage, slaine 600 upon the place, taken many Prisoners, amongst which were two Rit-masters, five Lieutenants, and many other Officers. Banniere in the absence of the Colonel, purposely to bring a generall terror upon the Imperiall Army, that by their distraction being assaulted in severall places,200. Imperial Horse defeated by Baniev at Pegaw. Slangh might be more secure, ranged about divers of their Quarters, and first at Pegaw, incountred with 2000 Imperiall horse, whom he defeated, and routed utterly. That victory incited him to proceed further, and appearing in Battell-array before the Imperiall Campe, provoked them to Battell, but they unwil∣ling to leave their holds, kept still in their Trenches, which made him returne to his owne quarters. The Caesarean Army lay then betwixt Torgaw, and Meisen, on the East side of the River Elve, and the greater part of the Swedish horse and Dragoons, on the other side just against the Caesarean Campe, which they kept waking with perpetuall Alarums. April 2. new stile, the Caesarean Commanders had a designe to transport some Regiments of Horse, from their head-quarter at Riesa, to the West side of the River, that there being no impediment which might stay their courses, they might sometimes breake in upon the Swedes, and gall them with sodaine skirmishes. The Swedes who
well understood their purpose,3. Regiments of Imperiall Horse oued by the Swedes. suffered three Regi∣ments to passe the River quietly, intending to requite trick for trick, but then having armed themselves for the assault, charged them so furiously, that they were forced to retreat in such a confusion, that above 200. of them were drowned in the Elve, and so many slaine, that the Captives whom they took in the Battell con∣fessed, that those 3. Regiments were almost totally rui∣ned. The next day following, Bannier resolved to vi∣site the Caesarean Army in their quarters, and to that purpose selected two Companies out of every Regi∣ment, both of Horse and Foot; and attended with those expert Soldiers, and the Watch-masters Regiment, he marched directly to the Imperiall head-watch, which consisted of 20. Companies of the best and ablest horse in the Caesarean Campe, and were commanded by the Sergeant-Major Bretta.The Head-Watch of the Imperiall Ar∣m fod to a  ght. The conflict betwixt them was short and sharpe; the Swedes came on roundly and charged home upon the Caesareans, which standing together in a close compacted body, endured that shocke, and prepared to entertaine the assailants again. But then Bannier doubled the number of them that gave the charge, and over burthening the Caesareans, with the waight of that heavie body, compelled them to slight, in which, they being stayed by the inconve∣nience of a small River, many of them (the number is uncertaine) were cut off, and left dead upon the place, and many taken Prisoners. All these severall Conflicts betwixt the two Armies, were not without the effusion of much Christian bloud, but the bloud so shed was not taken away by way of murther (Warre justly grounded, is continued lawfully; the Sword is oft a just decider of controver∣sies, and though it bee accompted one of the great Plagues, sent by God, it is not attended with any in∣justice
in the execution.) Black murthers and horrid treasons hatched in darknesse, what ever the pretence thereof may be, are not onely unexcusable, but detesta∣ble also to God and man. The Emperors Funerals.The Court at Vienna, was about this time clothed in blacke, for the solemnization of the late Emperours Funerals, which were solemnely celebrated by the Nuntius Apostolicus, attended with 10. Prelates in their Miters. The Herse was blacke, but inlayd with silver, and garnished with many burning white waxe Tapers; the Imperiall Eagles were blazoned about it, in the midst, stood the Corpes; covered with a blacke cloth, intermingled with gold; over his head lay the Imperiall Hungarian and Bohemian Crownes. At his Feet the Golden-fleece, and betwixt then both, the Imperiall, Ball and Scepter; in the middest whereof was placed a Crucifixe of silver; At his sides lay his Ra∣pier, Dagger, and Spurres. The Boots of the Herse were adorned with the pictures of Vertues, and upon the top, on a Pyramis, stood a Globe, and a Crowne. The Church being hung with blacke, and the solemni∣ty ended, his heart and bowels were lodged in three Cabinets, and convayed without any pompe, from Vienna to Gratz by his late Privie-Counsellours, and other Officers of the Court, which are since cashie∣red; the young King his Sonne instantly reforming, and by the hand of the Earle of Medaw the Major domo upon his Fathers decease; having reduced his Counsell to the number of 5. which were the Bishop of Vienna, the Earle of Trautmansdolff, who is now the Major Palatii, and the Earles of Slavata, Fran∣kenberg, and Venda; the care of his Chancry, be∣ing committed to Doctor Prickmajor, under the name and title of Vice-Chancellour.
The difference betwixt those two great Potentates the Christian and Catholike Kings, drew severall free Princes, and States to their parties, and caused such a combustion in the City of Liege, that the City was di∣vided against the Bishop, and the Bishop against the Burghesses: He labouring to advance the Caesarean and Spanish cause, and therefore ing great impositions and taxes upon the Citizens, and they rather inclining to the French King, though at first submitting them∣selves to the Bishops orders, with a kinde of unwil∣lingnesse, paying their contributions, yet in the end flatly opposed him: and in the beginning of the yeare, they sent a complaining petition to the Bishop of Rome against him, the heads whereof were these. That as a childe, by instinct of Nature, in its sufferings, will have recourse to the Mother; so, they did now humbly pro∣strate themselves at the feet of his Holinesse, to desire his assistance, and releefe in their present necessities: That their case was to be pityed,The Citizens on Liege com∣pline to the Ppe against their Bishop. in that notwithstan∣ding their due obedience, which they had alwayes ex∣hibited to S. Siege their proper Bishop, who recipro∣cally ought to protect them, hee yet oppressed them greevously, to the great prejudice and dishonour of the Catholike Religion, the warre raysed by him, ha∣ving already consumed and layd waste 5000. dwelling houses in the Country, not without prophanation of the Sanctuaries, Churches, and holy Vessels, as Chali∣ces, Bells, and other sacred Vtensils and Ornaments, which were imployed to other uses, then what they were first ordained for; That the hallowed Hoste was trampled on by them who ought to honour it: that the Church-men designed for Divine Service, were chased from their Parishes, where by that meanes the Liturgie was quite abolished in some places, and in the Major part much intermitted: That the Religious
women, and others, both Wives and Virgins, were ravished before the eyes of their owne husbands, and Fathers. Their Heards of Cattell were driven away, their tillage decayed, and to speake no more, that the sole inhabitants of Liege were constrained to contri∣bute above 60000. Florins to the Church to preserve the City from the Siege, threatned by Charles Duke of Lorraine, the Bishop of Verdun, Piccolomini, and Iohn de Werth, upon his solicitation, who had incen∣sed one party of the Liegois, against the other; whose tyranny caused 5. principall Burghesses of Tongres, to to be led as like slaves, before his tryumphant Chariot, putting two of them (in the end) to the Sword, and bastinadoing the other three, till they had promised a good ransome. Much more was added, and every par∣ticular expressed with such passion, as might have mo∣ved a Scythian to compassion; yet, their onely prayer was, that his Holinesse would excuse their boldnesse, and send them some Cardinall for a Protectour, by whose countenance, they might be defended from such oppressions. But the effect of this Petition, and what it avayled is not yet discovered, though it may bee thought fruitlesse (if we may guesse upon consequents) by this ensuing History. The Count of Warfusee's treason at Liege.Naturall respect must needes have moved teares. from the eyes of Caesars Sonne, at his Fathers funerall, But the consideration of his care in preservation, and for enlarging the honour of the House of Austria, de∣served a solemne mourning; his decease ministred oc∣casion to a bloody assasinate, to attempt a deed of hor∣ror, which for his owne credits-sake he meant to pal∣liate with a cloake of authority, forging letters to the Bishop of Cullen, and thereby expressing an order and commission given him by the King of Hungary, inten∣ding (doubtles) to mitigate his execrable action, under
pretence of his commission, if he should hap to fayle and be discovered (no sincere interpreter, being able to conceive that so heroicall a spirit would consent to so foule a treason) and to suppresse them, if hee had happily executed his designe. The story (as some doe relate it) is thus? The Count Warfusee, who some yeares past had revolted from the Catholick-King, stood in displeasure, during the life of the late Empe∣rour, both with his Imperiall-Majesty and the King of Spaine, and now thinking to winne his Maisters fa∣uour againe, by the heads, lives, and states of those which entertained him in his rebelion, plotted the death of la Ruelle, prime Magistrate of Lieg, & some o∣thr principall members of that body-politique, & put it thus in practice. The Count being lodged in St. Iohns-Cloyster, in the house of a Prebend of that Church, ac∣commodated with a backe-doore toward the water∣side; invited to dinner thither, the said Burger-master de la Ruelle, the Abbot of Mousson, and divers other principle men of the Citie, whom he intended to mur∣ther trayterously. To that purpose he suborned the Burgundian Count de Milis, and some choice Spanish-Souldiers drawne out of the Garrisons of Narrigue, and Argentoy, to steale privately by the Posterne into his house, and to lurke there secretly till the word be∣ing given, they might be prepared for execution, which they oberved & performed accordingly. In the middest of the east (as if his malice had not tended to the mine of their bodies, but their Soules also) when their hearts were merry with wine, hee began a health to Lewis King of France surnamed the lust, which had no sooner passed round, but the Assasinates armed with Swords & Pistolls, broke into the dining∣roome, surprised the Burgermaister, and the Abbot, sent for a Priest, and as soone as he was come, as if
they would doe them some favour at their death,Ruelle the Burger-Master murthered. bade them make their confession, for they must dye. The Priest who was sent for to take his confession, was the Sub-Prior of the Covent, by name Antory Evrard, a Dominican, who accompanied with his confrater William Lncon (both which have testified this relati∣on under their hands) went, and at their comming to Warfusee the Sub-prior hearing his demand to take Ruelles confession and give him absolution, like a man amazed, stood agast, inquiring the reason of that pro∣position, and what his Lordship meant, by requiring him to that service, which he might not doe but with licence from his Ordinary; except onely in some ca∣ses, in which upon the appearance of imminent death, it was lawfull for him so to doe if the Priest deputed thereunto, by his Superiour was not to be found. To this the Count replied, that Ruelle must dye, and that within the space of one quarter of an houre, & there∣fore commanded him to dispatch immediatly, as hee would answer upon his Soule the Burger-maisters salvation, being desperate if he should die unconfessed. The Frier seeing the inraged countenance of the Count, & fearing his owne life if he should disobey, an∣swered onely that he would not doe it till the Burger-maister called him; there needed no further words. A servant that stood by apprehended what his Lord meant, and going in, and comming suddainly againe from the Chamber where Ruelle lay bound, he tels the Frier that he desired him to come in. The sight of the Magistrate bound like a malefactor put the Domi∣nican into a greater passion, and compassion for him; and with some language expressing sorrow, wished him to prepare for death, the Count being resolved to murther him; Ruelle much distracted with the con∣sideration of his estate, one while according to the su∣perstition
of the Romanists, commended himselfe to God and the blessed Virgin preparing for death, and then againe, hoping for life, desired the Fryar to be an advocate for him to Worfusee, as willing to be con∣demned by him to any prison or gallies, if he had done him injury: all which was related againe by the Con∣fessour to the Count who stopped his eares against him and constrained the Good-man, to that un∣wellcome worke of his office, which was but the immediate Prodromus to the Burger-Maisters execution. There was no remedy but patience; they saw the guides which must cōduct them to the black-chambers of death before them, made their confession, and pre∣pared to bid the world good-night.Ruelle the Burger-Master muthered. Ruelle was the first who had discarged his Soule of the burthen of sinnes upon it, and he was instantly delivered by Warfu∣see to the Count de Millis, who tooke him into an∣other chamber, thrust him through the body 7 times with a rapier, and so murthered him. The Abbot of Mousson, a French-gentleman, named Mounsier de Saison, and two servants of the Burger-maisters, sur∣prized at the same time with those two prime men, were advised, in the interim, by the Traytor, to goe to confession, and prepare for their dissolution. The Abbot a well-spoken man, a good Orator, and now improved in that faculty, by the goodnesse of his cause, began to plead for his owne life, and his compani∣ons, declaring their innocency, laying before the murtherer the hainousnesse of his offence. But words were vaine, Millis returned sodainely from the for∣mer execution, drew out of s bosome a formall pro∣cesse, and sentence against them, in the name of the new Emperour (as they stiled him,) the Cardinall Infant, and the Prince of Liege, as offenders against his Im∣periall
Majesty,The Abbot of Mousson, and o∣thers strangely delivered. which they conceiting to bee an act of of Court, and not to be reversed, pleaded no more for life, but prepared for death. Familiarity of con∣versation, doth sometimes raise a strange affection, while the Abbot was under confession, a Souldier of Nairaigne, who had formerly bin intimately acquain∣ed, with one of the Burger-Masters-servants, mo∣ved with compassion, toward him, rounded him in the eare, and shewed him a way by which he might e∣scape, and save his life. It was needlesse to repeate that lesson againe unto him. Extremity ministers capaci∣ty, and the apprehension of an eminent danger, rouseth up a dul spirit to seek meanes to avoid it. The way was o∣pen enough, but too praecipitious to be attempted with security, Danger attended the counsell of esca∣ping (yet that perhaps might be avoided) but certain destruction waited upon his stay. A chamber-window proffered a passage, and through that the young-man escaped, crying out, Treason, Ruelle is murthered, Treason, Ruelle is murthered in the house of Count Warfusee, Treason, Treason, Treason. The noyse was full of horror, and the name of Ruelle much honoured among the Cittizens, who instantly tooke up their armes, assaulted the house, which being strong, and built of square stone, was by the space of two houres maintained against the Cittizens, by Warfusees Soul∣diers and servants, who being in all seventy strong, and more carefull of their owne preservation, then the intended murther, left the Abbot,The rage of the Cittizens, & the end of the Assasinates. the French-gentle∣man, and the other servant bound, to provide for their owne safety. But it was vaine for the defendants, to contest against such a multitude of assailants. The Cit∣tizens were ten thousand in number, and they in the end broke open the doores, fell upon the murthe∣rers (who cryed for quarter) without pitty, haled War∣fusee
into the open streets, where he no sooner appea∣red, but was hewen perce-meale by the Cittizens, the truncke of his body drawne, & hanged upon a gibbet, which ws raised suddainely for that purpose, and bur∣  tely. Milis the Burgundian had no bet∣t a fate, and the common-souldiers employed in that massc, had as bad a fortune, being all burned in and with the house, in which they were assembled for ex∣cention of their villany. The rage of the Citizens was not thus extinguished. The Iosuits, who were suppo∣sed the plotters of this device, were the next day after inquired into, and many fier-locks, carabines, & pistolls ready charged, being foūd in their cels, two of ye old Pa∣dres, were put to the sword, & the rest banished the ci∣ty. A more strict watch thē had bin kept formerly, was pointed presently, & Ap. 8/8 when their beloved Gover∣nour was buried in the church of St. Lābert, under the greate crown with this remēbrance ingraven on his tombe. Pour estre fidel à ma Patrie P ay perdu mon sang & ma vie. Which may be thus Englished. My studie for my Countries good, Hath cost my life and dearest blood. While the 32. Companies of the City were met to∣gether, it was condescended that the 20. penny of eve∣ man, lands and goods should be levied immediately, to raise and maintaine a fresh traine-Band of 1000. men, which at an houres warning should attend the colours of Bartholus Rolandus the Cities Generall, to serve the City in case of necessity. This is the History. And now see how the crime would conceale its owne shame by the countenance of authority. This ensuing Letter, sealed with 3. seales, was taken out of the Traytors bosome at his first ap∣prehension; directed in these words:
TO HIS MOST ILLVSTRI∣ous Highnesse, my Lord Elector of Coln. BY ayde of the Soldiers, which I raised for the Service of his Imperiall Majesty,Warfs counterfeited Letter. and by order and▪ Commission from his sayd Maiesty, I have slaine the Burger∣master Ruelle, he having first con∣fessed himselfe, and submitted to the will of GOD and his Maiestie. By his order also, have apprehen∣ded the Abbot Mousson, Mouns. de Sesan, and some others, over whom I keepe a strict guard. Had I stayed but two houres longer be∣fore I put the project into executi∣on, I should furely have bin a dead man, to the disgrace of his Impri∣all
Majesty and your Highnesse, as I shall shorrly show your Highnesse more particularly, and at large. It is much to be feared, that the French will now murther my onely Son: yet herein I reioyce, that I have of∣fered him up for the advantage, of your Highnesse, his said Imperiall Mas. and my King. I am resolved to continue their Servant, and will not omit to certifie your Highnes daily, of all that shall happen here, and what I shall effect. And now, Time forbidding me to write more largely, I humbly kisse your Highnes hand, and shall re∣maine as long as I live, Your Highnesse, most obedient, humble, and faithfull Servant, R. Count of WARFUSEE. Liege, Ap. . 1637.
Historia Varia. Hitherto we haue brought downe a continued Hi∣story, the wheeles of the worke, answering each other though farre distant by place. Now by a various, and incertexted relation, wee shall discover the most re∣markable passages, which haue happened, since the pe∣riod of our last discourse. The cause of the Turks in∣vading Tran∣silvania.Transilvania, the Mediterranian part of Dacia, a rich Countrey, and noted by Antiquity, for it's fruit∣fulnesse was terrified with Turkish Armies, the halfe Moones being there displayed, in the behalfe of Istuan Bethleem, against the Prince Ragotsky, who then sate at the sterne of that Province. The occasion was this: Solimy David, one of the greatest Lords of Transilva∣nia, Cosin to Estienne, or Istuan Bethleem, who preten∣ded himselfe, the lawfull heire of that Principality, then (as it was conceived) usurped by Ragotsky, mo∣ved with the fame of the late deceased King of Swe∣den, sent to him in the yeare 1631. to tender him his service, and unwilling to come alone, resolved secret∣ly, to raise 2000. men, whereof himselfe would bee the Chiefetaine. His designe could not bee carried so privately, from that stirring and warlike Nation, as to be confined with so small a number. Upon the beating of his Drumme, and report of his intendment, instead of 2000 alone, such a number of Voluntieres came to present themselues to the List; that Ragotskie, who before had carried a jealous eye over him, now more suspecting some designe against himselfe, then former∣ly; mustred up his forces, and with them dispersed and disarmed Bethleems new raised Army. This pro∣cesse so inraged Solymies friends (who had bin assisted in this action by some other Lords of Transilvania) that they conspired to murther Ragotskie, their pur∣pose being palliated with a new forme of hunting, to the which they meant to invite him. For execution
whereof, it being thought that none could be more affectionated than Solimy David, who was now com∣pelled to breake his word, with that renowned King, to whom he had promised so great matters, drew him also into their conjuration. But Solimy, more civilized, and not so inclined to cruelty, as others of that Province (though at the first hee seemed to consent) yet afterwards, distasting that course, the same day, when as the Plot should have bin put into execution; posted to the Prince, discovered the Treason, and with prayers, and teares, prevailed with him, to refraine from that daies sport. Ragotskie made good use of his tale, and carrying for the present, a face of love towards Solimy, dismissed him friendly; but armed withall a Squadron of Horse, against the Conspirators; who surprised them easily, (because un∣expectedly) and tortured them with divers kinds of punishments to death; onely the Prince Istuan, who was the prime Projector, (disguised) lurked upon an adjoyning Mountaine, to see the effect of the enter∣prise, and saw how his Friends were used, saving himselfe by fright into the Grand Signiors Territorie. A thought of treason, is treason; and however, a Conspi∣rator may thinke to merit his Princes favour, by revea∣ling it; yet if he defer the discovery to the last houre, and then, either stung with the pricks of Conscience, or allu∣red with the hope of reward, reveale it; his Princes cle∣mencie may pardon his transgression, his merit cannot be said to have deserved it; the execution of Iustice, being due to him that shall give consent to so horrid an action, though hee may afterward seeme to repent. Solimy not looking back to that part of the Wallet, which was behind him, or thinking of that speckled toad, which be had lodged in his heart, his treason; with a kind of confidence, of merit from the Prince, went againe to
the Court, pressed the service he had done to his Lord boldly, demanded recompence, not thinking that hee had been discovered, as a partie in that treason. But the Prince, who had already examined the matter throughly, and found him to be a Conspirator, retur∣ned him extremity of Justice, in stead of Mercie; bound him hand and foot; cast him into a stinking, loathsome, and terrible Prison, made more horrid by its solitude; all people being forbid to come thither (under paine of death) to give him so much as a visit, (those onely excepted) who were appointed to guard his person, and to give him the strict allowance of bread, and water, to the amazement of Solimy, who by this meanes, being brought to a frenzie, behaved himselfe so rudely, that the people supposed him to have beene possessed with a Devill. Newes of his strange comportment, raised by reason of the rigour of his imprisonment, was brought into the Empire, and Caesar, moved to compassion in respect of his suf∣ferings, wrote in his behalfe to Ragotskie, to abate his punishing hand, to admit some Iesuites to have re∣course unto him, for his instruction; that he might not lose his Soule together with his Body; Medi∣camentum pejus morbo; and to consider, that the effect of the service hee had done unto him, might at least, stand in an equall poise, against the treason to which he had consented: To all which, the Prince gave no other answer, but that if the Devill had got no new one, Solimy might be his Secretary. Istuan, in the meane time ceased not to intercede by Friends for his owne reconciliation, but not prevailing, hee implo∣red ayde of the Grand Signior, who furnished him with an Armie, and promised to invest him in the Principality of Transilvania. Regotskie, to oppose him, sent to the Emperour, and the Polonian for suc∣cours,
of which though hee failed, neither of them being willing to provoke such an enemie, with his owne forces encountred the Bassaw in the Field; and by foiling the Turkes in their first onset, cleared his Country of those Mahometan Invaders. The Christian King, who had lately given order for the billetting his Armie, and supplying in with com∣petent Provisions; seeing the inconvenience which happened thereupon, by a continuall accesse of men of Armes, Light-horse, and Carabines, to the molestation and great charge of his Subjects, after the old Com∣panies were layd in Garrison; put forth another De∣cree, as the Rule of his former Ordinance, the summe whereof was this: That the Contribution and Provi∣sion should not bee afterwards delivered,The King of France his or∣der for Provi∣sion for his Souldiers, and case of the people. but for 60 Masters of every Company of men of Armes; for fifty of each Company of Carabines, comprehending there∣in their Chieftaines, and other Officers; provided still, that there be that number in each Company effectivé; forbidding expressely, all the Commanders of the sayd Companies, to exact, or compell the Villages and pla∣ces lyable to those Contributions, to deliver more then as prescribed, for such a number of men as is limitted by this Ordinance, upon paine of suffering as Extor∣tioners. This Order both pleased the people, being thereby secured from further oppression, and the inrol∣led Souldiers, such good order being taken for their subsistance and maintenance. This billeting of Souldiers in the Frontiers was not unnecessary. Iohn de Werth, & Pycolimini, who were gone towards the Frontiers of Luxenburg, were upon the returne to invade the Kings Dominions, Decem 8/1 they were come over the Bridge of Gyvais, upon the Maase. The Marquesse De la Force understanding of the enterprise, made head against them, to the terrour
of the common Souldiers under the Spanish Com∣mande, their Generall commanding the Bridge to bee broken downe behind him, thinking thereby to cause his men to fight; the common Souldiers opposed it, and fearing to bee hemmed in betwixt the River and the French Army, made more haste then good speed to returne; and in a tumultuous confusion, hasting back towards the River (the Bridge being pestered with their owne Carriages) they pressed so thick one upon another, that to the number of foure hundred men were thrust into the water and drovvned, and many Waggons overturned into the River. And this ill be∣ginning, made the Spanish Generall betake himselfe to the Forrest of Liege,Iohn de Wethe flight. being pursued by the Count of Quinse, the Marqueste De la Force, and the Collonell Gassion, who cut off many of the Reareguard, the Ge∣nerall still flying towards the Bishopricke of Triers, where hee was appointed to take up his Winter-Quarter. Gassion, being now free from any offensive Enemy, ranne over the Country of Henault, plundering it, and exacting of the Villages there, the same summs of mo∣ney and Contributions which Don Marcos de Lima the Spanish Governour in La Capelie exacted from the French Villages in that Vicinage. The Cardinall In∣fant, as well to retaliate the French Frontiers with the like Inrodes, as to reinforce his Garisons, sent into Irson, (a Towne upon the River of Oise. lately apper∣taining to the Duke of Guise; but taken by the Spani∣ards in the late Invasion) the Regiments of Horse, un∣der the Command of St Bath, and De la Granges, ma∣king in all about six hundred, as a reinforcement to the Presidiaries there, and then that Garrison being growne confident of their owne strength, began to plunder the Neightour Territories. Decemb, 1/26 Gas∣sion
had Intelligence, that the next day at ten in the morning, the Garrison intended to goe a forraging in∣into the Villages about Neufmaison. To lose no time hee presently commanded the Sergeant-Maior of his owne Regiment, to take foure Companies out of his Regiment, which was then at Vervin, with instru∣ctions to lye in ambush in a Wood, and to attend the issuing out of the Garrison; Himselfe not being in case for that Service, because of an old would upon him, which then began to bleed afresh. The Ser∣geant-Maior performed his Directions so speedily, that within one hower after his Trumpets were soun∣ded (the Boute-selle being given immediately) the Horsemen were all ready, and were instantly about their businesse, wayting in their Ambushment till the next day at Noone, at which time the Enemies were discovered to bee ready to sally forth of the Citie. By the space of two and twentie howers, in vvhich the French Cavallery attended the Spaniards comming out of their Hold,oo Walloon Horse defea∣ted, and surpri∣zed by Gassion neere Neuf∣maison. no noyse was heard in that small Campe, nor were they discovered by the Garrison, though lodged within a quarter of an English mile from thence. An high tree, which raised his loftie head above the rest of the Thicket, vvas prepared by the Sergeant-Maior, as a Watch-tovver to discover the Spanish preparations. Foure Scouts were ap∣pointed by the Commander to that purpose; one in the topp of that boughie Tree, who could casily looke into the Castle, and himselfe unseene, see eve∣ry thing done therein, and observe especially the in∣gresse, and egresse of them that came in, and went out thence. Another Scout vvas placed in the middle of the Tree, a third at the foot, and a fourth twen∣tie paces thence, with fifteene French Horse, and the Bodie of the Armie fifteene paces thence, War∣ning
was given in a trice of the Spaniards sally, the second Sentinell receiving it from the first, the third from the second, the fourth from him, and the Ar∣mie from the last. The Cavallery thereupon kept close in their Ambushment, vvhile the Spanish for∣ces about three hundred Horse, having passed the River of Irson, and the Wood wherein they lay un∣discovered, tooke their March toward Neufmaison. The Spaniard surpassing the French in number, and the advantage of the place, made the French Com∣mander advise with his Captaines, whether it was fit at that time to incounter them. The feare of sup∣ply, by the neighbour-Garrison, and the countenance of the Spaniards shewing a couragious Resolution, dis-hartened the Commander from attempting any thing: but three Captaines of that Band, Rauonelle, La Lande, and Balthasar, sprightly Gentlemen, and ashamed to returne to the Collonell, without some tokens of their Valour, resolved to take fifteene Horse out of each Companie, which under the com∣mand of Balthasar, should give the first charge up∣on the Spaniards, whilest the other remainder of the Armie, being divided into three Squadrons, might come up conveniently to second them. The Spaniards stood then in a firme Body, and having sent an hun∣dred Horse into the Village of Neufmaison, the o∣ther two hundred attended armed in three Squadrons to secure the pillagers from the French Military men, if any should happen to march that way. And now began the hurly burly: Balthasar came on bravely, and in his first Charge had seven of his men woun∣ded by the Spanish opponents. But that scratch dis∣hartened not the French Assaylants, who comming up to his succour, charged upon the first Squadron with their Pistolets, and with the first volly of Shot, ha∣ving
slaine above twentie of the Enemies, routed the rest of the Squardron; whose sudden flight caused the other two Squadrons to betake themselves to their heeles in a strange confusion; the French troopes pursuing them eagerly, and in the pursuit having slaine seventy others, constrained the rest to take the River, wherein forty three of them were found drowned immediately, and seventy two begging Quarter, had it granted them. The storme was not yet spent, the Pesants of Neufmaison, and the other Neighbour Vil∣lages, heard the report of this defeat and sallied from the Woods, in which they had hid themselves for feare of the Enemie, and incouraged by the Soul∣diers, fell upon the remnant of the Spaniards, slew fifteene or sixteene of them, tooke the rest about ninety in number Prisoners, whom they brought to Vervins, with two hundred Horse, upon which the Spanish Souldiers were mounted; so gaining foure fold, what they had lost, by those Pillagers. In short, none escaped, save onely nineteen Souldiers, and their Captaine Bsansano, and his Cornet, who in this confusion, got over the River where it was wadeable, and saved themselves in that Garrison. All the Pri∣soners tooke service under Gassion, six onely excepted, men of rnk and qualitie, which having their wives and children in Irson, durst not serve under his Colours, but proffred a good ransome. Picardy hus freed, in the end of the old yeare, of the Spanish bands, the Countie of Burgundy, and the Province of Guien, onely remained to bee secured from those invaders. Ionville, a Citie in the French Countie, upon the River of Saone, was made a Ma∣gazine for Victualls, and other Provisions, and Am∣munitions for Warre, by Gallas, when hee made his first inrode into the Dutchie of Burgundy. Duke
Barnard in that time of Winter, resolved to besiege it, and to that purpose, taking with him three small Pieces of Canon, began to batter it; but those Guns, not able to bore the Wall, hee sent for three greater, which were brought unto his Armie, not without much difficultie; the fowle waies, and deepe waters being ready to sinke them, unlesse they had beene supported by strength of men. This incumbrance, did somewhat slacken the execution of what hee inten∣ded. The Garrison was One thousand strong, the Enemies succors began to appeare in person, for their assistance, and Duke Barnard, too weake with that handfull of men hee had designed for this occasion, sent to the Cardinall De Valette for more helpe, who sent thither, the Vicount De Turenne with Two thousand Foot, and the Collonell Tupadell with Ten Regiments of Horse: And they comming in maturely, plied their Batteries close, and having made a reasona∣ble breach in the Wall, threatned to assault it. The Praesidiaries, though so many in number, as might have defended the Citie, yet wanting courage (for they were not all Souldiers that bore Armes, Five hundred Burgesses and Pesants being imployed in that service) or not truly affecting the Spaniard, for Foure hundred of the Souldiers were strangers, and none of his Subjects; hung out a Flag of Truce immediately, and consented to deliver up the Towne, onely with leave to depart, with their Armes and Baggage, which was granted, and the Garrison dismissed, save onely Ha∣bercourt the Commander, who was detained Priso∣ner, and the Town surrendred to Duke Barnard. And thus the last yeares Tumults were ended about the Dutchie of Burgundy. In Guien, the Spanish Forces were still busie, since the prize of St. Iohn de Luz (whence thirty Religious
Reformadoes,The Fort of St. Barba taken by the Count of Grammont. rather desired to depart, and leave all they had, than to give the Oath of Allegeance to their Enemies, which they ought unto their King) and the Spaniards, seeing that the Holds which they possessed neere St. Iohn de Luz & Cibouro, could yield them no advantage; to proceed further with their Forces (a River running through the middle of the Valley, in which those Forts were placed, whose current hindred their Progresse) they devised in the month of October, to raise a Fort neere the Church dedicated to St. Bar∣ba, where there is a very strong Tower, and such a one as might serve almost for their designe. Six weeks together, their Labourers and Pioners had been im∣ployed for that worke, and they followed it so ear∣nestly, that by the ninth of December new stile, they had brought it to defence, and garrisoned it with two hundred of their best men, and fortified it with two Pieces of Canon. The Count of Grammont, Go∣vernour for the King in Bayon, considering how serviceable the Fort was for the Enemies, who might not onely from thence protect their spoiling Bands, sent into France, but discover also the French troopes, that should march from Bayon, against them; resolved to defer it no longer, but instantly to assault it. To this purpose, December 19. new stile, hee selected nine hundred men out of the Garrison of Bayon, and first the day following, having fallen upon fiftie Per∣dues of the Spanish partie, surprised them; and incou∣raged by this beginning, ran furiously with his Armie to the Fort, scaled it at once in twentie severall places, and though the Spaniards, fighting bravely, kept the Combate doubtfull by the space of halfe an houre, yet in the end, became Master of the great Bastion, and slew all the Souldiers appointed to guard it, save onely fifteene which fled to the Church, preserved as a place
of Refuge, by 12 of their companie, if the Fort should chance to be surprised by that onslat. Valour, not number, is most prevalent in warlike actions. Those twentie seven alone, which had made a Cittadell of the Sanctuary, did more hurt to the French Assai∣lants, than the whole companie appointed for the de∣fence of the Baestion. They baricadoed the Church dores, and by the advantage of the Tower, renewed a desperate fight, of two howers long against the be∣siegers. In the end wearied, not vanquished, they began to slacken the Combare, and that little inter∣mission, giving time to the French, to expedite the worke, a new Scalao was made, and the French be∣came Masters of the Tower. The Spaniards case then grew desperate; yet as the Nation is more jealous of their Honour, than carefull of their lives, they re∣solved to fight it out, though disadvantagiously, and not yield cowardly. The resistance they made, was rather desperate, than grounded upon true fortitude. To preserve their lives by fight, it was very impro∣bable, and to escape by flight impossible: Yet fight they did, almost to the last man, and all were slaine, save three onely, who complying with necessity, yielded themselves, and were taken as Prisoners of war Time would not permit the Count of Grammont, to advise what to doe. Carry away the two Pieces of Canon hee could not, wanting such equipage, as was needfull for that worke, and therefore hee tumbled them into the Sea. To stand to garrison the Ft, hee might not; during the Combare, the grosse body of the Spanish Armie, which was then at Bordagaine, began to play with their Ordance upon him and sent 200 Horse in 2 Squadrons against him, who appea∣ring in the vally, which separated the French frō heir Enemies, the Count posted speedily to assaile them, and
charged them so furiously, that hee compelled them to fly to St. Iohn de Luz, where another grosse body of their Armie was inquartered, and then returned to the fort, which he demolished and made unserviceable for the Enemie, and thence marched home to Bayon, to raise up stronger Forces to oppose the Invaders. Priches, a frontier towne of Picardy, plundred by the French Captaine Rand.One more Relation onely, I find worth the recor∣ding for that last yeare. The Marques of Praslin, having sent One hundred Horse to the Froutiers of Picardy, to informe him of the posture of the Spaniards, Rand the Captaine of the Companie, perceived himselfe of a sudden, to be come so neere the Town of Priches; then possessed by the Spaniard, that he thought it im∣possible for him to retire, before the Inhabitants of the place had raised the Countrey against him; and there∣fore, resolved to prevent them, and assault the Towne first. To this end, having disburthened some of his Horses, of Twentie Musquetiers, that number of Horse, serving as Dragons in this Expedition, they charging, discharging, & recharging nimbly, made his way against some few Defendants, which had guarded the Advenues, and barricadoed them against all Inva∣ders; himselfe following, with the rest of his Forces, broke them up, and entred the Towne, otherwise un∣defenced, saving by a small Fort, plundered it, and burnt it to the ground. Some Priseners hee tooke, and carried to the Marquesse, who being informed by one of them, that the wife of Don Marcos de Lima, Governour for the Catholick King in La Capella, was comming to visit her Husband, hee instantly tooke Two hundred Light-horse, and made an Ambuscado wich them, in a pace called Flamangre, neere the Ci∣tie, where hee was scarce arrived, before he had In∣telligence by a Corporall, that three Wallon Captaines, Lorgue, Franquin, and Anbrestrot, which served in
that Citie, were comming abroad to forrage;The Compa∣nies of Wal∣lons defeated, and rowted by the Marquesse praslin. presently tooke up his Sword and Pistoll, wishing the rest of his men to be in a readinesse after his example; and himselfe went secretly to one side of the Hill, whence he might discover the whole Plaine, through which the Enemie was to march, intreating the Earle of Quinsay, to repaire to another place, where he might observe their Posture. The Earle and his attendants had them first in view, and went instantly to the Mar∣quesse of Praslin, to certifie him of their comming. The French no sooner heard the tidings thereof, but prepared to Battell, scarce being able to contain them∣selves in their Ambuscado; yet the indiscretion of a Spie, appointed by the Count of Quinsay, by cer∣taine signalls, to notifie the whole troupe, of the neer∣nesse, and distance of the Enemy, had like to have pre∣vented the enterprise. The often waving of his Cap was perceived by the Wallons, who thereupon suspe∣cti g a traine laid for them, were upon Retreate, and had escped without blowes; had not the Marquesse of Praslin, with a round gallop▪ made up to them, and charged them so agerly, that of a sudden they were put to a precipitious flight, not being safe till they had reached the Fort of Grand-Floyon, whither they were pursued by the French Cavalarie, who slew forty of them in their flight, and tooke as many Prisoners. And here the last yeares Observarions are terminated. Wee must now looke on to the new yeare, and the new Actions and Occurrances thereof. Janus had scar left off his Infant-smile, when the Cardinall Infant, breathing out War against the united Provinces, sent out his Proclamation to his Officers, to practise all hostility agst the Friends, and Allies of the States in the Netherlands. The words ran thus:
By the King. S. TO our most deare and faithfull Chancellor, and to our Councell of Brabant, greeting, &c. Whereas wee are informed, That our enemies have lately presumed to impose heavy burthens,A Proclamati∣on set forth by the Cardinall Infant, concer∣ning Contri∣butions. and de∣mand Contribution for their owne advantage, upon the Vilages and Market Townes neere Thienen, intending to augment them, by exacting the like from other places neer that Iurisdiction, to the great damage of our good and loving subjects, whom wee desire to preserve in securitie, and o free from the like Exactions. Wee therefore ordaine and com∣mand by these Presents, That you shall immediate∣ly and without delay make Proclamation in each place of the foresaid Iurisdiction, where such Pla∣caràs are commonly proclaimed, That no man, upon paine of our displeasure, and a severe and exempla∣ry punishment, shall consent to collect or pay any such Contributions, more or lesse, to the advantage of our Enemies, but shall to the utmost of their po∣wer, hinder our enemies, those Rebels, from levying such aydes, injoyning withall, our Souldiers that now are in Garrison, or hereafter may be; and com∣manding all and every one residing in the Villages and Market-townes of the said Iurisdiction, which are able to beare Armes, to arme immediatly, upon the first report of our Enemies, or their adherents invasion; to issault and slay them that shall be found in the same dominion, neither admitting them as
prisoners of warre, nor permitting them quarter, which we allow not in any of these parts wherein the Contribution is prohibited. Furthermore wee will and require, that a carefull watch by night be kept in every Village where it is needfull, and that the same bee performed by a competent number of able Souldiers wel armed, who a stone as they shall de∣scry any of the said Rebeils, shll strike upan All∣arme, and purse fter them: That day and night there shall be placed in the Steeples of each Church, Sentinells, and Watch-man to give a warning peale by the sound of a Bell; upon the hearing whereof, the Neighbouring-villages are enjoyned to take Armes, and to doe their best endevour to encounter and pursue after our aforesaid Enemies and Rebels, and their adherents: Expresly withall forbidaing all and every one (of what condition soever) not to connive or dissemble in the execution hereof, upon paire of a rigourous, and their exemplary pu∣nishment. And for the better incouragement of those, whose valour and forwardnesse heerein shall tessifie their Loyaltie; Wee have graunted, and doe graunt, that to each of them who shall take Prisoner, or slay one of those Enemies, or Re∣bells, and bring him to us, either alive or dead; they shall bee payed in hand, and immediaty▪ fiie Gilders a time, by the Officers appoynted for our Receipt, who shall need no further discharge for their payment, then this our present Proclama∣tion. And for the better execition of what is heere required; nee have prohibited all Hoss,
Inne-keepers, Vintners, and Victuallers, which lodge strangers, either within Cities, Market∣townes, and Villages, or without, to receive any such, as are knowne, or suspected to bee in the ser∣vice of our En mies, bee they their neerest Kins∣men or Friends, but command them to advise the Officer, Magistrate, or Governour of the place thereof immediately, upon paine to forfeit his life, in case of his knowledge, and in case of su∣spition, five and twentie Gilders. This is Our pleasure. Given in our Citie of Bruxells, Ia∣nua. 17/17 1637. The States replyed againe in words, and in the same Language set foorth a Placard, against the Subjects of the Catholike King; yet neither partie came to blowes, preparations onely for warre be∣ing then undertaken, the time not fitting the field, to which the prosecution was referred. Italie, an hotter Climate, was more pregnant, and sooner shewed the new fruites of the Spring. Piacenza was still beleaguered with the Spanish Troopes, though Leganez, the Generall of the Ar∣mie, and Governour of Milan, was retyred home∣ward for his owne repose; the Armies still abode in the Field, which by closing up the Poe, and in∣tereepting the Land-passages, block't up the Citie, and relued it to such extremitie, that the Sister of the Grand Duke, wife to the Parmesan, was con∣strained, by the middle of Ianuarie, to become a Supplyat to the Spanish Armie for her departure, which was grated her, in regard of her blood, and her Brothers confederacie with the Crowne of Spaine; the Duke himselfe yet relying upon the French suc∣cors,
still abiding in the Citie,The Duke of Parma agree with the King of Spaine. to preserve it against the Assailants: His constancie to the Christian King, was admired through the Spanish Campe; which knowing his extremitie, and seeing his friends faile him, with faire words began to solicite him, to relin∣quish the French partie, and to renue his amitie with the Catholick King; promising as honorable Conditi∣ons, as could be demanded of them, or expected from them: There was no great choice. The French suc∣cors were still at Asti; the Spaniards grew stronger, and himselfe weaker: And though they had these ad∣vantages, they stood not upon extremities, but pro∣pounded freely, That if the Duke would be onely a neutrall, and not side with the Christian King, against his Catholick Majestie; they would remove all their Forces out of his Country, restore the forts and towns they had taken from him, and esteeme him as a Friend and Confederate.The Conditi∣ons of his a∣greement with the King of Spaine. The Duke conformed himselfe to the time, and his owne occasion; and willingly con∣sented to the Spanish Proposition, yet durst not acquaint the French Praesidiaries with his purpose, for feare, that they in a sudden displeasure should plunder the Citie, nor would he by force of Armes bring it to ef∣fect. At last, he pretended a generall Muster without the Gates, and thither drew all the Souldiers, upon a promise of paying them their Monies due for wa∣ges; but being there, hee calls forth the Collonels and Officers; declaring to them, That the non-performance of things promised him by the King of France, had brought all this trouble, both upon himselfe, and his Territorie: That, inforcing necessitie had compelled him to capitulate with the Crowne of Spaine; and shewed them withall, the Articles of the Treatie, sub∣scribed by himselfe, and the Count of Leganez, Gover∣nour of Millan, in behalfe of the Catholick King,
rendered thanks to the Souldiers for their service, paid them their stipends, which they accepted better than his words, and caused them to be conducted to the Frontiers of Piemont, by 500 Spanish horsemen. The Parmesan himselfe was thus quit of his trou∣bles, entertained in State at Millan, commerce of trade was granted betwixt his Subjects and the Millanoys; but Fabio Scotti his Embassador, to the Christian King; upon his returne from Paris,Fabio Scotti, the Pormesans Embassadour, sent Prisoner to Paris. whence hee came with Letters to the Confederate Generalls, the Duke of Sa∣voy, and the Marshall Crequi, was sent back by them, as a Prisoner to the King of France; the Duke concei∣ving (as hee thought) a just displeasure against the Prince of Parma for capitulating with the Spaniards, who threatned to invade his Territories; and soone after, invaded Montferat, driving away 700 great Cattell from the Territorie of Asti, which caused him to fortifie his Frontiers, especially at Turino and other places bordering upon the Dutchie of Millan, and to give a sudden assault against the strong Fort of Frassio∣netta; which hee tooke by onslat, and garrisoned with 1000 men. While these things were transacting in Italy, there passed some light overtures of War in the Dukedome of Loraine, and the Franch Countie. Chavanes, com∣monly called Chavagne, a strong Piece in the Franch Countie, placed betwixt two Hills, upon the banke of the River of Suran, neere the Frontier of France, and the Territorie of Bresse, garrisoned with 2 Spanish companies of Horse,Chavanes ta∣ken by Thian∣ges, Comman∣et of Treffor. bad lately pillaged Simanère a Towne in the Bressoys, burned down five or six dwel∣ling houses, slaine the Inhabitants, even to women and children, and the newes thereof being brought to Thi∣anges, Covernour of Trefford; he, with a selected com∣panie of that Garrison; some Voluntiers of the Coun∣try,
400 men of the Train-bands of Bresse and Bugey, and 300 old Souldiers of the Regiments of Anguien and Rebe, making in all 700 foot, and 50 horse, resol∣ved, if it was possible, to surprise it. The enterprise was put in practise about the middle of Ianuary, but not carried so secretly, as to be concealed from the Garrison, who acquainted the neighbour Forts there∣with, defired them to have a vigilant eye upon the French Commander, and they jointly blocked up the Passages, attending the march of the French Armie; but the number of the Defendants, was too small to withstand the Assailants; they made their vvay vvith Sword and Pistoll, vvere at the Tovvn unexpectedly, applied the Petards to the gates, and those engines working effectually, they forced the Garrison to yield upon discretion, vvith their lives saved, in the sight of five troopes of Light-horse, and three companies of Dragoons, vvhich were sent from the neighbouring Garrisons for their succour; carried avvay Prisoners, the tvvo Captaines of the Horse, vvith all their Offi∣cers and Cavaliers, whom they carried to Burg, having enriched the Souldiers with their Horse and Baggage, and the hopes of great Ransomes. Ericourt besie∣ged by part of Gallas his Ar∣mie.Ericourt, in the Countie of Monbeliard, was about the same time besieged by part of Gallas his Army, bat∣tered with the Cannon, some of the out-workes taken, and the Mill neere the gate of the citie surprized: by be∣nefit whereof, 400 of the Imperiall Army passed the water,400 Caesarean slaine, and ta∣ken Prisoners before Eri∣court. and tooke up their Quarter betwixt the River and the City. The Baron of Annevoux understanding how the place was endangered, with 300 Foot of his owne, and 40 Horse, attempted hereupon to relieve it; the Quarter betwixt the River and the Citie, was the place he first assaulted; which being but weakly guar∣ded, and scarce brought to defence, the Souldiers there∣in
in became a prey to the Assay lants, who slew 300 of them upon the place, (amongst which was the Lieute∣nant of the Marquesse of Grana his Regiment) took the most part of the rest orisoners, and amongst them the Lieutenant to Tieffbach, who afterward dyed of his wounds. This beginning was but an introduction to his further proceeding. The Baron, who commanded a Regiment of 14 French Companies in Monbeliard for the King, was informed afterwards, that Collonell Mercie, and the Baron of Suitz, the Imperiall Com∣manders there, since the last defeat, were reinforced by a new accrewt of some troops appertaining to the Ge∣nerall Gallas; had continued the siege, and brought the Garrison to the point of surrendring for want of suc∣cors: Hereupon, he had a designe to relieve it; to bring his  to effect, he assayed to doe it many times in the night; but then they having doubled their Guards, and himselfe failing of the Enterprise, hee resolved to accomplish that by day-light, which hee could not bring to passe in the darke; nor was his counsell cros∣sed with an unhappy issue. The command of his In∣fantery, being deputed to Tilloy,The Siege rai∣sed. and Bailly; himselfe in the head of his Horse fell upon the Trenches of the ene∣my, put to the sword a guard of Cavalliers, consisting of about 50 Maisters, 10 only excepted, who were ta∣ken prisoners, compelled the Imperiall Foot to forsake a Fort which they had built upon the passage betwixt Monbeliard and Ericourt; rowted some other Corpses du guard, and sent the Auxiliaries into the Citie, under the commaund of his owne Lieutenant Goliefer, who also carried with him all manner of Ammunition for warre, even to very Hand-mills, whereof the besieged had much need; to the great incouragement of the In∣habitants, and Praesidiaries; who thus inheartened, the next night, made out two sallies; in one of which they
nayled foure pieces of Cannon, and slue divers Caesare∣ans; & to the great dis-hartening of the Imperiall com∣mon souldiers and Generals, who seeing that place thus provided, both of military and alimentary provisions, after they had lost above 1000 men before it, made 400 Cannon-shot against it, cast in severall Bombards, and Granadoes to fire it, and broke downe some piece of the wall, Ian. 27. old stile, raised the siege, marched the same night to Granges, in the way to Burgundy, where the next day they divided their Forces, the Baron of Suitz taking the way of Germany to joyne with Gallas his Army, and Mercie the way of the Franch Countie, to Duke Charles, who yet remained there. Fortune smiled all this while upon the French; by Sea and Land the affaires of that Kingdome went on, if not prosperously, yet not unhappily. Zarquemine, a frontier towne betwixt Alsatia and Loraine, in posses∣sion of the Caesareans and Loranois, was as a pricke in the sides of the Villages about Haguenau, and the Countie of Bitche, in the alliance, and under the obe∣dience of the French King; but the Garrison there was forced,Zarqueine surprised by Brevill Com∣mander of Bitche. and the Towne yielded to obedience by the Armes of Brevill, Governour of the Countie, Towne, and Castle of Bitche (against which place, those of Zarquemine had a designe formerly; who assisted with 100 Souldiers, sent unto him from Aiguebonne, Go∣vernor of Haguenau, about the middle of Ianuary, old stile, marched against it, came to the Fort, broke it o∣pen, & became Masters of the place; burning down the house of the Provost, & Controller of the Town, the 2 Boutefeaues, and principal Authors of their hostilities, sparing the Inhabitants (except one who was sent Pri∣soner to Haguenau, till hee had paid his Ransome) giving them this caution, That they should comport themselves fairely, toward the Kings Subjects and
the Crowne of France: threatning otherwise, That they would returne thither, and deale with them, as they had done with that Provost, and Controller, who had suffered exemplarily, to deter the rest from giving eare hereafter to such wicked Counsels. The same day, which was so fortunate to the French Commander in the North-east, by land, was as prospe∣rous in the North-west by Sea. The Ides of Ianuary, ministred a fortunate adventure, and the first was se∣conded by some others. The Pirates of Dunkerque, who often times had roved thrivingly upon the Coast of Callis, were ranging about for more spoile. The Count of Charost, Governor of the Citie, being advised ther∣of, dispatched to Sea a Frigate well armed,Dunkerquer Rovers taken by the Sea∣men of Callis, meerly to discover the number of the Dunkerquers. A small boat of Dunkerque, haling a rich Holland Ship, which the Fleet had taken 4 daies before, appeared singly, which being guarded only with 13 Wallons, the French Pinace subdued, and brought into Callis with the Hollander; to the incouragement of the Seamen in the Port, who presently rigg'd up a small Navie, put forth to Sea, re∣solving not to returne with emptie hands; and the en∣terprise succeeded so well, that the next day they brought into the harbor three other Prizes: one wher∣of, was a Vessell laden with all sorts of Marchandise from Spaine, and bound for the Low-countries, in which bottom, and the two others, were found also many Prisoners. This good event, rouzed up the courage of some other Adventurers to attempt the like. The 3d of the Calends of February, Intelligence was given, That some of the Dunkerquers were in the Channell neere that Coast, with some Ships which they had taken as prize from the Hollanders, and that occasion was so po∣werfully perswasive, that the Marriners needed no other Orator, to incourage them to put to Sea, and fight
with them. Three French Frigates were instantly lan∣ched out of the Haven, and upon the first sight of the Dunkerquers, the winds filling their Sailes, made up to them without delay, let fly their Ordnance, and the Dunkerquers, rather willing to save themselves, than fight to preserve their Prize; left the Hollanders Ships to the French Adventurers, who returned with them to Gallis, and thereby so hartened the Sea-men, that the Port which lately wanted Sailers, and could scarse af∣ford one good Commander, soone after abounded both with Captaines and Marriners. But these peteete Victories, though the newes of them soone after arrived at the Court of France, were not so pleasing to the Christian King, as the reconclia∣tion of the Monsiour his Brother, was to his Matie, for the Prince having vanquished himselfe, & dispossessed his heart of those jealousies, which made him depart as a Malecontent from the Court, returned againe of his owne accord, in the beginning of February; and gave the King such a plenary assurance of his loyaltie, bro∣therly affection,The Christian King, and the Monsieur re∣conciled. and true zeale to the Crowne and State of France, that the King by his owne Letters, made a kind of Proclamation through his whole Kingdom, of the reunion of their fraternall affections, and assurance of his fidelitie. Thus his Letters ran: The Kings let∣ters to the Ge∣neralls, &c. TO all Generalls of our Armies, and Governours of our Provinces, Greeting. My good Cosins, since that the departure of my brother the Duke of Orleance to Bloys, in the Moneth of November last, without our permission, hath given the world occasion to suspect his good intentions; and I my selfe beleeved, that if hee had (accordingly as hee ought) with attention examined the Motives of his Action, (according to our Letters sent after him immediatly, to give him as good evidence (as be
could desire) of our good will toward him; by that imploy∣ment which hee had in the Command, and Conduct of the principall Forces of the Realme) hee might easily have knowne, that those Avisements, and Motives which caused him to eloyne himselfe from us, were not onely contrary to truth, but also to his proper good; Yet this credulitie never hindered me, from taking all care to pre∣vent those evill consequents, which might have followed this our separation: But thanks be to God, whatever hath ensued, hath served to no other end, then to make me know the fidelitie of my Subjects; whose constancy I have found unmoevable. My Brother, who hath well concluded, that the union of Hearts, in these times of danger, is as necessary as the forces of the Kingdome, to oppose with the more puissance, the Enemies of the greatnesse of this Crowne, and its tranquilitie: Of his owne accord, hath applyed himselfe to all which I could desire; and no soo∣ner acknowledged his transgression,His Majestie undertaketh, for his zeale to the State, &c. then I was ready, with all my heart, to forget it, giving such credit to the Assu∣rances he hath given me of his good affection, and zeale to the good of this State, that I my selfe doe undertake, and am a Suretie for him to my selfe. I am also resolved, up∣on the intreatie of my said Brother, to pardon my Cosin the Count of Soissons, not onely his fault for retyring to Sedan, without my licence, but also for his behaviour there all the time since; though it hath bin otherwise then I ex∣pected. All which I doe most willingly; provided, that my said Gosin within the space of fifteene dayes after the pub∣lication of this Declaration (which I make freely and of my owne good grace) returue to his obedience. All which I would have you understand by this Letter, to the end that you may impart it to all my Servants and Subjects in the extents of your commands: praying God (my good Co∣sins) that he would take you into his protection. Written at Orleance the 9 day of Febr. 1637. Signed Lovis. And a little lower, Sublet.
Some discourse interceded at the same time of a gene∣rall peace to be concluded at Coln, and of a particular peace betwixt the Christian and Catholick Kings, and the report was delivered so confidently, that the compromit∣tors in that negotiation, were named expresly; but whe∣ther the Spaniards prevailing in Italy with the Duke of Parma, as the French would haue it, or the French A∣gents refusall, to goe upon the safe pasport of Ferdinand the third (in whose name that Instrument was sealed) as by an Imperiall power, (the French not allowing him the title of Caesar) the treatie held not, it is uncertaine. This is sure, that strong preparations for warre, were suddenly made of either side. The French set forth a Navie of 26.The Spanish and French preparations for warr. Gallies, to invade the Island of Sardignia, attended with 22. other vessells which carried over 8000. land-men. The Spaniard on the other side, knowing that moneyes were not onely the ligaments, but the very foundations of warre, sent first 1000. chests, containing two millions and a halfe of gold in Royalls of Eight to Genoa, for payment of his Souldiers in Germany, and Italy; then leavied in the Dukedome of Millan 8000. foot; and in the Kingdome of Sicilie, a Regiment for 2500. foot, under the command of the Marquesse di Spava-Forno, to be imployed in his Navie; and lastly, by the helpe of the Duke of Florence, (who assisted him with ten Gallies) sent out a convenient Fleete to oppose them. The French in their gallantrie rowed and sailed to the Island; and comming on furious∣ly, tooke the Port Orestano, neere Cagliano, affrighted the Inhabitants of that Countrey, who at first hid themselues in the woods, and caues, and holes, for safeguard of their liues; yet of a sodaine betooke themselues to Armes, beat out those who were landed, surprized their baggage, and forced the Fleete to returne, to Tolour,Crequi sent to the King of France by the Duke of Sa∣voy. a harbour in Province. And now the warre by land began to be re∣newed. The Duke of Savoy, who till this, never felt the fire of warre burning in his Dominions, found that Basi∣liske ready to infect his Territories; and to prepare an
Antidote against this poyson, sent for the Marshall Crequi, bestowed upon him a Diamond worth 1000. Crownes, and his Dutchesse another esteemed worth 600; not for service already done, but to be done hereafter, dispatched him by Post to Paris, himselfe soone after faigning to goe to Chambery, but (as it was thought) intending to goe to Lyon to conferre with the Christian King there, for reliefe in that extremitie. About the same time, viz. about the beginning of March (as it is wrote from Triers) a private conspiracy, being made in Diete hofen and Walderfangen by some of the In∣habitants, to deliver those Townes and Forts into the hands of the French Allies, (some of the Souldiers that lay in garrison in Dietenhofen,The French project disco∣vered at Die∣tenhofen, and their forces defeated. being corrupted with money, to kill the Commander of that place, & nayle the Canons, that lay to guard the passage thither by the river of Mosel) and the last of these performed really; the French being made acquainted therewith, sailed downe the river with scaling ladders, and other needfull implements to prose∣cute what was thus projected; but the plot was of too dishonourable a birth to haue a glorious issue. A French man, who being married in the Towne, was master of a small fortune, and father of some children, was made ac∣quainted by the conspirators of their intention, and he not knowing, what might fall to his fortune in that confusion, discovered the treason to the Magistrate, who doubled his watches, kept a strong Corps du guard at each Port, man∣ned the walls, and armed the Citizens to oppose these un∣welcomely expected guests; who finding their purpose prevented by this care, marched from thence to Walder∣fangen, where the Commander (having notice thereof from Dietenhofen the night before) gaue them so rude en∣tertainment, that of 400 foot, and 100 horse, which were designed for this bufinesse, scarce the one halfe returned; and after their departure, made inquirie for the conspira∣tors, proceeded against them legally, condemned them, and as they had deserved, put them to a shame full death.
In the Ʋaltoline, the French expeditions began at the same time to flag. The Grisons, an unconstant and uncer∣taine people (as all Democraticall States are) had often murmured against the Christian King, and his Generall there the Duke Rohan; and oft-times been appeased with money from France,The Duke of Rohan his goods arre∣sted by the Grisons, and the good order which was ob∣served by the French Commander; but now, what they had long praeconceived, of disburthening themselues of the French Forces, was brought into action. A generall Diet for the setling of that State was appointed to be held at Chur, or Coire, at the same time, when the multitude made head against the French, and to expell them by force out of the Countrey, were gathered together to the num∣ber of 4 or 5000. men, and resolved to surprize the Duke of Rohan in person, if it were possible. A superiour provi∣dence over-ruleth the wisest Counsells, and often infa∣tuateth their determinations, which would be accounted most prudent: The Duke was then abroad on hunting, and so by accident prevented that mis-fortune. The Gri∣sons perceiving that course to fayle, arrested his good which were at Chur, and by that violence discovered an alienation of their affections from him. It was not done so privately, as to be kept secret, the valley ecchoed with the same of what was done in the Citie, the report was quickly brought to the French Generalls eares, who up∣on the tydings repayred to the Staig, astrong peece, and hardly to be taken, while well manned, and defended. Thus secured, he stood upon tearmes of Capitulation, as holding it too dishonourable for himselfe and his Nation to leaue the Province, which he had gained by his pru∣dence, and managed by his valour, upon the mutinie of the giddie multitude, which for their owne advantage, and hope of gaine, might happily haue complied with the Christian Kings professed enemie, and the States of that Province, by mediation of those of Zurch, giving eare to counsell, came to a faire parley, assured him of the good respect they had of the amitie of the Christian King; that,
they intended no combination, and confederacie with the enemies of the Crowne of France; but that (as hitherto they had been a free State, not over-ruled by strangers) so now againe, they onely desired to be Masters of their own Dominions, promising withall, with their owne Armes, and at their proper costs, to secure those passages, (which were then held by the French) against the Spaniards; if he would freely restore them. The treatie was upon une∣quall tearmes, the Duke was their prisoner, and might not stand to make his owne conditions; To gaine his safe∣tie, and to be assured of the Grisons, he condescended to seale mutually to these Articles. That the Staig, the Coun∣tie of Bormeo, and Chiavenna, should be presently redeli∣vered to the States of those Provinces, and the money which was due unto them payed with all expedition: And the Grisons, on the other side, condescended, to con∣firme their amitie with the King and Crowne of France;The Condi∣tions agreed upon, betwixt the Grisons, and the Duke of Rohan. and to maintaine the passages against the Spaniard. All which, being sealed unto by the Duke in behalfe of the King his Master, and by the Colonell Gasper Smith, in be∣halfe of the Grisons, April 8. old stile, and the places were surrendred to the Grisons accordingly. These were the counterbuffes and spots, with which the flourishing fortune and splendour of the French glory was at that time checked and sullyed, which yet was som∣what restored and revived by another happy adventure of the Christian Kings Forces in Loraine about the same day when the Duke was almost surprized. The Caesareans who had some moneths before taken the Citie of Switz,Switz besie∣ged and taken by the French be∣twixt the Dukedome of Burgundy, and Switzerland, had thereby intercluded the passage, and communion, betwixt France, and the Allies of that Crowne in that Territorie. To regaine it the French Garrisons at Beffort, Bruntrant, and Ericourt, mustered up 2000. men, armed them with necessary provisions for a battery, sent them against that Citie and Castle, and then after two dayes battery, with 8. Pieces of Ordnance, forced the Garrison to yeeld upon
composition, to depart with their low weapons onely, and so opened the way for commerce betwixt that State and the Kings Subjects. But, this gaine, had been a small requitall to the former losses, had it come singly, and un∣attended without any other. It was the concomitant of better fortunes to the French, who under the Duke of Longueville, did much harme to the Spanish Garrisons in the Dukedome of Burgundy, surprized the Citie of Amur under the conduct of the Lord Thianges,Honorita and Margarita re∣covered by the French. and cut in pieces the Caesareans there; and by their Fleete, March. 19. old stile, at night assaulted the Iland Margarita, and landed some Forces under the Count of Harcourt, tooke in the first Fort, & after beleaguered the Fort Royall; where the Garrison, after a tedious Siege began to parley, and at last agreed upon composition, and so marched out, leaving the whole Island againe to the French, who now goe to assault and besiege the other Island named St. Honorata. The Spring began now to come on, and the united States of the Netherlands, and the Cardinall Infant,Preparations for warre by the Cardinall Infant. & the united tates. began to prepare for warre. The States began with the castigation of some rude Souldiers, cashiering at Mastricht 4. Com∣panies of foote, and at Venlo, and Roermond some others, who being out of pay, and knowing nothow to liue o∣therwise, than by warre, promised to reforme themselues, and were placed under other more severe Commanders; and this done, dispatches were sent and Proclamation pub∣lished, that all Commanders should haue their Companies ready by the beginning of May. The Cardinall Infant, who was engaged else-where, and not onely against the States, made great preparation both by sea & land to com∣passe his designes. Great store of Bisket was baked at Ant∣werp to supply the Dunkerkers, who with two men of warre and 16 Frigates, had already put to Sea. Picolomini was furnished with money, and a full Commission, and sent into upper Germany, to levie some thousands of men for the Infante's service, who had prepared his waggons for carriage of the Baggage; and Prince Francis of Lo∣raine,
who already had the Command of 4. Regiments, received order to rayse two new ones, and to joyne with the Earle Picolomins. The time of action was not yet come, the harvest was still in the blade, and the fields afforded no forrage. No Armies could yet be brought into Campagnia, onely some private parties were imployed abroad by the Garrisons, more for spoyle, and pillage, than in hope of victory. From Breda 100. valiant and experienced Souldiers were sent out on plundering, who were surprized, and rowted neere Balen by another partie of the States Garrison at the Bosh, which though it surpassed the Brabantiers in number yet obtained not the victory by meere valour & strength, but by a finenesse adjoyned thereto; which neverthelesse was not so prevalent as to giue them a cleere victory, without much losse of their own bloud.A bloudie ight betwixt apartie of the Spanish, and another of the States Souldiers. The States Soul∣diers, knowing of the enemies march, divided themselues into two bands, the one consisting of 80. the other of 40. men. The minor Company, appeared to the view of the Brabantiers, while the other and greater part remained hidden & undiscovered. The eye of the Spanish Souldiers was no sooner fixed upon the lesser band, but they made towards them with all hast, whilst they pretending a fear∣full flight, hasted to gaine two strong farme houses, neere the place where their complices lay, as places of refuge in that necessitie. Their enemy pursued them with all eager∣nesse, assaulted the houses with all violence, whilst those within playing upon them with their small shot, and the ambush rising from behinde them, made them know, that the victory was hardlier to be atchieved, than they imagi∣ned. Neither the odds of twenty men in number, nor the unexpected troope comming on so sodainely, did utterly discourage these resolved men, but made them recollect their spirits, and prepare to fight; droping, if not to obtaine the conquest, yet to goe off without much losse. The fight was hot on both sides, the Musquetiers were both good markmen, and nimble fingerens of that deadly engine; and
charged  discharged so nimbly, that the ground was purpled with the bloud of the wounded,The Statists get the victo∣rie. so many being slaine on both sides, that after the combate was done, ten waggons were laden with the dead corpses of those two pettie Armies, yet in the end, the victory fell to the Statists, the Spanish Souldiers being forced to flie. The Prince of Orange soone after, had a designe against Hulst, a Town of importance in the frontiers of Brabant,The Prince of Orarge his de∣signe against Hulst preven∣ted. and the Key of the Countrey from Zealand to that Pro∣vince, and the Earledome of Flanders. He had made pre∣paration to surprize it, and was about the expedition when certaine notice came unto him, that his project was disco∣vered, which made him forbeare the attempt, deeming it lesse dishonour, not at all to begin a work of that difficul∣tie, which might put himselfe and his Army into hazard, than to goe on desperately, and be repulsed shame∣fully. And thus, we haue described the occurrences of these few moneths, omitting nothing worth observation, which hath happened in these Westerne parts of the world. In the Easterne parts amongst the Turkes, we heare of tumults, civill dissentions, rebellions managed with a strong power, and such like barbarismes. The Belgerbeg Basha in Morea, attended with twentie thousand Souldiers, made head there against his Soveraigne, not contenting himfelfe with that high office, but ayming at a higher kinde of dominion in that Peninsula, and to effect his designe, called in o∣ther twelue thousand Alboneses, to assist him; and with those Forces, possessed himselfe of the Citie and Port de Santa Maura in Morea. The Grand Signior, enraged with this affront summoned him to appeare at his Court at Constantinopl; and (he not comming in) confiscated his lands and goods, and sent an Armie against him to surprize his person, and disperse the Rebells;The Basha in Morea rebel∣leth against the Turke. but with what suc∣cesse, it is not yet knowne. The Ʋizier basha who had bin imployed against the Persian, was threatned also to be
strangled (a miserable case, when service  by the event) by a Capigie, who was sent pposely to the Armie, to deprive the Basha of his life, because he had not beene fortunate in his warres against the Sophy. The Ʋezier knowing the fury of the Mahometan Em∣perour, and jealous of what was intended against him, for safeguard of himselfe, fell to the Persian, and left the Ar∣my without Commander,The Ʋezier Basha, im∣ployed lately against the Persian, fleeth to the Sophy. and so prevented the Capigie in the dispatch of his Commission. The Sultan missing his designe against the Vezier, proceeded in rage against the Capigie, smote off his head, and sent Camacan, ano∣ther of his Basha's, with the power and title of the for∣mer, to command his Armies, whose proceedings wee must expect hereafter. FINIS.
