5131 S118343 99853550 18937
A CORDIALL OF COMFORT. To preserue the Heart, from fainting with Griefe or Feare: for our Friends, or our owne Visitation, by the Plague. Also a Thankes-giuing to Al∣mightie God, for staying the Visitation in London, and the Subvrbs thereof. Both which may be of vse to Christians in other places, that are cleere, visited, or recouered. BY WILLIAM CHIBALD. Printed at London by W. I. for Nic. Bourn and Edw. Brewster, and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange, and at the Bible in Pauls-Church-yard. 1625.
TO The Right Wor∣shipfull; the Company of the Lether-Sellers: The Masters and Wardens; The Assistants and Liuery, with the rest of the Brethren, of that worthy Societie. Right Worshipfull, and Worthy: THE DE∣dication of bookes vn∣to persons of place and qualitie, is
to manifest a seruice∣able respect and reue∣rence vnto them; and to supplicate a fauoura∣ble aspect, and accepta∣tion from them. According to these fayre endes, I haue ad∣uentured to deuote this my Treatise, which doth need the one, to your Worships that are worthy of the other. You are worthy of my Dedication in two respects (namely) as Ci∣tizens, and as Lether-Sellers
of London. 1. As Citizens, be∣cause I wrote it in the Visitation of the City; and for the comfort of Citizens, in the Visita∣tion thereof. 2. As Lether-sellers, because you are that Company, whereof my deare Father was, Mr. Iames Chibald, (of sweet memory I hope among you) who a∣bout the yeere 1595. was Master, & head of your Body, euen as his
eldest Sonne, my lo∣uing Brother, is a li∣uing member of the same at this day. It remaynes, that your Worships would be pleased, by accep∣ting the seruice of this Dedication, to Patro∣nize the Booke: The rather, seeing the Au∣thors ayme in dedi∣cating it to you, is, but to honour you that are liuing, by my deare Parent that is dead: and to honour
the memory of him that is absent, by you that are present, which as Brethren of one Company, and Parents of Children, you cannot but ap∣proue. That you may the more freely grant my request, I pray you to take vnto your consi∣deration further, the subiect matter of the Booke: which is Spiri∣tuall Physicke. For it prescribes you, first, a
Cordiall: Secondly, a Dyet. The Cordiall hath a twofold nature. 1. To preserue your bodyes from infection or death by the Plague (if the Lord see it good for your soules, and as Christians you should not desire it otherwise.) 2. To keep your soules from fainting, with immoderate Griefe or Feare for your Friends, or your owne Visitati∣on by the Plague.
The Dyet is, to teach you that suruiue, how to liue to GODS glo∣ry, by learning to bee thankefull to God for your own preseruation, and for Gods wonder∣full and mercifull stay∣ing of the sicknesse a∣mongst vs. Both which as men, and Christian men, you haue rea∣son to looke after and learne. In hope of your free fauor herein, I humbly take my leaue, with my
heartie prayer vnto God, to blesse the rea∣ding of my Treatise to your Corporall and Spirituall health in Iesus Christ, in whom I am Your Worships most bounden in all Chri∣stian seruice, WILLIAM CHIBALD.
To the Christian Reader, that needs Spi∣rituall Physicke from the Word, against Griefe, or Feare, by reason of the Plague. IN the beginning of the Creation,Gen. 1.2. when dark∣nesse was vpon the deepe,2 Cor. 4.6. the Lord com∣maunded the light to shine out of darknesse. As vnlikely effect of such a cause as the ma∣king one see, that was
borne blind,Ioh. 9.11. by anointing his eyes with clay and spittle; which was more likely to put them out, if euer hee had any sight. Not long since, there was darknesse and heaui∣nesse vpon the face of my Family, by reason of Gods Visitation, and (behold) out of the darknes of that sorrow, Almightie GOD hath brought forth this Light of Spirituall cōfort. After a sort, I may truly say, GOD hath commaunded it to shine
forth, partly by his speciall assistance, when J was (in my selfe) very vnfyt for study, and partly by his prouidence in stirring vp many to bee very inqui∣sitiue to seeke after it, and to bee very importunate for the publishing thereof. J neuer intended to put this Light vnder a Bushell wholly to couer it:Matt. 5.15 for J did set it vpon a Candlesticke to giue light in one roome (name∣ly) to my Parishioners, kindred, and friends to
whom J gaue some Copies: But now at the instance of many, J haue put it into a Lanthorne & hung it out, in the open streets for the benefit of all passengers. J confesse the light is but small it giues, but J hope it will burne cleere, and sweet: the Treatise (J trust) wil be free from errour, and offence. J acknowledge also, that it is hung out somewhat late in the Euening, when many are at rest in their graues by the Visitation:
but (the truth is) my tynder was wet, J could not strike fyer to light it sooner, and when it was lighted, J could not get it hung vp any sooner. My meaning is, the hea∣uinesse of my heart for Gods visytation, on the Citie, my Congregation, and my Family was some let to the penning of it: and the difficultie of get∣ting Work men to print it, was a great hinderance to the publishing thereof any sooner.
Now that it is fyni∣shed, and published my request is to the Christian Reader, that hee vvould not close his eyes,Mat. 13.19 that hee cannot see the light, but open them to walke by it, to the end hee may not stumble and fal, at im∣moderate Griefe or Feare by reason of his own, or his friendes Visytation by the Plague. And my humble Pray∣er is: That hee, who is the true Light,Iob. 1.9 that lighteneth euery one
which commeth into he world,Reuel. 1.13 and who wal∣keth in the midst of the euen golden Candle∣sticks: That he would be graciously pleased to adde further light & life to the eading & perusing of my Treatise, for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; and let all that read it for their comfort, say with me, Amen. Euen as J will say with all that find comfort by the rea∣ding of it, The Lord bee praised Yours in the seruice of your Faith W. C.
A Table shewing the Contents of this Booke. WHen teares for sin proue godly pag, 4. How to comfort our selues against greife for the visitation of our fami∣lies. pag. 7. How to comfort our selues against greife for our visita∣tion p. 12. The nature of the affliction of Gods children. p. 12. The causes of their afflicti∣ons, efficient and mouing. pa. 13. 14. 15. The Companion of it. p. 17.
The end of it, intent and e∣uent. p. 18. &c. How to hearten our selues against the feare of the plague. pa. 24. How you may lawfully feare the plague. pa. 32, &c. How you may not feare the plague. pa, 35. The plague is no signe of Gods eternall anger to the godly, p. 43. Sixe meanes to preuent the infestiion of the plague. p. 48. The 1. meanes, p. 48. the 2. in p. 50. the 3. p. 51. the 4. in p. 53. the 5 p. 55. the 6 p. 66. Sixe meanes to keep us from dying of the plague. p. 57. The 1 meanes p. 58. the 2 in pa. 59. the 3 in pa. 60. the 4 in pa. 64. the 5 in pag 65. the 6
meanes in pa. 66. Cautions touching the effi∣cacie of these meanes, to keepe vs frrm infection or death by the plague. pa. 68. &c. Reasons to proue that the godly doe dy in Gods fauour though the dy of the plague pag. 74. How that comes to passe page 81. What makes death blessed or accurssed to men. pa. 84. Rules to know how we shal dy in Gods fauour, though we dy of the plague. pa. 74. 86. The first pa. 86. The second pa. 92 The third pa. 96. The fourth pag. 99. The fift p. 101. The sixt pa. 102.
Seuen holy vertues or acti∣ns to be done by Christians, to assure them of Gods fauour and loue in life and death. pag. 107 A distinction of the sauing graces of the Spirit wrought in the Elect. pag. What brings vs into the estate of grace, and what keeps vs therein. p. 108. A farewell to them that haue not been visited. p. 118. A farewel to them that haue been visited, and yet are esca∣ped. p. 118. A farewell to both sorts. pag. 119.
Dr. FEATLIES Approbation. I Haue perused this Treatise, and fynd it very sound for Doc∣trine, and seasonable for the time; and hauing re∣ceiued much comfort by it my selfe, J desyre others may do the like by the fur∣ther publishing thereof. DANIEL FEATLY.
A SPIRITV all Cordiall, against the Plague. OF late it hath pleased God to visite my Fami∣lie with the sick∣nesse. Vpon this occasion (according to good order) I amIer. 36.5 shut vp in my Church yard: and by this meanes I may not (without offence) go abroad, either to the house of God to teach my people, or to my freinds houses, to see how they doe: but (bles∣sed be God (that in iudgment remembers mercy) sixe of nine personsAbac. 3.2 remaine escaped, as
it is this day from death,Ezra, 9.15 and foure of nine from infection. Though God haue impri∣soned my body: yet hath he enlarged my spirit, though he hath silenced my tongue, and thereby taken from me liberty to preach: yet hath he put my pen into my hand, and thereby given me an op∣portunitie to write some spi∣rituall counsell, for the com∣fort of my dearly beloved & like loving neighbours, and Parishioners, and my kind∣red and friends, that are af∣fected & afflicted with Gods visitation on vs. As also for their consolation that haue been, are: or may be in hea∣vines, by meanes of the like visitation. That which I haue now written vnto you is that
which will be best for you to reade, and that will be best for you to read at this time, which will best meet with, and remoue that, which doth now most trouble you name∣ly, Griefe and feare. That you are grieued for me and mine, and for our vi∣sitation, I assuredly beleeue. And because I beleeue it, therefore haue I writtē these few leaues & lines, 11 0 to asswage your sorrow: for it were hard, if my affliction should make a wound of griefe in your hearts, and I not endea∣vour to make a playster of comfort to heale it. Farre be such ingratitude from me, and farre bee such a want from you. Though, in some respects I am grived with your sor∣row;
yet in other regards I reioyce. not simply, for the griefe it selfe: but for that which (I know) is the cause, and that which (I hope) will be the fruite, and that which (I pray) may be the issue of it. The cause of your griefe for vs is your loue; for when the Iewes saw, how Christ wept for Lazarus,oh. 11.36 they said, behold how he loued him. The fruite, is godly sorrow for sinne;hē eares or sin proue godly. or repentance vn∣to amendment of life and sal∣uation: and indeed then sor∣row or teares proue godly, when they exercise a twofold nature they haue, namely, 1. A salt brackish or brinish quality. 2. A wet or moyst qualitie. The salt or brinish qualitie of sorrow or teares
shewes it selfe to be godly, 1. when it Seasons the soule with grace, 2. When it eates out the corrupt humour of wickednes that is in it, and 3 keepes the heart from pu∣trifiyng in sin. The moyst & wet qualitie that is in teares: doth shew it selfe to be god∣ly, when 1. it softens the heart that is hardnedHeb. 3.13. with the deceitefulnes of sinne, and 2. when itIer. 4.14 washeth the heart from wickednes andIsa. 16.1 clenseth it from the loue of sensuall pleasures. The issue which (I pray) may come of your sorrow for me, is an assurance to your soules, that you are living, and not dead members of the Christian body, in that you g can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities.Heb. 4.1 Rom. 12.15 Weepe
with them that weep.Heb. 4.5 remem¦ber them that are in bonds, as if you were bound with them.Rom. 12.5 And pittie your brethren when the hand of the Lord toucheth them.Heb. 13.3. Iob. 19 21 In these respects I hope I may say with the Apostle S. Paul,2 Cor. 7.9. Now I reioyce, not that yee were made sorry: but that yee sorrowed to repentance for yee were made sorry after a god∣ly manner, that yee might re∣ceiue damage by vs in nothing. But (to omit any longer preface,) and to come to the matter intended, which is remouing of your griefe and feare. Against your griefe I will propound, 1. matter of con∣tent. 2. Meditations of com∣fort, (the good Lord reach and apply it, by his Spirit, vnto your Spirits, according
to the nature of the doctrine it selfe; and according to my desire & minde in propoun∣ding it.) That you may be conten∣ted with the hand of Gods visitation vpon my Family,How to con∣tent our selues with Gods visita∣ion on our family. I pray you take notice of, and consider seriously these fiue points. 1 That we are not able to resist the hand of God, for we are k not stronger then he? Wee are in this respect but I as clay in the hands of the Pot∣ter: for the1. Cor. 10.22. Ier. 18.6. Dan. 4.35 Lord doth accor∣ding to his will in the armie of heauen, and among the inhabi∣tants of the earth and none can stay his hand. 2 That we haue most iust∣ly deserued to drinke of this cup with others b wee haue accepted the punishment of our
iniquitie. For we haue sinned against God and therefore must we beareMicah 7 the hand of the Lord, we indeed iustly receiue the due reward of our deedes. Yea, we must be anmbe & not open our mouthes, because it is his doing, who hath not done without causeLevit. 26 all that he hath done vnto vs. and thereforeLuk 23. the Lord is iust for wee haue deserued to haue ben beneath for our sinnes.Psal. 39. For who are we? And what is our Fathers house, that in such a common calamity we should looke to be free? See∣ing1. Pet. 4. the time is come that iudg¦ment must begin at the house of God. 3. That we are not alone in this affliction, for we haue fellowes enough (too many if the Lord saw it good)1 Cor. 10.13. There hath no tentation taken
vs: but such as is common to man. The Lord hath2. Sam. 7.14. chastened vs with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men: yea, with the stripes of them that are his owne children. 4. That all in our family haue not bin smitten (as yet) but a few onely; nor are they all dead that were smitten, but some onely, nor were they all smitten together: but by degrees & successiue∣ly only. First, our seruants, and then our children; nor with so heauie a stroke as some haue bin, but gently & with moderation,Ier. 30.11. & 10.24 with mea∣sure and iudgement the Lord be praised therefore. 5. And lastly, consider, that none of vs haue wanted that which many (our bet∣ters)
haue beene without, namely, food and physicke: helpers and keepers, varie∣tie of roomes and chambers, with other conueniences: so that I may truely say (to Gods glory, our benefit, and your content) of our selues, as Paul did of himselfe and companions in affliction: We are2 Cor. 6.9. as dying, and behold we liue, as chastened; but not kill∣ed: and in another place,2 Cor. 4.8. We are troubled on euery side: but not distressed. Wee are in doubt: but not in despaire. And with Dauid, the n Lord hath thrust sore at vs, but hath not giuen vs ouer vnto death. It is true, I haue parted with a good seruant & good childe: and a good Curate, My faithfull fellow helper in the ministery, but it is con∣tent
to vs they were not too good for him that gaue them their goodnes, and that had more right to them then I, for God, in heauen was o ma∣ster to the one, p Father to the other, and q Arch-Pastor and Bishop to the other, and ther∣fore might command them. And it is a comfort to vs, & so it may be to you, that r the Lord is better to vs then tenne sns,2. Sam. 1 3. as Elkanah said that him∣selfe was to his wife Annah. Now least (haply) content may seeme to some but a dry plaister for such a running sore, not broad enough to couer it, or not soueraigne enough to heale it; therfore (to make a perfect cure) I haue thought of another medicine for the malady; and so I passe on to the se∣cond
sort of meditatiōs that may giue you comfort (as well as content) against your heauinesse for our visitation. How to cō∣fort our selues a∣gainst griefe for our vi∣sitation.These comforts shall be ta∣ken from seuerall considera∣tions concerning our afflic∣tion, as namely, 1. The Na∣ture of it. 2. The Cause of it. 3. The Effect of it. 4. The Companion of it. 5. And last∣ly, the End of it. For in all these points there lieth mat∣ter of comfort; from all these haue the faithful raised com∣fort to themselues in their af∣flictions, and withall these haue wee comforted our selues in our visitation. 1. The Nature of this visi∣tation is the same with the nature of all other afflicti∣ons on the godly:The nature of the af∣fliction of the godly. which is, not to be a vengeance of God
to wreake his fury on vs to our vtter destruction: but to be aHeb. 12.5, 6, 7. 1. Cor. 11.32. chatistment and correc∣tion, to make vs repent more soundly of our past sinnes, and to prevent with more watchfulnesse the commit∣ting of the same, or like sins againe,Reu. 3.19. thatReu 2.29. we may be zea∣lous and amend. Indeed, it is in it selfe a punishment, and to the wicked that repent not, it is a vengeance: but to the godly that amend, it is not so, as shall bee proued more at large hereafter. And therefore in this respect may we all take comfort in it. 2 The cause of this our visitation is twofold,The causes of the afflic∣tions of the godly. Effici∣ent and impulsiue. The Effi∣cient Cause is the author or sender of it, which is God, and herein God is d to be con¦sidered
not simply, as God onely: but as God2. Sam. 7 14. our Fa∣ther, or as mercifull. For by this visitation wee fall into Gods hands, whose2. Sam. 4 14 mercies are great: and herein GODHeb 12.7 deals with vs, as with his sons and daughters. Therefore wee ought not toHeb. 16. faint when vvee are rebuked of him: but con∣sequently bee comfortable therein. The second cause is Im∣pulsiue, or that which moo∣ueth God thus to afflict or chasten vs, which is his eter∣nall loue in Christ. For as many as the Lord loues hee re∣bukes and chastens.Reu. 3.19 The Lord may chasten vs with the2 Sam. 7.4, 15. rod of men, and vvith the stripes of the children of men but his mercy shall not depart from vs.
So that,Phil. 2.1. if there be any com∣fort in loue, that is, in Gods loue, then may wee comfort our selues in our affliction which proceeds from it. It is true, the Instrumen∣tall cause of this our visitati∣on, hath been Gods Angell, or infection by men: but the supreme Efficient is GOD. It is true also, that in re∣spect of our sinnes, the h anger and fury of GOD may bee sayde to bee an Impulsiue or moouing cause of it.2 Sam. 24 1. Ezek. 10 19 But it is but his tem∣porary anger, vvhich is but for a i moment:Isa. 54.8. VVhich may and doth well stand with his eternal loue, & euer∣lasting compassion in Christ, with which wee are to bee comforted.
The effect of their af∣fliction.3 The effect and fruit that comes to the faithfull by all their affltions, when they are exercised thereby, is very cō¦fortable: it is the a peaceable fruite of righteousnes:Heb 5.8 (that is) increase of holinesse, both in heart & life, which will bring forth true quet and peace to the soule, though the bo∣dy and outward man,Heb 6.9. be dis∣quieted & afflicted with thē for the present it is to c learne obedience by the things we suf∣fer:Hos. 6.1. it is toHeb. 12.12. returne to God that smites vs, and be zealous and amend.Reu. 3.29. So that we having in some measure (through Gods grace) foūd these fruits and effects wrought in vs by our affliction, and these bee∣ing comfortable, because they be such as e accompany saluation, therfore ought you
not to sorrow f as men without hope,1 Thes. 4.18. Mat. 2.18. like Rachell that would not be comforted: but even in griefe to remember comfort, in him, as God hath in iudg∣ment remembred mercy for vs. 4 The Cōpanion of the out∣ward affliction of Gods chil∣dren,The comda∣nion of their affliction. it is inward Spirituall consolation, at one time or o∣ther, in one kind or other, or in one measure or other, wherein also wee haue had our share (blessed bee God.) For as the1. Cor. 2.5. sufferings of Christ abound in them: so their consolations also abound in Christ. TherePsal 97. is light sowen for the righteous, and ioy for the vpright in heart.1.5. And that which is sowne for them.Gal. 6 9 They shall reape in due time if they faint not: the Lord Iesus
will notIoh 14 18. leaue them comfort¦lesse: hee will not1. Cor 10 13. suffer them to bee tempted aboue that they be able to beare: hee hathIoa. 16.33. bidden them to bee of good comfort, because, though they shall haue afflictions in the world: yet shall haue peace in him. For thoughPsal. 30. heauinesse may endure for a night: ioy shl come in the morning.Hos. 6.2. After two dayes hee will reuiue vs, in the third day hee will raise vs vp, and we shal liue in his sight. The last thing to be consi∣dered in our affliction, is the end of it: which is the same with the end of all the afflic∣tions of the godly. And this end is twofold. 1. Gods in∣tent in sending of them. 2. The event of thē when they are sent. For both these mi∣nister comfort.
1. The end or intent of GOD in afflicting his chil∣dren, is generally their good. For euen in them, i God is good to Israel. More especially God intends to them therein these good things, namely, 1. In re∣spect of himselfe, to make themheb. 12.10. partakers of his holi∣nesse. 2. In respect of Christ, that they may hauePhil. 3.10 fellow∣ship with his sufferings, and bee made conformable to his death. 3. In respect of the wicked, that1 Cor. 11 33. they may nor be condemned with the world. And fourthly, in respect of themselues,Heb 12. that they may liue, namely in heauen, and there bee glorified vvith Christ, when first they haueRom. 8.17 suffered with him.
2 The end or euent like∣wise which according to Gods intent follows vpon all the afflictions of the godly, it is comfortable, for general∣ly it is their good, so Dauid found it, when he said, It is good for me that I haue been af∣flicted. More particularly, these good things insue thereupon: namely, 1. grace,Psal. 119 7. better to learne Gods Statutes and to keepe his word. 2 Peace or comfort in God and in conscience.Psal. 119 71.61. For marke the perfect man & behold the iust the end of that man is peace.Psal. 37.37. 2 Cor. 4 17. 3, Glory. forIam. 5.11. our light affliction which is but for a moment work∣eth for vs a farre more exceed∣ing and eternall weight of glo∣ry. The beginning and pro∣gresse of Iobs troubles, were very harsh and greeuous: but
S. Iames tells vs thatIoh. 8.16 we haue seene and theard what an end God made. It is true the visitation of the plague is vncomfortable, because the feare of infecti∣on makes friends afraide to see vs: but it is content that we haue had some that haue visited vs; and it is comfort that though we had not had one to come vnto vs, yet had we not been alone, forMat. 18.20. God our Father hath beene with vs. x he hath not forsaken vs in our bondage, for hee hath promi∣sed neuer to leaue of, nor to for∣sake any of his. And Iesus Christ hath been with vs, for y wheresoeuer two or three are gathered together, in the name of Christ, hee is in the midst of them, and wee (according to our neede and dutie) haue
often humbled our selues be∣fore him in priuate fasting, praying, searching of our hearts, and confessing our sinnes, which is (in part) to bee gathered together in the name of Christ. It was Samp∣sons Riddle, thatIudg. 14 14. out of the eater should come meate, and out of the strong should come sweet¦nesse. And it is a Christians Riddle, That out of affliction should come consolation: for of all the birds of the ayre fewe sing in winter; but the Red-brest. And of all the trees of the garden, few are greene but the Bay tree; and of all sorts of men, fewRom. 5.3 reioyce in tribulation, but the godly. That they haue cause to reioyce in tribulation, bath euen now ben shewed in fiue seuerall points. That they
ought to doe so, wee are taught by the Apostle Saint Iames who wills ChristiansIam. 1.2. to account it exceeding ioy, when they fall into diuers tribu∣lations. That they do so may bee seene by the exampls of Peter and the other Apostles, whoAct. 5.41 Col. 1.24 reioyced that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ: how it comes to passe shall be shewed hereafter. In the mean while you that are made sorrowfull with our vi∣sitation, bee ioyfull at our consolation: and so from as∣swaging your griefe, I come to compound your feare. Your feare is twofold, partly in respect of vs, and partly also in respect of your selues. Your fear in respect of vs, is, least the hand of God should still bee stretched out
against our familie, to strike more with the infection that is amongst vs, and to take a∣way more by death of it. To hearten you against this feare,How to hearten our selues against the feard of the plague. I pray you to take into your thought and considera∣tion these three things. 1. Though the Lord be a∣ble to proceed against vs still, and though hee should bee iust, if hee did so: yet it may please the Lord to spare vs1. Sam. 12.22. for his owne Names sake, be∣cause,Ierem. 1.7. it hath pleased the Lord to make vs his people: for the LordEph. 3.20 is able to doe exceeding aboundantly aboue all that wee are able to aske or thinke. Hee deales not with his children according to their iniquities, for who should remain in health or life?Ahac. 3.2. Euen in iudgement the Lord remembers mercy, as the
Prophet Abacuck tells vs, & as wee see it proued in that great plague in Israel, for when the Angel of the Lord had slaine thereof 70000 in three dayes;2 Sam. 24.19. and hee began to stretch out his hand against Ierusalem also, the Lord repented him of the euill, and said to the Angel that had destroyed the people, It is enough, stay now thy hand. That all are not infected, or die not of the infection: It is not because he is not a∣ble to doe it, or if he did it, it were not iust, and all did not deserue it:Lament. 3.31.32.33. but because the Lord will not cast off for euer, though hee cause griefe: yet will he haue compassion ac¦cording to the multitude of
his mercies for he doth not af∣flict willingly;Mica. 7.18 for who is a God like vnto our God, that pardoneth iniquitie, and pas∣seth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retaineth not his anger for euer, because hee delighteth in mercy. 2. Though the Lord should smite vs all with the stroke of this sicknesse, so that wee were all infected and sicke of it: (as in some families better then ours it is, & as iustly hee may deale with vs for ought we are a∣ble to resist, or can deserue to the contrary) yet may it please God to spare vs that wee die not.sal. 38.1.5 Ezekiah was sicke of the plague (as the learned iudge) and the text
saith, he was sicke vnto death, (that is) in his owne appre∣hension, and in the opinion of the Physicians, and in the violent and malignant na∣ture of the disease: yet did he recouer & liued fifteene yeeres after. The like is to bee seene by daily experi∣ence of many that doe sur∣uine:Ionah. 2. Ionah was in the sea, but hee was not drowned:Dan. 3. The three children were in the fire, but were not burnt:Dan. 6. Daniel was in the den of Lions, but was not deuoured. And why may not we be kept from dying of the plague, though wee should bee infected; with it (if the Lord be so pleased in his free fauour.) Seeing in generall afflictions,Amos 4.11. some
are as firebrands pluckt out of the burning: euen as in har∣uest som gleanings are scat∣tered that are not gathered by the owner, and in the vintage some clusters of grapes are left on the vine, that are not pluckt off. I write not this in secu∣rity, as if I thought with A∣gag,1 Sam. 15.32. The bitternesse of death vvas past, or in presumpti∣on, as if I were past all feare: the conscience of mine own vnworthynes, & the know∣ledge of Gods after recko∣nings with som families do keepe mee from such folly. But because the seruants of God, may (with Abraham)Rom. 4.18. hope against hope. We doe not confidently, assure our selues that it shall be so, but
comfortably we hope it wil, in the free fauor and mercie of God, which is as great as is his Maiestie, and vvho vvill haue mercy on them, on vvhom he vvill haue mercy.1 Rom. 9.15. 3. What though all in our family, that are now in health and life should bee smitten, and that weIsai 21.14 could not bee purged from our ini∣quitie till vvee die: then for content, I say, for vs all (as Paul did for himself and his companions)Act. 22. The vvill of of the Lord be done. And as Christ our blessed Sauiour hath taught vs to say,Mat. 9.10 Thy vvill be done on earth as it is in heauen. More particular∣ly, I say for my selfe, as Dauid did for himselfe, l Here am I,2 Sam. 15.24. let him doe to mee as seemeth
good to him. And for my selfe, and children, and ser∣uants, I say, as good old Eli did for his sonnes.1 Sam. 3, 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good. And for comfort to my selfe and you, I say,Heb. 4 9. There remaines a rest for Gods people.1 Cor. 15 19. We haue hope in Christ, not in this life onely:1 Cor. 51 For vvee know that if our earthly house of this taberna∣cle be dissolued, vvee haue a building of GOD, not made vvith handes, eternall in the heauens.2. Pet. 3 13. We according to his promise look for new heauens, and a new earth, vvherein dwelleth righteousnesse. For we know that our Redeemer liueth.Iob. 19.25. Wee know vvhom vvee haue trusted, and vvee are perswaded that hee is able
to keepe that which wee haue committed vnto him against that day. And therefore2. Tim 1.12. though the Lord kill vs, yet will we trust in him.Iob 13.15. And so I descend from your feare for vs, to your feare for your selues. Your feare for your selues and your owne families is, that though hitherto the Lord hath spared your houses from the visitation: yet hereafter ere hee make an end he may, though not with the first, yet with the last, either soone, or Syne. Concerning this your feare, I must first giue you some instructions 2. Some directions: And thirdly, some consolations. The Instructions shall beHow we may law∣fully feare the Plague
in two points. 1. How farre you may feare the plague lawfully. 2. How farre, and in what respects you may not feare the plague. 1. You may lawfully feare the plague in three respects. 1. In respect of it selfe. 2. In respect of God. 3. In respect of your selues. 1. In respect of the plague it selfe, because it is2 Chron. 20 9. an e∣uill of punishment: It is1 Reg. 8.30 a plague or sicknes, It isDeut. 28.21. a con¦suming pestilence. And be∣cause it is a great plague, yea, one of the foure great plagues of God, with which hee scourges his people when they rebell against him,Ezek. 44.21. namely, The Famine, the Sword, wilde Beasts, and Pestilene.
2. In respect of God like∣wise it is to bee feared, be∣cause it is his sword where∣with he killeth: whosoeuer is smitten with this sicknes, hee is said after an extraor∣dinary manner, and more immediatelyEzek. 14 21 to fall into the hands of God, which is a1. Chron 24.12. fearefull thing. When the Lord sends this punish∣ment into a land, he is said to2 Sam 24.14. powre out his fury vpon it in blood, and toHeq. 10.31. plead with it in blood. 3. In respect of your selues, you may warranta∣bly feare the plague for two causes. 1. Because you are but flesh and blood, and there∣fore subiect to bee infected by the malignant qualitie
of it, and to be corrupted in your blood with the con∣tagion of it. For you are not made of stones which it cannot pierce, yee are as weake as water, and cannot resist the stroke of GODS Angel, you areIer. 18.6. as clay and cannot resist the Potter. 2. You may feare the plague in respect of your selues: because you are sin∣ners, and it is inflicted as a chastisement for1 King 8 33.37. sin. Wee haue beene partakers of the sins of this Citie, that mo∣ved God to send it,Deur. 28, 15.22. 2 Sam. 24 17. & there∣fore we may iustly feare we shall be partakers in the vi∣sitation of the Citie by the plague sooner or later, by infection, or by death, wee our selues, or ours. We that
haue deserued the worst, may warantably feare the worst; though God should be pleased beyond our ex∣pectation & desert, to spare vs as aMal. 3.17 father doth his own child which serueth him. 2.How you may not feare the plague. You may not lawful∣ly feare the plague in other respects, as namely, 1. Not foolishly. 2. Not profanely. 3. Not desperately. 1. You may not feare the plague foolishly or chil∣dishly out of a fond conceit, That if you come neere a person, or house infected, you must presently receiue the contagion of it. The plague is but GODS crea∣ture, whether it strike vs im∣mediately by an Angel, or mediately by infection frō
men; therfore can he coun∣termand it, when hee will. That he doth countermand his Angel, that is sent to destroy of this disease is plain; where the Lord saith,2 Sam. 24 16 Stay thy hand, it is enough: and that hee can and doth restraine the power of in∣fection that is in this dis∣ease, it is euident by those which visit them (as Physi∣cians and Surgeons) and by those which keep them that are sicke of it, (as Nurses & Keepers) that sweat them and dresse their sores, and wash their linnen that coms from them, polluted with the filthy corruption that comes out of their sores, yea which lie with them that haue sores running on
them, and are continually in their breath, and drinke after them in the same cup, who notwithstanding are preserued from touch of in∣fection. I suppose it comes to pass, not because the plague is not in it selfe infectious, (as some ignorantly & sens∣esly haue thought and spo∣ken) but it is effected by an extraordinary hand of God by his wisdome and soue∣raigne power, and namely, and of purpose to encou∣rage people to bee pittifull to them that are diseased with it, & to hearten them in this deed of charitie to minister to them: for the Lord knowes that without tending of them that are
thus visited, many would pinch miserably, and if all should be infected that cāe neere them that were visi¦ted, there would be few or none to tend them. Is not the fire of a bur∣ning nature in it selfe, be∣cause some one house in a streete, or one roume in a house escaps burning, by the wise and powerfull pro¦vidence of God; when the rest are burnt to ashes. Even so, the plague it selfe, is in it owne nature malignant & infectious, & (yet notwith∣standing the malignancy of it) the Lord can and doth restraine it, and therefore it is not to be feared foolish∣ly, as if God could not keep vs if wee came neere where
it is, but we must needes be infected by it. 2 You must not feare the Plague profanely, which they do that more feare the punishing Angell thē God, and the infection of it, more then to sinne; as they doe that in this time of con¦tagion runne away from the Citie, and carry their sinnes with them into the Countrey, namely, their se∣curitie and impenitencie, their pride & covetousnes, whereby it comes to passe, that they neither repent of their owne sinnes, nor bee greived for the affliction of Ioseph,Amos 6.6. to cōmisserate their brethren in misery. I speake not of all that depart, for some doe it war∣rantab y
in a godly man∣ner, without diffidence in God for themselues, o negligēce of their afflicted brethrē; but of such as ma∣nifest their impenitency, by going on in their former sinnes, and spending this heauie time in pastime and merriment, and shew their vnmercifulnesse by leauing nothing behind them for the poore and sicke when they went, nor haue sent no thing to them since they went, nor haue a purpose to doe it, when they shall re∣turne. Thus wee may not feare the plague,Mat. 10.28 for wee must not feare them which can but kill the body, and can do no more, but we must feare him & it, which can kill both
soule and body (that is) God and Sinne. The plague can but infect the blood, and thereby fill the body with putrified sores, that it die. But sin can kill both soule and body too, and therfore wee ought not so much to feare the plague, as we doe to offend God. Wee ought not to pray so to bee kept from the plague, as to be kept from sinne: we ought not to bee thankful so much for being kept from the plague, as from sin, nor ought wee to bee so watchfull ouer our selues, that wee bee not in∣fected with the plague, as that wee be not corrupted by the deceitfulnesse of si; for the one is simply euill,
so is not the other at all: the one is a breach of GODS Law; the other is but a pu∣nishment of that breach. 3. You must not feare the plague desperately, so as to thinke that if you bee smitten with it, and die of it, That presently therefore you are none of Gods chil∣dren, and that you shall not die in Gods fauour (as some sottishly and blasphemous∣ly haue giuen out.Dan. 3.23.) With this point, because I haue occasion anon to meet, and to diproue it, therefore I will referre it to its proper place, in the last generall point concerning your feare, which is the consolations. It is true, the stroke of the
plague is a signe of Gods temporall anger, but not of his eternall displeasure. 1. Because it is inflicted but on the bodie onely, and not on the soule. 2. Because it is in this life onely infli∣cted and not in the life to come, and therefore by it selfe (without spirituall iudgements) of blindnesse of minde, hardnes of heart and impenitencie,) it is no signe of Gods eternall wrath, because a all things come a like to all, there is one euent to the righteous and to the wicked,Eccle. 6.2 no man knoweth either loue or hatred, by all that is before thee, of earth∣ly and worldly blessings, o punishments, accompany∣ing it.
It is true, that in some fa∣milyes, God striks all with sicknesse, in others none at al, Some infected persons are very sicke, others ayle nothing at all. This comes not to passe by chance, but by Gods Soveraigne po∣wer. If he please, hee can arme his cretures so, as to kill whole housholds, as he armed the fire to burne & slay those men that tooke vp the three children,Dan. 3.23. and putt them into the firy Fornace, therfore you should feare it as I haue formerly taght you to doe, and as warran∣tablie you may. Againe, he can restraine and counter∣mand his creature, so as not to kill one in a Familie though they be all infect¦ed,
no, nor in inect any one, no, nor to make any one ill at ease of it, though they be infected, as hee re∣strained the heate of that exceeding whott fier, that it had no power one their bo∣dyes,Dan 3.27. an hayre of their heads was not sindged, neither were their coates changed, nor had the smell of fire passed one them, therefore you should not feare it as some doe, (whereof you haue heard before) vnwarrantably. If euery one should die that were infected, some would say, God were not able to keepe aliue him that were smitten with the plague: and if none should die of it, many would set light by it, and not humble
themselues before GOD when they are smitten with it. Let vs therefore in these two respects in this morta∣litie, walke before GOD with Feare & Faith. With Feare, because by sin we are subiect to the infection: for it is iust with God, that we who doe corrupt one ano∣thers soules with the eull example of our words and workes vnto sin, should al∣so infect one anothers bo∣dies with the contagion of this disease vnto punish∣ment: and let vs walke with Faith, because he can coun∣termaund and restraine it. And thus much for my In∣structions concerning your feare of the plague, namely, how farre you may feare it,
and how far you may not. The directions concerning this your feare doe follow. My directions touching your feare of the plague, shall be giuen in two parti∣culars. 1. I will direct you how you may preserue your selues from being in∣fected with the plague. 2. I will direct you how you may keep your selues from dying of the plague, thogh you be infected with it: & this wil I do, not as a friend, by requesting you to bee wary into what house or company you come (which I need not doe.) Nor as a Physician, by prescribing vnto you some rare preser∣uatiues (which I cannot do) but as a Minister and Prea∣cher
of the Gospel, by gi∣uing you some good coun∣sel from the Word of God, which (being followed) wil (by Gods blessing) bee bet∣ter for these endes, (if the Lord see it good for his glo∣ry and our saluation) then all the Bezrs stone, Vni∣corns horne, or Mithidate in the world. Sixe meanes to preunt the infecti n of the plaguFor the first. The means to preuent the plague are in number six, and they are of two kindes. 1. Such as concerne God. 2. Such as concerne our selues. The meanes which con∣cerne God are three. The first meanes to pre∣uent the plague which con∣cernes God is Faith, (that is) trust or confidence in
God, whereby we rest and rely on his power & good∣nes for protection, and not on the broken reeds of any outward meanes, as good ayre, refraining company, shift of roomes, and varie∣tie of perfumes, much lesse on any exorcised preserua∣tiues & enchanted Tablets, or Amults to weare about our necks for that end. To trust in God, In whom we liue, moue,Act 17.28 and haue our being, is to make him our rocke and our sortresse. And because the righteous man makes the Lord his refuge, and the most high his habitation, therefore there shal none euill befall him,Psa. 91.9.10.11. neither shall the plague come nigh his dwel∣ling, for he shall giue his An∣gels
charge ouer him to keepe him in all his wayes. For by this faith or relying on God, the Israelites, when they had no power in thē∣selues ouercame their ene∣mies the Hagarites, and for want of this faith,1 Chro. 5.20. or trust∣ing in God his wrath fell vp∣on them.Psal. 78.21 The se∣cond. The second means which concernes God, is seeking his face and fauor, his mercy and his loue, wherby his anger may be appeased towardes vs, and his displeasure re∣moued, which prouokes him to send his pestilence among vs. To this seeking of Gods face,2 Chron. 7.14. wee are directed by the Spirit of God in the Word, and vnto this is promised
likewise a blessing. For to haue the Lord to lift vp the light of his countenance vpon vs,Psal. 4.8. is better then all the contents of worldlings, yea better then life it selfe. The Lord saith to vs, seeke yee my face,Psal. 27, 8. and wee must say to to him, Thy face Lord wil we seeke, yea wee must seeke it before health or life. For if we enioy his fauour we are happy, though we were in∣fected vnto death; and if we want this, we are accursed, though wee should neuer bee smitten or die of the plague. The third meanes to pre∣uent the plague,The third which con∣cernes God, is feruent and faithfull prayer to God in the name of Christ, accor∣ding
to his will. 2. Chron. 7.14.This is likewise comman∣ded in the Word, for this end; and to this is annexed a promise to encourage vs to the practise thereof. By praier Moses preuent∣ed the plague frō falling ge∣nerally on all the Israelites, when some of them dyed by the plague before the Lord.Numb. 14.20.37.38. 1. Cor. 10.10. And by prayer Moses pre∣uēted another great plague and vtter destruction from falling on the Israelites, & did therby (as it were) bind the hands of the Lord that hee could not smite them:Exod. 32. for the Lord said,Vers. 10.11 Let me a∣lone that my wrath may waxe hot against them, and that I may consume them.Vers. 14 And vp∣on this prayer the Lord re∣pented
him of the euill which hee thought to doe vnto his people. The meanes which con∣cerne our selues, and which are good to preuent the plague from smiting vs, are likewise three: but they are of two sorts. 1. Some which concerne our sins, and diso∣bedience. 2. Some which concernes our dutie and o∣bedience. Those which concerne our sins are two. The first meanes to pre∣uent the plague which concernes our selues and our sinnes,The fourth. is humbling our selues in soule and bo∣dy before the Lord in a free confession of our sins, and acknowledgement of
our worthinesse to be smit∣ten by it. This humiliation was commaunded by the Lord to the people of Israel, and consequently to vs in them in the like case,2 Chr. 7.14 and to it al∣so is promised a blessing. 1 Chro. 21 15.16.17. 2 Sam. 24.17.This Dauid and the Elders of Israel did, being clothed in sackcloth and falling on their faces. And by this they pre∣uented the stroke of the Angel, when hee stood be∣twixt the earth and heauen, hauing a drawne sword in his hand stretched out ouer Ieru¦salem, namely, to destroy it also by the plague, as other parts of the Countrey had euen then beene. Amo 4.22.By this humiliation wee meet God to pacifie his an∣ger
(as Iacob did his brother Esau) and by this wee hide our selues from the puni∣shing hand of God,Gen. 32. Pro. 22.3. when we see it comming towards vs. By this Iosiah and the Niniuites preuented the ex∣ecution of GODS iudge∣ments threatned.1 Chro. 34.28. Ionah. 3. The second means which concernes our sins,The fift. and is effectual for the preuenting of the plague, is zeale a∣gainst sin in our selues and others, for God and his sake.Num. 25.11.12. This zeale against sin, is to be shewed by vs, either as Magistrates vpon Male∣factors (notorious ones e∣specially:Psal. 106.30) for by this Phi∣nias stayed the plague, when foure & twentie thousand had dyed thereof. Or as
Ministers or Masters of Fa∣milies, by rebuking & cor∣recting sin in our people, seruants and children. Or as Christians,1 Cor. 11.31. 2 cor. 7.11 by iudging our selues, & taking reuenge on our selues. And this wee doe when wee deny to our sinfull senses, the allure∣ments and contents of sin, (which is to plucke out the right eye,Mat. 23.19 and to cut off our right hand, and to cast it from vs) and when we beat down the body of sin,1. cor. 9.27 by fasting and temperance. And this is a meanes to keep vs from be∣ing iudged of the Lord.1 Cor. 11 32. The sixtThe Sixt and last meanes to keep vs from the infecti∣on of the plague, concernes our duty and obedience to God, and it is faithfulnesse
and diligence in our cal∣lings, with prudence to keepe vs within the com∣passe of our own waies: for the Lord hath promised, that hee will giue his Angels charge ouer his children to keepe them in all their wayes.Ps. 91.11. And this Ezekiah found; for hee walked before the Lord in truth and vpright∣nesse, not onely as an Israe∣lite or Christian; but as a King and Gouernour, and hereby hee was preserued. For (as Salomon saith) Hee that walkes vprightly,Pro. 28.18 walkes safely. For the second:Six meanes to keepe vs frō dying of the plague. The meanes to remooue the plague, and to keepe you from dying of it, though you be infected with it, are
likewise six, and they are of two sorts. 1. Ciuill. 2. Re∣ligious. The first.The Ciuill meanes is the vsing of skilfull & religious Physicians and Surgeons, in obedience to Gods or∣dināce, and with trust in his power and blessing. For by the commandement of the Prophet Esay frō the Lord, Ezekiah was to take a lumpe of dry figs, and to lay it on the sore,2 Reg. 20.7. and by this meanes (through Gods blessing) hee did recouer. The Religious means to keepe vs from dying of the plague, are fiue; and they be of two kinds: for they con∣cerne either God, or our selues. The meanes which con∣cerne
GOD are two. The first meanes to keep vs frō dying of the plague and which concernes God,The Se∣cond. is earnest and fervent pra¦yer to God to keepe vs a liue, either by his blessing on the meanes if we haue a∣ny, or without, if wee haue none. By prayer,Num. 16.46.47.48. the plague was stayed in Israell, when it was begun very hot. For incense was offered vp with pray∣ers to God, & the offering vp of incense Ceremonial∣ly did signifie & teach the putting vp, and accepting of our feruent prayers, as is playne by the Psalmist, where he saith,Psal. 141.2. let my prayer be set forth before thee as in∣cense and the lifting vp of my
hands, bee, as the euening Sa∣crifice. And of this Ezekiah had good experience when the Lord said, I haue heard thy prayer & seene thy teares, behold I will add vnto thy dayes fifteene years.Isay 38.5. And be∣sides,2 chr. 6.29 1 Reg. 8.37.38. the Lord promised to heare their prayer made by the Israelits when they were visited by the Pesti∣lence, and the Lord hath promised Christians, that thy prayer of faith shall pre∣serue the sicke.Iam. 1.15. The thirdThe Second meanes which concernes God and that will keepe vs from dy∣ing of the plague, is zeale and forwardnes in erecting and establishing (and con∣sequently in deuout and re∣ligious frequenting & per∣forming)
of the pure wor∣ship of God, according to his Word and Will. We read that when God was about to stay his hand from slaying the Inhabi∣tants of Ierusalem by the plague, that the Lord (as a meanes thereunto) bids his Angel to commaund his Prophet Gad to say to Da∣uid, Goe vp,1 Chron. 21.18. and set vp an Altar to the Lord in the thre¦shing floore of Araunah the Iebusite: Whereunto Dauid obeying, the text saith, that hee went vp at the saying of Gad,Verse 19. which hee spake in the name of the Lord: Then Da∣uid said to Ornan grant mee the place of this threshing floore,Verse 22. that I may build an Al∣tar thereon vnto the Lord
(thou shalt grant it me for the full price) that the plague may be staied from the people.Note 1 Sam. 24. And when Dauid had bought & paid for it,Verse 26. then the Text saith, Dauid built there an Altar to the Lord, and offered burnt offerings and peace offe∣rings, and called vpon the Lord. And to the end it might appeare, he accepted this worship for the appea∣sing of his wrath, and stay∣ing of the plague: The Lord answered him from heauen by fier vpon the Altar of burnt offerings. For in the very next Verse it is said,vers. 37. that the Lord commanded the An∣gel,Note. and he put vp his sword a∣gaine into the sheath thereof. Wee reade also, that the people of Israel in Egypt
made this a reason to per∣swade Pharaoh to let them go three dayes iourney,Exod. 5.3. and sacri∣fice to the Lord their God, least (say they) hee fall vpon vs with the pestilence. Which shewes, that if neglecting Gods worship be a meanes to bring the plague: then zeale and deuotion in erec∣ting, countenancing, & per∣forming of Gods worship according to his will is a meanes to remoue it, and to keepe vs from dying of it. And we may very probably coniecture, not without good warrant that the so∣lemne worship of GOD, with fasting, praying, and preaching, appointed by Authoritie, hath beene a meanes (not for the wor∣thinesse
of it: but by Gods blessing on his owne Ordi∣nance) to stay the sicknesse, and to abate the multitudes that died thereof. The meanes to preuent death of the plague which cōcern our selues, are three. The first appertains to the iudgement of the plague it selfe,The fourth. and it is a sensible fee∣ling when wee are smitten with it in our own soules of the heauy hand of God, by laying it close to our harts. Which we do when we are made to search out our sins which are the cause therof, and when we consider seri∣ously of Gods heauy dis∣pleasure therein against our sinnes:1 Reg. 8.37, 38. 2 Chron. 6.28, 29. for to this is pro∣mised a blessing, & indeed
this will make vs pray hum∣bly & feruently for the par∣don of our sinnes, the cause therof that they being par∣doned, a way may be made for mercy vnto vs. And S. Peter tels vs,1 Pet. 5.6. that if we hum∣ble our selues vnder the migh∣tie hand of God, hee will exalt vs in due time. And the A∣postle S. Iames saith,Iam. 5.16. that the prayer of the righteous man preuaileth much with God, if it be feruent. The second means which concernes our selues,The fift. and is good to keepe vs from dy∣ing of the plague belongs to our sinnes, and it is a tur∣ning from them & leauing them. For when Gods peo∣ple,2 Chron. 7.13, 14. on whom his Name is cal∣led, shal turne from their wic∣ked
wayes, he hath promised to heale them of the pestilence. For by this wee cause God to repent of the euill. And by this we remooue and put a∣way the euill of our doing from before the eye of the Lord which were the cau∣ses of it,Ionah. 3.10 Isai. 1.16. & punish our selues for our sin, that we may not be punished of the Lord. The sixt.The third means which concernes our selues, and is auailable to preuent our death of the plague apper∣taines to the cōmandemēts of God, and it is sincerity & vprightnes of heart, where∣by we desire and endeuour to walke in obedience to all Gods commandements, in the refraining of all known sinnes (euen our beloued
ones) and in the practising of all knowne duties, cheer∣fully, conscionably, and constantly. The Lord tells vs by the Prophet Ezekiel,Ezek. 14.17, 20. that the righteous shall by his righte∣ousnesse deliuer his owne life from the pestilence,Prou. 10.2. and Solo∣mon saith that Righteousnesse deliuers from death. An experiment of the so∣ueraignty of this meanes & medicine wee haue in Eze∣kiah, who to preuent (if it were possible) his death of this sicknesse with which he was smitten (as the learned iudge) hee vseth no better an argument to perswade the Lord to heare him here∣in then this,Isay 38.3. Remember mee now (O Lord) how I haue wal∣ked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, & haue done that which is good in thy sight, and behold what the Lord said vnto him by his Prophet Isai.2 Reg. 20.6. I haue added to thy dayes fifteene yeares, & I will heale thee, and the third day thou shalt goe vp to the house of the Lord.Verse 5. And according to this promise, was Gods performance, for the text saith plainely,Verse 7. that he recouered. Cautions touching the efficacy of these meanes to keepe vs from infec∣tion or death of the plague.But cōcerning these dire∣ctions, I must giue you som cautions, to teach you how for you are to rely on them for the preventing of infec∣tiō by the plague, or death by infection. You are to know then: 1. That you are not to
think to prevaile with God to these endes, by vsing some one of these meanes that is easiest to be done, or which you like to choose: but by the vsing of them all with continuance therein. 2. You are not to expect preservatiō, howeuer they be performed by you, but then, whē for manner, aswel as for matter they are done according to the Word. 3. You are not to imagine that you can me∣rite preseruation by these meanes, for when you doe them best,Lu. 17.10 you are vnpro∣fitable seruants: for the effi∣cacie of these exercises to their seueral ends, depends not on our good perfor∣mance: but on Gods insti∣tution
and blessing. 4. You must not look to ob∣tain by these religious exer∣cises preseruation frō infec∣tion, or death, absolutly, but with condition and re∣seruation only. For we must vse these meanes in faith & beleife to receiue good by them, else why doe wee vse them as Gods ordinances to this end? and wee must by faith beleeue to receiue good by them, so farre as God meanes and intends we shall, (for it is in vayne to looke for it otherwise) and God meanes and in∣tends we shall receiue good by these holy exercises, so farr as he hath reuealed his will and meaning, for thus speaks the Scripture which
reveals Gods will and mea∣ning herein,1 Ioh. 5.14 If wee aske any thing according to Gods will, he heareth vs. And the spi∣rit maketh intercession for the Saints according to the will of GOD.Rom. 8.27 But you will aske me, what is this will of God, ac∣cording to which wee are to pray? and what is asked according to Gods will? Surely, that which God doth will and meane to grant. What doth God will & meane to grant? Surely that which he hath promi∣sed to giue. What is that which God hath promised to giue? Surely, good things: for so speakes the Scripture,Mat 7.11 Your Father which is in heauen will giue
good things to them that aske him. They whichPsal. 34.9 10. feare the Lord stall want nothing that is good. And no goodPs. 84.11 thing will hee with hold from them that liue vprightly. And what be those good things? Surely those which are good for Gods glory and good for our saluation. For what doth God will more then his own glory, and the saluation of his Elect? See∣ing hee hath appointed their saluation by his own Sonne,Eph. 1.5.6.11.12. according to the good pleasure of his will, for the praise of the glory of his grace wherein hee hath made vs ac∣cepted in the beloued. What is good, if these bee not: what is good without these? Is it not enough for
vs poore sinners, that de∣serue not our health or life vpon any conditions, to in¦ioy them vpon these terms; but wee must haue them without Gods good will, & whether or no it bee good for Gods glory & our own saluation, or else we are vn∣done, and God is not true of his word, nor carefull of vs? Far be such strange lust from Christians (whose lot is the Lord, and whose por∣tion is heauen) to desire to liue here to the dishonour of God, and the hinderance of their owne saluation; far be it from crauers to be car∣uers, and beggars choosers. And so I come to the third thing which I propounded to deliuer touching your
feare, and it is comfort and consolation. The comfort is against your feare to die of the plague: and it is this. That though you die of it, yet are you not accursed: but you shal die in the loue and fauour of God, for you shal dieNum. 23, 10. the death of the righte∣ous: you shallReu. 14.13. rest from your labours: yee shallLu. 2.27. 1 Thes. 4.14. de∣part in peace, and r sleepe in Iesus; which whosoeuer doth is blessed. In handling this matter of comfort, I will obserue this method. 1. I will proue that the fathfull doe die in Gods loue, though they die of the plague. 2. I will shew how it comes about to bee
so. 3. I will giue you some Rules, by which you may assure your selues that you shall die in GODS loue, though you die of the sick∣nesse. 1. That the godly die in the fauour of God, though they die of the plague, I wil proue by two Reasons: of which this is the first. The faithfull that die of the plague, doe die in Gods loue; because their death works to them spiritual and eternall good. The Reason is good, be∣cause nothing works to the spirituall and eternall good of the wicked, that doe not die in Gods loue: for they haue right to no spirituall or eternall good thing, be∣ing
out of Christ,Phi. 3.19 minding earthly things, and hauing theirPs. 17.14 portion in this life onely. And that the death of the godly, though it bee of the sicknesse, workes vnto their spiritual and eternall good; I proue by S. Paul, who af∣firmes, That allRo. 8.28 things worke together vnto good, to them that loue God, who are called according to his pur∣pose. Whence I thus argue: If the death of the godly by the plague be somthing; then must it worke to the good of them, for all things work: & if vnto their good, then vnto their spirituall and eternall good. 1. Be∣cause it is not likely that death should worke vnto
any temporall good: for all temporal good things leaue them when they die. And secondly, because the good, which by the text is said to be wrought, is good vnto them that loue God, and are called of his purpose: there∣fore it is a spirituall and an eternall good, in the eternal loue of God to their soules. The godly, which die of the plague, doe dy in Gods loue: because nothing can separate them from the loue of God in Christ Iesus. The Reason is good, be∣cause they that are separa∣ted from the loue of God in Christ, doe die in Gods eternall displeasure, because they die in their sinnes, and goe to hell. For if they that
dye in the Lord areReu. 14.13. blessed, then they that die out of him are accursed. And that the godly can∣not be separated from the loue of God in Christ, is plaine by the Apostle, who saith of himselfe (and that which is true of one that is truely godly, is true of all that partake of theIude v. 3. com∣mon saluation.) NeitherRo. 8.38. life nor death, nor any other crea∣ture, can bee able to separate me from the loue of God, which is in Iesus Christ our Lord. Whence I thus reason. 1. If death cannot separate the godly from the loue of God, then no death can: for in∣definite propositions are generall, &, if no death can, then death of the plague
cannot. 2. If nothing can separate the godly from his loue, then death of the plague cannot, for that is something; and if death of the plague cannot separate the faithfull from Gods loue in Christ: then must they needs dy in his loue, thogh they die of the plague. ForRo. 14.8. whether they liue, or whe∣ther they die, they are the Lords, & therefore the Lord is theirs. The state of Laza∣rus when hee lay full of sores, and pouertie was (in the eye of the world) very wretched, yet was hee bles∣sed in his death: for hee b was carried to Abrahams bosome,Luc 16.22. and therefore died in Gods loue. Indeed death of the plague may seeme to
separate the godly from the loue of God: but it is a separation of them from his loue of them, as his crea∣tures onely, not as his chil∣dren, because it is not a se∣paration of them from his loue of themRom. 8.38.39. in Christ. Death of the plague, is a signe of Gods displeasure: but it is a signe of his tem∣porary displeasure only, and not of his eternall. For though God, inIsa. 58.7, 8. a little wrath hide himselfe from his children, for a moment, yet with euerlasting kindnes will hee haue mercie on them. Though God, by death of the plague take our life and health from vs:Psal. 89.31, 32. Yet will he not take his louing kindnes from vs vtterly. Though
our friends depart from vs, and death of this sicknesse part the parents from the children, &c. Yet2. Sa. 7.15 Gods mercy shall not depart from vs. And so much of the first point, in the doctrine of comfort, touching your feare to die of the plague. The second point here∣in is to shew how it comes to passe, that the faithfull dy in Gods fauour though they dy of the plague. This is effected by that which hath ben done,How it coms to passe, that though the godly dy of the plague, they dy in Gods fauour. and suffered, by our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, in whose righteousnesse weEph. 1.6. are accepted and by whoseIsa. 53.5. stripes we are healed. For 1. He hathIoh. 16.33. ouercome the world (that is) the afflictions of
it, (one whereof is death) which the mē of the world lay one them, so that the af∣flictions which his child∣ren endure in this world, while they liue here cannot hinder their saluation in an other world. And there∣fore in this respect our Sa∣viour wills them to be of good comfort,Ibid. notwithstan∣ding them. 2 Christ hath giuen1. Cor. 15 56.57. vs victory ouer the stinge of death: that it cannot now bee vnto vs a passage to e∣ternall death and damnati∣on, as by nature through sinne it was, and is to them that beleeue not in Christ, nor amend their liues. 3 Christ hathHeb. 2.14 ouercome him that had the power of death
which is the Deuill, by his owne death, so that he cannot car∣rie our soules to hell when we dy,Luc. 16.22. as he did the soule of Diues, and as he hath po∣wer to execute that punish∣ment on all those that are out of Christ. 4. Christ hathGal. 3.13. redeemed vs from the curse of the law, being made a curse for vs. And thereby freed vs from the curse of any kind of death or afflicti∣ons bodily whatsoeuer. In which respect, S. Paule saith that inRom. 8.35.36.37. tribulation, in death in persecution, in famine, in nakednes, in perill, in sword, (and why not then in1. Chron. 11.12. the sword of the Lord, euen the pestilence) in all these things wee are more then Conque∣rours, through him that hath
loued vs, the Lord Iesus Christ,1. cor. 1.30 vvho is made vn∣to vs of God, wisedome, righteousnes,Phil. 2.21. sanctification, and redemption, and both in life and death advantage. What makes death bles∣sed or cur∣sed.It is not the kind of death in respect of the matter, that makes men blessed or accurssed: For in this res∣pectEzek. 9.2 all things comes a like to all there is one euent to the righteous and to the wicked. By this no man knoweth ei∣ther loue or hatred. But it is their graces, or their sinnes, whch they carrie with thē to teir deathes, and the re∣ward or punishment that followes after them when they are dead, that makes them happy or miserable. The godly carrie their
graces & vertues with thē to death,Heb. 11.13 for they b dy in faith, theyReuel. 14.13. dy in the Lord, theyLu. 2.29. depart in peace. But the wicked carry their sins to their death.Iohn 8.21.24. For they dy in their sinnes, as Absolon in his treason,2 Sam. 18. Num. 16. Corah in his rebellion, and Herod in his pride, Act. 12. That which followes af∣ter the godly, is heauen, forHeb. 4.9 there remaines a rest for them,1 Pet. 1.5 an inheritance and incorruptible reserued for thē in heauen, Lazarus went to Abrahams bosome, and the good Theife on the Crosse, was with Christ in Paradise,Luk. 23.43 that very day he dyed. But that which follows the wic∣ked after theirHeb. 9.27 death is iudgement, which isReu. 6.8. hell
that followes death, &Rom. 2.5 wrath against the day of wrath. As Iudas that went toAct. 2.15. his owne place, and Diues toLuc. 16.22. Hell when they died. So that as long as yee dy not in your sinnes nor goe to hell, but liue and dye in the grace of God and goe to heauen, which you shall certainely doe, if you liue and dye in Gods feare and in the faith of Christ, you must needes dye in Gods loue though yee dye of the plague. The third and last point in the doctrine of comfort,Rules to know how christians shall dy in Gods fauour though they dy of the plague. against the feare to dye of the plague, is to giue you some Rules, by which you may assure your selues, you shall dye, in the loue
of God, and his eternall fa∣uour, though you dye of the plague. To which I now addresse my selfe. That you may assure your selues you shall dye in Gods loue, It is requisite that first you bee sure you liue in Gods loue. (for he cannot dye in any sense that neuer liued in the same.) And that you may knowe you liue in Gods loue, it must appeare vnto you by the effects, and motions of this life, forIam. 2.16 Iob. 27.5. the body with∣out breath, is iudged dead. Breathing and mouing are signes of life. The effects and motions of your life in Gods loue, will appeare, by the vse and exercise of the graces of the
Spirit of God, which in his loue hee workes in you, toEphes. 2.5, 6. quicken and raise you from the death of sin, to the life of righteousnesse. For this the Lord doth in his rich mercy,Ibid. 4. and for his great loue wherewith he hath loued vs. These graces are of two sorts. 1. Such as bring vs in∣to an actual communion of Gods loue and fauour, and sets vs in the state of grace. 2. Such as keepe & preserue in this state vnto the end. The first, Faith in Christ.Of the graces of the first kind, namely, which bring vs into the state of grace, there is but one onely, and it is a iustifying Faith, cal∣led, Faith in Christ, where∣by a sinner, with aMatt. 11.28. weary and heauy laden soule, that is,
a repenting and relenting heart goes and seekes to Christ for saluation, rests and trusts in the merites of his death and righteousnes for forgiuenesse of sinnes,Ioa 3.16. and eternall life. This faith doth, not of it selfe: but by vertue of the obiect thereof, which is Christ, to whom, by Gods appointment it doth vnite and ingraft vs, in whom we are accepted andEph. 1.4.6. beloued of God, and who dwells in your hearts by it. Now ifEph. 3.17. Christ dwell in your hearts by faith, you shall be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth and length,v. 18 and depth and height, and to know the loue of Christ which passeth knowledge.
If you liue and die in this faith of Christ, then you may assure your selues you liue, and shall dy in the loue of God. For if yee beleeue in Christ, then this will fol∣low, that, first, you are1. Ioh 5.1. born of God: 2. yee are theGal. 3.26. chil∣dren of God. 3. yee areAct 13 39. iusti∣fied from all your sinnes, and shall receiue remission of them:Act. 10.43. 4. Ye are passedIob. 3.36 from death to life: 5. Yee shall bee able toEph. 6.16 quench all fiery darts of the deuil. And sixtly, for the certainty of this, yee areEph. 1.13 sealed with the Spirit of promise. The second sort of graces that may assure vs wee shall dy in Gods fauour, are they which keepe and continue vs in the state of grace whē
we are set into it, and they are of foure kinds: The first, Sanctifying; The second, Comforting; The third, Contenting; The fourth, Crowning graces: of which in order. But first I would not bee mistaken: for though, I say, faith in Christ doth set vs into the state of grace, I would not bee vnderstood to speake exclusiuely, as if it had no worke in keeping vs also in that state (for wee are kept by the power of God through faith vnto saluati¦on.1 Pet. 1.5,) But I haue therefore as∣signed vnto it, that worke of bringing vs into the state of grace, and iustifying vs, because the primary and chiefe act of it is this. viz.
To ingraft vs into Christ, and hereby to bring vs into vnion & communion with the loue of God in him, and into the state of grace, to liue by faith. Rom. 1.17. The first kind of graces that keepe vs in the state of grace, are sanctifying gra∣ces, so called, because they keepe vs from sinne, and in∣cite vs to holinesse. These sanctifying graces are two: The first is the loue of God. The 2. is the feare of God: of each a litle. And first of loue vnto God. What the nature of this grace of our loue to God is,The second, the Loue of God. will appeare by the nature of our loue to any person like our selues, whom wee loue vnfainedly: our loue
appeare in two things. 1. In delighting in their compa∣ny and communion. 2. In a desire and indeuour to doe them good. For so are wee affected to God, if wee loue him, for we delight to be in his presence and company in his Temple, and to haue communion with him in his Ordinances; the Word, Sacrament, Prayer, Medita∣tion and Thanksgiuing. 2. Wee desire and will en∣deuour to doe the best wee can, to honour and obey him; in refraining those things that will displease him, which is sinne; and in practising all such things as wee know will plea him, which are comprehendd vnder faith and obedience.
If wee haue this loue of God, and liue and dy ther∣in, wee shall thereby be as∣sured that we shal dy in the loue of God to vs. 1. Be∣cause it will assure vs of the loue of God to vs.1 Ioh. 4.19 For we loue God because hee loued vs first. 2. Because it will assure vs, wee haue the Spirit of God, for loue is theGal. 5.22 fruite of the Spirit, and they who haue GodsRom. 8.9 Spirit are Christs. 3. Because it will assure vs our faith is sound. ForGal. 5.6. faith is working and it works by loue.1 Thes. 1.3 4. Because it, will assure vs thatRo. 8.28. all things shall worke together to good, namely, to the good of our saluation, for so doe they doe to them that loue God. 5. Because it will assure vs we
are1 Cor. 8.3. knowne of God, that is, acknowledged of him for his owne, for so are they that loue God. 6. Because the Loue of God will assure vs of the crowneIam. 1.12 & 2, 5. of life, and the kingdome of heauen; for it is promised, to them that loue God. 7. Because it will assure vs, we1 Ioh. 4.7. are borne of God, and are his children, yea that wee1 Ioh. 4.19. dwell in God, and that God dwels in vs. In which case whosoeuer is, cannot but die in Gods loue and fauour, the rather, because this loue of GOD produceth the loue of our neighbour also, yea of our enemyes; which whosoe∣uer doth for conscience sake, in action, as well as af∣fection, may knowe they are
1 Iohn 3.16. Matt. 5 44. translated from death to life, and that they are the child∣ren of their heauenly Fa∣ther. The third, is the Feare of God.The second sanctifiyng grace, is the feare of God, (that is) feare to offend God, not onely because he is iust: but also and cheifly because hePsa. 130.2. is mercifull. By this feare, Christians learne toPro. 3.7. depart from euil, and also toDeut. 6.2 keep Gods com∣mandements: which whoso∣euer doe,2 Ti 2.19. the Lord knowes that they are his, and they are thePs. 112.1. blessed of God. If thus you feare God, you may bee sure you shall dy in Gods loue and fauor, first, because Gods mercy is on all them that feare him.Luc. 1.50. 2. Because it is a signe to all
such, that they are redeemed from their spirituall enemies, Sinne, Hell, Death, Satan. 3.Luc. 7.14. Because such walke in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. 4.Act. 9.31. Because such know they are redeemed by the precious blood of Iesus Christ. 5.1 Pet. 1.17 18, 19. Be∣cause such worke out their saluation (that is) the assu∣rance of it to themselues.Philip. 2.12 6. Because such are blessed. And so much for the sancti∣fying graces.Ps. 128.1. I know faith in Christ is a sanctifying grace, as well as the loue & feare of God: for the Elect are sanctified by faith in Christ.Act. 26.18. But I haue named all these six graces, by the chiefe and most pro∣per act of each, which of faith is to iustifie and not to
sanctifie. It is true, faith doth sanctifie as well as iu∣stifie: but by a secondary act, not as it layes hold on Christ, for so it iustifies: but as it incites to obedi∣ence and restrains from sin: for which it produceth the loue and feare of God: for faith sanctifies as it workes, and faith workes by loue:Gal. 5.6. which also is true of the fear of God:Ioh. 1.12. for by faith we re Gods children, & he is ou adopted Father. And  call on the Father b fith, then must wee passe the time of our soiourning heere in feare, namely, in feare to offend God by sin.1 Pet. 1.17 As obedient chil∣dren, not fashioning our selues according to the former lusts in our ignorance.v. 14.
Of the second kinde of vertues & holy gifts which keep vs in the state of grace,The third, is Hope. when wee are set into it by faith there is but one, it is a comforting grace, and it is Hope,1. Thes. 4. vlt. and Hope is a grace of God, whereby we com∣fort our selues against the immoderate feare of death in our selues, or greife for the death of our friendes; and by it the faithfull ear∣nestly looke, long, and will for the second comming of Christ,Act. 23.6. Rom. 5.2. and a ioyfull resur∣rection from death, to eter∣nall life thereby. Whosoeuer hath this Hope, may assure them∣selues they shall dy in Gods favour. 1.Rom. 5.5. Because i will not make them ashamed (that
is) they which by it looke for a ioyfull Resurrection, it will not deceiue them of the thing hoped for; but will bring them to the po∣ssession of it. 2. Because it is a sure signe, that the loue of GOD is shed abroad in their hearts by the holy Spi∣rit.Rom. 5.5. 1 Thes. 5.8 3. Because this hope is a helmet of saluation to co∣ver the heads of the Saints here one earth against Sin, Satan; and all spirituall ene∣myes. 4. Because by this hope the faithfull assure themselues their bodies are at rest in the graue, till the second comming of Christ.Act. 2.26. 5. Because they are saued by hope.Rom. 8.24. 6. Because he that hath this hope purgeth him∣selfe,1. Iohn 33, viz. from sinne & wic∣kednesse,
and he that thus purgeth himselfe,2 Ti. 2.21. Rom. 9.21 is a vessel of honour, and hee that is a vessell of honour,Ibid. 23. is a vessell of mercy, and he that is a ve∣ssell of mercy, is a vessell a∣fore prepared vnto glory. The third kind of holy vertues that keepe vs in the state of grace,The fift, is Patience. is the conten∣ting grace, & it is Patience. And by this patience, wee first quiet our selues in the will of God in all our afflic∣tions, and meekely submit our selues to indure them. 2. By patience we stay our selues on Gods pleasure, pa∣tiently waiting his leasure for the performance of his promise of helpe and deli∣uerance. If you haue and doe ex∣ercise
this patience, you may be sure to die in Gods fauour.Luk. 21.19 1. Because by it you possesse your soules.Rom. 2.7. 2. Be∣cause by it you shall gaine eternall life.Heb. 6.12, 15. 3. By patience you shall inherit the promises of grace and glory. 4. By patience we shall get experi∣ence,Rom. 5.4. namely, of the father∣ly loue of God towards his children.Rom. 15.4. 5. By patience we shall nourish and confirme our hope.Iam. 1.4. And 6th. Because, if patience haue her perfect worke, wee shall be entire and lacke nothing. The sixt, is Perseue∣rance.The fourth fort of ver∣tues and holy gifts of the Spirit, that keepe vs in the state of grace, when we are set into it by faith in Christ: It is a crowning
grace; and the grace that puts the crowne of glory on our heades, is perseue∣rance to the end of our liues, in the number & mea∣sure of all our Christian gra∣ces, together with all the holy fruits and effects that proceed from them, in the vse and exercise of them. If you shall thus perse∣uere in grace, you may bee sure to dy in Gods favour. 1.1 Ioh. 2.24 Because you shall conti∣nue in the Sonne and in the Father. 2. Because you shall bee saued 3.Mat. 10.22 Because you shall receiue the crowne of life. 4.Reu. 2.10. Because the Lord Iesus will present you vn∣blameable and vnreproueable in Gods sight. 5.Col. 1.22. Because when Christ shall appeare,1 Ioh. 2.28 you
may haue confidence, and not bee ashamed before him a his comming. 6. If yee fight a good fight, finish your course, and keepe the faith,2. Tim. 4. then you may assure your selues that henceforth is laid vp for you a crowne of righteousnes, which the Lord the righteous Iudge will giue you at that day. There be other graces of God that are necessary to saluation, viz. a beleife of the Gospell, & repentance for past sinnes, (I doe not meane amendment of life or new obediēce which in na∣ture follow Faith in Christ) but these doe not set men into the state of grace: but onely dispose them there∣unto, and vnto faith which doth set men therein, and
therfore haue I not menti∣oned them here, because it is possible for a man to haue these, and yet not dye in the state of grace, if hee dy before he haue faith in Christ, and the other bee wrought in him, and there∣fore can you not assure your selues, that you dy in Gods fauour if you stay here, and haue not the o∣ther sixe. There be also besides, a beleife of the gospell, and repentance for past sinnes, some other graces that doe follow it as effects & fruits thereof, namely, peace of conscience, and ioy in the holy Ghost; and these also are helpes to preserue vs in the state of grace. For that
peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding (and conse∣quently the ioy of GOD,Phil. 4.7. which is,1 Pet. 1.8. vnspeakable & glo∣rious (doth keepe our hearts and minds in Christ. But these graces imply comfort more then duty, & I had rather that Christians should endeauour to assure themselues they shall die in Gods fauour, by graces that import duty; then by them which import cōfort: least some Christians tender in conscience, not finding the graces of comfort, may therfore think they haue no grace, nor are in the state of grace, which is vsual with such to thinke of thēselues, specially in affliction, & vio∣lence of temptation: wher∣as
indeed as long as the du∣tifull graces exercise them∣selues in them, they may as∣sure themselues they shall die in Gods fauour, though they want the feeling of their ioyfull and comforta∣ble graces for the time, so they hunger for them, la∣ment after them, and ende∣uour in the vse of the means to get them. In like manner, besides all the forenamed graces and holy gifts of the Spirit, there be some vertuous ac∣tions and Christian duties,Vertuous actions, that will assure vs to dy in Gods fauor. to which the godly are stir∣red vp continually by the Spirit, and by the means of the six forenamed graces; and by the constant & con∣scionable practise whereof,
they may rather assure thē∣selues they liue in Gods fa¦uour, & consequently shall dye therein. I will but only touch them. Rom. 10.9. Heb 10.231. A zealous profession of the Gospel, notwithstan∣ding the slaunder and dan∣ger accompanying it. Heb. 6.6. Ier. 50.4.5 6. 2 Reg. 23.32. Often renewing our couenant with God of new obedience, by searching our hearts and liues for our sins, and lamenting our back-sli∣dings. 3. Deuout intention of mind,Psal. 26.6.7.8.84. and instant affection of heart in Gods seruice and worship,Col. 3.5. in all the points and kinds of it, publike, pri∣uate, or secret, ordinary or extraordinary. Matt. 5.24.50.4. Mortifying our sinful
nature, and lessoning our will and power to sinne, by crossing our owne wills, to the end we may doe Gods, and denying to our selues the occasions and opportu∣nities of our beloued sins. 5. Growing in grace,2 Pet. 3.18 & 5.10, 12 and increasing in the number and measure of our Christi∣an vertues and holy graces. 6.1 Pet 5.7.8 A sober moderating of our affections about worldly profits, pleasures, and honors, that our hearts be not set too much there∣upon. 7.1 Cor 7.31 30.39. Diligent faithfulnesse and conscionablenesse, ac∣cording to Iustice, and E∣quitie in doing our duty in our ordinary callings: whe∣ther in Common-wealth,1 Cor. 7.24
Church,Col. 3.18,  22. or Family. But all these are the fruits and effects of the sixe fore∣named graces, & they shew the soundnesse and sinceri∣tie of them, and therefore are necessarily implied in them: and for as much as they are not habits or ver∣tues themselues, but actions of those vertues and graces; and also, for because the forenamed sixe (with their vse and exercise) are suffici∣ent to assure vs that we shall die in Gods fauour; there∣fore haue I forborne to speake of them at large, as I haue done of the other six. The rather because these sixe are sufficient to free vs from all euils, sin, affliction, death, hell, and the deuill:
and to make vs partakers of all good things; as grace, peace, glory, and God him∣selfe. But to draw towards an end: We doe all owe God a death; this debt is to be paid when God will de∣mand it. The Lord respects not (& therefore what need we stand on it) in what coyn we pay our debt, gold or sil∣uer, so it be his own stampe, and bee weight with the al∣lowance (that is) what need we be troubled what death we die,Num. 23.1 so it bee the death of the rigtheous: which God himselfe sends, and not we our selues pull vpon our selues, through our owne sins, and so it be in the faith,Heb. 11.13 with trust and confidence
for the allowance and ac∣ceptation, of the death and obedience of Iesus Christ to our iustification; for what euer our death be, wee shall be happy in it. Be it ordina∣ry or extraordinary; of an Ague, or the Plague, in the bed, or in the field, in the Citie or in the Countrey, a naturall or a violent death. And thus much by occa∣sion of your present Griefe & Feare, to pacifie the one, and to satisfie the other; and further to sanctifie & sweet∣en thē both to your future edification, by humiliation or consolation in Iesus Christ. Of these Meditations, which God by his Spirit hath ministred vnto mee, I
may say as Physicians do of their medicines, Probatum est (that is) They haue been proued, and approued by the seruants of GOD, of whō we read in the Word, out of which they are ta∣ken by, and my Selfe in this present Visitation of my seruants, children, & louing Assistant, whom the Lord hath taken to rest from his labours in his Vineyard be∣times,Math. 20.12. and hath giuen him his wages for his worke (as it were) but one houre therein, Matt. 20.12. What remaines, but that as I haue made the potion, and sent it, so you take and apply it. And because I haue taken paines to write these Meditation for you,
that therefore you will take care to read & peruse them, to ponder and consider of them seriously for your selues and your own good, to confer the points with the proofs, and to compare your selues with the points, that you may receiue fur∣ther direction and instructi∣on, according as the nature of the seuerall points shall lead you, and your particu∣lar need require. To the end you may (by laying your selues to the Rule) find iu∣ster cause of humiliation in your selues, or of consolati∣on in Iesus Christ. If you shall lay them close to your hearts, I doubt not, but as they haue ministred comfort and content to vs,
(for which wee praise our good God) so will they vn∣to you, by his blessing. (For which I will not cease to pray.) But (before I end,) I would take my leaue of you by saying one thing more vnto you, according as your houses haue beene cleare (all this while) or vi∣sited, and your selues sound or infected, and that which I will say, shall be first vnto you all, of both sorts ioynt∣ly, and then vnto each sort of you in severall. That which concernes you altogether, is a watch∣word and a Request. My watch-word is to warne you, not to censure your brethren that haue
been either infected when you were cleere, or visited more heauily then your selues, or taken away by the visitation when you sur∣viue, as if they were greater sinners, then you for this were to bee miserable com∣forters,Luc. 13.2, 4 Iob. 16.2. when you should be comforters of them in mi∣sery. Yea, it is to trample on them, whom God hath cast downe. My request is, that you would (according to your abillitie) with your handes releiue their povertie, as well as in heart pitty them. for that is charitie. Here∣unto you are called, not onely by the word, which bids you Loue indeed, as well as in word,1 Ioa. 3.18 & affection
only, but also by the extreme penurie wherein too many haue bin, are, & will be cast;Luc. 2.16. partly by sicknesse, partly by decay of trade, and part∣ly by approching winter. That which shall be spo∣ken of each sort o you in seuerall, shall be first to them that haue not ben vi∣sited all this while, and thē to them that are recouered and escaped from death, though you were visited. To you whose houses haue yet been free, I would giue an admonition, and an exhortation. My admonition is, That you would not be secure, as if God now could not smite you: For there were first in this Visitation, that shall
not be last, and there shall be last that were not first. And my exhortation is, That you neuer forget the free fauour of God in your protection & preseruation: (least he repent him of the good hee hath done vnto you:) But that you studie what you shall render to the Lord for his benefits,Ps. 116.12 and endeuour to expresse your thankfulnesse for such a de∣liuerance by seruing him, you and your houshold more constantly & conscionably.Iosh. 24.15 To you whose houses haue been visited, and yet your selues are escaped and enioy your liues so a pray, I would likewise giue you a caution and a counsell. My caution is, that you
thinke not that any thing in your selues, or in your meanes, hath made the dif∣ference betwixt you that are aliue, and other that are dead; for this were to sacri∣fice to your selues,Abac. 1.16 and to your net and yarne. But that God his free favour, his power and goodnesse: hath made the difference; who will haue mery on whom hee will, and who can preserue whom he pleaseth. And my counsell is, That during the time of your liues hereafter,2 Chron. 30.17. you set your hearts to seeke God, and make him your portion and inheritance,Ps. 116.5. walke within your houses with a perfect heart;Ps. 101.2. Ioh. 5.14. and sin no more least a worse thing come vnto you.
2 The. 2.16Now our Lord Iesus Christ himselfe, and God euen our Father, which hath saued vs, and giuen vs euerlasting con∣solation; comfort your hearts, and stablish you in euery good word and worke. And Blessed bee God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ,2 Cor. 1.3, 4. the Father of mercies, and the GOD of all comfrt, who comforteth vs in all our tribulation, that wee may bee able to comfort them which are in trouble, by the com∣fort vvherewith wee our selues are com∣forted of God; Amen. FINIS.
AN HVMBLE THANKS-GIVING TO ALMIGHTIE GOD: For his so soone, so great, and so gracious staying of the Plague, in the Citie of London, and Subvibs thereof. BY WILLIAM CHIBALD. PSAL. 36.1. O giue thankes vnto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for euer. Printed at London by W. I. for Nic. Bourne, and Edw. Brwster, and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange, and at the Bible in Pauls-Church-yard. 1625.
The Preface. THE more deadly a dis∣ease is, the greater is the Cure; and the greater the Cure is, the greater is the commendation of the Physician. Euen so the greater any danger is, the greater is GODs deliue∣rance
from it, the greater ought to bee our Thankes∣giuing vnto his blessed Maiesty for it. On these, and the like grounds, J haue formerly stirred vp my selfe vnto secret, priuate, and publike giuing of thankes to our good God, for abating the heat of the sicknes, & the number of them that dye thereof. And synce, J haue endeauoured to forward others also to glorifie God in this behalfe, by penning a forme thereof, and publi∣shing
it, with this Trea∣tise. The rather because J haue not seen nor heard of any thing in this kind set forth for publike be∣nefyt. The time and meanes of grace considered, J thinke J may truely say (for the generalitie) that synne did neuer so abound in quantitie, qualitie, and variety, as of late it hath done in our Citie of Lon∣don, and the Suburbs thereof. And now (be∣hold) answerable to the
measure of our synnes, is the measure of Gods Vi∣sytation, for there was neuer such a plague sent among vs. Jn like manner the contagion and maligni∣tie of this Plague con∣sydered, which in so short a time, when so many vvere absent, killed so many thousands: J may safely say there was ne∣uer such a Deliuerance in this kinde vvrought by Almightie GOD for vs: d therefore answe∣rable
to Gods great good∣nes, ought to be our great gratefulnes. Now, consydering (Christian Reader) that the measure of our thank∣fulnesse to GOD, ought to be so great, and that our power (as of our selues) to performe it, is so small Let vs all that want ho∣ly wisdome,Iam. 1. for this pur∣pose,1 Ti. 1.17 aske of God onely wise, that hee would bee pleased to giue vs in abili∣tie, what he requires of vs in dutie, and that the me∣ditations
of my heart in conceiuing of this forme, and the vvordes of our mouthes in vttering it, may bee directed by his blessed Spirit, and accep∣ted in his beloued Sonne, Amen.1 Reg. 1.36 And let the Lord God of our Citie, and our deliuerance say so too.
The parts of the Thanksgiuing for this Deliuerance, are SIXE. I. BEmoning our Mi∣serie, caused by the Plague. II. Confessing our sinnes that brought it. III. Acknowledging Gods Iustice in sending the Plague. IV. Thanking GODs goodnesse for staying it.
V. Praying to GOD, wholly to remooue the Plague. VI. Professing our amend∣ment vpon the remoue∣all thereof.
A THANKES∣GIVING TO GOD, FOR STAYING the Plague. O LORD GOD of Heauen and earth, by whose patience & pro∣uidence it is, that yet vvee liue, and moue,Act. 17.28 and haue our being in this world: for our life drew nigh vnto the graue,Ps. 88.3, 4 and wee were counted with them that goe downe in∣to the pit. Through thy
goodnesse (O Lord) wee are a remnant escaped,Ezra 9.15. as ap∣peareth this day, reserued (as wee trust) to glorifie thy Name. But who are wee, dast and ashes, miserable sin∣ners, that should be bold to glorifie thy goodnesse, that desee not to confesse our owne vildenesse: being vn∣worthy, as of the Deliue∣ance it selfe, so to giue thee thankes for it. I. Bemoning our misery, caused by the Plague.Our vildenesse and vn∣worthinesse appears by our great and many sinnes, and the haynousnes of our sins, by thy late dealing with vs in heauy displeasure. Our soule hauing in remembrance our affliction and misery,Lam. 3.19, 20. the wormewood and the gaull is humbled in vs: For thou
hast sent the plague among vs after the manner of Egypt,Amos 4.10 in most grieuous manner, the like was neuer before a∣mong vs. Thou hast not on∣ly visited vs with Agues and Feuers,Eze. 14.21 but with one of thy foure sore iudgements; The Plague or Pestilence, a consuming sicknesse,Deu. 23.21 by which thou hast powred out thy fury in blood vpon vs.Eze. 14.19. With it bane been infected all the Parishes of our Citie and Suburbs saue one) and of it haue dyed and fallen thousands at our sides,Psal. 91.7. and ten thousands at our right hand: rich and poore, young and old, profane and sincere, professours and preachers. The chiefe and Princes of the Cities of our Nation, is
solitary & sits as a widdow: She that was full of People, is emptie of Inhabitants; the streets thereof mourne, and the high wayes to it la∣ment; the publike markets are not frequented, and the solemne Assemblies of thy worship are much desola∣ted & darkned, by the put∣ting out of many worthy Lights, his faithfull Mini∣sters. At home, ô Lord, som haue perished for want of keeping, and abroad some haue fallen downe dead in the feilds and streets. One of some houses (O Lord God) haue dyed all and e∣very one, Parents and chil∣dren, Masters and seruants, and in other, all haue bin sicke at once, not one a∣ble
to help another. In som familyes might bee heard, the out-cry of the tender mother, for her onely child and in other, the lamenta∣tion of the carefull father, for the death of his sonne and heire, or the child, that was the picture of his like∣nes. Yea, such and so great was our greife and feare (O Lord) that when wee went to bed well, wee looked to bee smitten ere morning, and could take little rest for the noise of bells, towling & ringing out in our eares. And when wee arose in health in the morning, we expected to be cast downe ere night, and could not follow our callings chere∣fully for the sight of our
eyes, multituds of our dead brethren and sisters, caried vp and downe the streets to buriall. Wee doe not (O Lord God) repeate these our calamityes to informe thee, as if thou, who didst bring them vpon vs, didst not know of them, or hadst forgotten them: but that we might not forget them, nor thy heauy displeasure against our sinnes in them, that wee might bee made more sensible of our great deliuerance, by calling to minde our former danger and distresse, and thereby also the better prepared to a more free, and humble confession of our sins,Eze. 12.16 that haue brought these cala∣mities vpon vs.
For wee must needs con∣fesse (O Lord our God) to thy glory and our owne shame,II. Confessing our sins, that brought the Plague. that we haue practi∣sed those sinnes, against which, in thy Word, this plague is threatned, and vp∣on the committers where∣of, it hath beene executed, in former Ages of the Church. For in all duties, concerning thy sacred Ma∣iestie, our brethren, and our owne selues,Ezek 14.13.19. Wee haue sinned by trespassing grieuously, and therefore hast thou sent the plague,Eze. 38.22 & with the pestilence pleaded against vs, in blood. Wee haue not (O Lord our GOD) sacrificed vnto thee,Exod. 5.3. nor worshipped thee so frequently, nor so de∣uoutly as wee should, there∣fore
hast thou fallen vpon vs by the pestilence, and many of vs haue defiled thy sanctu∣ary,Ezek. 5.11 the place of thy wor∣ship, when wee haue resor∣ted thereunto with our de∣testable things, our abomi∣nable sinnes, impenitencie, and hypocrisie, and therfore a great part of vs haue dyed by the pestilence in this visitati∣on. Vnto our brethren we haue beene cruell, and haue not proclaimed libertie to them that were in our dan∣ger;Ier. 34.5.17. therefore the Lord hath proclaimed libertie to the pestilence for many of vs.Ier. 14.10.12. And we our selues haue de∣lighted to wander in our own wayes,Ier. 14.10.12. and to take pleasure in sin for a season, and haue not refrained our feet from e∣uill
paths: Therfore the Lord hath not accepted vs, hee hath remembred our iniquity, hath visited our sinnes, and consu∣med vs by the pestilence. With Pharaoh wee haue hardned our hearts against thy mercies & iudgements,Exod. 9. and haue not beene reclai∣med from our sinnes there∣by, we haue not let our lusts goe that we might serue thee; nor let our brethren goe, that they might serue thee. But haue discouraged & cooled their Zeale in thy seruice, therefore hast thou smitten vs by the pestilence,Ver. 18. and cut off many from off the earth. Wee haue with Israel murmured against Moses & Aaron,Nu 16.21. our Magistrates and Ministers, for their zeale in correcting
and reprouing our vnrigh∣teous dealing, & inordinate walking, and there haue dy∣ed many thousands of the plague,Nu 16.42 besides those that y of other diseases. With the Spies of the Land of Cana∣an,Num. 14.37.36. wee haue brought vp an euill report vpon thy holy Maiesty, thy Church, and holy Ordinances,Ps. 50.31. as if thou wert like the wicked, as if thy Church were a compa∣ny of none but Hypocrites and Rebels, and as if thy sa∣cred Ordinances were vn∣holy things, & taught pro∣fanenesse, and therefore by bringing vp this slander vp∣on thy Name, through our loosenesse and vnconscio∣nable life many are dead of the plague before the Lord.Nu. 14 37.
As Magistrates, and Mini∣sters, Husbands and Wiues, Parents and Children, Ma∣sters and Seruants, rich and poore, high and low, young and old, one with another. We haue not obeyed thy voyce,Ier. 32.23 24. nor walked in thy Law. Wee haue done nothing at all, that thou hast commaunded vs to doe: and therfore what thou hast spoken in thy Word of the pestilence, it is come to passe, and thou seest it, and wee haue felt it.Deu. 25.21 Yea wee would not obserue to doe all thy commandements and sta∣tutes, which thou comman∣dest vs to do, but haue bro∣ken them all in one kinde and measure or other. And therefore hast thou made the pestilence cleaue vnto vs tillIbid.
it hath consumed vs. We haue not harkened vnto thy words,Ier. 29.19.17. which thou hast sent unto vs, by thy seruants the Prophets or Pastors & teachers,Leu. 26.23. when they haue called vs vnto re∣pentance, nor haue we been reformed by lesser correcti∣ons but walked contrary unto thee,Iere. 29.18 therefore hast thou persecuted us with the pesti∣lence,Leu. 26.25 and sent it vnto our Cities, where we haue ben ga∣thered together. We doe not (O Lord our God) thus confesse our sins vnto thee, as if thou knewest them not who art greater then our con∣sciences & knowest althings.1 Ioh. 3.20 but that by the repetition and remembrance of them, we might be drawne, more soundly to repent of them,
and to haue our eyes open∣ed, more cleerely to dis∣cerne thy iustice, in punish∣ing of vs with this thy visi∣tation, and thy righteous∣nes in afflicting vs with ma∣ny miseries thereby,Ps. 52.4. that thou mayest bee cleare when thou art iudged.Dan. 9.7. For Righteousnes belong∣eth vnto thee (O Lord) but vnto us open shame as at this day. All this is come vpon us,III. Acknow∣ledging Gods Iu∣stice in sen∣ding the Plague. for our euill deedes, and for our great trespasses, and thou hast punished vs lesse then our iniquities deserue,Ier 9.13. therefore will wee be dumbe and not o∣pen our mouthes.Psal. 39.9. Thou hast not done without cause,Ezek. 14.28. all that thou hast done vnto vs,Lev. 26.43 and therefore will wee accept the punishment of our iniquitie.
Though thou hast not pu∣nished vs according to the greatnesse of our sinnes as they deserue in measure, (which is thy mercy,) yet hast thou punished vs ac∣cording to the kind & man∣ner of our sinnes (which is thy iustice) for we haue pro∣faned thy house and san∣ctuarie, with our formall and hypocriticall seruing of thee, without the in∣ward partes both of our selues, and of thy worship, and therefore hast thou shut the dores of thy house vpon vs, when we were vi∣sited, and hast (by lawfull authoritie and good order) shut vs vp in our owne hou∣ses.Psa. 101.2 In our owne houses wee haue not walked before thee,
with a perfect heart, for false weights and measures, false lights and bad wares, haue been in many of our shops and ware-houses, and therefore it is iust with thee to shutt vp our shopps for want of trading, and to in∣fect other of our roomes, and chambers, with a feare∣full contagion. Many of vs that were wont, proudly to let and strutt it out in the streetes, in the vanitie and varietie of strange apparell, and new fangled habits and attyres, hast thou now clad with mourning weeds and giuen vs cause to put sack∣cloth on our backs, and a∣shes on our heads, fo we are baased even to the dung∣hill. The members of our
bodyes, we haue abused as weapons of vnrighteous∣nesse vnto sinne, and there∣fore hast thou (O Lord) weakened and deformed the bodies of some with blanes and sores, boyles and carbuncles, and filled the bodies of others with the Tokens of thy displea∣sure. We haue corrupted one another wirh the euill example of our workes, and made them sinne; and there∣fore it is iust (with thee) that we should be a meanes to infect one another to sicknesse and death. Many of our Ministers, thy faith∣full seruants, wee regarded not while they liued, and therefore hast thou depri∣ued vs of them: yea, many
of vs haue defrauded them of their double honour,1. Ti. 5.17. reue∣rend respect, and plentifull maintenance; and therfore hast thou taken from vs the means of our maintenance, by commerce and traffique. Wee haue been hard-hear∣ted, and close-fisted to the necessities of our poore neighbours liuing amongst vs; and therefore it is iust, (in respect of thee) that our neighbour countries round about vs, did deny to bring vs (that abode in the Citie) food and victualls, and to bury those of vs that did go out of it, with comely buri∣all. Wee haue by our bad liuing and vniust dealing, caused thy Gospel, thy truth (so plentifully prea∣ched2. Pet. 2.2.
in this Citie) to bee euill spoken of abroad, and therfore it is iust with thee, that wee should bee a moc∣king and hissing, a by∣word and a reproach vnto our neighbour countries a∣bout vs. Wee doe not (O Lord God) thus iustifie thy proceeding against vs, as if it needed our cleering: but to testifie our desire (as much as possible wee can) to glorifie thy iustice by shaming our selues, to the end wee may bee the better prepared to glorifie thy mercy also (which is aboue all thy workes) in our won∣derfull deliuerance.Psa. 145.9 IV. Thanking Gods good∣nes for stay∣ing Plague.For (O Lord our God) In that when the sicknesse was so hot, and so many
had dyed thereof, thou shouldest then stay it: It was not because the sword of thine Angel was blunted with so many strokes; or be∣cause there were no more people to dye, or no more graues in London: or because there was in vs no more desert of punishment,Exod. 14.11. or in thee no more power to pu∣nish: But because thou wert pleased in iudgement to remember mercy,Abac. 3.2. and that thou delightest in mercy ra∣ther then iudgement.Mica. 7.18. That wee are aliue when others are dead, that wee were in health when others were sicke. It was not because wee were not within the compasse of thy stroke, or could defend our selues, or
were able to heale the wound: But because thou wouldst haue mercy on whom thou wouldst: no goodnesse or power in vs, but meere∣ly greatnesse and goodnesse in thee, hath made the dif∣rence. And therefore, as thou art worthy to receiue glory,Rev. 4.11. honour, and power: so saluation, and glory, and ho∣nour and power, (euen glory and honour for manifest∣ing thy power in our salva∣tion and preseruation,2. Chr. 7.14) bee vnto thee, for euer. For in this our deliuerance (O Lord our God) we see, and therefore desire to glorifie thy wisedome, in putting it into the minde of our Go∣uernours to appoint thine owne means of healing our
Citie by humiliation with Fasting and Prayer, and enabling thy Ministers and people vnderstandingly & feelingly, faithfully and fer∣uently to vse those meanes, and also in taking oppor∣tunitie in our greatest ex∣tremitie to worke this our deliuerance, to the end the worke might the more cleerely appeare to be thine owne. In this thy deliue∣rance we discerne thy pow∣er, and therfore according∣ly wee desire to praise thee, in that thou art able to countermand all thy crea∣tures, euen the very An∣gels, those principalities and powers: for thou didst on a sodaine, and in a short time worke a great deliuerance,
notwithstanding the won∣derfull increase of the con∣tagion in so many places, the heate of the weather, the multitude of the peo∣ple, and heynousnesse of our sins, all which wrought toward a contrary end. In this thy deliuerance, wee behold thy truth and faith∣fulnesse (O Lord our God) in making good thy pro∣mises of healing thy people,2. Chr. 7.15. when they shall seeke thy face with prayers, teares, hu∣miliation, and turning vnto thee, in not keeping thine an∣ger for euer, in not letting the rod of the wicked rest for euer vpon vs all,Psa. 103. Psa. 105. nor suffe∣ring thy people to bee tempted aboue their strength, but gi∣uing a good issue of their try∣all.
In this our deliuerance we glorifie thy patience, in that thou hast not dealt with vs according to our sins,Psa. 103.11. nor rewarded vs after our iniquities; but hast borne with vs all this while, and giuen vs yet a longer time to repent, sparing vs, as a father spareth his owne sonne that serueth him.Mat. 3.17. In this thy deliuerance (O heauenly Father) wee see also thy pittie, in that, when our great sinnes had deserued the greatest and forest of thy foure plagues, euen the sword; that yet notwith∣standing thou didst send but the smallest of them: for hereby wee are not fallen into the hands of men,Prou. whose mercies are Cruelties; but,
into thy hands, whose mercies are great:2. Sam. 24. hast already wonderfully lessened this thy hand, and hast also gi∣uen vs good hope (through grace) of quite remouing the same. But aboue all, (O Lord our God) In this our deliuerance felt and ex∣pected, we cleerely behold thy free grace, and rich fa∣vour, with thy infinite mer∣cie and vnspeakable loue, (and accordingly we desire to bee plentious in thanks∣giving) for when there was no goodnes in vs to moue thee to it, nor power to pro∣cure it to our selues; Yea when iustice on thy part, and wickednesse on ours, did withstand it, then thou wast pleased to thinke
thoughts of peace towards vs, and to stay thy hand, to say to vs,Ezek. 16.6 when we were pol∣luted in our bloud, Liue. When the fornace of thy displeasure was heated,Dan. 3. much hotter, then euer it was before, and the flame thereof, had consumed ma∣ny of our neighbours hou∣ses, yet on some of our houses the fire had no power at all, nor was a hayre of the heads of many of vs synged; wee ayled nothing all the while,Psa. 115.1. and therfore not vn∣to vs (O Lord) not vnto vs, but vnto thy Name bee gi∣uen all the praise. Not vn∣to Physicians or Surgeons: Not vnto Magistrates or Ministers; Not to Watch∣men or Keepers, not to an∣tidotes
or preseruatiues, not to house or ayre, not to Signes or Planets, not to Saints or Angels, not to our selues or others. Not thy workes in vs of nature or grace; no, not to our fa∣sting and prayers, to our humiliation & teares: But to thy wisedome and pow∣er, to thy faithfulnesse and truth, to thy patience and pittie, to thy free grace and rich mercy, be giuen by vs all, and by all meanes in all times, and in all places, ho∣nor and glory, with thanks∣giuing and obedience, in Iesus Christ, from this time forth and for euer. V. Praying to God woy remone the lauAnd now (heauenly Fa∣the) seeing wee that are but dust and Ashes, haue taken
vpon us to speake vnto thee in thanksgiuing,Gen. 1.18. bee not an∣gry with vs, if we speake once more in prayer and suppli∣cation also, we rather hope thou wilt bee pleased with vs,Psa. 116.13. if hauing taken the cup of saluation in thankefulnesse for staying the plague so soone, and so much already wee also call vpon the Name of the Lord for the quite re∣moueall thereof.P. 2.125.4 The rod of the wicked hath long lyen vpon vs; Oh let it not rest vpon vs that are the lot of thine inheritance: for thou hast said,1. Reg. 11.7. Esay. 29.5.25. Thou wilt not af∣flict the seed of Dauid for e∣uer. Thy hand is stretched out still, Oh wee pray thee pull it in, and put it into thy bosome, for we haue beene
consumed by the heauinesse of it. Thou hast formerly gi∣uen vs many great deliue∣rances, to this Citie in this kind, & to the whole Land in other kindes, namely, from forraine inuasion and priuy conspiracie;The Spanish Armado. 1588. The Gun-powder-Treason. 1605. and wee confesse to thy glory, and and our owne shame, that most of vs haue almost for∣gotten to celebrate the memoriall of them; & none of vs haue euer since led our liues (which thou didst preserue from the crueltie of those intendments and attempts) in righteousnesse and holinesse before thee. And in this respect wee are vnworthy thou shouldst proceed in mercy, as thou hast begun; & end in mer∣cy,
as thou hast proceeded: But though wee be vnwor∣thy of more deliuerance, yet art thou worthy of more honor, which accordingly thou shalt receiue. For by how much the more we are vnworthy, by so much the more doth the freenesse & greatnesse of thy grace and mercy appeare; and by how much the more thy grace & mercy appeares free and great, by so much the more doth the glory thereof ap∣peare for thine honor. And therfore (O Lord our God) though our iniquities testifie against vs:Ier. 14.7. 1 Sa. 12.21 yet do it for thine owne Names sake, forsake not thy people for thy great names sake, because it hath pleased thee to make vs thy people.
Thou art an exquisite worke-man, leaue not thy worke halfe done as if thou couldst not finish it, but end it in perfection. Thou art an absolute Physician, leaue not thy Patients crazy & sickly, till thou hast made a perfect Cure. And that thou maist perfect the work of deliuerance, which thou hast begun amongst vs, wee beseech thee perfect the works of grace and amend∣ment, which thou hast be∣gun within vs. Thou hast already said to thine Angel, Stay thy hand: for this wee praise thee, bee pleased also to goe on and to say, It is e∣nough, for this we pray thee command thine Angel also to put vp his sword into the2. Sam. 24.16. 1. Chron. 21.7
sheath thereof and to draw it out no more. Returne, O Lord, how long? let it repent thee concerning thy seruants,Psa 90.13.15. make vs glad according to the dayes wherein thou hast afflic∣ted vs, and the months and weekes wherin we haue seen euill.Lam. 5.21. Renew our dayes as of old, Helpe vs,Psa. 85.8. O God of our sal∣uation, for the glory of thy Name. Wherefore should Papists say, It is for our re∣ligion that wee are thus plagued: wherefore should Atheist say, Thou wast not able to saue vs, &c. where∣fore should carnall Gospel∣lers say, What profit is it that thy people haue pray∣ed vnto thee, and walked mournefully before thee,Iob. 21.14 Mal. 3.15 and It is in vaine to serue thee.
And to the end thou maist continue the worke of our deliuerance, giue vs grace also to continue the worke of our humiliation before thee, vntill thou haue repai∣red our Ierusalem, the praise of our Nation; neuer letting thee go vntil thou hast blessed vs, nor giuing thee rest till thou hast healed our Ci∣tie. Neither are we mind∣full of it onely, but we re∣member other parts of our Land, beseeching thee (good Lord) to stay thy hand from spreading the sicknes in other Towns and Cities, and to withdraw it where it is disperst, giuing them all grace (according to their seueral conditions) by seasonable amendment to
preuēt or remoue the same; and in the mean time to cō∣fort al those that any where are visited with this or any other sicknes, by recouering thē vnto health, to liue bet∣ter to thy glory, or by fitting them for death, to depart in peace to their saluation. Make an end of the tryall, (wee pray thee) of other Churches by the sword, fa∣mine, or any other iudgmēt, and continue to ours the peace of the Gospel, & the Gospel of peace; preseruing all Estates and degrees a∣mongst vs, in Church and Common-wealth from this & other plagues (if it be thy blessed will) to execute iu∣stice and to shew mercy, for the taking away of this,
and the turning away of o∣ther heauy iudgements. Be thou exalted (Lord) in thine owne strength, so will we sing and praise thy power.Psa. 21.16. VI. Professing our amend∣ment vpon our remou∣all of the Plague.For we doe not desire (O Lord our God) to haue the plague of our sicknes taken away from amongst vs, that the plague of our sinnes may remaine within vs, nor that thou shouldest turne thy heauie hand from vs, that wee might returne to our former wickednes, for the time past of our life is suf∣ficient (and to much) to haue liued therein.1. Pet. 4.3. If thus againe we should breake thy comman¦dements,Ezera. 9.14 wouldst thou not be angrie with vs till thou hadst consumed vs: but wee beg this further favour of thee,
not to die,Psa. 118.17 but to liue to declare thy works and to praise thy name.Ier. 50.4.5 For this end with mourning and weeping for our former many and grei∣uous sinnes, wee come vnto thee and seeke thee, and will ioyne our selues vnto thee in a perpetuall couenant neuer to be forgotten. Wee will make a couenant befe thee our God, to walke after thee, & to keepe thy cōmandements, thy statutes and thy testimonies with all our hearts, and with all our soules, nnd to performe the words of the couenant,2 Reg. 23.3 and to stand vnto it, wee will make a sure couenant & write it and seale vnto it,Neh. 9.38. yea wee will enter into a curse and in∣to an oath to walee in Gods lawe,Neh. 10.29 and to obserue and to do
all the commandemnts of the Lord our God that we may ty our loose harts to the obedi∣ence of thy holy wil for euer And let our houses which thou hast visited or kept cleare from this contagi∣on, and let our bodies, which thou hast healed or preserued from infection, and let our soules which thou hast humbled & com∣forted in any measure by and vnder this visitation, beare witnes to our sinceri∣ty in making this holy vow and couenant with thee. Let them bee a continuall remembrance to put vs in minde of often renewing it before thee: and let them bee as a threefold cord not ea∣sily broken faster to binde
vs to the keeping of this oath & couenant with thee for euer. And now (O Lord our God) since thou hast by thy Spirit put into our hearts this desire to giue thee thanks, & direct∣ed vs to this means of mani∣festing our thankfulnes we humbly beseech thee keepe it for euer in the thoughts and imaginations of the hearts of thy people,1 Chr. 29 15. and set our hearts vnto thee, And giue vs such a heart that wee may feare thee, & keepe thy commandements alwayes,Deu. 5.29. that it may bee well with vs and with our children for euer, so wee thy people and sheepe of thy pasture will giue thee praise for euer, & will al∣wayes bee setting forth thy praise from generation to ge∣neration, Amen.
Now vnto the King immor∣tall, inuisible and onely true God, most mighty & wise, faithfull and true, patient and pittifull, gracious & mercifull, infinite in all perfection; The Father of mercy, in The Sonne of peace, through The Holy Spirit of cō∣fort, be yeelded and giuen for all our former and later deli∣uerances in this or any other kind; and namely, for the pre∣sent staying of the Plague, (happily in great measure al∣ready begun and continued, and hopefully in the end to be perfected & accomplished) From our beliefe & trust; our loue and feare; our hope and ioy; our patience & obedience with our bodies and soule, by our thoughts, words, & works in our liues and deaths: all ho∣nour and glory, and all praise & thanks, from this time forth and for euer.Ps. 106.48 And let all the peo∣ple say, AMEN FINIS.
