6245 99844907 9762
THE CIVILE WARES betweene the Howses of Lancaster and Yorke corrected and continued by Samuel Daniel one of the Groomes of hir Maiesties most honorable Priuie Chamber. Aetas prima canat veneres postrema tumultus. PRINTED AT LONDON by Simon Watersonne 1609:
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE Lady, the Lady Marie, Countesse Dowager of Pembrooke. MADAME: THis Poem of our last Ciuile Warres of England, (whereof the many Editi∣ons shewe what kinde of intertaine∣ment it hath had with the world) I haue now againe sent-forth, with the addition of two bookes: the one,  the course of the Historie; the other, making-vp  part, which (for haste) was left vnfurnisht in the former . And, hauing nothing else to doo with my , but to worke whil'st I haue it; I held it my part, to  (the best I could) this Prouince, Nature hath  to my Charge: and which I desire to leaue, after my death, in the best forme I may; seeing I can erect no o∣ther pillars to sustaine my memorie, but my lines nor  pay my debts and the recknings of my gratitude to their honour who haue donne me good, and furthered  Worke. And, whereas this Argument was long since vnderta∣ken
(in a time which was not so well secur'd of the future, as God be blessed now it is) with a purpose, to shewe the deformities of  Dissension, and the miserable e∣uents of Rebellions, Conspiracies, and bloudy Reuenge∣ments, which followed (as in a circle) vpon that breach of the due course of Succession, by the Vsurpation of Hen. 4; and thereby to make the blessings of Peace, and the happi∣nesse of an established Gouernment (in a direct Line) the better to appeare: I trust I shall doo a gratefull worke to my Countrie, to continue the same, vnto the glorious  of Hen. 7: from whence is descended our present Hap∣pinesse. In which Worke, I haue carefully followed that truth which is  in the Historie; without adding to, or subtracting from, the general receiu'd opinion of things as we finde them in our common Annalles: holding it an impietie, to violate that publike Testimonie we haue, with∣out more euident proofe; or to introduce fictions of  owne imagination, in things of this nature. Famae rerum standum est. Though I knowe, in these publike actions, there are euer popular bruites, and opinions, which run ac∣cording to the time & the biass of mens affections: and it is the part of an Historian, to recite them, not to rule thē; especially, otherwise then the circumstances may induce: according to that modest saying; Nec affirmare sustineo de quibus dubito, nec subducere quae accepi. I haue onely vsed that poeticall licence, of framing speaches to the persons of men according to their occasi∣ons; as C. Salustius, and T. Liuius (though Writers in Prose, yet in that kinde Poets) haue, with diuers other an∣tient and modern Writers, done before me. Wherin, though
they   vpon   ,   à  that was not properly theirs: yet, seeing they  so  a proportion, with the nature of men, and the course of af∣fayres; they passe as the partes of the Actor (not the Wri∣ter) and are 'd with great approbation. And although many of these Images are drawne with the pencil of mine conceiuing: yet I knowe, they are according to the portraiture of Nature; and carrie a re∣semblance to the life of Action, and their complexions whom they represent. For, I see, Ambition, Faction, and Affections, speake euer one Language, we are like colours (though in seuerall fashions) feed, and are fed with the same nutriments; and only vary but in time. Man is a creature of the same dimension he was: and how great and eminent  hee bee, his measure and height is easie to be taken. And all these great actions are openly presented on the Stage of the World: where, there are euer Spectators, who will iudge and censare how men personate those parts, which they are set to perform; and so enter them in the Records of Memorie. And if I haue erred somewhat in the draught of the young Q. Isabel (wife to Ric. 2.) in not suting her passi∣ons to her yeares: I must craue fauour of my credulous Readers; and hope, the young Ladies of England (who peraduenture will thinke themselues of age sufficient, at 14 yeares, to haue a feeling of their owne estates) will ex∣cuse me in that point. For the rest, setting-aside those or∣naments, proper to this kinde of Writing; I haue faithful∣ly obserued the Historie. Wherein, such as loue this Har∣mony of words, may finde, that a Subiect, of the greatest grauitie, will be aptly exprest: howsoeuer others (seeing
in      , )   but as a language  Lightnes and . For  owne part, I am not so far in  with this forme of Writing (nor haue I sworne Fealtie onely to Ryme) but that I  serue in any other state of Inuenti∣on, with what weapon of  I will: and, so it may make good my , I care not. For, I see, Iudgement and Discretion (with what soeuer is worthy) carry their owne Ornaments, and are grac't with their owne beauties; be they  in what fashion they will. And because I finde the common tongue of the world is Prose; I purpose in that kinde to write the Historie of England, from the Conquest: being incouraged thereunto, by many noble & worthy Spirits. Although , I must not neglect to prosecute the other part of this Worke  being thus re∣uiued by your Goodnes: to whome; and to whose Noble Family, I hold my selfe euer bound; and will labour to  you all she honor, and seruice I can. SAM. DANYEL.
❧ TO THE HIGH and most Illustrious Prince CHARLES His Excellence. SIR: PResents to gods were offered by the hands of graces; and why not those of great Princes, by those of the Muses? To you therefore Great Prince of Honor, and Honor of Princes; J ioyntly present Poesie and Musicke, in the one the seruice of my defunct Bro∣ther, in the other, the duty of my selfe liuing, in both the douotion of two Bro∣thers, your Highnes humble seruants. Your Excellence then who is of such
recommendable fame, with all Nations for the curiosity of your rare Spirit to vnderstand, and ability of Knowledge to iudge of all things: I humbly inuite leauing the Songs of his Muse, who liuing so sweetly chanted the glory of your High Name: Sacred is the fame of Poets, Sacred the name of Princes; To which Humbly bowes, and vowes Himselfe, euer your Highnesse Seruant, Iohn Daniel.
THE FIRST BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. What times fore-goe Richard the seconds Raigne, The fatall causes of this ciuile VVarre, His Vncles pride, his greedy Minions gaine, Glosters reuolt, and death, deliuered are. Herford, accus'd, exil'd, call'd-back againe, Pretendes t' amend what others Rule did marre. The King from Ireland hastes, but did no good; VVhil'st strange prodigious signes fore-token blood. 1 I Sing the ciuill Warres, tumultuous Broyles, And bloody factions of a mightie Land: Whose people hautie, proud with forraine spoyles, Vpon themselues turn-backe their conquering hand; Whil'st Kin their Kin, Brother the Brother foyles; Like Ensignes all against like Ensignes band; Bowes against Bowes, the Crowne against the Crowne; Whil'st all pretending right, all right's throwne downe.
2 What furie, ô what madnes held thee so, Deare England (too too prodigall of blood) To waste so much, and warre without a foe, Whilst Fraunce, to see thy spoyles, at pleasure stood! How much might'st thou haue purchast with lesse woe, T'haue done thee honour and thy people good? Thine might haue beene what-euer lies betweene The Alps  vs, the Pyrenei and Rhene. 3 Yet now what reason haue we to complaine? Since hereby came the calme we did inioy; The blisse of thee Eliza; happie gaine For all our losse: when-as no other way The Heauens could finde, but to vnite againe The  sev'red Families, that they Might bring foorth thee: that in thy peace might growe That glorie, which few Times could euer showe. 4 Come sacred Virtue: I no Muse, but thee, , in this great labour I intend. Doo thou inspire my thoughts, infuse in mee A power to bring the same to happie end. Rayse vp a worke, for later times to see, That may thy glorie, and my paynes commend. Make me these tumults rightly to rehearse: And giue peace to my life, life to my verse. 5 And thou Charles  (who didst once afford Rest for my fortunes, on thy quiet shore; And cheer'dst mee on, these measures to record In grauer tones, then I had vs'd before) Beholde: my gratitude makes good my word Ingag'd to thee (although thou be no more) That I, who  haue liv'd by thee, Doo giue thee now a roome to liue with me.
6 And MEMORIE, preserv'resse of things done, Come thou, vnfold the woundes, the wracke, the waste: Reueale to me now all the strife be gunne Twixt Lancaster and Yorke, in ages past: How causes, counsels, and euents did runne, So long as these vnhappie times did last, with fictions, fantasies. I versifie the troth; not Poetize. 7 And to the ende wee may with better ease Discerne the true discourse; vouchsafe to showe, What were the times foregoing, neere to these, That these we may with better profit knowe: Tell, how the world sell into this disease, And how so great distemperature did growe. So shall we see, by what degrees it came, " How things, at full, do soone wex out of frame. 8 Ten Kings had, from the Norman Conqueror, raign'd, Which  in the space of 260 . With intermixt and variable fate, When England to her greatest height attain'd Of powre, dominion, glorie, wealth, and State; After it had, with much a doo, sustain'd The violence of Princes, with debate For titles, and the often mutinies Of Nobles, for their ancient liberties. 9 For, first, the Norman, conquering all by might, 1067.  1. surnamed the Conqueror,   sonne to Ro∣bert the sixt Duke of Normand , raig∣ned 20. yeares and 8. monthes, and lest the Crowne of Eng∣land to William his third sonne; contrary to the  of . By might was forc't to keepe what he had got; Mixing our Customes and the forme of Right With foraine Constitutions he had brought: Maistering the mightie, humbling the poorer wight By all seuerest meanes that could be wrought: And, making the succession doubtfull, rent This new-got State, and left it turbulent.
10 . .  wars with    Robert D. of : with    ,  many of the  of   . Hee was    the new forrest by Sir Walter  shooting at a , when he had  13. yeares. VVilliam his sonne, tracing his fathers wayes (The great men spent in peace, or   fight) Vpon depressed weaknes  preyes, And makes his force maintaine his doubtfull right: His elder brothers clayme, vexing his dayes, His actions and  still incite: And giuing Beastes, what did to Men pertaine (Tooke for a Beast) himselfe in th'end was slaine. 11 His brother Henrie next commands the State: 1100. Hen. 1. the youngest sonne of   35. yeares, & 4 , whose sonne . & Ric.   on the , he  the  to Maude  maried to the , . 4 and after to Geffrey  . of . Who, Roberts title better to reiect, Seekes to repacifie the peoples hate; And with faire shewes, rather then in effect, Allayes those grieuances that heauie sate: Reformes the lawes, which soone hee did neglect; And reft of , for whom he did prepare, Leaues crowne and strife, to Maude his daughters care. 12 Whom Stephen his nephew (falsifying his Oath) 1135. Stephen son to the . of Bloys & Adela daughter to  1.   the   with Maude the Empresse for the succession, and   18. yeares and 10. . Preuents, assay les the Realme, obtaines the Crowne; Such tumults ray sing as torment them both, Whil'st both held nothing certainely their owne: Th'afflicted State (diuided in their troth And partiall faith) most miserable growne, Endures the while, till peace, and Stephens death, Gaue some calme leasure to recouer breath. 13 1154. Hen 2. sonne of Gef   E. of  &  the Empresse  ated his sonne Hen. in the Crown and gouerment;   to hu gre t , and set  sonnes, Henry, Richard, Geffry, & Iohn against him.  34.  & 7. . When Henrie, sonne to Maude the Empresse, raignes, And England into forme and greatnes brought, Addes Ireland to this Scepter, and obtaines Large Prouinces in Fraunce; much treasure gote, And from exactions here at home abstaynes: And had not his  children sought his age with tumults, he had beene The   that this State had seene.
14 1189. Richard went to the  warres, was  of Ie∣rusalem  his brother  by the help of the King of France  the crown of England. Hee was detained prisoner in Au∣stria, redeemed, and reigned nine years. 9. months. Him, Richard followes in the gouernment; Who much the glory of our Armes increast; And all his fathers mighty  spent, In that deuoutfull  of the East: Whereto, whiles he  forces wholly bent, and  his  opprest; A  , and a fatall King, Cut-off his   glory, in the spring. 15 Which wicked brother, contrary to course, False Iohn vsurpes his Nephew Arthurs right; Gets to the Crowne by craft, by wrong, by force; Rules it with lust, oppression, rigour might; 1199. K. Iohn vsurps the right of Ar∣thur, sonne to Geffery his el∣der brother; and raignes 17 yeares. Hee had warres with his Barons; who e∣lected Lewis, Sonne to the K. of France. Murders the lawfull heire without remorse: Wherefore procuring all the worlds despight, A Tyrant loath'd, a homicide conuented, Poysoned he dyes, disgrac't and vnlamented. 16 Henrie his sonne is  , though young, And Lewes of France (elected first) beguil'd; After the mighty had debated long, Doubtfull to choose a straunger or a child: With him, the  (in the  growne strong) Warre for    so long exil'd. 1216. Hen. 3 at 9. yeares of age, was Crowned King: and raig∣ned 56 yeares. He graunts the  that pretended ease; Yet kept his owne, and did his State appease. 17 Edward, his  a Martiall , succeedes; Iust, prudent, graue, religious, : Whose happy ordered Raigne most fertile breedes, 1272. Ed. 1. had the dominion ouer this whole Iland of : and  glori∣ously 34. yeeres. 7. Moneths. Plenty of mighty spirits to strength his State: And worthy mindes, to manage worthy deedes, Th'experience of those times ingenerate: For, euer great imployment, for the great, Quickens the blood, and honour doth beget.
18  307. Edward 2. abused by his Minions & de∣baushed by his owne weaknesse, was deposed frō his gouernment, when he had reig ned 19. yeares 6. moneths; and was murthered in prison. And had  his mis-led lasciuious Sonne, Edward the second, intermitted so The course of glory happily begunne (Which brought him and his fauorites to woe) That happy current without stop had runne Vnto the full of his sonne Edwards flowe: But, who hath often seene, in such a State, Father and Sonne like good, like fortunate? 19 But now, this great Succeeder, all repaires, 13. 26. Edw. 3 And reinduc't that discontinued good: He builds vp strength & greatnes, for his heires, Out of the virtues that adornd his blood: He makes his Subiects Lords of more then theirs; And sets their bounds farre wider then they stood. His powre, and fortune, had  wrought, Could but the State haue kept what he had got. 20 And had his heire surviu'd him in due course, Edward the black prince who died before his father. What limits England hadst thou found? what barre? What world could haue resisted so great force? O more then men! (two thunderbolts of warre) Why did not Time your ioyned worth diuorce, T'haue made your seueral glories greater farre? Too prodigall was Nature, thus to doe; To spend in one Age, what should serue for two. 21 But now the Scepter, in this glorious State, Richard. 2. being but 11. yeares of age, was crow∣ned K. of Eng∣land. 1377 Supported with strong powre and victorie, Was left vnto a Child, ordain'd by fate To stay the course of what might growe too hie: Here was a stop, that Greatnesse did abate, When powre vpon so weake a base did lie. For, least great fortune should presume too farre, Such oppositions interposed are.
22 Neuer this Iland better peopled stood; Neuer more men of might, and minds addrest: Neuer more Princes of the royall blood, (If not too many for the publique Rest) Nor euer was more treasure wealth and good; Then when this Richard, first, the Crowne possest; The second of that name, in two accurst: And well we might haue mist all, but the first. 23 In this mans Raigne, began this fatal strife (The bloudie argument where of we treate) That dearely cost so many'a Prince his life; And spoyld the weake, and euen consum'd the great: That, wherein all confusion was so rife, As Memory euen grieues her to repeat, And would that time might now this knowledge lose; But that tis good to learne by others woes. 24 Edward the third, being dead, had left this child, Richard the 2. son to the blacke prince. (Sonne of his worthy sonne deceast of late) The Crowne and Scepter of this Realme to wield: Appointing the protectors of his State Two of his sonnes, to be his better shield; Supposing, Vncles, free from guile or hate, Would order all things for his better good, In the respect and honour of their bloud. 25 Of these, Iohn, Duke of Lancaster, was one, The D. of Lan∣caster intitled K. of Castile in the right of his wife Constance eldest daughter to K. Peter. (Too great a Subiect growne, for such a State. The title of a King, and glorie wonne In great exploits his mind did eleuate Aboue proportion kingdomes stand vpon: Which made him push at what his issue gate) Edmond Langly Earle of Cam∣bridge; after created D. of Yorke. The other, Langley: whose mild temperatness Did tend vnto a calmer quietnesse.
26 With these, did Woodstock interpose his part; A man, for action violently bent, Thomas of Wood  after made D. of Glocester. And of a spirit averse, and ouer-thwart; Which could not sute a peace-full gouernment: Whose euer-swelling, and tumultuous heart Wrought his owne ill and others discontent. And these had all the manage of affayres, During the time the King was vnder yeares. 27 And in the first yeares of his gouernment, Things past, as first; the warres in France proceed, Though not with that same fortune and euent, Being now not followed with such carefull heed; Our people here at home, growne discontent, Through great exactions, insurrections breed: Priuate respects hindred the Common-weale: And idle ease doth on the mighty steale. 28 Too many Kings breed factions in the Court: The head too weake, the members growne too great. Which euermore doth happen in this sort, When Children  the plague which God doth threat Vnto those Kingdomes which he will transport To other Lynes, or vtterly defeat: " For, the ambitious, once inur'd to , " Canneuer brook a priuate state againe. 29 " And Kingdomes euer suffer this distresse, " Where one, or many, guide the infant King: " Which one or many (tasting this excesse " Of greatnesse & command) can neuer bring " Their thoughts againe t'obay, or to be lesse. " From hence, these insolencies euer spring; " Contempt of others, whom they seek to foyle: " Then follow leagues, destruction, , spoyle.
30 And whether they, which vnder-went this charge, Permit the King to take a youthfull vaine, That they their priuate better might inlarge: Or whether he himselfe would farther straine (Thinking his yeeres sufficient to discharge The gouernment) and so assum'd the raine: Or howsoeuer, now his eare he lends To youthfull counsell, and his lustes attends. 31 And Courts were neuer barren yet of those Which could with subtile traine, and apt aduice, Worke on the Princes weakenesse, and dispose Of feeble frailtie, easie to entice. And such, no doubt, about this King arose, Whose flatterie (the dangerous nurse of vice) Got hand vpon his youth, to pleasures bent: Which, led by them, did others discontent. 32 For, now his Vncles grew much to mislike These ill proceedings; were it that they saw That others, fauour'd, did aspiring seeke Their Nephew from their counsels to withdraw, (Seeing him of nature flexible, and weake) Because they onely would keepe all in awe; Or that  they found the King and State Abus'd by such as now in office sate. 33 Or rather else, they all were in the fault; Th'ambitious Vncles, th'indiscreete young King, The greedie Councell, and the Minions naught; And altogether did this tempest bring: Besides, the times, with all iniustice fraught, Concurr'd, with such confus'd misgouerning, That wee may truely say, This spoyld the State, " Youthfull Counsaile, priuate Gaine, partiall Hate.
34 And then the King, besides his iealousies Which nourisht were, had reason to be led To doubt his Vncles for their loyalties; Since Iohn  Gaunt (as was discouered) Had practised his death in secret wise; And Gloster openly becomes the head Vnto a league, who all in armes were bent T'oppose against the present gouernement; Robert Veere Duke of Ire∣land. 35 Pretending to remoue such men as were Accounted to abuse the king, and State. Ann. Reg. 11. the D. of Gloster with the E E. of Darby, Arūdel, Nottingham, Warwicke & o∣ther L L. hauing forced the K. to put from him all his officers of Court, at this Parliamēt, cau∣sed most of thē to be executed: as,  Beauchamp L.  of his , Sir Si∣mon Burley, L. Chamberlaine, with manyother. Also the L. chief Iustice was here executed, and all the Iudges con∣dēned to death, for  the kings  against these L L. & the  of the last Parlia∣ment, m Ann. 10 Of whome, the chiefe they did accuse, was Veere, Made Duke of Ireland, with great grace of late; And diuers else, who for the place they beare Obnoxious are, and subiect vnto hate. And these must be sequestred with all speed: Or else they vow'd, their swordes should doo the deed. 36 The King was forc't in that next Parliament, To grant them what he durst not well refuse. For, thither arm'd they came, and fully bent To suffer no repulse, nor no excuse: And here they did accomplish their intent; Where Iustice did her sword, not Ballance, vse. For, euen that  place they violate, Arresting all the Iudges as they sate. 37 And here had many worthy men their ende, Without all forme, or any course of Right. " For, still these broyles, that publike good pretend, " Worke most iniustice, being done through spight. " For, those aggrieued euermore do bend " Against such as they see of greatest might: " Who, though they cannot helpe what will go ill; " Yet, since they may doo wrong, are thought they will.
38 And yet herein I meane not to excuse The Iustices, and Minions of the King (Who might their office and their grace abuse) But blame the course held in the managing. " For, great-men, ouer-grac't, much rigor vse. " Presuming fauorits discontentment bring. " And disproportions harmonie do breake. " Minions, too great, argue a king too weake. 39 Now, that so much was granted, as was sought; A reconcilement made, although not ment, Appeas'd them all in shewe, but not in thought, Whilst euery one seem'd outwardly content: Though hereby king, nor peeres, nor people got More loue, more strength, or easier gouernment; But euery day, things still succeeded worse. " For good from Kings is seldome drawne by force. 40 And thus it loe continued, till by chaunce The Queene (which was the Emperours daughter) di'de: Ann. Reg. 18. When-as the King, t' establish peace with Fraunce, And  for home-quiet to prouide, Sought by contracting marriage to aduance His owne affayres, against his Vncles pride; Tooke the young daughter of King Charles to wife: Ann. 20. , daughter to Charles, 6. Which after, in the end, rays'd greater strife. 41 For, now his vncle Gloster much repin'd, Against this French alliance and this peace: As either out of a tumultuous minde; (Which neuer was content the warres should cease:) Or that he did dishonorable finde Those articles which did our State decrease; And therefore storm'd because the Crowne had wrong: Or that he fear'd, the King would growe too strong.
42 But whatsoeuer mov'd him; this is sure, Hereby he wrought his ruine in the end; And was a fatall cause, that did procure The swift approching mischiefes that attend. For loe, the King no longer could indure Thus to be crost in what he did intend; And therefore watcht but some occasion fit T'attache the Duke, when he thought least of it. 43 And Fortune, to set forward this intent, The Cont S. Paule, from France, doth hither bring: Whom Charles the sixt imploy'd in complement, Valeran E. of S. Paule who had maried the kings halfe sister. To see the Queene, and to salute the King. To whom he shewes his Vncles discontent, And of his secret dangerous practising, How he his Subiectes sought to sulleuate, And breake the league with Fraunce concluded late. 44 " To whom the Cont, most cunningly replies; " Great Prince, it is within your power, with ease " To remedy such feares, such iealousies, " And rid you of such mutiners as these; " By cutting off that, which might greater rise: " And now at first, preuenting this disease, " And that before he shall your wrath disclose. " For, who threats first, meanes of reuenge doth lose. 45 " First take his head; then tell the reason why: " Stand not to finde him guiltie by your lawes. " You easier shall with him your quarrell trie " Dead then aliue, who hath the better cause. " For, in the murmuring vulgar, vsually " This publique course of yours compassion drawes; " Especially in cases of the great: " Which worke much pitty, in the vndiscreat.
46 " And this is sure, though his offence be such: " Yet doth calamitie attract commorse: " And men repine at Princes blood-shed much, " (How iust-soeuer) iudging tis by force. " I know not how, their death giues such a tuch, " In those that reach not to a true discourse; " As so shall you, obseruing formall right, " Be held still as vniust, and win more spight. 47 " And, oft, the cause may come preuented so: " And therefore when tis done, let it be heard. " For, thereby shall you scape your priuate wo, " And satisfie the world too, afterward. " What neede you weigh the rumors that shall go? " What is that breath, being with your life compar'd? " And therefore, if you will be rul'd by me, " In secret sort, let him dispatched bee. 48 And then arraigne the chiefe of those you finde Were of his faction secretly compact: Who may so well be handled in their kinde; As their confessions, which you shall exact, May both appease the aggrieued peoples minde, And make their death to aggrauate their fact. So shall you rid your selfe of dangers quite; And shew the world, that you haue done but right. 49 This counsell, vttred vnto such an eare As willing listens to the safest wayes, Workes on the yeelding matter of his feare; Which easily to any course obayes. For, euery Prince, seeing his daunger neere, By any meanes his quiet peace assaies. " And still the greatest wrongs, that euer were, " Haue then been wrought, when Kings were put in feare.
50 Call'd in with publique pardon, and release, At the parlia∣ment, in Anno 11. the I. L. of the league with Gloster, be∣ing pardoned for their opposing a∣gainst the kings proceedings, were quiet till Anno 21; when vp∣on report of a new conspiracie, they were sur∣prised. The Duke of Gloster, with his complices; All tumults, all contentions seem to cease, The land rich, people pleas'd, all in happinesse; When sodainely Gloster came caught, with peace; VVarwicke, with profered loue and promises: And Arundell was in, with cunning brought: Who else abrode, his safetie might haue wrought. 51 Long was it not, ere Gloster was conuayd To Calice, and there strangled secretly: VVarwicke and Arundell close prisoners laid, Th'especiall men of his confederacie: Mowbray E. Marshal, after made Duke of Norfolke,  the charge of dis∣patching the D. of Gloster, at Calice. Yet VVarwickes teares and base confessions staide The doome of death; and came confin'd thereby, And so prolongs this not long base-begg'd breath: But Arundell was put to publique death. 52 Which publique death (receiv'd with such a cheare, As not  sigh, a looke, a shrink bewrayes The least felt touch of a degenerous feare) Gaue life to Enuie, to his courage prayse; And made his stout-defended cause appeare The K. had by  be∣fore pardoned the D. and those two Earles: yet was the pardon . With such a face of Right, as that it layes The side of wrong t'wards him, who had long since By Parliament forgiuen this offence: 53 And in the vnconceiuing vulgar sort, Such an impression of his goodnes gaue As Sainted him, and rays'd a strange report Of miracles effected on his Graue: Although the Wise (whome zeale did not transport) " Knew, how each great example still must haue " Something of wrong, a taste of violence; " Wherewith, the publique quiet doth dispense.
54 The King foorth-with prouides him of a Guard; A thousand Archers daily to attend: Which now vpon the act he had prepar'd, As th'argument his actions to defend: But yet the world hereof conceiu'd so hard, That all this nought auaild him in the end. " In vaine, with terror is he fortified, " That is not guarded with firme loue beside. 55 Now storme his grieued Vncles, though in vaine; Not able better courses to . They might their grieuance inwardly complaine; But outwardly they needes must temporise. The King was great; and they should nothing gaine T'attempt reuenge, or offer once to rise: This league with Fraunce had made him now so strong, That they must needes as yet indure this wrong. 56 For, like a Lion that escapes his boundes, Hauing beene long restrain'd his vse to stray, Ranges the restless woods, stayes on no groūd, Riots with blood-shed, wantons on his praie; Seekes not for neede, but in his pride to wound, Glorying to see his strength and what he may: So this vnbridled King (freed of his feares) In liberty, himself thus wildely beares. 57 For, standing now alone, he sees his might Out of the compasse of respectiue awe; And now beginnes to violate all right, While no restraining feare at hand he saw. Now he exacts of all,  in delight, Riots in pleasure, and neglects the law: He thinkes his Crowne is licenst to do ill. " That lesse should list, that may do what it wil.
58 Thus b'ing transported in this sensuall course; No friend to warne no counsell to withstand, He  proceedeth on from bad to worse, Sooth'd in all actions that he tooke in hand, —  quo l credere de se non possit, cùm laudatur,  aequa . By such as all impietie did nurse, Commending euer what hee did command. " Vnhappie Kings! that neuer may be taught " To know themselues, or to discerne their fault. 59 And whilst this course did much the kingdome daunt, The Duke of Herford being of courage bolde, Hen. Bolling∣broke of Here∣sord. As sonne and heire to mighty Iohn  Gaunt, Vtters the passion which he could not holde Concerning these oppressions, and the want Of gouernment: which he to Norfolke told; Tho. Mowbray D. of Norfolke. To th'end, he (being great about the king) Might do some good, by better counselling. 60 Hereof doth Norfolke presently take hold, And to the king the whole discourse relate: Who, not conceipting it, as it was told, But iudging it proceeded out of hate; Disdeigning deepely to be so controwl'd, That others should his Rule preiudicate, Charg'd Herford therewithall: who re-accus'd Norfolke, for words of treason he had vs'd. 61 Norfolke denies them peremptorily. Herford recharg'd, and supplicates the king, To haue the combate of his enemie; That by his sword hee might approue the thing. Norfolke desires the same, as earnestly: And both with equall courage menacing Reuenge of wrong; that none knew which was free: For, times of faction, times of slaunder bee.
62 The combate granted, and the day assign'd, They both in order of the field appeare, Most richly furnisht in all Martiall kinde, And at the point of intercombate were; When (lo) the king chang'd sodainely his minde, Casts downe his warder to arrest them there; As being aduis'd a better way to take, Which might for his more certaine safetie make. 63 For, now considering (as it likely might) The victorie should hap on Herfords side (A man most valiant and of noble sprite, Belov'd of all, and euer worthy tri'd) How much he might be grac't in publique sight, By suchan act, as might aduance his pride, And so become more popular by this; Which he feares, too much he already is. 64 And therefore he resolues to banish both, Mowbray was banished the very day (by the course of the yeere) whereon he murthered the D. of Glocester. Though th'one in chiefest fauour with him stood, A man he dearely lov'd; and might be loth To leaue him, that had done him so much good: Yet hauing cause to do as now he doth, To mitigate the enuie of his blood, Thought best to lose a friend, to rid a foe; And such a one, as now he doubted so. 65 And therefore to perpetuall exile hee Mowbray condemnes; Herford but for ten yeares: Thinking (for that the wrong of this decree, Compar'd with greater rigour,  appeares) It might of all the better liked bee: But yet such murmuring of the fact he heares, That he is faine foure of the ten for giue, And iudg'd him sixe yeares in exile to liue.
66 At whose departure hence out of the Land, How did the open multitude reueale The wondrous loue they bare him vnder-hand! Which now, in this hote passion of their zeale, They plainely shew'd; that all might vnderstand How deare he was vnto the common weale. They feard not to exclaime against the King; As one, that sought all good mens ruining. 67 Vnto the shore, with teares, with sighes, with mone, They him conduct; cursing the bounds that stay Their willing feete, that would haue further gone, Had not the fearefull Ocean stopt their way: " Why Neptune; Hast thou made vs stand alone " Diuided from the world, for this, say they? " Hemd-in, to be a spoyle to tyrannie, " Leauing affliction hence no way to flie? 68 " Are we lockt vp, poore soules, heere to abide " Within the waterie prison of thy waues, " As in a fold, where subiect to the pride " And lust of Rulers we remain  as slaues? " Here in the reach of might, where none can hide " From th'eye of wrath, but onely in their Graues? " Happie confiners you of other landes, " That shift your soyle, and oft scape tyrants hands. 69 " And must we leaue him here, whom here were fit " We should retaine, the pillar of our State? " Whose vertues well deserue to gouerne it, " And not this wanton young effeminate. " Why should not he in Regall honour sit, " That best knowes how a Realme to ordinate? " But, one day yet, we hope thou shalt bring backe " (Deare Bullingbrooke) the Iustice that we lacke.
70 " Thus muttred, loe, the malecontented sort; " That loue Kings best, before they haue them, still; " And neuer can the present State comport, " But would as often change, as they change will. " For, this good Duke had wonne them in this sort " By succ'ring them, and pittying of their ill, " That they supposed streight it was one thing, " To be both a good Man, and a good King. 71 When-as the grauer fort that saw the course, And knew that Princes may not be controld, Lik't well to suffer this, for feare of worse; " Since, many great, one Kingdome cannot hold. For, now they saw, intestine strife, of force, The apt-diuided State intangle would, If he should stay whom they would make their head, By whom the vulgar body might be led. 72 " They saw likewise, that Princes oft are faine " To buy their quiet, with the price of wrong: " And better 'twere that now a few complaine, " Then all should mourne, aswell the weake as strong: " Seeing still how little, Realmes by chaunge do gaine; " And therefore learned by obseruing long, " T'admire times past, follow the present will, " Wish for good Princes, but t'indure the ill. 73 For, when it nought auailes, what folly then To striue against the current of the time? Who will throwe downe himselfe, for other men, That make a ladder by his fall to clime? Or who would seeke t'imbroyle his Country, when He might haue rest; suffering but others crime? " Since wise men euer haue preferred farre " Th'vniustest peace, before the iustest warre.
74 Thus they considered, that in quiet sate, Rich or content, or else vnfit to striue: Peace-louer wealth, hating a troublous State, Doth willing reasons for their rest contriue: But, if that all were thus considerate, How should in Court, the great, the fauour'd thriue? Factions must be, and these varieties: And some must fall, that other-some may rise. 75 But, long the Duke remain'd not in exile, Before that Iohn of Gaunt, his father, dies. Vpon whose state the king seis'd now, this while, Disposing of it, as his enemies. This open wrong no longer could beguile The world, that saw these great indignities. Which so exasperates the mindes of all, That they resolv'd, him home againe to call. 76 For, now they saw, t' was malice in the King (Transported in his ill-conceiued thought) That made him so to prosecute the thing Against all law, and in a course so naught. And this aduantage to the Duke did bring More fit occasions; whereupon he wrought. " For, to a man so strong, and of such might, " He giues him more, that takes away his right. 77 The King in this meane time (I know not how) An. Reg. 22. Was drawne into some actions, foorth the Land, T'appease the Irish, that reuolted now: And, there attending what he had in hand, Neglects those parts from whence worse dangers growe; As ignorant, how his affayres did stands Whether the plot was wrought it should be so, Or that his fate did draw him on to go.
78 Most sure it is, that hee committed here An ignorant and idle ouersight; Not looking to the Dukes proceedings there, Being in the Court of Fraunce, where best he ; Where both the King and all  were T' haue stopt his course, being within their right: But now he was exil'd, he thought him sure; And, free from farther doubting, liv'd secure. 79 So blindes the sharpest counsels of the wise This ouershadowing Prouidence on hie; And dazleth all their clearest sighted eyes, That they see not how nakedly they lie. There where they little thinke, the storme doth rise, And ouercasts their cleare securitie: When man hath stopt all wayes saue onely that, Which (as least doubted) Ruine enters at. 80 And now was all disorder in th'excesse, And whatsoeuer doth a change portend; As, idle luxurie, and wantonnesse, Proteus-like varying Pride, vaine without ende: Wrong-worker Riot (motiue to oppresse) Endless Exactions, which the idle spend, Consuming Vsurie, and credits crackt, Call'd-on this purging Warre, that many lackt. 81 Then Ill-perswading want, in Martiall mindes, And wronged patience (long opprest with might) Loosenes in all (which no religion bindes) Commaunding force (the measure made of Right) Gaue fuell to this fire, that easie findes The way, t'inflame the whole indangerd quite: These were the publique breeders of this Warre; By which, still greatest States confo unded .
82 For, now this peace with Fraunce had shut in here The ouergrowing humours Warres do spend. For, where t'euacuate no imployments were, Wider th'vnwieldy burthen doth distend. Men, wholly vs'd to warre, peace could not beare; As knowing no other course, whereto to bend: For, brought vp in the broyles of these two Reames, They thought best fishing still, in troubled streames. 83 Like to a Riuer, that is stopt his course, Doth violate his bankes, breakes his owne bed, Destroyes his bounds, and ouer-runs, by force, The neighbour-fieldes, irregularly spred: Euen so this sodaine stop of Warre doth nurse Home broyles, within it selfe, from others led: So dangerous the change hereof is tri'd Ere mindes 'come soft, or otherwise imploid. 84 But, all this makes for thee, ô Bulling brooke, To worke a way vnto thy Soueraintie. This care, the Heauens, Fate, and Fortune tooke, To bring thee to thy  easily. Vpon thee fall's that hap, which him forsooke, Who, crownd a King, a King yet must not die. Thou wert ordaind, by Prouidence, to rayse A quarrell, lasting longer then thy dayes. 85 For, now this absent Lord, out of his Land (Where though he shew'd great sprite and valor then; Being attended with a worthy band Of valiant Peeres, and most couragious men) Gaue time to them at home, that had in hand Th'vngodly worke, and knew the season when: Who faile not to aduise the Duke with speed; Solliciting to what hee soone agreed.
86 Who presently, vpon so good report, The D. being ba∣vished in , landed in the beginning of Iu∣lie, after,  Rauenspurre, in Yorkeshire, some say but with 60. men, other with 3000 and 8 shippes set forth and furni∣shed by the Duke of Brittaine Ann. Reg. 22. Relying on his friends fidelitie, Conueyes himselfe out of the French Kings Court, Vnder pretence to go to Britannie: And, with his followers, that to him resort, Landed in England: Welcom'd ioyfully Of th'altring vulgar, apt for changes still; As headlong carried with a present will. 87 And com'n to quiet shore, but not to rest; The first night of his ioyfull landing here, A fearefull vision doth his thoughts molest: Seeming to see in reuerent forme appeare A faire and goodly woman all distrest; The Genius of England ap∣peares to Bul∣lingbrooke. Which, with full-weeping eyes and rented haire, Wringing her hands (as one that griev'd and prayd) With sighes commixt with words, vnto him said; 88 " O whither dost thou tend, my vnkinde Sonne? " What mischiefe dost thou go-about to bring " To her, whose Genius thou here lookst vpon, " Thy Mother-countrey, whence thy selfe didst spring? " Whither thus dost thou, in ambition, run, " To change due course, by foule disordering? " What bloodshed, what turmoyles dost thou commence, " To last for many wofull ages hence? 89 " Stay here thy foote, thy yet vnguilty foote, " That canst not stay when thou art farther in. " Retire thee yet vnstain'd, whil'st it doth boote: " The end, is spoyle, of what thou dost begin: " Iniustice neuer yet tooke lasting roote, " Nor held that long, Impietie did win. " The babes, vnborne, shall (ô) be borne to bleed " In this thy quarrell, if thou do proceede.
90 This said, she ceast: when he in troubled thought Griev'd at this tale and sigh't, and thus replies; " Deare Countrey, ô I haue not hither brought " These Armes to spoyle, but for thy liberties: " The sinne be on their head, that this haue wrought; " Who wrongd me first, and thee do tyrannise. " I am thy Champion, and I seeke my right: " Prouok't I am to this, by others spight. 91 " This, this pretence, saith shee, th'ambitious finde " To smooth iniustice, and to flatter wrong. " Thou dost not know what then will be thy minde, " When thou shalt see thy selfe aduanc't and strong. " When thou hast shak't off that, which others binde; " Thou soone forgettest what thou learnedst long. " Men do not know what then themselues will bee, " When-as, more then themselues, themselues they see. 92 And here with all, turning about he wakes, Lab'ring in spirit, troubled with this strange sight: And mus'd a while, waking aduisement takes Of what had past in sleepe and silent night: Yet hereof no important reck'ning makes, But as a dreame that vanisht with the light: The day designes, and what he had in hand Left it to his diuerted thoughts vnscand. 93 Doubtfull at first, he warie doth proceed; Seemes not: affect that, which he did effect: else perhaps seemes, as he meant indeed, Sought but his owne, and did no more expect. Then, Fortune, thou art guiltie of his deed: That didst his state aboue his hopes erect: And thou must beare some blame of his great sinne; That  him worse, then when he did beginne.
94 Thou didst conspire with Pride, and with the Time, To make so easie an ascent to wrong, That he who had no thought so hie to clime (With sauouring comfort still allur'd along) Was with occasion thrust into the crime; Seeing others weakenes and his part so strong. " And who is there, in such a case that will " Do good, and feare, that may liue free with ill? 95 We will not say nor thinke, O Lancaster, But that thou then didst meane as thou didst sweare Vpon th'Euangelists at Doncaster, In th' eye of heauen, and that assembly theare, That thou but as an vpright orderer, Sought'st to reforme th'abused Kingdome here, And get thy right, and what was thine before; And this was all; thou would'st attempt no more: 96 Though we might say, and thinke, that this pretence Was but a shadow to the intended act; Because th'euent doth argue the offence, And plainely seemes to manifest the fact: For that hereby thou mightst win confidence With those, whom else thy course might hap distract, And all suspicion of thy drift remoue; " Since easily men credit whom they loue. 97 But, God forbid wee should so neerly pry Into the lowe-deepe-buried sinnes long past, T'examine and conferre iniquitie, Whereof faith would no memorie should last: That our times might not haue t'exemplifie With aged staines; but, with our owne shame cast, Might thinke our blot the first, not done before; That new-made sinnes might make vs blush the more.
98 And let vn wresting Charitie beleeue That then thy oath with thy intent agreed; And others faith, thy faith did first deceiue, Thy after-fortune forc't thee to this deed. And let no man  idle censure giue, Because th'euent proues so, 'twas so decreed. " For, ost our counsels sort to other end, " Then that which frailtie did at first intend. 99 Whil'st those that are but outward lookers on (Who sildome sound these mysteries of State) Deeme things were so contriv'd as they are done, And hold that policie, which was but fate; Imagining, all former acts did run Vnto that course they seeth' effects relate; Whil'st still too short they come, or cast too far, " And make these great men wiser then they ar. 100 The D. put to death VVilliā Scroope E. of , Treasurer of Eng. with Sir Hen. Greene, & Sir Iohn Bushy, for misgouerning the king and the Realme. But, by degrees he ventures now on blood; And sacrifiz'd, vnto the peoples loue, The death of those that chiefe in enuie stood: As, th' Officers (who first these dangers proue) The Treasurer, and those whom they thought good, Bushy and Greene, by death he must remoue: These were the men, the people thought, did cause Those great exactions, and abus'd the lawes. 101 This done, his cause was preacht with learned skill, By Arundel, th' Archbishop: who there show'd A Pardon sent from Rome, to all that will Take part with him, and quit the faith they ow'd Th. Arundel Archbish. of Canterburie. To Richard; as a Prince vnfit and ill: On whom the Crowne was fatally bestow'd. And easie-yeelding zeale was quickly caught, With what the mouth of grauity had taught.
102 O that this power, from euerlasting giuen Bis peccat, qui pretextu Religionis peccat. (The great alliance made twixt God and vs; Th' intelligence that earth doth hold with heauen) Sacred Religion; ô that thou must thus Be made to smooth our wayes vniust, vneuen; Brought from aboue, earth-quarrels to discusse! Must men beguile our soules, to winne our wils, And make our Zeale the furtherer of ils? 103 But, the ambitious, to  their might, Dispense with heauen, and what Religion would. " The armed will finde right, or els make right; If this  wrought not, yet an other should. And this and other now do all incite To strength the faction that the Duke doth hold: Who easily obtained what he sought; His vertues and his loue so greatly wrought. 104 The King, still busied in this Irish warre (Which by his valour there did well succeed) Had newes, how here his Lords reuolted are, And how the Duke of Herford doth proceede: In these affaires he feares are growne too farre; Hastes his returne from thence with greatest speed: But was by tempests, windes, and seas debarr'd; As if they likewise had against him warr'd. 105 But, at the length (though late) in Wales he lands: Edward D. of Aumerle Sonne to the D. of Yorke. Where, thoroughly inform'd of Henries force, And well aduertis'd how his owne case stands (Which to his griefe he sees tends to the worse) He leauest' Aumarle, at Milford, all those bandes He brought from Ireland: taking thence his course To Conway (all disguis'd) with fourteene more, Conway Ca∣stle in Wales. To th'Earle of Salisburie, thither sent before:
106 Thinking, the Earle had rays'd some Armie there; Whom there he findes for saken all alone: Montague E. of . The forces, in those parts which leuied were, Were closely shrunke away, disperst and gone. The king had stayd too long; and they, in feare, Resolued euerie man to shift for one. At this amas'd, such fortune he laments; Foresees his fall, whereto each thing consents. 107 In this disturb'd tumultuous broken State, Whil'st yet th'euent stood doubtfull what should bee; Whilst nought but headlong running to debate, And glittering troupes and arm or men might see: Furie, and feare, compassion, wrath, and hate, Confus'd through all the land, no corner free: The strong, all mad, to strife, to ruine bent; The weaker waild: the aged they lament, 108 And blame their many yeeres that liue so long, To see the horrour of these miseries. Why had not we (said they) di'd with the strong, In forraine fieldes, in honourable wise, In iust exployts, and noble without wrong, And by the valiant hand of enemies? And not thus now reserued, in our age, To home-confusion, and disordered rage. 109 Vnto the Temples flocke the weake, deuout, Sad wayling Women; there to vow and pray For husbands, brothers, or their sonnes gone out To blood-shed: whom nor teares, nor loue could stay. Here, graue religious Fathers (which much doubt The sad euents these broyles procure them may) As Prophets warne, exclaime, disswade these crimes, By the examples fresh of other times.
110 And (ô!) what, do you now prepare, said they, Another Conquest, by these fatall wayes? What, must your owne hands make your selues a pray To desolation, which these tumults rayse? What Dane, what Norman, shall prepare his way To triumph on the spoyle of your decayes? That, which nor Fraunce, nor all the world, could do In vnion, shall your discord bring you to? 111 Conspire against vs, neighbour nations all, That enuie at the height whereto w'are growne: Coniure the barbarous North, and let them call Strange furie from farre distant shores vnknowne; And let them altogether on vs fall, So to diuert the ruine of our owne: That we, forgetting what doth so incense, May turne the hand of malice, to defence. 112 Calme these tempestuous spirits, O mighty Lord; This threatning storme that ouer-hangs the Land. Make them consider, ere they 'vnsheath the sword, How vaine is th' earth, this point whereon they stand; And with what sad calamities is stor'd The best of that, for which th' Ambitious band: " Labor the ende of labor, strife of strife; " Terror in death, and horrour after life. 113 Thus they in zeale, whose humbled thoughts were good, Whil'st in this wide-spread volume of the skies, The booke of Prouidence disclosed stood, Warnings of wrath, foregoing miseries In lines of fire and characters of blood, There feare full formes in dreadfull flames arise, Amazing Comets, threatning Monarchs might, And new-seene Starres, vnknowne vnto the night,
114 Red  Dragons in the ayre do flye, And burning Meteors, pointed-streaming lightes: Bright Starres in midst of day appeare in skie, Prodigious monsters, ghastly fearefull sights: Strange Ghostes, and apparitions terrifie: The wofull mother her owne birth affrightes; Seeing a wrong deformed infant borne, Grieues in her paines, deceiv'd in shame doth mourne. 115 The earth, as if afeard of blood and wounds, Trembles in terrour of these falling : The hollow concaues giue out groning sounds, And sighing murmures, to lament our woes: The Ocean, all at discord with his boundes, Reiterates his strange vntimely flowes: Nature all out of course, to checke our course, Neglects her worke, to worke in vs remorse. 116 So great a wracke vnto it selfe doth, lo, Disorder'd proud mortalitie prepare, That this whole frame doth euen labour so Her ruine vnto frailty to declare: And trauailes to fore-signifie the wo That weake improuidence could not beware. " For heauen and earth, and ayre and seas and all, " Taught men to see, but not to shun their fall. 117 Is man so deare vnto the heauens, that they Respect the wayes of earth, the workes of sinne? Doth this great All, this Vniuer sall, weigh The vaine designes that weakenesse doth begin? Or doth our feare, father of zeale, giue way Vnto this errour ignorance liues in? And deeme our faults the cause that moue these powres, That haue their cause from other cause then ours?
118 But, these beginnings had this impious Warre, Th'vngodly blood-shed that did so defile The beautie of thy fields, and euen did marre The flowre of thy chiefe pride, thou fairest Ile: These were the causes that incenst so farre The ciuill wounding hand inrag'd with spoyle; That now the liuing, with afflicted eye, Looke backe with griefe on such calamitie. The end of the first Booke.
THE SECOND BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. King Richard mones his wrong, and wails his raigne: And here betrayd, to London he is led, Basely attyr'd, attending Herfords traine: Whereth' one is scornd, the other VVelcomed. His Wife, mistaking him, doth much complaine; And both togither greatly sorrowed: In hope to saue his life and ease his thrall, He yeelds vp state, and Rule, and Crowne, and all. 1 IN dearth of faith, and scarcitie of friendes, The late great mighty Monarch, on the shore In th'vtmost corner of his Land, attendes To call backe false obedience, fled before; Toyles, and in vaine, histoyle and labour spendes; More harts he sought to gaine, he lost the more: All turn'd their faces to the rising sunne, And leaue his setting-fortune, night begunne.
2 Tercy, how soone, by thy example led, The household traine for sooke their wretched Lord! This Percie was Earle of Worster, bro∣ther to the Earle of Northum∣berland, and steward of the Kings house. When, with thy staffe of charge dishonoured, Thou brak'st thy fayth, not steward of thy word, And tookst his part that after tooke thy head; When thine owne hand had strengthned first his sword. " For, such great merits do vpbraid, and call " For great reward, or thinke the great too smal. 3 And Kings loue not to be beholding ought: Which makes their chiefest friends oft speed the worst. For, those, by whom their fortunes haue bin wrought, Put them in minde of what they were at . Whose doubtfull faith if once in question brought, Tis thought they will offend because they durst: And taken in a fault are neuer spar'd; " Being easier to reuenge, then to reward. 4 And thus these mightie actors, sonnes of change, These partizanes of factions, often tri'd; That, in the smoake of Innouations strange, Builde huge vncertaine plots of vnsure pride: And, on the hazard of a bad exchange, Haue ventur'd all the stocke of life beside; " Whilst Princes, rais'd, disdaine to haue bin rais'd " By those whose helpes deserue not to be prais'd. 5 But thus is Richard left, and all alone Saue with th'vnarmed title of his right; And those braue troupes, his fortune-followers gone, And all that pompe (the complements of might) Th'amuzing shadowes that are cast vpon The state of Princes, to beguile the sight, All vanisht cleane, and only frailty left; Himselfe, of all, besides himselfe, bereft:
6 Like when some great Colossus, whose strong base Or mightie props are shrunk or sunke away, Fore-shewing ruine, threatning all the place That in the danger of his fall doth stay, All straight to better safetie flocke apace; Nonerest to helpe the ruine, while they may. " The  great, and doubtfull the redresse, " Men are content to leaue Right in distresse. 7 And looke, how Thames, inricht with many a Flood, And goodly Riuers (that haue made their Graues, And buried both their names and all their good Within his greatnes, to augment his ) Glides on, with pompe of Waters, vn withstood, Vnto the Ocean (which his tribute craues) And layes vp all his wealth, within that powre, Which in it selfe all greatnes doth deuowre: 8 So flocke the mighty, with their following traine,  D. of Yorke, left Gouernour of the 'Realm in the  of the king, hauing leuied a  Ar∣my, as if to haue opposed against Bul∣ling brooke, brought most of the  of the kingdome to take his Vnto the all-receiuing Bulling brooke: Who wonders at himselfe, how hee should gaine So many harts as now his partie tooke; And with what ease, and with how slender paine, His fortune giues him more then he could looke: What he imagind neuer could be wrought Is powrd vpon him,  beyond his thought. 9 So, often, things which seeme at first in showe, Without the  of accomplishment, Once ventred on, to that successe do growe, That euen the Authors do admire th'euent; So many meanes which they did neuer knowe Do second their designes, and do present Straunge vnexpected helps, and chiefly then When th' Actors are reputed worthy men.
10 And Richard, who lookt Fortune in the backe, Sees headlong-lightness running from the right, Amazed standes to note how great a wracke Of faith, his riots caus'd, what mortall spight They beare him, who did law and iustice lacke; Sees how concealed hate breakes out in sight, And feare- enuie (pent before) When fit occasion thus vnlockt the dore. 11 Like when some mastive whelpe, dispos'd to play, A whole confused heard of beastes doth chace, Which with one vile consent run all away; If any hardier then the rest in place But offer head, that idle feare to stay, Backe straight the daunted chaser turnes his face, And all the rest (with bold example led) As fast run on him, as before they fled: 12 So, with this bold opposer, rushes-on This many-headed monster, Multitude: And he, who late was feard, is set vpon, And by his owne (Actaeon-like) pursu'd; His owne, that had all loue and a we forgone: Whom breath and shadowes onely did delude, And newer hopes, which promises perswade; Though rarely men keepe  so made. 13 Which when he saw; thus to himselfe complaines: " O why do you, fond, false-deceined, so " Run headlong to that change that nothing gaines, " But gaine of sorrow, onely change of wo? " Which is all one, if he be like who raignes: " Why will you buy, with blood, what you forgoe? " Tis nought, but shewes, that Ignorance esteemes: " The thing possest is not the thing it seemes.
14 " And when the sinnes of Bullingbrooke shall be " As great as mine, and you vnanswered " In these your hopes; then may you wish for me " Your lawfull Sov'raigne, from whose faith you sled; " And, grieued in your soules, the error see " That shining promises had shadowed: " As th'humorous sicke, remouing, finde no ease, " When changed Chambers change not the disease. 15 " Then shall you finde this name of Libertie " (The watch-word of Rebellion euer vs'd; " The idle eccho of Vncertaintie, " That euermore the simple hath abus'd) " But new-turnd Seruitude and Miserie; " And euen the same and worse, before refus'd. " Th'aspirer once attaind vnto the top, " Cuts off those meanes by which himselfe got vp. 16 " And with a harder hand, and streighter raine, " Doth curbe that loosenes he did finde before; " Doubting th'occasion like might serue againe: " His owne example makes him feare the more. " Then, ô iniurious Land, what dost  gaine " To aggrauate thine owne afflictions store? " Since thou must needs obay Kings gouernement; " And no rule, euer yet, could all content. 17 " What if my youth hath offered vp to lust " Licentious fruites of indiscreet desires, " When idle heate of vainer yeeres did thrust " That furie on: yet now when it retires " To calmer state, why should you so distrust " To reape that good whereto mine age aspires? " The youth of Princes haue no boundes for sinne, " Vnlesse themselues do make them boundes within.
18 " Who sees not, that sees ought (wo worth the while) " The easie way, that Greatnesse hath to fall? " Enuirond with deceit, hemm'd-in with guile, " Sooth'd vp in flatterie, fawned on of all: " Within his owne, liuing as in exile; " Heares but with others eares, or not at all: " And euen is made a prey vnto a fewe, " Who locke vp grace that would to other shewe: 19 " And who (as let in lease) do farme the Crowne, " And ioy the vfe of Maiestie and might; " Whil'st we hold but the shadow of our owne, " Pleas'd with vaine shewes, and dallied with delight: " They, as huge vnproportion'd mountaines, growne " Betweene our land and vs, shadowing our light, " Bereaue the rest of ioy, and vs of loue, " And keepe downe all, to keepe themselues aboue. 20 " Which wounds, with griefe, poore vnrespected zeale, " When grace holdes no proportion in the parts; " When distribution, in the Common-weale, " Of charge and honour due to good desarts " Is stopt; when others greedie hands must deale " The benefite that Maiestie imparts: " What good we meant, comes gleaned home but light, " Whilst we are robd of prayse, they of their right. 21 Thus he complained; when, lo, from Lancaster The E. of  sent to the king from Hen. Bul∣ling brooke now D. of Lancaster. (The new intit'led Duke with order sent Arriv'd Northumberland, as to conferre And make relation of the Dukes intent: And offred there, if that he would referre The controuersie vnto Parlement, And punish those that had abus'd the State, As causers of this vniuersall hate;
22 And also see that Iustice might be had On those the Duke of Glosters death procur'd, and such remov'd from Councell as were bad; His cosin Henry would, he there assur'd, On humble knees before his Grace be glad To aske him pardon, to be well secur'd, and haue his right and grace resto'rd againe: The which was all he labour'd to obtaine. 23 And therefore doth an enterparle exhort, Perswades him leaue that vnbeseeming place, and with a princely hardinesse resort Vnto his people, that attend his Grace: They meant his publique good, and not his hurt; and would most ioyfull be to see his face: He layes his soule to pledge, and takes his Oath, The ost of Christ, an ostage for his troth. 24 This proffer, with such protestations, made Vnto a King that so neere danger stood, Was a sufficient motiue to perswade, When no way else could shew a face so good: Th'vnhonourable meanes of safety, bade Danger accept, what Maiesty withstood. " When better choyses are not to be had, " We needes must take the seeming bost of bad. 25 Yet standes he'in doubt, a while, what way to take; Conferring with that small remaining troope Fortune had left; which neuer would forsake Their poore distressed Lord, nor neuer stoope The Bishop of Carlile. Montague Earle of Sa∣lisbury. To any hopes the stronger part could make. Good Carlile, Ferby; and Sir Stephen Scroope, With that most worthy Montague, were all That were content with Maiesty to fall.
26 Time, spare, and make not sacrilegious theft Vpon so memorable constancie: Let not succeeding Ages be bereft Of such examples of integritie: Nor thou magnanimous Leigh must not be left This was sir eter Leighs uncitor of ime in Che∣ire that ow is. in darknesse, for thy rare fidelitie; To saue thy faith, content to lose thy head; That  head, of good men honoured. 27 Nor will my Conscience I should iniury Thy memorie most trusty Ienico, For b'ing not ours; though wish that  nico d' Ar∣is a Gas∣oin. Claym'd not, for hers, the faith we reuerence so; That England might haue this small companie Onely to her alone, hauing no moe: But le'ts diuide this good betwixt vs both, Take she thy birth, and we will haue thy troth. 28 " Graue Montague, whom long experience taught " In either fortune, thus aduis'd his King: The Earle of alsbury his peech to K. Richard. " Deare Sou'raigne know, the matter that is sought, " Is onely now your Maiesty to bring " (From out of this poore safetie you haue got) " Into theyr hands, that else hold euery thing: " For, now, but onely you they want, of all; " and wanting you, they nothing theirs can call. 29 " Here haue you craggie Rocks to take your part; " That neuer will betray their faith to you: " These trusty Mountaines here will neuer start, " But stand t'vpbraid their shame that are vntrue: " Here may you fence your safetie with small art, " against the pride of that confused Crew: " If men will not, these verie Cliffes will fight, " and be sufficient to defend your right.
30 " Then keepe you here, and here shall you behold, " Within short space, the slyding faith of those " That cannot long their resolution hold, " Repent the course their idle rashnesse chose: " For, that same mercenarie faith (they sold) " With least occasions discontented growes, " And insolent those voluntarie bands; " Presuming how, by them, he chiefly stands. 31 " And how can he those mightie troupes sustaine " Long time, where now he is, or any where? " Besides, what discipline can he retaine " Whereas he dares not keepe them vnder feare, " For feare to haue them to reuolt againe? " So that it selfe when Greatnesse cannot beare, " With her owne waight, must needes confus'dly fall, " Without the helpe of other force at all. 32 " And hither to approche hee will not dare; " Where deserts, rockes, and hilles, no succours giue; " Where desolation, and no comforts are; " Where few can do no good, many not liue. " Besides, we haue the Ocean to prepare " Someother place, if this should not relieue: " So shall you tire his force, consume his strength, " And weary all his followers, out, at length. 33 " Doe but referre to time, and to small time; " And infinite occasions you shall finde " To quaile the Rebell, euen in the prime " Of all his hopes, beyond all thought of minde: " For, many (with the conscience of the crime) " In colder blood will curse what they design'd; " And bad successe, vpbrayding their ill fact, " Drawes them, whom others draw, from such an act.
34 " For, if the least imagin'd ouerture " But of conceiv'd reuolt men once ; " Straight shrinke the weake, the great will not indure, " Th'impatient run, the discontented flie: " The friend his friends example doth procure, " And all to gither haste them presently " Some to their home, some hide; others, that stay, " To reconcile themselues, the rest betray. 35 " What hope haue you, that euer Bullingbrooke " Will liue a Subiect, that hath tri'd his fate? " Or what good reconcilement can you looke, " Where he must alwayes feare, and you must hate? " And neuer thinke that he this quarrell tooke " To reobtaine thereby his priuate state. " T'was greater hopes, that hereto did him call: " And he will thrust for all, or else lose all. 36 " Nor trust this suttle Agent, nor his oth. " You knowe his faith: you tri'd it before hand. " His fault is death: and now to lose his troth, " To saue his life, he will not greatly stand. " Nor trust your kinsmans proffer; since you, both, " Shew, blood in Princes is no stedfast band. " What though he hath no title? he hath might: " That makes a title, where there is no right. 37 Thus he: when that good Bishop thus replies, The Bishop of Carlile. Out of a minde that quiet did affect: " My Lord, I must confesse, as your caselies, " You haue great cause your Subiects to suspect, " And counterplot against their subtelties, " Who all good care and honestie neglect; " And feare the worst what insolence may do, " Or armed fury may incense them to.
38 " But yet, my Lord, feare may aswell transport " Your care, beyond the truth of what is meant; " As otherwise neglect may fall too short; " In not examining of their intent: " But, let vs weigh the thing which they exhort, " Tis Peace, Submission, and a Parlement: " Which, how expedient 'tis for either part, " T were good we iudg'd with an vnpartiall hart, 39 " And first, for you my Lord, in griefe we see " The miserable case wherein you stand; " Voyde here of succour, helpe, or maiestie, " On this poore promontorie of your Land: " And where how long a time your Grace may be " (Expecting what may fall into your hand) " Wee know not; since th'euent of things do lie " Clos'd vp in darkenes, farre from mortall eye. 40 " And how vnfit it were, you should protract " Long time, in this so dangerous disgrace? " As though that you good spirit and courage lackt " To issue out of this opprobrious place: " When euen the face of Kings do oft exact " Feare and  in faultie subiects base; " And longer stay a great presumption drawes " That you were guilty, or did doubt your cause. 41 " What Subiects euer so inrag'd would dare " To violate a Prince, t'offend the blood " Of that renowmed race, by which they are " Exalted to the height of all their good? " What if some things by chaunce misguided were, " Which they haue now rebelliously withstood? " They neuer will proceed with that despight " To wracke the State, and to confound the right.
43 " Nor doe I thinke that Bulling brooke can bee " So blind-ambitious, to affect the Crowne; " Hauing himselfe no title, and doth see " Others, if you should fayle, must keepe him downe. " Besides, the Realme, though mad, will neuer gree " To haue a right succession ouerthrowne, " To rayse confusion vpon them and theirs, " By preiudicing true and lawfull heires. 43 " And now it may be, fearing the successe " Of his attemptes, or with  of minde, " Or else distrusting secret practises, " He would be glad his quarrell were resign'd; " So that there were some orderly redresse " In those disorders which the Realme did finde: " And this, I thinke, he now sees were his best; " Since farther actions further but vnrest. 44 " And, forth'impossibilitie of peace " And reconcilement, which my Lord obiects; " I thinke, when doying iniurie shall cease " (The cause pretended) then surcease th'effects: " Time and some other Actions may increase " As may diuert the thought of these respects; " Others law of forgetting iniuries Lex Am∣nestiae. " May serue our turne in like calamities. 45 " And for his oath, in conscience, and in sense, " True honour would not so be found vntrue, " Nor spot his blood with such a foule offence " Against his soule, against his God, and you. " Our Lord forbid, that euer with th'expence " Of heauen and heauenly ioyes, that shall insue, " Mortalitie should buy this little breath, " Tindure the horror of eternall death.
46 " And therefore, as I thinke, you safely may " Accept this proffer; that determine shall " All doubtfull courses by a quiet way, " Needfull for you, fit for them, good for all. " And here, my Sov'raigne, to make longer stay " T'attend for what you are vnsure will fall, " May  th'occasion, and incense their will: " For, Feare, that's wiser then the truth, doth ill. 47 Thus he perswades, out of a zealous minde; Supposing, men had spoken as they ment: And, vnto this, the King likewise inclin'd; As wholly vnto peace, and quiet bent: And yeeldes himselfe to th'Earle, goes, leaues-behind His safetie, Scepter, Honor, Gouernement: For, gone, all's gone: he is no more his owne; And they rid quite of feare, he of the Crowne. 48 A place there is, where proudly rais'd therestands A huge aspiring Rock, neighb'ring the Skies; Whose surly brow imperiously commaunds The Sea his boundes, that at his proud feete lies: And spurnes the waues, that in rebellious bands Assault his Empire, and against him rise: Vnder whose craggy gouernment, there was A niggard narrow way for men to pasle. 49 And here, in hidden cliffes, concealed lay A troope of armed men, to intercept The vnsuspecting King, that had no way To free his foote, that into danger stept. The dreadfull Ocean, on the one side, lay: The hard-incroching Mountaine th'other kept. Before him, he beheld his hateful foes: Behind him, tray terous enemies inclose.
50 Enuiron'd thus, the Earle begins to cheere His al-amased Lord, by him betrayde; Bids him take courage, ther's no cause of feare, These troopes, but there to guard him safe, were layd. To whom the King; What neede so many here? This is against your oath, my Lord, he said. But, now hee sees in what distresse he stood: To striue, was vaine; t'intreat, would do no good. 51 And therefore on with careful hart he goes; Complaines (but, to himselfe) sighes, grieues, and freats; At Rutland dines, though feedes but on his woes: The griefe of minde hindred the minde of meats. For, sorrow, shame, and feare, scorne of his foes, The thought of what he was, and what now threats, Then what he should, and now what he hath done, Masters confused passions all in one. 52 To Flint, from thence, vnto a restless bed, That miserable night, he comes conuayd; Poorely prouided, poorely followed, Vncourted, vnrespected, vnobayd: Where, if vncertaine sleepe but hoouered Ouer the drooping cares that heauy weigh'd; Millions of figures, fantasie presents Vnto that sorrow, wakened griefe augments. 53 His new misfortune makes deluding sleepe Say 'twas not so (False dreames the trueth denie). Wherewith he starts; feels waking cares do creepe Vpon his soule, and giues his dreame the lie; Then sleepes againe: and then againe, as deepe Deceites of darknes mocke his miserie. So hard believ'd was sorrow in her youth: That he thinks truth was dreams, & dreams were truth.
54 The morning light presents vnto his view (Walking vpon a turret of the place) The trueth of what hee sees is prov'd too true; A hundred thousand men, before his face, Camemarching on the shore, which thither drew: And, more to aggrauate his great disgrace, Those he had wrongd, or done to them despight, (As if they him vpbrayd) came first in sight. 55 There might hee see that false forsworne vile crue, Those shameless agents of vnlawfull lust, His Pandars, Parasites (people vntrue To God and man, vnworthy any trust) Preacing vnto that fortune that was new, And with vnblushing faces formost thrust; As those that still with prosperous fortune sort, And are as borne for Corte, or made in Cort. 56 There hee beheld, how humbly diligent New Adulation was to be at hand; How ready Falsehood ; how nimbly went Base pick-thank Flattery, and preuents Command: Hee saw the great obay, the graue consent, And all with this new-rays'd Aspirer stand; But, which was worst, his owne partacted there, Not by himselfe; his powre, not his, appeare. 57 Which whilst he view'd, the Duke he might perceiue Make towards the Castle, to an interview. Wherefore he did his contemplation leaue, And downe into some fitter place withdrew; Where now he must admitte, without his leaue, Him, who before with all submission due Would haue beene glad, t'attend, and to prepare The grace of audience, with respectiue care.
58 Who now being come in presence of his king (Whether the sight of Maiestie did breed Remorse of what he was in compassing, Or whether but to formalize his deed) He kneeles him downe with some astonishing, Rose; kneeles againe (for, craft wil still exceed) When-as the king approch't, put off his Hood, And welcomd him, though wisht him little good. 59 " To whom, the Duke began: My Lord, I knowe " That both vncall'd, and vnexpected too, " I haue presumed in this sort to showe " And seeke the right which I am borne vnto: " Yet pardon I beseech you, and allow " Of that constraint, which driues me thus to doo. " For, since I could not by a fairer course " Attaine mine owne, I must vse this of force. 60 " Well: so it seemes, deare Cosin, said the King; " Though you might haue procur'd it otherwise: " And I am here content, in euery thing, " To right you, as your selfe shal best deuise: " And God voutsafe, the force that here you bring " Beget not England greater iniuries. " And so they part: the Duke made haste from thence: " It was no place to ende this difference. 61 Straight towards London, in this heate of pride, They forward set; as they had fore-decreed: With whom, the  King constraind mustride, Most meanely mounted on a simple Steed: Degraded of all grace and ease beside, Thereby neglect of all respect to breed. For, th'ouer-spreading pompe of prouder might Must darken vveaknes, and debase his sight.
62 Approaching neere the Cittie, hee was met With all the sumptuous shewes ioy could deuise: Where new-desire to please did not forget To pasle the vsuall pompe of former guise. Striuing applause, as out of prison let, Runnes-on, beyond all bounds, to nouelties: And voyce, and hands, and knees, and all do now A strange deformed forme of welcome showe. 63 And manifold confusion running greetes, Shoutes, cries, claps hands, thrusts, striues and presses neere: Houses impov'risht were, t'inrich the streetes, And streetes left naked, that (vnhappie) were Plac't from the sight where ioy with wonder meetes; Where all, of all degrees, striue to appeare; Where diuers-speaking zeale one murmure findes, In vndistinguisht voyce to tell their mindes. 64 He that in glorie of his fortune sate, Admiring what hee thought could neuer be, Did feele his blood within salute his state, And lift vp his reioycing soule, to see So many hands and hearts congratulate Th'aduancement of his long-desir'd degree; When, prodigall of thankes, in passing by, He resalutes them all, with chearefull eye. 65 Behind him, all aloofe, came pensiue on The vnregarded King; that drooping went Alone, and (but for spight) scarce lookt vpon: Iudge, if hee did more enuie, or lament. See what a wondrous worke this day is done; Which thimage of both fortunes doth present: In th'one, to shew the best of glories face; In th'other, worse then worst of all disgrace.
67 Novv Isabell, the young afflicted Queene (Whose yeares had neuer shew'd her but delights, Nor louely eyes before had euer seene Other then smiling ioyes, and ioyfull sights; great, matcht great, liv'd great, and euer beene of the worlds best benefits) plac't her selfe, hearing her Lord should passe way, where she vnseene in secret was; 68 Sicke of delay, and longing to behold Her long- Loue in fearefull ieoperdies: To whom, although it had, in sort, beene told Of their proceeding, and of his surprize; Yet thinking they would neuer be so bold To lead their Lord in any shamefull wise, But rather would conduct him as their King; As seeking but the States reordering. 69 And foorth shee lookes, and notes the formost traine; And  to view some there she wisht nor there: Seeing the chiefe not come, stayes, lookes againe; And yet she sees not him that should appeare: Then backe she stands, and then desires as faine Againe to looke, to see if hee were neere: At length a glittering troupe farre off she spies, Perceiues the throng, and heares the shouts and . 70 Lo, yonder now at length he comes, sayth shee: Looke, my good women, where he is in sight: Do you not see him? yonder; that is hee, Mounted on that white Courser, all in white, There where the thronging troupes of people bee; I know him by his seate, he sits s vpright: Lo, now he bowes: deare Lord, with what sweet grace! How long, haue I longd to behold that face!
71 O what delight my hart takes by mine eye! I doubt me, when he comes but something neere, I shall set wide the window: what care I Who doth see me, so him I may see cleare. Thus doth false ioy delude her wrongfully (Sweete Lady) in the thing she held so deare. For, neerer come, she findes she had mistooke; And him she markt, was Henrie Bullingbrooke. 72 Then Enuie takes the place in her sweet eyes, Where Sorrow had prepar'd her selfe a seat: And words of wrath, from whence complaints should rise, Proceed from egre lookes, and browes that threat: Traytor, saith shee; ist thou, that, in this wise To braue thy Lord and King, art made so great? And haue mine eyes done vnto me: this wrong, To looke on thee? for this, staid I so long? 73 Ah, haue they grac't a periur'd Rebell so? Well; for their errour I will weepe them out, And hate the tongue defil'd, that praysde my foe, And loath the minde, that gaue me not to doubt: What? haue I added shame, vnto my woe? Ile looke no more: Ladies, looke you about, And tell me if my Lord be in this traine; Least my betraying eyes should erre againe. 74 And in this passion turnes  selfe away: The rest looke all, and carefull note each wight; Whil'st she, impatient of the least delay, Demaundes againe; And what, not yet in sight? Where is my Lord? What, gone some other way? I muse at this. O God, graunt all goe right: Then to the window goes againe at last, And sees the chiefest traine of all was past;
75 And sees not him her soule desir'd to see: And yet hope, spent, makes her not leaue to looke. At last, her loue-quicke eyes, which ready be, Fastens on one; whom though she neuer tooke Could be her Lord; yet that sad cheere which hee Then shew'd, his habit and his woful looke, The grace he doth in base attire retaine, Caus'd her she could not from his sight refraine. 76 What might he be, she said, that thus alone Rides pensiue in this vniuersall ioy? Some I perceiue, as well as we, do mone: All are not pleas'd with euery thing this day. It may be, hee laments the wrong is done Vnto my Lord, and grieues; as well he may. Then he is some of ours: and we, of right. Must pittie him, that pitties our said plight. 77 But stay:  not my Lord himselfe I see? In truth, if 't were not for his base aray, I verily should thinke that it were hee; And yet his basenes doth a grace bewray: Yet God forbid; let me deceiued be, And be it not my Lord, although it may: Let my desire make vowes against desire; And let my sight approue my sight a lier. 78 Let me not see him, but himselfe; a King: For so he left me; so he did remoue. This is not he: this feeles some other thing; A passion of dislike, or else of loue. O yes; 'tis he: that princely face doth bring The euidence of Maiestie to prooue: That face, I haue conferr'd, which now I see, With that within my heart, and they agree.
79 Thus as she stood assur'd, and yet in doubt; Wishing to see, what seene she griev'd to see; Hauing beliefe, yet faine would be without; Knowing, yet striuing not to know 'twas hee: Her heart relenting, yet her heart so stout As would not yeeld to thinke what was, could be: Till, quite condemn'd by open proofe of sight, Shee must confesse; or else denie the light. 80 For, whither loue in him did sympathize, Or chaunce so wrought, to manifest her doubt; Euen iust before, where she thus secret pries, He stayes, and with cleare face lookes all about; When she: Tis, ô, too true; I know his eyes: Alas, it is my owne deare Lord cries out: And, with that crie, sinks downe vpon the flore. Abundant griefe lackt words to vtter more. 81 Sorrow keepes full possession in her heart, Lockes it within, stops vp the way of breath, Shuts senses out of doore from euerie part; And so long holdes there, as it hazardeth Oppressed Nature, and is forc't to part, Or else must be constrain'd to stay with death: So, by a sigh, it lets in sense againe; And sense, at length, giues words leaue to complaine. 82 Then, like a torrent had beene stopt before, Teares, sighes, and words, doubled togither flowe; Confus'dly striuing whether should do more, The true intelligence of griefe to showe. Sighes hindred words: words perisht in their store: Both, intermixt in one, together growe. One would do all: the other, more then's part; Being both sent equall Agents, from the hart.
83 At length, when past the first of sorrowes worst, When calm'd confusion better forme affordes; Her heart commands, her words should passe out first, And then her sighes should interpoint her words; The whiles her eyes out into teares should burst: This order with her sorrow she accordes; Which, orderless, all forme of order brake: So, then began her wordes, and thus she spake; 84 What? dost thou thus returne againe to mee? Are these the triumphs, for thy victories? Is this the glorie thou dost bring with thee, From that vnhappie Irish enterprise? And haue I made so many vowes to see Thy safe returne, and see thee in this wise? Is this the lookt-for comfort thou dost bring? To come a Captiue, that wentst out a King? 85 And yet, deare Lord, though thy vngratefull Land Hath left thee thus; yet I will take thy part: I doo remaine the same, vnder thy hand; Thou still dost rule the kingdome of my hart: If all be lost, that gouernment doth stand; And that shall neuer from thy rule depart: And so thou bee, I care not how thou bee: Let Greatnes goe; so it goe without thee. 86 And welcome come, how-so vnfortunate; I will applaud what others do despise: I loue thee for thy selfe; not for thy State: More then thy selfe, is what without thee lies: Let that more goe, if it be in thy fate: And hauing but thy selfe, it will suffize: I married was not to thy Crowne, but thee; And thou, without a Crowne, all one to mee.
87 But what do I, heere lurking idlie, mone And wayle apart, and in a single part Make seuerall griefe? which should be both in one; The touch being equall of each others hart. Ah, no: sweet Lord, thou must not mone alone. For, without me, thou art not all thou art; Nor my teares, without thine, are fully teares: For thus vnioyn'd, sorrow but halfe appeares. 88 Ioyne then our plaints, and make our griefe full griefe: Our state being one, let vs not part our care. Sorrow hath onely this poore bare reliefe, To be bemon'd of such as wofull are. And should I rob thy griefe, and be the thiefe To steale a priuate part, and seuerall share, Defrawding sorrow of her perfect due? No, no, my Lord; I come to helpe thee rue. 89 Then foorth she goes, a close concealed way (As grieuing to be seene not as she was); Laborst' attaine his presence all she may: Which, with most hard a-do, was brought to passe. For, that night, vnderstanding where he lay, With earnest treating she procur'd her Passe To come to him. Rigor could not denie Those teares, so poore a suite, or put her by. 90 Entring the chamber, where he was alone (As one whose former fortune was his shame) Loathing th'vpbrayding eye of any one That knew him once, and knowes him not the same: When hauing giuen expresse command that none Should presse to him; yet hearing some that came, Turnes angerly about his grieued eyes: When, lo, his sweete afflicted Queene he spyes.
91 Straight cleares his brow; and with a borrowed smile, What, my deare Queene? welcome, my deare, he sayes: And (striuing his owne passion to beguile, And  the sorrow which his eye betrayes) Could speake no more; but wrings her hands, the while: And then, Sweet Lady; and againe he stayes: Th'excesse of ioy and sorrow both affordes Affliction none, or but poore niggard wordes. 92 Shee that was come with a resolved hart, And with a mouth full stor'd, with wordes well chose; Thinking, This comfort wil I first impart Vnto my Lord, and thus my speach dispose: Then thus Ile say, thus looke, and with this art Hide mine owne sorrow to relieue his woes: When being come, all this prov'd nought but winde; Teares, lookes, and sighes, do only tell her minde. 93 Thus both stood silent and confused so, Their eyes relating how their hearts did morne: Both bigge with sorrow, and both great with wo In labour with what was not to be borne: This mightie burthen, where withall they goe, Dies vndeliuered, perishes vnborne; Sorrow makes silence her best Orator, Where words may make it lesse, not shew it more. 94 But he, whom longer time had learn'd the art T'indure affliction, as a vsuall touch, Straines foorth his wordes, and throwes dismay apart, To rayse vp her; whose passions now were such As quite opprest her ouercharged hart (Too small a vessell to containe so much) And cheeres and mones, and fained hopes doth frame, As if himselfe beleeu'd, or hop't the same.
95 And now, the while these Princes sorrowed, Forward ambition (come so neere her ende) Sleepes not, nor slippes th'occasion offered, T'accomplish what it did before intend: A Parlement is foorth with summoned In Richards name; whereby they might pretend A forme, to grace disorder, and a showe Of holy right, the right to ouerthrowe. 96 Order, how much predominant art thou! That if but onely thou pretended art; How soone, deceiv'd mortalitie doth bow To follow thine, as still the better part! Tis thought, that reuerent forme will not allow Iniquitie, or sacred right peruart. Within our soules, since then thou dwell'st so strong; How ill do they, that vse thee, to do wrong! 97 So ill did they, that in this formall course Sought to establish a deformed right: Who might as well effected it by force; But that men hold it wrong, what's wrought by might. Offences vrg'd in publique are made worse: The shew of iustice aggrauates despight. " The multitude, that looke not to the cause, " Rest satisfied, so it seeme done by lawes. 98 And now they diuerse articles obiect Of rigor, malice, priuate fauourings, Exaction, riot, falsehood, and neglect; Crimes done, but sildome answered by Kings: Which Subiectes doelament, but not correct. And all these faults, which Lancaster now brings Against a King, must be his owne, when hee, By vrging others sinnes, a King shall be.
99 For, all that was most odious was deuis'd, And publisht in these articles abrode. All th'errours of his youth were here compris'd, Calamitie with obloquie to lode: And more to make him publikely despis'd, Libels, inuectiues, rayling rimes, were sow'd Among the vulgar, to prepare his fall With more applause and good consent of all. 100 Looke how the day-hater, Mineruas bird, Whil'st priuiledg'd with darknes and the night, The Owle is said to bee Mineruas bird. Doth liue securet' himselfe, of others feard; If but by chaunce discouered in the light, How doth each little Fowle (with enuie stirr'd) Call him to iustice, vrge him with despight; Summon the feathered flockes of all the wood, To come to scorne the tyrant of their blood: 101 So fares this King, layd open to disgrace, Whil'st euerie mouth full of reproche inuayes; And euerie base detractor, in this case, Vpon th'aduantage of misfortune playes: Downe-falling Greatnes, vrged on apace, Was followed-hard, by all disgracefull wayes; Now in the point t'accelerate an end, Whil'st miserie had no meanes to defend. 102 Vpon those articles in Parlement So haynous made, inforc't, and vrg'd so hard, He was adiudg'd vnfit for gouernment, And of all regal powre and rule debarr'd: For, who durst contradict the Dukes intent? Or, if they durst, should patiently be heard? Desire of change, old wrongs, new hopes, fresh feare, Being far the maior part, the cause must beare.
103 Yet must we thinke, that some which saw the course (The better fewe, whom passion made not ) Stood careful lookers-on, with sad commorse, Amaz'd to see what headlong rage design'd: And, in a more considerate discourse Of tragicall euentes, thereof diuin'd; And would excuse and pittie those defects, Which, with such hate, the aduerse parts obiects: 104 " Say'ing, better yeeres might worke a better care, " And time might well haue cur'd what was amisse; " Since all these faults fatall to Greatnes are, " And worse deserts haue not beene punisht thus: " But yet in this, the heauens, we feare, prepare " Confusion for our sinnes, aswell as his; " And his calamitie beginneth our: " For, he his owne, and we abus'd his powre. 105 Thus murmur'd they; when to the king were sent Certaine who might perswade him to for sake And leaue his Crowne, and with his free consent A voluntarie Resignation make; Since that he could no other way preuent These dangers which he else must needes partake: For, not to yeeld, to what feare would constraine, Would barre the hope of life, that did remaine. 106 And yet this scarce could worke him to consent To yeeld vp that so soone, men hold so deare. Why, let him take (sayd he) the gouernement, And letme yet the name, the title beare: Leaue me that shewe, and I wil be content; And let them rule and gouerne without feare. What, can they not my shadow now indure, When they of all the rest do stand secure?
107 Let me hold that, I aske no other good: Nay, that I will hold; Henrie do thy worst. For, ere I yeeld my Crowne, I'le lose my blood; That blood, that shall make thee and thine accurst. Thus resolute a while he firmely stood, Till loue of life, and feare of being forc't, Vanquisht th'innated valour of his minde; And hope, and friends, so wrought, that he resign'd. 108 Then to the Towre (where he remained) went The Duke, with all the Peeres in company, To take his offer with his free consent, And this his Resignation testifie; And thereof to informe the Parlement, That all things might be done more formally, And men thereby rest better satisfide; As of an act not forc't, or falsifide. 109 And forth h'is brought vnto th'accomplishment, Deckt with the Crowne in princely robes that day; Like as the dead, in other Landes, are sent Vnto their Graues, in all their best aray: And euen like good, did him this ornament. For, what he brought, he must not beare away; But buries there his glory and his name, Intomb'd both in his owne and others blame. 110 And there vnto th'assembly of these States, His sorrow for their long indured wrong Through his abus'd authority relates, Excuses with confessions mixt among: And glad he sayes, to finish all debates, He was to leaue the Rule they sought-for long; , if it might be for their good, He would as gladly sacrifice his blood.
111 There, he his Subiectes all (in generall) Assoyles and quites of oath and fealtie, Renounces interest, , right and all That appertained to kingly ; Subscribes thereto, and doth to witnesse call Both heauen and earth, and God, & Saints on hie, To testifie his act, and doth professe To do the same with most free willingnesse. 112 This said, with his owne hands he gaue the Crowne To Lancaster, and wisht to God he might Haue better ioy thereof then he had knowne, And that his power might make it his by right: And furthermore he crav'd, of all his owne, But life, to liue apart a priuate wight; The vanity of Greatnes he had tri'd, And how vnsurely standes the foote of pride. 113 This brought to passe, the Lords returne with speed, The Parlement hereof to ; Where, they at large publisht the Kings owne deed, And forme of his resignement verbally: And thereupon doth Lancaster proceede To make his claime vnto the Monarchie; And shewes the right he hath, both by descent, And by recouerie, to the gouernement. 114 The Arch∣bishop of Cant. takes his text out of the first booke of the Kings, cap. 9. Vir domina∣bitur in po∣pulo. Which being granted, Canterburie rose And animates them, by the sacred word, " In this their course: and by his Text, he showes " How well they made their choyce of such a Lord; " Who, as a man was able to dispose " And guide the State: and how the royall sworde " Ought to be at a mans commandement; " Not at a childes, or one as impotent.
115 " Since, when the greatnes of his charge exceedes " The smallnesse of his powers, he must collate " The same on others: whence, sayes he, proceedes " This  expilation of the State; " Whence no man any more the publike heedes, " Then so much as imports his priuate state. " Our Health is from our head: if that be ill, " Distemp'red, faint, and weake, all the rest will. 116 " Then to the present, all his speach he drawes, " And shewes what admirable parts abound " In this braue Prince; being fit to giue them lawes, " Fit for his valour, fit for iudgement sound. " And, Lancaster, indeed I would thy cause " Had had as lawfull and as sure a ground, " As had thy vertues, and thy noble hart, " Ordaind, and borne for an Imperial part. 117 Then had not that confus'd succeeding Age Our fieldes ingrayn'd with bloud, our riuers dy'd With purple-streaming woundes of our owne rage, Nor seene our Princes slaughtred, Peeres destroyd. Then  not thou, deare Countrie, com'n to vvage Warre vvith thy selfe, nor those afflictions try'd Of all consuming discorde here so long; Too mightie novv, against thy selfe too strong. The ende of the second Booke.
THE ARGVMENT OF THE THIRD BOOKE. Henrie, the fourth, the Crowne established. The Lords, that did to Glosters death consent, Degraded, do rebell, are vanquished. King Richard, vnto Pomfret Castle sent, Is by a cruell Knight there murthered, After the Lords had had their punishment. His Corps, from thence, to London is conuayd; And there, for all to view, is open layd. 1 NOw risen is that Head, by which did spring The birth of two strong Heads, two Crownes, two rights; That monstrous shape, that afterward did bring Deform'd confusion to distracted wights. Now is attain'd that dearely purchast thing That fill'd the world with lamentable sights: And now, attain'd, all care is how to frame Meanes to establish, and to hold the same.
2 First, he attends to build a strong conceipt Of his vsurped powre, in peoples mindes; And armes his cause with furniture of weight: Which easily the sword, and Greatnesse findes. Succession, Conquest, and election straight Suggested are, and prov'd in all their kindes. More then ynough they finde, who finde their might Hath force to make all, that they will haue, Right. 3 Though one of these might verie well suffise His present approbation to procure. " But who his own cause makes, doth stil deuise " To make too much, to haue it more then sure. " Feare casts too deepe, and euer is too wise: " No vsuall plots, the doubtfull can secure. And all these disagreeing Claymes he had, With hope to make one good of many bad. 4 Like vnto him that fears, and faine would stop Aninundation working-on apace, Runs to the Breach, heapes mightie matter vp, Throwes indigested burthens on the place, Lodes with huge weights, the out-side, & the top, But leaues the inner partes in feeble case; Whil'st th'vnder-searching water, working-on, Beares (proudly) downe, all that was idly don: 5 So fares it with our indirect desseignes, And wrong contriued labors, at the last; Whil'st working Time, and iustice vndermines The feeble frame, held to be wrought so fast: Then when out-breaking vengeance vncombines The ill-ioyn'd plots so fayrely ouer-cast; Turnes vp those huge pretended heapes of showes, And all these weake illusions ouer-throwes.
6 But, after, hauing made his title plaine, Vnto his Coronation he proceedes: Which, in most sumptuous sort (to intertaine The gazing vulgar, whom this splendor feeds) Is stately furnisht, with a glorious traine: Wherein, the former Kings he far exceedes; And all t'amuse the world, and turne the thought Of what & how 'twas done, to whatis wrought. 7 And that he might on many props repose, He strengths his owne, & who his part did take: New Officers, new Councellors he chose: His eldest sonne, the Prince of Wales doth make; His second, Lord high Steward: and, to those Had hazarded their fortunes for his sake, He giues them charge, as merites their deseart; And rayses them, by crushing th'aduerse part. 8 So that hereby, the vniuersall face Of Court, with all the Offices of State Are wholly chang'd, by death, or by disgrace, Vpon th'aduantage of the peoples hate; " Who, euer enuying those of chiefest place " (Whom neither worth nor vertue, but their fate " Exalted hath) doo, when their Kings doo naught " (Because it's in their powre) iudge it their faute. 9 And in their steed, such as were popular, And wel-deseruing, were aduanc't by grace. Graue Shirley, he ordaines Lord Chancelor; Both worthy for his vertues, and his race: And Norburie hee appoints for Treasurer; A man, though meane, yet fit to vse that place: And others, t'other roomes; whom people hold So much more lov'd, how much they loath the old.
10 And it behoues him now to doo his best T'approue his vow, and oath made to the State: And many great disorders he redrest; Which alwayes Vsurpation makes the gate To let it selfe into the peoples brest, And seekes the publike best t'accommodate: Wherein, Iniustice better doth then Right: " For, who reproues the lame, must go vpright. 11 Though it be easie to accuse a State, Of imperfection and misgouernment: And easie to beget in people hate Of present Rule, which cannot all content; And fewe attempt it, that effect it not: Yet, t'introduce a better gouernment In steed thereof, if we t'example looke, The vnder-takers haue beene ouer-tooke. 12 Then, against those he strictly doth proceed, The Nobilitie accused  the death  Thomas of Woodstocke D. of Gloster. Who chiefe of Glosters death were guiltie thought; Not so much for the hatred of that deed: But, vnder this pretext the meanes he sought To ruine such whose might did much exceed His powre to wrong, nor else could well be wrought. Law, Iustice, blood, the zeale vnto the dead, Were on  side, and his drift coloured. The Dukes of Surry Excester, and Aumarle, The Earles of  and , the Bi∣shop of Carlile, Sir Thomas Blunt, and o∣ther, were the parties accused, for the death of the D. of Gloster. 13 Here, many of the greatest of the Land Accus'd were of the act, strong proofes brought out; Which strongly were : the Lords all stand, To cleare their Cause,  resolutely stout: The King,  what he tooke in hand Was not with safety to be brought-about, Desists to vrge their death, in any wise; Respecting number, strength, friends, and allies.
14 Nor was it time now, in his tender raigne, And infant-young-beginning gouernement, To striue, with blood; when lenitie must gaine The mightie men, and please the discontent. " New Kings do feare; when old Courts farther straine: Establisht States to all things will consent. He must dispense with his will, and their crime, And seeke t'oppresse and weare them out with time. 15 Yet not to seeme, but to haue some thing done, In what he could, not as he would effect; To  the people (that , to expect) He     , one, this  was elect; A   , few, or none would misse: Who first did serue their turne; and now serues his. 16 And, to abase the too high state of those That were accus'd, and lesten their degrees, Aumarle, Surry, Exceter, must lose The names of Dukes, their titles, dignities, And whatsoeuer profits thereby rise; The Earles, their titles and their Signories: And all they got in th'end of Richards raigne, Since Glosters death, they must restore againe; 17 By this, as if by Ostracisme, t'abate That great presumptiue wealth, whereon they stand. For, first, hereby impov'rishing their state, He killes the meanes they might haue to withstand: Then equals them with other whom they hate, Who (by their spoyles) are rais'd to hie command; That weake, and enuied, if they should conspire, They wracke themselues, and he hath his desire.
18 Yet, by this grace (which must be held a grace; As both they, and the world, are made beleeue) He thinks t'haue dealt benignly in this case, And left them state ynough, to let them liue; And that the taking, from thē, meanes & place, Was nothing, in respect what hee did giue: But they, that knowe how their owne reckning , Account not what they haue, but what they lose. 19 The Parlement, which now is held, decreed What-euer pleas'd the King but to propound; Confirm'd the Crowne, to him, and to his seed, And by their oath their due obedience bound: Which was the powre that stood him best in steed, And made what-euer broken courses sound. For, what he got by fortune, fauour, might, It was the State that now must make his right. 20 Here was agreed, to make all more secure, That Richard should remaine, for euermore, Close-prisoner; least the Realme might chaunce indure Some new reuolt, or any fresh vp-rore: And, that if any should such broyle procure, By him, or for him, he should die therefore. So that a talke of tumult, and a breath, Would serue him as his passing-bell to death. 21 Yet, reuerent Carlile, thou didst there oppose Thy holy voyce, to saue thy Princes blood; And freely checktst this iudgement, and his foes: When all were bad, yet thou dar'dst to be good. Be it inrold (that time may neuer lose The memorie) how firme thy courage stood; When powre, disgrace, nor death, could ought diuert Thy glorious tongue, thus, to reueale thy heart.
22 " Graue, reuerent Lords, since that this sacred place " Our Auentine-Retire, our holy hill " (This place, soule of our State, the Realmes best grace) " Doth priuiledge me speake what reason will: " Let me but say my conscience in this case; " Least sinne of silence shew my hart was ill: " And let these walles witnesse, if you will not, " I do discharge my soule, of this foule blot. 23 " Neuer shall this poore breath of mine consent, " That he that two and twentie yeeres hath raignd " As lawfull Lord, and King by iust descent, " Should here be iudg'd, vnheard, and vnarraignd; " By Subiects too (Iudges incompetent " To iudge their King vnlawfully detaind) " And vnbrought-foorth to plead his guiltless Cause; " Barringth' Annoynted, libertie of lawes. 24 " Haue you not done inough, with what is done? " Must needes disorder growe, from bad, to worse? " Can neuer mischiefe end as it begunne, " But being once out, must farther out, of force? " Thinke you, that any meanes, vnder the Sunne, " Can aslecure so indirect a course? " Or any broken cunning build so strong, " As can hold out the hand of vengeance long? 25 Stopt, there, was his too vehement speech with speed, And he sent close to warde, from where he stood; His zeale vntimely, deem'd too much t'exceed The measure of his wit, and did no good. They resolute, for all this, do proceed Vnto that iudgement could not be withstood: The King had all he crav'd, or could compell: And all was done; let others iudge, how well.
26 Now Muse relate a wofull accident, And tell the blood-shed of these mightie Peeres, Who (lately reconcil'd) rest discontent, Griev'd with disgrace, remayning in their feares: How-euer seeming outwardly content; Yet th' inward touch, that wounded honor beares, Rests closely rankling, and can finde no ease, Till death of one side cure this great disease. 27 Meanes how to feele, and learne each others hart, By th' Abbots skill of Westminster is found: Who, secretly disliking Henries part, Inuites these Lords, and those hee meant to sound; Feasts them with cost, and drawes them on with art; And darke, and doubtfull questions doth propound: Then playner speakes; and yet vncertaine speakes: Then wishes well; then off abruptly breakes. 28 My Lords, saith he, I feare we shall not finde This long-desired King, such as was thought: But yet, he may do well: God turne his minde: Tis yet new dayes: but, Ill bodes new and nought: Some yet speed well: though all men of my kinde Haue cause to doubt; his speech is not forgot, That Princes had too little, we too much. God giue him grace: but, 'tis ill trusting such. 29 This open-close, apparent-darke discourse Drew-on much speech: and euerie man replies: And euery man addes heate: and words inforce And vrge out wordes. For, when one man espies Anothers minde like his, then ill breedes worse; And out breaks all in th'end what closest lies. For, when men well haue fed, th'blood being warme, Then are they most improuident of harme.
30 Bewray they did their inward boyling spight; Each stirring other to reuenge their cause. One sayes he neuer should indure the sight Of that forsworne, that wrongs both Land and lawes, Another vowes the same; of his minde, right. A third t'a point more neere the matter drawes; Sweares, if they would, he would attempt the thing, To chace th' vsurper, and replace their King. 31 Thus one by one, kindling each others fire, Till all inflam'd, they all in one agree: All resolute to prosecute their ire, Seeking their owne, and Countries cause to free; And haue his first, that their blood did conspire. For, no way else, they sayd, but this, could be Their wrong-detained honor to redeeme: Which, true-bred blood should, more then life, esteeme. 32 And let not this our new-made faithless Lord, Thom. late Duke of Surry. Sayth Surry, thinke, that we are left so bare (Though bare inough) but we wil finde a sword To kill him with, when he shal not beware. For, he that is with life and will instor'd, Hath, for reuenge, inough, and needes not care: For, time brings meanes to furnish him withall: Let him but way te occasions as they fall. 33 Then, of the manner how t'effect the thing, Consulted was: and in the ende agreed, That at a Maske, and common Reuelling, Which was ordain'd, they should performe the deed; For, that would be least doubted of the King, And fittest for their safetie to proceed: The night, their number, and the soddaine act, Would dash all order, and protect their fact.
34 Besides, they might vnder the faire pretence Of Tilts and Turnements, which they intend, Prouide them horse, and armour for defence, And all things else conuenient for their end: Besides, they might hold sure intelligence Among themselues, without suspect t'offend: The King would thinke, they sought but grace in Court, With all their great preparing in this sort. 35 A solemne oath religiously they take, By intermutuall vowes protesting there, This neuer to reueale; nor to forsake So good a Cause, for danger, hope, or feare: The Sacrament, the pledge of faith, they take: And euerie man vpon his sword doth sweare, By Knighthood, honor, or what else should binde; To assecure, the more, each others minde. 36 And when all this was done, and thought well done, And euerie one assures him good successe, And easie seemes the thing to euerie one That nought could crosse their plot, or them suppresse: Yet one among the rest (whose minde not wonne With th'ouer-weening thought of hot excesse, Nor headlong carryed with the streame of will, Nor by his owne election led to ill) 37 Iudicious Blunt (whose learning, valor, wit, Sir Thom. Blunt. Had taught true knowledge in the course of things; Knew dangers as they were, and th'humerous fit Ofware-lessediscontent, what end it brings) Counsels their heat, with calme graue words, and fit (Words wellfore-thought, that from experience springs) And warnes a warier cariage in the thing; Least blind presumption worke their ruining.
38 " My Lords, sayth he, I knowe your wisedomes such, " As that of mine aduice you haue no need: " I knowe, you knowe how much the thing doth touch " The maine of all your states, your blood, your seed: " Yet, since the same concernes my life, as much " As his whose hand is chiefest in this deed, " And that my foote must go as farre, as his; " I thinke, my tongue may speake what needfull is, 39 " The thing we enterprize, I knowe, doth beare " Great possibilitie of good effect; " For-that so many men of might there are " That venture here this action to direct: " Which meaner wightes, of trust and credite bare, " Not so respected, could not looke t'effect. " For, none, without great hopes, will follow such " Whose powre, and honor doth not promise much. 40 " Besides, this new, and doubtfull gouernment, " The wauering faith of people vaine, and light, " The secret hopes of many discontent, " The naturall affection to the right, " Our lawfull Sov'raignes life, in prison pent, " Whom men begin to pittie now, not spight, " Our well layd plot, and all, I must confesse, " With our iust cause, doth promise good successe. 41 " But this is yet the outward fayrest side " Of our desseigne: within, rests more of feare, " More dread of sad euent yet vndescri'd, " Then (my most worthy Lords) I would there were: " But yet, I speake not this as to diuide " Your thoughts from th'act, or to dismay your cheere; " Onely to adde, vnto your forward will, " A moderate feare, to cast the worst of ill.
42 " Danger, before, and in, and after th'act, " You needes must graunt, is great, and to be waigh'd. " Before; least, while we do the deede protract, " It be by any of our selues bewraid: " For, many being priuie to the fact, " How hard it is to keepe it vnbetraid? " When the betrayer shal haue life and grace, " And rid himselfe of danger and disgrace. 43 " For, though some few continue resolute, " Yet many shrink, which at the first would dare, " And be the formost men to execute, " If th'act, and motion at one instant were: " But, intermission suffers men dispute " What dangers are, and cast with farther care: " Cold doubt cauils with honor, scorneth fame: " And in the end, feare waighes downe faith, with shame. 44 " Then in the act, what perils shall we finde, " If either place, or time, or other course, " Cause vs to alter th'order now assign'd? " Or that, then we expect, things happen worse? " If either error, or afainting minde, " An indiscreet amazement, or remorse, " In any at that instant should be found; " How much it might the act, and all confound? 45 " After the deede, the dangers are no lesse; " Lest that, our forwardnes not seconded " By our owne followers, and accomplices " (Being kept backe, or slowe, or hindered) " The hastie multitude rush-on, t'oppresse " Confused weakenes, there vnsuccored; " Or ray se another head, of that same race, " T'auenge his death, and prosecute the case.
46 " All this (my Lords) must be considered " (The best and worst of that which may succeede) " That valourmixt with feare, boldnesse with dread, " May march more circumspect, with better heed. " And, To preuent these mischiefs mentioned, " Is, by our faith, our secrecie, and speed. " For, euen already is the worke begun: " And we rest all vndone, till all be done. 47 " And though I could haue wisht another course, " In open fielde t'haue hazarded my blood; " Yet some are heere, whose loue is of that force " To draw my life, whom zeale hath not withstood: " But, like you not of your desseigne the worse. " If the successe be good, your course is good: " And ending well, our honor then begins. " No hand of strife is pure, but that which wins. 48 This sayd, a sad still silence held their mindes, Vpon the feareful proiect of their woe; But that, not long, ere forward furie findes Incouraging perswasions on to goe. We must (sayd they) we wil, our honour bindes, Our safety bids, our fayth must haue it so: We know the worst can come, 'tis thought vpon: We cannot shift; being in, we must goe on. 49 And on in deed they went; but (ô!) not farre: A fatal stop trauerst their headlong course; Their drift comes knowne, and they discouered are: For, some of many will be false, of force. Aumarle became the man, that all did marre, Whether through indiscretion, chance, or worse: He makes his peace, with offring others blood; And shewes the King, how all the matter stood.
50 Then lo, dismayde, confusion all possest Th'afflicted troupe, hearing their plot descride. Then runnes amaz'd distresse, with sad vnrest, To this, to that, to slie, to stand, to hide: Distracted terror knew not what was best; On what determination to abide. At last,  would yet stand to the Sword, To trie what friendes would doe, or fate asfoord. 51 Then this, then that mans ayde, they craue, implore; Poste here for helpe, seeke there their followers; Coniure their friendes they had, labour for more, Sollicite all reputed fauourers, Who Richards cause seem'd to affect before: And, in his name, write, pray, sende messengers; To try what faith was , if by this art Any would  to take Afflictions part. 52 And some were found; and some againe draw backe: Vncertaine power could not it selfe retaine: Intreate they may; authoritie they lacke: And here, and there they march (but, all in vaine) With desp'rate course; like those that see their wracke Euen on the Rockes of death, and yet they straine That death may not them idly finde t'attend Their certaine last, but worke to meet their end. 53 And long they stand not, ere the chiefe, surpriz'd, Conclude with their deare blood their tragedie: And all the rest, disperst, run some disguis'd To vnknowne coastes; some to the shores do flye; Some to the woods, or whither feare aduis'd: But running from, all to destruction hie. The breach once made vpon a battered state, Downe goes distresse; no shelter shroudes their fate.
54 And now what horror in their soules doth growe! What sorrowes, with their friendes, and neere allies! What mourning in their ruin'd houses now! How many childrens plaints, and mothers cryes! How many wofull Widowes left to bow To sad disgrace! what perisht families! What heires of hie rich hopes, their thoughts must frame To base-downe-looking pouertie and shame! 55 This slaughter and calamitie fore-goes Thy eminent destruction, wofull King. This is the bloody Comet of thy woes, That doth fore-tell thy present ruyning. Here was thy ende decreed, when these men rose: And euen with theirs, this act thy death did bring; Or hastened, at the least, vpon this ground: Yet, if not this, another had beene found. 56 Kings, Lords of times and of occasions, may Take their aduantage, when, and how they list: For, now the Realme, he thought in this dismay, T' like mischiefes, neither would resist, Norfeele the wound at all; since, by this way, All future disturbations would desist; The roote cut off, from whence these tumults rose, He should haue rest, the Common-wealth repose. 57 He knew this time: and yet he would not seeme Too quicke to wrath, as if affecting blood; But yet complaines so farre, that men might deeme He would 'twere done, and that he thought it good: And wisht that some would so his  esteeme, Asridde him of these feares wherein he stood: This Knight was Sir Pierce of The Exton. And there-with eyes a Knight, that then was by; Who soone could learne his lesson, by his eye.
58 The man, he knew, was one that willingly For one good looke would hazard soule and all; An instrument for any villanie, That needed no commission more at all: A great ease to the King, that should, hereby, Not neede in this a course of iustice call, Nor seeme to wil the act  for, though what's wrought Were his owne deed, he  should so be thought. 59 " So foule a thing () thou Iniustice art, " That tort'rest both the dooer and distrest. " For, when a man hath done a wicked part, " How doth he  t'excuse to make the best, " To shift the fault,  then his charg'd hart, " And glad to finde the least surmise of rest! " And if he could make his, seeme others sin; " What great repose, what case he findes therein! 60 This Knight; but yet, why should I call him Knight, To giue impietie this reuerent stile? Title of honour, worth, and vertues right, Should not be giuen to a wretch so vile: But pardon me, if I do not aright: It is because I will not here defile My vnstaind verse, with his opprobrious name, And grace him so, to place him in the same. 61 This caitife goes, and with him takes eight more As desperate as himselfe, impiously bold (Such villaines, as he knew would not abhorre To execute what wicked act he would) And hastes him downe to Pomfret; where, before, The restless King, conuaide, was laid in hold: There would he do the deed, he thought should bring To him great grace and fauour, with his King.
62 Whether the soule receiues intelligence, By her neere Genius, of the bodies end, And so impartes a sadnesse to the sense Fore-going ruine, whereto it doth tend: Or whether Nature else hath conference With profound sleepe, and so doth warning send By prophetizing dreames, what hurt is neere, And giues the heauie careful hart to feare: 63 How-euer, so it is, the now sad King (Tost here and there, his quiet to confound) Feeles a straunge waight of sorrowes, gathering Vpon his trembling hart, and sees no ground; Feeles sodaine terror bring cold shiuering; Listes not to eate, still muses, sleepes vnsound, His senses droope, his steady eyes vnquicke, And much he ayles; and yet he is not sicke. 64 The morning of that day, which was his last, After a wearie rest rysing to paine, Out at a little grate his eyes he cast Vpon those bordering hils, and open Plaine, And viewes the towne, and sees how people past: Where others libertie, makes him complaine The more his owne, and grieues his soule the more; Conferring captiue-Crownes, with freedome poore. 65 " O happie man, sayth hee, that lo I see " Grazing his cattle in those pleasant fieldes! " If he but knew his good (how blessed hee, " That feeles not  affliction Greatnes yeeldes!) " Other then what hee is, he would not bee, " Nor change his state with him that Scepters wieldes: " Thine, thine is that true life; That is to liue, " To rest secure, and not rise vp to grieue.
66 " Thou sitst, at home, safe, by thy quiet fire, " And hear'st of others harmes; but feelest none: " And there thou telst of Kings, and who aspire, " Who fall, who rise, who triumphs, who do mone: " Perhaps thou talkst of mee, and dost inquire " Of my restraint, why here I liue alone, " And pittiest this my miserable fall: " For, pittie must haue part; enuie, not all. 67 " Thrice happy you that looke, as from the shore, " And haue no venture in the wracke you see; " No int'rest, no occasion to deplore " Other mens trauailes, while your selues sit free. " How much doth your sweet rest make vs the more " To see our miserie, and what we bee! " Whose blinded Greatnes, euer in turmoyle, " Still seeking happy life, makes life a toyle. 68 " Great Dioclesian (and more great therefore Primus im∣perium com∣municauit, & posuit Di∣oclesianus: & in eo ponendo, dixisse fer∣tur; Recipe Iupiter im∣perium, quod mihi commo∣dasti. " For yeelding-vp that whereto pride aspires) " Reckning thy Gardens in Illiria more " Then all the Empire, all what th'earth admires; " Thou well didst teach, that he is neuer poore " That little hath, but he that much desires; " Finding more true delight in that small ground, " Then, in possessing all the earth, was found. 69 " Are Kings that freedome giue, themselues not free, " As meaner men, to take what they may giue? " What, are they of so fatall a degree, " That they cannot descend from that, and liue? " Vnlesse they still be Kings can they not bee, " Nor may they their authority suruiue? " Will not my yeelded Crowne redeeme my breath? " Still am I fear'd? is there no way, but death?
70 Scarce this word, Death, from sorrow did proceed, When in rusht one, and tels him, such a knight Is new arriv'd, and comes from Court in speed. What newes sayd he, with him, that traytrous wight? What, more remouing yet? alas! what need? Are we not farre ynough sent out of sight? Or is this place, here, not sufficient strong To guard vs in? or must we haue more wrong? 71 By this, the bloody troope were at the dore; When-as a sodaine and a strange dismay them straine, who should go in before: One offers, and in offring makes a stay: An other forward sets, and doth no more: A third the like, and none durst make the way: So much the horror of so vile a deed, In vilest mindes, deterres them to proceed. 72 At length, as to some great aduentrous fight, This Brauo cheeres these dastards, all hee can; And valiantly their courage doth incite, And all against one weake vnarmed man: A great exployte, and fit for such a knight; Wherein, so much renowne his valor wan. But see, how men that verie Presence feare, Which once, they knew, Authority did beare, 73 Then, on thrusts one, and he would formost be To shead anothers blood; but lost his owne: For, entring in, as soone as he did see The face of Maiestie, to him well knowne; Like Marius Souldier at Minternum, hee Stood still amaz'd, his courage ouer-throwne. The King, seeing this, starting frō where he sate, Out from his trembling hand his weapon gate.
74 Thus, euen his foes, who came to bring him death, Bring him a weapon, that before had none; That yet he might not idly lose his breath, But die reueng'd, in action, not alone. And this good chaunce, that thus much fauoureth, He slackes not: for, he presently speedes one: And, Lion-like, vpon the rest he flyes: And here falles one; and there another lies. 75 And vp and down he trauerses his ground; Now wardes a felling blowe, now strikes againe, Then nimbly shiftes a thrust, then lends a wound, Now backe he giues, then rushes-on amaine. His quicke and ready hand doth so confound These shamefull beastes, that foure of them lie slaine: And all had perisht happily and well, But for one act, that (ô!) I grieue to tell. 76 This coward Knight, seeing with shame and feare His men thus slaine, and doubting his owne end, Leapes vp into a chaire that (lo) was there, The-whiles the King did all his courage bend Against those foure, which now before him were, Doubting not who behind him doth attend; And plyes his hands vndaunted, vnaffeard, And with good heart, and life for life he stird. 77 And whiles he this, and that, and each mans blowe Doth eye, defend, and shift, being layd-to , Backward he beares for more aduantage now, Thinking the wall would safegard him the more; When, lo, with impious hand, ô wicked thou, That shamefull durst not come to strike before, Behind him gav'st that lamentable wound, Which layd that wretched Prince flat on the ground.
78 Now, proditorious wretch, what hast thou done, To make this barbarous base assassinate Vpon the person of a Prince, and one Fore-spent with sorrow, and all desolate? What great aduancement hast thou hereby wonne, By being the instrument to perpetrate So foule a deed? where is thy grace in Corte, For such a seruice, acted in this sort? 79 First, he for whom thou dost this villanie (Though pleas'd there with) will not auouch thy fact, But let the weight of thine owne infamie Fall on thee, vnsupported, and vnbackt: Then, all men else will loath thy treacherie, And thou thy selfe abhorre thy proper act: " So th' Wolfe, in hope the Lyons grace to win " Betraying other beastes, lost his owne . 80 But now, as this sweet Prince distended lay, And him nor Life, nor Death, their owne could call, (For, Life, remouing,  not all away; And Death, though entring, had not seis'd on all) That short-tym'd motion had a little stay (The mouer ceasing) though it were but small: (As th' Organ-sound, a time, suruiues the stop, Before it doth the dying note giue vp) 81 When, lo, there streames a spring of bloud so fast, From those deepe woundes, as all imbru'd the face Of that accursed caytiue, as he past (After the deed effected) through the place: And therewithall those dying eyes did cast Such an vpbrayding looke on his disgrace (Seeming to checke so cowardly a part) As left th'impression euen in his hart.
82 And this one King, most neere in bloud ally'd, Is made th'oblation for the others peace. The Corps was  from  to Londō:   witho∣pen  in Paules, 3 dayes; and after a solemne obseque, was had to Langley and there  . Which peace yet was not hereby ratifi'd So, as it could all future feares release. For, though the other did forth with prouide To haue the rumour run of his decease, By drawing the corps to London, where it was Layd (three dayes to be seene) with open face: 83 Yet, so great was this execrable deed, As men would searce therein belieue their eyes; Much lesse their eares: and many sought to feed K. Ric. bruted to be  after he was  murthered: which  a con∣Con, ; for the which, Sir  Clarindon, supposed to be the base sonne of the   was executed, with diuers . The easie creditours of nouelties, By voycing him aliue; how hee was freed By strange escape out of his miseries: And many did conspire now to relieue Him dead, who had forsaken him aliue. 84 And many suffred: for his Cause, when now He had : many  for him againe, When they perceiv'd th'exchange did not allow Their hopes so much as they did looke to gaine, By traffiquing of kings; and all saw how Their full  were in the wane. They had a King was more then him before; But yet a king, where they were nought the more. 85 And sure, this murthred Prince, though weake he was, He was not ill; not yet so weake,  that He shew'd much Martiall  in his place, Aduentring of this person for the State: And might amongst our better Princes passe; Had not the flatterie, rapine, and debate Of factious Lords and greedie Officers his actions, and abus'd his yeares.
86 Nor is it so much Princes weakenesses, As the corruption of their Ministers, Wherby the Common-wealth receiues distress. For, they, attending their particulars, Make imperfections their aduantages To be themselues both Kings and Councellors. And, sure, this Common-wealth can neuer take Hurt by weake kings, but such as we doo make. 87 Besides, he was (which people much respect In Princes, and which pleases vulgarly) Of goodly personage, and of sweete aspect, Of milde accesse, and liberalitie; Hee  in his Courte 1000.  in ordinarie allowance of , 300.  in his Kitchin, aboue 300. Ladies , and Lande∣rers:  apparell was sumptuous;  so was it generally, in his time: bee had one Cote of gold and stone, valued as 30000. . One  with the Fr. King at , when   Isabel was deliuered vnto him, cost 300000. markes. And feastes, and shewes, and triumphs did affect, As the delights of youth and iollitie: But, here, the great profusion and expence Of his reuenues, bred him much offence: 88 And gaue aduantage vnto enmitie, This grieuous accusation to prefer; " That he consum'd the common Treasurie: " Whereof he being the simple vsager " But for the State (not in proprietie) " Did alien at his pleasure, and transfer " The same this minions, and to whome hee list; " By which, the Common-wealth was to subsist. 89 " Whereby, sayd they, the poore concussed State Hen. 4.  al letters patents of  granted by K. . and K. Ric. Ann. reg. 6. " Shall euer be exacted for supplyes. " Which accusation was th'occasion, that " His succeslour by order " Many his Patents, and did reuocate When he was first surpris'd in Wales, the D. of  had in  Castle 100000.  in coyne, and 200000, markes in : and at his Resignation  the , 300000 , beside: plate and Iewels. " And reaslume his liberalities: " And yet, for all these wastes, these gifts and feasts, " He was not found a Bankrupt in his chests.
90 But they, who tooke to Syndicque in this sorte The Actions of a Monarch, knew those things Wherein the accoumpts were likely to fall short Betweene the State of Kingdomes, and their Kings: Which president, of pestilent import (Had not the heauens blest thy indeuourings) Against thee Henry, had beene likewise brought, Th'example made of thy example wrought. 91 For, though this bountie, and this liberalness, A Prince,  ,       . A glorious vertue be; it better fits Great men, then kings: who, giuing in excesse, Giue not their owne, but others benefits: Which calles-vp manies hopes, but pleasures lesse; more loue, then it begets. For, Iustice is their Virtue: that alone Makes them sit sure, and glorifies the Throne. The ende of the third Booke.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. King Henrie, his excuses publishes For Richards death; and truce doth intertaine With France The Scots,  for wrongs, address Themselues to warre; and are appeas'd againe. The Welsh rebell. The Percies practises (To part the State) are stopt, in battell slaine. Continuall troubles still afflict this King; Till Death an end doth to his trauailes bring. 1 THe bounds once ouer-gone, that hold men in, They neuer stay; but on, from bad to worse. " Wrongs do not leaue off there, where they begin; " But, still beget new mischiefes in their course. Now, Henrie, thou  added to thy Of vsurpation, and intruding force, A greater crime; which makes that gone before T'appeare more then it did, and noted more.
2 For, now thou artinforc't t' apologise   sent to forraine Princes,   &  the Kings proceedings. With forraine States, for two enormious things, Wherein, thou dost appeare to scandalise The publike Right, and common Cause of Kings: Which, though (with all the skill thou canst deuise) Thou ouerlay'st with fayrest colourings; Yet th' vnder-worke, transparent, shewes too plaine. " Where open acts accuse, th' excuse is vaine. 3 And these defences, are but complements, To dallie with confining Potentates; Who, busied in their proper gouernments, Do seldome tend th' affaires of other States: Their wisedome, which to present powre consents, Liue-dogges before dead Lyons, estimates: " And no man more respects these publike wrongs, " Then so much as t'his priuate state belongs. 4 Yet, most it seem'd the French King to import; As sharer in his daughters iniurie: " Though bloud, in Princes, links not in such sort, " As that it is of any powre to tye, Where their estates may seeme t'aduenture hurt; Or where there is not a necessitie, That doth combine them with a stronger chaine, Then all these great Alliances containe. 5 For, though this King might haue resentiment, And will, t'auenge him of this iniurie: In this time of Charles 6.  the  warres  , between the Dukes of , and . Yet, at that time, his State being turbulent, Factious, and full of partialitie, And of tentimes he him selfe impotent, By meanes of his Phreneticque maladie; It was not likely, any good could rise By vndertaking such an enterprise.
6 And therefore both sides, vpon entercourse The Truce made with R'c. 2. renewd for 30, yeares: but broken the next yeare after, vpon their part; sending  de Burbon, with forces into , to the ayde of . (As fitted best their present termes) agreed, The former truce continue should in force, According as it had beene fore-decreed Vpon the match with Richard; and a course For Isabel (with all conuenient speed) Prouided, with an honorable Traine Suting her state, to be sent home againe. 7 Whome willingly they would haue still retain'd, The  labors to haue   to his sonne Henry, Prince of Wales. And matcht vnto the Prince: but shee (though yong; Yet sensible of that which appertain'd To honor, and renowne) scornd any tongue That offred such a motion; and disdaynd To haue it thought, she would but heare that wrong Mov'd to her, of her Lord, and husband dead, To haue his murtherers race inioy his bed. 8 Besides; the French (doubting the Gouernment, Thus gotten, would be subiect still to strife) Not willing were to vrge her to consent  Isabel was maried to Charles, sonne to  D. of . T'accept a troublous, and vncertaine life: And, being returnd, she grew in th' end content To be (at home) a Duke of Orleance wife; Scap't from such stormes of powre, holding it best To be belowe her selfe, to be at rest. 9 And so hath Henrie assecur'd that side, Thom.   of  was sent into Gascony with 200. men at Armes and 400. Archers, to  Sir Robert  Lieutenant there: where he  that Country, being  by the  to  vpon their  for the death of King Ric. whom they especial∣ly  for   at Burdeux. And there with all his State of Gasconie: Which, on th'intelligence was notifi'd Of Richards death, were wrought to mutinie; And hardly came to be repacifi'd, And kept to hold in their fidelitie: So much, to him were they affectioned, For hauing beene amongst them borne and bred.
10 These toyles abrode, these tumults with his owne (As if the frame of all disioynted were, With this disordred shifting of the Crowne) Fell, in the reuolution of one yeare. Beside; the Scotte (in discontentment growne, For the detayning, and supporting here, George , E. of March,  out of Scotland, was     England, and  against his Country. The scourge of all that kingdome, George Dunbar) With fire and sword, proclaymes an open war; 11 Taking their time, in these disturbances And  of a wauering Gouernment, T' auenge them of their former grieuances, And by our spoyles their fortunes to augment. Against whose forces, Henry furnishes A powrefull Army, and in person went; But warres with a retyring enemy, With much more trauaile then with victorie. 12 And, being (by sharp, deformed Winters force) Owen Glendour, an  in North∣Wales,  with the L. Gray of , for      by ; and being not     owne  to recouer them,  force and made   the L. Gray; and   for the  of that . Caus'd to retire, he findes new stormes at home, From other Coasts ary sing; that prov'd worse Then those, which now hee was returned from. In VVales, a Cause of Law, by violent course, Was (from a variance) now a warre become; And Owen Glendour, who with Gray of late Contests for priuate landes, now seekes a State. 13 Whom to represle, he early in the Spring, With all prouisions fit, doth forward set; When straight his enemies (not purposing Ann. Reg. 2. To hazard battaile) to the mountaines get. Where, after long and weary trauayling, Without performing any great defeat, He onely their prouisions wastes, and burnes, And with some prey of Cattell home returnes.
14 Wherewith, the Rebell rather was the more Incourag'd, then addaunted: and begun T'aduenture farther then he did before; Seeing such a Monarch had so little done, Being comn in person, with so great a powre, And sodainely againe retyr'd and gone. " For, in this case, they helpe, who hurt so small; " And he hath nothing done, that doth not all. 15 But now (behold) other new heads appeare, New Hidra's of rebellion, that procure Ann Reg. 3. More worke to doo, and giue more cause of ; And shew'd, that nothing in his State stood sure. And these, euen of his chiefest followers were, Of whome he might presume him most secure; Who had th' especiall ingins beene, to reare His fortunes vp, vnto the State they were. 16 The Percies were the men; men of great might, Strong in alliance, and in courage strong: Who now conspire; vnder pretence to right Such wrongs, as to the Common wealth belong: Vrg'd, either through their conscience, or despight, Or finding now the part they tooke was wrong: Or else Ambition hereto did them call, In this battell of Homeldon, the L: Hen. , surna∣med Hot-spur, ac∣companied with George  . of March, ouerthrew the Scottish forces: where were slaine 23 Knights and 10000 of the : the   of Fife, Murry, Angus, with 500. other of meaner degree, to∣ken prisoners. Or others enuy'd grace; or, rather, all. 17 And such they were, who might presume t'haue done Much for the king, and honour of the State; Hauing the chiefest actions vnder-gone, Both forraine and domesticall of late: Beside that famous day of Homeldon; Where Hotspur gaue that wonderfull defeat Vnto the Scottes, as shooke that kingdome more Then many Monarchs armies had before.
18 Which might perhaps aduance their mindes, so farre Aboue the leuell of subiection, as T'assume to them the glory of that war; Where all things, by their powre, were brought to passe: They, being so mightie, and so popular, And their command so spacious as it was, Might (in their State) forget, how all these things That subiects doo effect, must be their Kings. 19 And so fell after into discontent, For-that the king requir'd to haue, as his, Those Lords were taken prisoners; whome they ment To hold still as their proper purchases: Then, that he would not, at their sute, consent To worke their Cosin Mortimers release, Out of the Rebell Owen Glendour's hands; Who held him prisoner, in disgracefull bands. 20 But be, what will, the cause; strong was their plot, Their parties great, meanes good, the season fit, Their practise close, their faith suspected not, Their states far off, and they of wary wit: Who, with large promises, so wooe the Scot To aide their Cause,  he consents to it; And glad was to disturne that furious streame Of warre, on vs, that else had swallowed them. 21 Then ioyne they with the Welsh; who, now wel train'd, In Armes and action dayly grew more great. In the 9.  of the  of King Richard 2.   by  ordained  E. of March  apparent to the Crowne. Their Leader, by his wiles, had much attaynd, And done much mischiefe on the English State: Beside, his prisoner  he gain'd, From being a foe, to  his confederate; A man the King much fear'd: and well he might;  Roger was the  of Edmond Mortimer, who married  the only daughter of Leonel D. of , the third son of King Ed. 3.  by her had   Roger & Elizabeth:  had  4. children, all ,  only Anne,  without ;     to .  of , second   Edmo d D. of Yorke. This Rich.  at ,  issue  , , surnamed , after Duke of Yorke. Least he should looke whether his Crowne stood right.
22 For, Richard (for the quiet of the State) Before he tooke those Irish warres in , About Succession doth deliberate: And, finding how the certaine Right did stand, With full consent this man did ordinate The heyre apparent to the Crowne and Land; Whose competencie was of tender touch: Although his might was small, his right was much. 23 With these, the Percies them confederat, And (as three heads) conioyne in one intent: And instituting a Triumuirate) Do part the Land, in triple gouernment; Diuiding thus, among themselues, the State: The Percies should rule all the North, from Trent; And Glendour, VVales; the Earle of March should be Lord of the South, from Trent: and so they'gree. 24 Then, those faire bayts these Trouble-States still vse (Pretence of common good, the Kings ill Course) Must be cast forth, the people to abuse, And giue their Cause, and them, the  force. The king, for tyranny, they doo accuse, By whom the State was growne from bad to worse; A periur'd man, who held all faith in scorne: Whose trusted Oathes had others  forsworne. 25 And, there withal, the execrable act, The   against . . Ann. . 4. On their late murthered King, they aggrauate: How he imploy'd the dooers of the fact, Whom afterwards hee did remunerate: And dayly such taxations did exact, As were against the Order of the State; Presuming, those great summes hee did impose, About his priuate vses to dispose:
26 And how he was inuironed with such As had possest him; and in slanderous sort Accus'd them so, as they durst not approche To cleare themselues of such vniust report: And, thereupon, they  disauouch To yeld him more obedience, or support: And, as t'a  Duke of Lancaster, Their Cartell of Defiance they preferre; 27 Protesting, these obiections to make good, With sword in hand, and to confirme and seale Their vndertaking, with their dearest bloud, As Procurators for the Common-weale: And that vpon their Consciences it stood, And did import their dutie and their zeale Vnto the State, as Peeres to seeredrest Those miseries wherewith it was opprest. 28 Great seem'd their Cause: and greatly, too, did adde The peoples loue thereto, these crymes impos'd; That many gathered to the troupes they had, And many sent them aide though vndisclos'd: So that, the King, with all maine speed, was glad Both by his remonstrances well compos'd, And with his sword (his best defence) prouide To right himselfe, and to correct their pride: 29 Divulging, first, a fayre Apologie Of his cleere heart, touching the foule report Of that assassinate: which vtterly He doth  protesting, in no sort Tagree thereto, in will or priuitie: And, how he had beene vsed to extort, The State could witnesse best; by whose consent Was granted what he had, in Parlement.
30 Which neuer was, but onely one supply, Infoure yeares troublous and expensiue Raigne: And , vpon extreame necessitie, The safetie of the publicke to maintaine: And that the Percies best could testifie, How most that mony issued was, againe; To whom the same was rendred, to the end To warre the Scot, and Borders to defend: 31 And that the rest was, to the same effect For which it was obtaynd, in like . And where-as they did slanderously obiect, How that they durst not hazard to present In person their defences, in respect He was incenst by some maleuolent; It was most false: for, he knew no defence They were to make, till now they made offence. 32 And how far, he had been, from cruelty, Both VVales, and Scotland could him witnes beare; Where, those effects of his great clemencie, Insparing bloud, do to his cost appeare: Much more, his subiects finde his lenitie; Whose loue he seekes to haue, and not their feare. " But thus, said he, they euer do pretend " To haue receiv'd a wrong, who wrong intend. 33 Not to giue time vnto th'increasing rage, And gathering furie, foorth hee marcht with speed; Least more delay, or giuing longer age To th' euill growne, it might the cure exceed. All his bestmen at Armes, and Leaders sage, All he prepar'd hee could; and all did need. For, to a mighty worke thou goest, ô King, That equall spirits, and equall powres shal bring.
34 There shall young Hotspur, with a fury led, Ingrapple with thy sonne, as fierce as hee: There Martiall VVorster, long experienced In forraine armes, shall come t'incounter thee. There Dowglas, to thy Stafford, shall make head: There Vernon, for thy valiant Blunt, shall be. There, shalt thou finde a doubtfull bloudy day; Though sickenesse keep Northumberland away. 35 Who yet reserv'd (though, after, quit for this) Another tempest on thy head to rayse; As if, still, wrong-reuenging Nemesis Meant to afflict all thy continuing And here this field hee happely doth misse, For thy great good; and therefore well hee stayes. The K.  forward by George Dunbar, was in sight of his enemies lying in Campe  to , sooner then  was exspected: for the  supposed he would haue stayde longer then  did, at   Trent, for the  of his  cell with other   werethere to  him.  they  to  the Towne of ; and Prepared to encoun∣ter the kings . Ann. . 4. What might his force haue done, being brought thereto, When that already, gaue so much to doo? 36 The swift approche, and vnexpected speed, The King had made vpon this new-rays'd force, In th' vnconfirmed troupes, much feare did breed, Vntimely hind'ring their intended course: Theioyning with the Welsh (they had decreed) Was hereby dasht; which made their Cause the worse: Northumberland, with forces from the North, Expected to be there, was not set forth. 37 And yet, vndaunted Hotspur, seeing the King So neere arriv'd; leauing the worke in hand, With forward speed his forces marshalling, Sets forth, his farther comming to withstand: And, with a cheerefull voyce incouraging His well experienc't and aduentrous Band, Brings on his Army, eger vnto fight; And plac't the same, before the King in sight.
38 " This day (saith he) my valiant trusty friendes, " What-euer it doth giue, shal glory giue; " This day, with honor, frees our State, or endes " Our misery with fame, that still shal liue: " And doo but thinke, how well the same he spends, " Who spends his blood, his Country to relieue. " What? haue we hands, and shall we seruile bee? " Why were swordes made? but, to preserue men free. 39 Besides, th'assured hope of victorie, Which we may even fore-promise on our side, Against this weake constrayned company; Whom force and feare, not will and loue doth guide: Against a Prince, whose foulimpiety The heauens doo hate, the earth cannot abide: Our number being no lesse, our courage more, No doubt we haue it, if wee worke therefore. 40 This sayd, and thus resolv'd, euen bent to charge Vpon the King; who well their order view'd, And wary noted all the course at large Of their proceeding, and their multitude: The Abbot of Shrew bury and one of the Cleark of the  seale were  from the K to the  to offer them parden if they wold come to any reasonable agreement. And deeming better, if he could discharge The day with safetie, and some peace conclude, Great proffers sendes of pardon and of grace If they would yeeld, and quietnesse imbrace. 41 Which though his feares might driue him to propose, Wherupon the E. of Worcester  to the K.  many kind  and  sing to moue  Nephew ,  at  re∣turne,  sayd, conceale them,  hastened on the bat∣tel; which was   . An. Reg. 4. To time his businesle, for some other ende; Yet, sure, hee could not meane t'haue peace with those, Who did in that supreame degree offend: Nor were they such, as would bee wonne with showes; Or breath of oathes, or vowes could apprehend: So that in honor, th'offers, he doth make, Were not for him to , nor them to take.
42 And yet this much his courses doo approue, He was not bloudy, in his Naturall; And yeeld he did to more, then might behoue His dignitie, to haue dispenst withall: And, vnto VVorster, hee himselfe did moue A reconcilement to be made of all: But VVorster, know'ing it could not be secur'd, His Nephews on-set (yet for all) procur'd. 43 Which seeing, the King (with greater wrathin censt) Rage, against furie, doth with speede prepare. And though, sayd he, I could haue wel dispenst With this dayes bloud, which I haue sought to spare; That greater glory might haue recompenst The forward worth of these, that so much dare; That we might good haue had by th'ouerthrowne, And th'wounds we make, might not haue beene our owne: 44 Yet, since that other mens iniquitie Calles-on the sword of wrath, against my will; And that themselues exact this crueltie, And I constrayned am this bloud to spill; Then on, braue followers, on courageously, True-harted subiects, against traytors ill: And spare not them, who seeke to spoyle vs all; Whose foul confused end, soone see you shal. 45 Forth-with, began these fury-mouing sounds, The notes of wrath, the musicke brought from Hell, The  Drums (which trumpets voyce confounds) The cryes, th'incouragements, the shouting shrill; That, all about, the beaten ayre rebounds Confused thundring-murmurs horrible; To robbe all sense, except the sense to fight. Well hands may worke: the minde hath lost his sight,
46 O warre! begot in pride and luxurie, The child of malice, and reuengeful hate; Thou impious good, and good impietie, That art the foul refiner of a State; Vniust-iust scourge of mens iniquitie, Sharpe-easer of corruptions desperate; Is there no meanes, but that a sin-sicke Land Must be let bloud with such a boy sterous hand? 47 How well mightst thou haue, here, beene spar'd this day, Had not wrong-counsaild Percy beene peruerse? Whose forward hand, inur'd to woundes, makes way Vpon the sharpest fronts of the most fierce: Where now an equall furie thrusts, to stay And backe-repell that force, and his disperse: Then these aslaile, then those re-chase againe, Till stayd with new-made hils of bodies slaine. 48 There, lo that new-appearing glorious starre, Wonder of Armes, the terror of the field, Prince ,  this Battel, was not 17 yeares of Young Henrie, laboring where the stoutest are, And euen the stoutest  backe to yeeld; There is that hand boldned to bloud and warre, That must the sword, in wondtous actions, wield: Though better, he had learnd with others bloud; A lesle expence to vs, to him more good. 49 Yet here had he not speedy succour lent To his indangered father, neere opprest, That day had seene the full accomplishment Of all his trauailes, and his finall rest: For, Mars-like Dowglas all his forces bent T'incounter, and to grapple with the best; As if disdayning any other thing To doo, that day, but to subdue a King.
50 And three, with fierie courage, he assailes; Three, all as kings adornd in royall wise: And each successiue after other quailes; Still wondring, whence so many Kings should rise. And, doubting lest his hand or eye-sight fayles, In these confounded, on a fourth hee flyes, And him vnhorses too: whom had hee sped, He then all Kings, in him, had vanquished. 51 For Henrie had diuided, as it were, The person of himselfe, into foure parts; To be  knowne, & yet known euery where, The more to animate his peoples harts: Who, cheered by his presence, would not spare To execute their best and worthyest parts. By which, two special things effected are; His safetie, and his subiects better care. 52 And neuer worthy Prince a day did quit With greater hazard, and with more renowne, Then thou didst, mightie Henry, in this fight; Which onely made thee owner of thine owne: Thou neuer proov'dst the Tenure of thy right (How thou didst hold thy easie-gotten Crown) Till now: and, now, thou shew'st thy selfe Chiefe Lord, By that especial right of kings; the Sword. 53 And deare it cost, and much good bloud is shed To  thee, a  victorie: Great Stafford thy high Constable lyes dead, , E of Staf ,  of . With Shorly, , Gawsell, Caluerly, And many more; whose braue deathes witnessed Their noble valour and fidelitie: And many more had left their dearest bloud Behind, that day, had Hot spur longer stood.
54 But he, as Dowglas, with his furie ledde, Rushing into the thickest woods of speares, And brakes of swordes, still laying at the Head (The life of th' Army) whiles he nothing , Or spares his owne, comes all inuironed With multitude of powre, that ouer-beares His manly worth: who yeeldes not, in his fall; But fighting dyes, and dying kils withall. 55 What Arke, what trophey, what magnifence Of glory, Hot-spurre, hadst thou purchas't here; Could but thy Cause, as fayre as thy pretence, Be made vnto thy Country to appeare! Had it  her protection and defence (Not thy ) made thee sell so deare Thy selfe this day; shee must haue here made good An euerlasting Statue for thy bloud. 56 Which thus misspent, thy Army presently, (As if they could not stand, when thou wert downe) Disperst in rout, betooke them all to flie: And Dowglas, faint with wounds, & ouer-throwne, Was taken; who yet wonne the enemie Which tooke him (by his noble valour showne, In that dayes mighty worke) and was preserv'd With all the grace, and honor he deserv'd. 57 VVorc'ster (who had escap't vnhappily His death in battel) on a Scaffold dyes, Tho.  . of Worcester, with Sir Richard Vernon and the Baron of Kinderton, were taken in the  and . The next day after, in the company Of other chiefest of that enterprise. And, so, the tempest of this mutinie Became allay'd; and those greatieoperdies Blowne-ouer in this sort, the Coasts well cleer'd, But for one threatning cloud, that yet appear'd.
58 Northumber land (recouered) still out-stands, The principall of this great family And faction; hauing Berwike in his hands, With other holdes; strong by confed'racie With Scotland; mighty by his owne command: And, likely now, his vtmost powre to trie, T'auenge him on the ruine of his Bloud, And ioyne with Wales; which yet vndanted stood. 59 Which mov'd the king (who had too much indur'd In this dayes worke, to hazard new againe) By all the aptest meanes could be procur'd To lay to draw him in, by any traine. And write he did, and vow'd, and him assur'd (Vpon his princely word) to intertaine With former grace, if hee would but submit, And come to yeeld th'obedience that was fit. 60 The Earle, be'ing now by this defeat dismay'd (And fearing his confederates would fayle With Fortune, and betray, rather then ayde, Those who are downe; being for their owne auayle) Relying on his Sov'raignes oath obay'd; Which, with his tender griefs, did much : And in hee came, and had no detryment, But (for a shew) some short imprisonment. 61 The Parlement, that afterward insu'd, Restor'd him t'all his dignities and landes. And now none, but the Welsh, seem'd to seclude The king, from hauing wholly in his hands All peace within: and them he had pursu'd Whiles this braue army, with these ready bands, Were yet on foot; could he but haue got pay To hold them, and his charge of war defray.
62 But, that hee could not gaine, though all the wayes That might be wrought, he labours to procure Meanes to effect the same. But, those delayes, And long protraction, which he must indure By way of Parlement, so much betrayes The opportunitie, that might secure His vndertaking; as, the occasion, lost, Draue both the State, and him, to greater cost. 63 The Fr. K.   to Owen  with 140. , which lan∣ded at  . An. Reg. 6. For, now the Rebell, thus forborne, growes strong Both in his reputation and successe: For,  with his powre held out so long, Many aduenture (with more ) To yeeld him ayd, and to support his wrong: And forraine Princes (in his businesse Whom hee sollicites) now wil lend their hand To hould him vp; seeing, himselfe can stand. 64 An. Reg. 6. with much adoo the Lai∣tie  2 , vpon conditi∣on that the L. Fur∣niuall should receiue all the mony, and see it to bee spent in the . And thus he prospers; whiles, the King here spent Much time to leuie treasure, to maintaine His charge abrode: which, with that discontent, That murmure, those denyals, hee doth gaine, As that hee findes it euen as turbulent To warre for it, as with it, all his Raigne; The D. of Orleans with an Army of 6000. men entred into , and be∣sieged , the space of , moneths, & return'd without obtaining . Though hee had those inforcements of expence, Both for , retaynements, and defence. 65 For, here beside these troubles in the Land, His large Dominions, held abrode, require An. Reg. . The Conte Cleremont, Sonne to the D. of ,  Mon. de la Bret, wonne  Casties in . The same time the Conte Sa. Paul  the  of Wight, with 1600. men. A plentiful and a prepared hand To guard them; where so mightie men aspire T'assaile, distract  trouble his Command, With hopes, with promises, with sword and fire: And  as deepe importes, his  to cleere; Which, by his neighbors, much infested were
66 The Flomings, Britaines, with the French and all, . Reg. 6. The Cont  Paule   Castle of Marke  3.  of . The  vn∣der the conduct of the L. of  spoyled and  the Towne of . Attemptincursions, and worke much despight: Orleance, for Guien: and here the Conte, Saint Paul, For Calais labours, and the Ile of Wight. Wherein, though neither had successe at all; Yet  ouercame, and wonne by fight Important Holdes, in Gasconie the-while, And did the English much distresse and spoyle, 67 All which require prouisions to withstand:  K. sends 4000  to  and 3000 to the S ,  the   his second sonne  of  after D. of . And all are succord with great prouidence: A Nauie, to secure the Seas, is mann'd, And forces sent to Calais; for defence. And wherein other parts defectiue stand, are supply'd, with carefull diligence: So that his subiects could not, but well knowe, That what they , he did sure bestowe. 68 Nor did hee spare himselfe, nor his; but (bent All-wholly  actiue Worthynesse) The Prince of VVales vnto his Prouince sent; Where, hee was sure hee should not take his ease: His second soune is, with the Earle of Kent, Imployd (as ) to keepe the Seas. , after D. of Bedford, sent with Ralph Neusle E. of Westmerland,  the North. A third (though very yong) likewise sent forth With VVestmerland, attends vnto the North. 69 Thus were they bred, who after were to bee Men amongst men: here, with these graue Adioynts (These learned Maisters) they were taught to see Themselues, to read the world, and keep their points. Thus were they entred in the first degree (And Accedence) of action; which acquaints Them, with the Rules of Worth and Nobleness: Which, in true Concord, they learn'd well t'expresse.
70 And, whiles h'attends the State thus carefully, The Earle of Marches children are conuay'd Out of the Towre of VVindsor, secretly; Being prisoners there, not for their merit, lay'd; But, for their Bloud; and to the ende whereby This Chayne of Nature might be interlay'd Betweene the Father and his high intents, To hold him backe, to saue these innocents. 71 For which attempt (though it were frustrated By their recouerie, who were got againe) The  ,  to Edward D.  Yorke, late wife to . L. Spencer (executed at , An. Reg. 1.)  her brother to be the  author of conuaying away the E. of Marches  out of the  of . Aumarle (now Duke of Yorke) is chalenged, By his owne sister, to haue layd that trayne; Who (late) her Lord, with others ruined, In secretly betraying them, t'obtaine His grace and peace: which yet contents him not. For, Who hath grace and peace by treason got? 72 So much did loue, t'her executed Lord, Predominate in this faire Ladies hart, As in that region, it would not afford Nature a place, to rest in any part Of her affections; but that she abhord Her proper blood, and left to doo the part Of , to doo that of a wife; T'auenge a Husbands death, by Brothers life. 73 Vpon which accusation, presently The Duke committed is, without much stirre Or vulgar noyse; for that it tenderly Did touch the secretst wounds of Lancaster: When streight, another new conspiracie .  E. of North. againe  against the K with Rich.   of (As if it were a certaine Ally'd to this) ingendred in the North, Is by th'Archbishop Scroope with power brought forth:
74 And with faire zeale, and pietie, approv'd To be forth vniuersall benefit Yorke. .  E Marshal, Tho. L, Bardolph, and others. They  the Citi∣zens of Yorke with the Country adioy  to take their part for the commo∣dity of the . And succour of the people, who (soone mov'd By such perswaders, as are held vpright; And for their zeale, and charitie belov'd) Vse not t'examine if the Cause be right, But leap into the toyle, and are vndon By following them that they rely'd vpon. 75 Here, new aspersions, with new obloquies, Are layde on old deserts; and future ill They   Articles  the King. On present suffrings, bruted to aryse, That farther grieuancesing ender wil. And then concussion, rapine, pilleries, Their Catalogue of accusations fill. Which to redresse, they doo presume to make Religion to auow the part they take. 76 And euen as Canterburie did produce A Pardon to aduance him to the ; The . of York offers pardon to all   their part  the King. The like now Yorke , to His faction for the pulling of him down: Whilst th'ignorant, deceiv'd by this abuse, Makes others ends to be as if their owne. But, what wold these haue don against the crimes, Oppressions, ryots, wastes of other times? 77 Since now they had a Monarch, and a man, Rays'd by his worth, and by their owne consent, To gouerne them, and workes the best he can T'aduance the Crowne, and giue the State cōtent;  E. of . land, with  D. of       against the   pow∣er being too great for thē, the E. made somblance to toyne with the Archb. for redresse of  greuances as he ;    and  him of  forces. An. Reg. 6. Commits not all to others care, nor ran Anidle course, or on his  spent. " But, thus the Horse at first bites at the Bit; " That after is content to play with it.
78 Growne to a mighty powre (attending now Northumberland, with his prepared ayde) The Bishop (by a parle) is, with a showe Of combination, cunningly be trayde By Westmerland: whose wit did ouerthrowe, Without a sword, all these great feates, and stayd The mightiest danger, that did euer yet Thy Crowne and State, disturbed Henrie, threat. 79 For which, this reuerent Priest with Mowbray dyes: The Archb. was brother to scroope E. of Will∣shire, Treasurer of Eng and before be∣headed.. Who both, drawne on, with passion of despight, To vndertake this fatall enterpise (The one his brothers bloud-shed to requite; The other for his fathers iniuries) Tho' Monbray . Marshall, sonne to the Duke of Nor∣folke, banished about the quarrell with H. Bullingbrooke. Did wrong themselues, and did not others right. For, who through th'eyes of their affections looke, And not of iudgement, thus are ouer-tooke. 80 Where of when newes came to Northumberland (Who seldome other then of miserie Seemes borne to hear being ever behind hand With Fortune, and his opportunitie) The E. of North. returning out of Wales Slaine in the Battail, An. Reg. 9 To Scotland flyes: where, giuen to vnderstand Of some intrapment by conspiracie, Gets into VVales: whence, hee aduentured T'attempt another day; and lost his head. 81 Whereby, once more those Parts are quieted, When-as the King (who neuer had his brow Seene free from sweat nor hart from trouble rid) The K. growes iealous of his sonne, Hen. Prince of Wales: who with a better minde then fashion, came to his Father and cleared himself. An. Reg. 13 Was, with suspicion that his sonne grew now Too popular, and forward, so much fed By wicked instruments (who well knew how To gaine by Princes feares) as he thereby Fell, in his griefe, to great extreamitie.
82 Which when that vertuous Prince (who borne to bee The module of a glorious Monarch) heard, With humble protestations did so free His fathers feares, and his owne honor cleer'd, As that he plainely made the world to see How base, Detraction, and Deceipt appeard; And that a hart, so nobly built, could not Containe (within) a thought, that wore a blot. 83 Wherewith, the king betakes him to some peace; Yet to a peace, much like a sicke-mans sleep (Whose vnrelenting paines do neuer cease; But alwayes watch vpon his weakenes keepe) That neuer any Sabaoth of release Could free his trauailes, and afflictions deepe: But still his cares held working, all his life, Till Death concludes a finall end with strife. 84 Whose Herald, Sickenes, being imployd, before, With full commission to denounce his end; And paine and griefe, inforcing more and more, Besieg'd the Hold, that could not long defend; Consuming, so, al that resisting store Of those prouisions Nature daign'd to lend, As that the walles,  thin, permit the Minde To looke out thorow, and his frailty finde. 85 For, now (as if those vapors vanisht were, Which heat of boyling bloud, and health, did breed, To clowd the iudgement) things do plaine appeare In their owne colours, as they are indeede; When-as th'illightned soule discouers cleere Th'abusing shewes of Sense, and notes with heed How poore a thing is pride; when all, as slaues, " Differ but in their fetters, not their Graues.
86 And, lying on his last afflicted bed, Pale Death and Conscience both before him stand; Th'one holding out a Booke, wherein he read In bloudy lines the deedes of his owne hand: The other shewes a glasse, which figured Anougly forme of foule corrupted Sand; Both bringing horror in the hiest degree, With what he was, and what he soone should be. 87 Which seeing; all trembling, and confus'd with feare, He lay a while, amaz'd, with this affright: Atlast, commands some, that attending were, To fetch the Crowne, and set it in his sight. On which, with fixed eye, and heauy cheere, Casting a looke; O God, sayth he, what right I had to thee, I now in griefe conceiue: Thee, which with blood I held, with horror leaue. 88 And, herewithall, the soule (rapt with the thought Of mischiefes past) did so attentiue wey These present terrors, whil'st (as if forgot) The dull oppressed body senselesse lay; That he, as breathlesse quite, quite dead is thought; When, lo, the sonne comes in, and takes-away This fatall Crowne from thence, and out he goes; As if impatient, longer time to lose. 89 To whom (call'd backe for this presumptuous deed) The King (return'd from out his extasie) " Began: O sonne, what needst thou make such speed " To be before-hand with thy miserie? " Thou shalt haue time ynough, if thou succeed, " To feele the stormes that beat on Dignitie. " And, if thou  but bee (be any thing) " In , then neuer be a King.
90 " Nay, Father; since your Fortune did attaine " So high a Stand, I meane not to descend, " Replyes the Prince: as if what you did gaine, " I were of spirit vnable to defend. " Time will appease  well, who now complaine, " And ratifie our int'rest in the end. " What wrong hath not continuance quite out-worne? " Yeares make that right, which neuer was so borne. 91 " If so; God worke his pleasure, sayd the King: " Yet thou must needs contend, with all thy might, " Such euidence of vertuous deeds to bring, " That well may proue our wrong to be our right: " And let the goodnesse of the managing " Raze out the blot of foul attaining, quite; " That Discontent may all aduantage misse, " To wish it otherwise, then now it is. 92 " And since my death my purpose doth preuent, " Touching this Holy warre I tooke in hand " (An action wherewithall my soule had ment " T'appease my God, and reconcile my Land) " To thee is left to finish my intent; " Who, to be safe, must neueridly stand: " But some great actions entertaine thou still, " To holde their mindes, who else wil practise ill. 93 " Thou hast not that aduantage by my Raigne, " To ryotit, as they whom long descent " Hath purchas'tloue, by custome; but, with paine " Thou must contend to buy the worlds content. " What their birth gaue them, thou hast yet to gaine, " By thine owne vertues, and good gouernment: " So that vnlesse thy worth confirme the thing, " Thou neuer shalt be father to a King.
94 " Nor art thou borne in those calme dayes, where Rest " Hath brought asleepe sluggish Securitie: " But, in tumultuous times; where mindes, addrest " To factions, are invr'd to mutinie; " A mischiefe, not by force, to be supprest, " Where rigor still begets more enmitie: " Hatred must be beguil'd with some new course, " Where States are stiffe, and Princes doubt their force. 95 This, and much more, Affliction would haue say'd, Out of th'experience of a troublous Raigne Ann. dom. 14. 12. the K. died in the 46. yeare of his age, when he had  13 yeares 6 ; and left 4 ; . after him K. The D. of Clarence, Iohn D. of Bedford, and  D. of . (For which, his high desires had dearely pay'd The int'rest of an euer-toyling paine) But that this all-subduing Power here stai'd His fault'ring tongue, and paine (r'inforc't againe) Barr'd vp th'oppressed passages of breath, To bring him quite vnder the state of Death. 96 In whose possession I must leaue him now; And now, into the Ocean of new toyles, Into the stormie Maine (where tempestes growe Of greater ruines, and of greater spoyles) Setfoorth my course (to hasten-on my vow) Ov'rall the troublous Deepe of these turmoyles. And, if I may but liue t'attaine the shore Of my desired end, I wish no more. The ende of the fourth Booke.
THE FIFT BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. Henry the fift cuts off his enemie, The Earle of Cambridge, that conspir'd his death. Henry the sixt (married vnluckily) His, and his Countryes glorie ruineth. Suffolke, that made the match, preferd too hie, Going to exile, a Pirat murthereth. VVhat meanes the Duke of Yorke obseru'd to gaine The worlds good-will, seeking the Crowne t'attaine. 1 CLose smothered lay the lowe depressed fire, Whose after-issuing flames confounded all, Henry . began   the 20 of March. . 1412 The whil'st victorious Henry did conspire The wracke of Fraunce, that at his feete did fall: Whil'st ioyes of gotten spoyles, and new desire Of greater gaine, to greater deeds did call His conquering troupes; that could no thoughts retaine, Saue thoughts of glorie, all that actiue Raigne.
2 Whome here, me thinks (as if hee did appeare, Out of the clowdy darkenes of the night) I do behold approche with Martiall cheere, And with a dreadful (and yet louely) sight: Whose eye giues courage, and whose brow hath feare; Both representing terror, and delight; And stayes my course, and off my purpose breakes, And in vp brayding words thus fiercely speakes: 3 " Vngrateful times, that impiously neglect " That worth, that neuer times againe shall shew; " What? merites all our toyle no more respect? " Or else standes Idlenesse asham'd to knowe " Those wondrous Actions, that do so obiect " Blame to the wanton, sinne vnto the slowe? " Can England see the best, that she can boast, " Lie thus vngrac't, vndeckt and almost lost? 4 " Why do you seeke for fained Palladines " (Out of the smoke of idle vanitie) " Who may giue glory to the true designes, " Of  chier, Talbot, Neuile, Willoughby? " Why should not you striue to fill vp your lines, " With wonders of your owne, with veritie? " T'inflame their ofspring with the loue of good, " And glorious true examples of their Blood. 5 " What euerlasting matter here is found, " Whence new immortall Iliads might proceed! " That those, whose happie graces do abound " In blessed accents, here may haue to feed " Good thoughts, on no imaginarie ground " Of hungry shadowes, which no profite breed; " Whence, musicke-like, instant delight may growe; " Yet, when men all do knowe, they nothing knowe.
6 " And why dost thou, in lamentable verse, " Nothing but blood-shed, treasons, sinne and shame, " The worst of times, th'extreame of ills, rehearse; " To rayse olde staynes, and to renew dead blame? " As if the mindes of th'euill, and , " Were not farre sooner trained from the same, " By good example of faire vertuous acts, " Then by the shew of foul vngodly facts. 7 " Would God, our times had had some sacred wight, " Whose words as happy as our swords had bin, " To haue prepar'd for vs Tropheis aright, " Of vnde caying frames t'haue rested in; " Triumphant Arks, of perdurable might, " O holy lines! that such aduantage win " Vpon the Sieth of Time, in spight of yeares. " How blessed they, who gaine what neuer weares! 8 " For, what is it to do, if what we do " Shall perish neere as soone as it is donne? " What is that glory wee attaine vnto " With all our toyle, if lost as soone as wonne? " A small requitall, for so great adoo, " Is this poore present breath, a smoake soone gone; " Or these dumb stones, erected for our sake: " Which, formless heapes few stormy changes make. 9 " Tell great ELIZA (since her dayes are grac't, " With those bright ornaments, to vs deni'd) " That sherepaire what darknesse hath defac't, " And get our ruyn'd deedes, reedifi'd: " She in whose all-directing eye is plac't " A powre, the highest powers of wit to guide; " Shee may command the worke, and ouer-see " The holy frame, that might eternall bee.
10 For, would Shee be content, that Time should make A  prey, vpon her glorious Raigne; That Darkenesse, and the Night, should ouertake So cleare a Brightnesse, shining without staine? Ah! no: She fosters some (no doubt) that wake For her eternitie, with pleasing paine. And if shee, for her selfe, prepare this good; Let her not so neglect those of her Blood. 11 This, that great Monarch, Henrie, seem'd to craue; When (weighing what a holy motiue here Vertue propos'd, and fit for him to haue, Whom all times ought of dutie hold most deare) I sigh't, and wisht that some would take t'ingraue, With curious hand, so proud a worke to reare (To grace the present, and to blesse times past) That might, for euer, to our glorie last. 12 So should our well-taught times haue learn'd alike, How faire shin'd Virtue, and how foul Vice stood; When now my selfe am driuen to mislike Those deedes of worth, I dare not vow for good: I cannot mone who lose, nor prayse who seeke By mightie Actions here t'aduance their Blood. I must say, Who wrought most, least honor had: How euer good the Cause, the deedes were bad. 13 And onely tell the worst of euerie Raigne; And not the intermedled good report. I leaue, what glorie Virtue did attaine At th'euer-memorable Agincort: I leaue to tell, what wit, what power did gaine Th'assieged Roan, Caen, Dreux; or in what sort: How Maiestie, with terror, did aduance Her conquering foote, on all subdued Fraunce.
14 All this I passe, and that magnanimous King, Mirror of vertue, miracle of worth; Whose mighty Actions, with wise managing, Forc't prouder boasting Climes to serue the North. The best of all the best, the earth can bring, Scarce equals him, in what his Raigne brought foorth; Being of a minde, as forward to aspire, As fit to gouerne what he did desire. 15 His comely body was a goodly seate, Where Virtue dwelt most faire; as lodg'd most pure: A body strong; where vse of strength did get A stronger state to do, and to endure: His life he makes th'example, to beget Like spirit in those, he did to good inure; And gaue, to , such life, and liuelihood, As if hee Greatnes sought, but to do good. 16 Hee as the Chiefe, and all-directing head, Did with his subiects, as his members, liue; And them to goodnesse forced not but led; Winning, not much to haue, but much to giue (Deeming, the powre of his, his powr did spread) As borne to blesse the world, and not to grieue; Adorn'd with others spoyles, not subiects store: No King, exacting lesse; none, winning more. 17 Hee, after that corrupted faith had bred An ill inur'd obedience for Command; And languishing luxutiousnes had spred Weyward vnaptnesse ouer all the Land; Those long vnordred  so marshalled, Vnder such formall discipline to stand, That euen his soule seem'd onely to direct So great a body, such exployts t'effect.
18 He brings abrode distracted Discontent, Disperst ill humors into actions hie; And, to vnite them all in one consent, Plac't the faire marke of glorie in their eye; That, Malice had no leasure to dissent, Nor Enuie time to practise treacherie: The present actions do diuert the thought Of madnesse past, while mindes were so well wrought. 19 Here now were Pride, Oppression, Vsurie (The canker-eating mischiefes of the State) Call'd foorth to prey vpon the enemie; Whil'st the home-burth'ned, better lightned sate: Exactors did not, with a greedy eye, Examine states, or priuate riches rate: The silent Courts warr'd not, with busie words; The Courtes of Iu∣stice. Nor wrested law gaue the contentious, swords. 20 Now, nothing  th'attentiue , But stratagems, , surprises, fightes; How to giue lawes to them that conquered were, How to articulate with yeelding wightes: The weake with mercie, and the proud with feare, How to retaine; to giue deserts their rights, Were now the Artes: and nothing else was thought, But how to win, and maintaine what was got. 21 Nor here were any priuately possest Or held alone imprisoned Maiestie, Proudly debarring entraunce  the rest; As if the prey were theirs, by victorie. Here, no detractor woundes who merits best; Nor shameless brow cheeres-on impietie. Vertue, who all her toyle with zeale had spent, Not here, all vnrewarded, sighing went.
22 But, here, the equally-respecting eye Of Powre, looking alike on like deserts, Blessing the good, made others good thereby; More mightie, by the multitude of hearts. The fielde of glorie, vnto all doth lie Open alike; honour, to all imparts. So that the onely fashion in request, Was, to be good, or good-like, as the rest. 23 So much, ô thou Example, dost effect (Being farre a better Maister, then Command) —  tolerare labores; Non . That, how to do, by doing dost direct, And teachest others action, by thy hand. " Who followes not the course, that kings elect? " When Princes worke, who then wil idle stand? " And, when that dooing good is onely thought " Worthy reward; who will be bad for nought? 24 And had not th'Earle of Cambridge, with vaine speed, Richard E. of Cam∣bridge the second sonne to Edmond , Duke of Yorke, maried  the  of Roger  Earle of March, descended from Li∣onell D. of , the third sonne to K Ed. . by whose right 'Richard D. of Yorke sonne to this E. of Cambridge, af∣terwards aymed the Crowne. Vntimely practiz'd for an others right, With hope to aduance those of his proper seed (On whome the Rule seem'd destined to light) The Land had seene none of her owne to bleed, During this Raigne, nor no aggreeued sight; None the least blacknesse inter clouded had So faire a day, nor any eye lookt sad. 25 But now, when Fraunce perceiued (from afarre) The gathering tempest, growing-on from hence, Ready to fall, threatning their State to marre, They labour all meanes to prouide defence: And, practising how to preuent this warre, And shut-out such calamities from thence, Do foster, here, some discord lately growne; To hold Ambition busied, with her owne.
26 Finding those humors which they saw were fit Soone to be wrought, and easie to befed, Swolne full with enuie, that the Crowne should sit There where it did (as if established) And whom it toucht in Blood, to grieue at it; They with such hopes and helps sollicited, That this great Earle was drawne t'attempt the thing, And practiseth how to depose the King. 27 For, being of mightie meanes to do the deed; And yet of mightier hopes, then meanes to do: And yet of spirit, that did his hopes exceed; And then of Blood as great, to adde thereto: All these, with what the gold of France could breed (Being powers enow a clyming minde to woo) The E of Cābridge  the  of the King, was with Hen. Scroope Lord Treasurer, & Sir Thomas Gray  at South∣hampton. Ann. 3. Reg. He so imploy'd, that many he had wonne, Euen of the chiefe the King reli'd vpon. 28 The well-knowne right of th' Earle of March allur'd A leaning loue: whose Cause he did pretend. Whereby, he knew that so himselfe procur'd The Crowne for his owne children, in the ende. For, the Earle beeing (as hee was assur'd) Vnapt for issue, it must needes descend On those of his, being next of Clarence race; As who, by course of right, should hold the place. 29 It was the time, when-as the forward Prince  . Had all prepar'd for his great enterprize; And ready stand his troupes to part from hence, And all in stately forme and order lyes, When open Fame giues out intelligence Of these bad complots of his enemies: Or else, this time (of purpose) chosen is: Though knowne before; yet let run-on, till this.
30 That this might yeeld the more  aggrauate Vpon so foul a deed vntimely sought, Now at this point, t'attempt to ruinate So glorious a designe so forward brought, Whil'st careful Virtue seekes t'aduance the State, And for her euerlasting honor sought: That though the Cause seem'd right, and title strong; The time  dooing it, yet makes it wrong. 31 But, straight, an vnlamented death he had: And straight were ioyfully the Anchors weighd: And all flocke fast aboord, with visage glad; As if the sacrifice had now beene payd, For their good speed; that made  stay so sad, Loathing the least occasion that delayd. And, now new thoughts, great hopes, calme seas, fair windes, With present action intertaine their mindes. 32 No other crosse, ô Henry, saw thy dayes Richard, Duke of Yorke, sonne to the E. of Cambridge, by Anne daughter to the Earle of March, made his claime, in .  of Hon. 6. But this, that toucht thy now possessed hold; Nor after, long, till this mans sonne assayes To get, of thine, the right that he controll'd: For which, contending long, his life he payes. So that, it fatal seem'd the father should Thy winning seeke to stay, and then his sonne Should be the cause to lose, when thou hadst won. 33 Yet now in this so happy a meane-while, And interlightning times, thy  wrought, That Discord had  leasure to defile So faire attempts with a tumultuous thought: And euen thy selfe, thy selfe didst so beguile With such attention vpon what was sought, That time  not now with feare or hate Others to seeke, thee to secure thy State.
34 Or else, how easie had it beene, for thee, All the pretendant race t'haue layd full lowe? If thou proceeded hadst with crueltie, Not suffering any fatall branch to growe: But, vnsuspicious Magnanimitie Shames such effectes of feare, and force, to showe; Busied in free, and open Actions still Being great: for, being good, hates to be ill. 35 And yet, such wrongs are held meete to be done, And often for the State thought requisite: As, when the publike good depends thereon, When great iniustice is esteem'd great right: But yet, what good with doing ill is won? Who hath of blood made such a benefite, As hath not fear'd, more after then before, And made his peace the , his plague the more? 36 Farre otherwise dealt this vndaunted King, That cherished the ofspring of his foes; And his Competitors to grace did bring: And them, his friendes for Armes, and honors, chose; As if plaine courses were the safest thing, Where vpright goodnesse, sure, and stedfast goes, Free from that subtile maskt impietie, Which this depraued world calles policie. 37 Yet, how hath Fate dispos'd of all this good? What haue these Virtues after  auail'd? In what stead hath hy-raised Valour stood, When this continuing cause of Greatnes fail'd? Then, when proud-growne, the irritated blood, Enduring not it selfe, it selfe ; As though that Prowesse had but learnd to spill Much blood abrode, to cut her throat with skill
38 How doth th'Eternall, in the course of things, Immix the causes both of Good and Ill? That thus the one, effects of th'other brings: As what seemes made to blisse, is borne to spill? What? from the best of Virtues glorie, springs That, which the world with miserie doth fill? Is th'end of happinesse, but wretchednesse? Hath Sinne his plague, and Virtue no successe? 39 Either that is not good, the world holdes good: Or else is so confus'd with ill; that we (Abused with th'appearing likelihood) Run to offend, whil'st we thinke good to bee: Or else the heauens made man (in furious blood) To torture man; Allotting no course free From mischiefe long: Sending faire dayes that breed But stormes; to make, more foul, times that succeed. 40 Who would haue thought, that so great victories, Such conquests, riches, Land, and Kingdome gain'd, Could not but haue establisht in such wise This powrefull state, in state to haue remain'd? Who would haue thought, that Mischiefe could deuise A way, so soone to lose what was attain'd? As if powre were but shew'd to grieue, not grace; And to reduce vs into farre worse case. 41 With what contagion, Fraunce, didst thou infect This Land, by thee made proud, to disagree? T'inrage them so, their owne swordes to direct Vpon them-selues, that were made sharp in thee? Why didst thou teach them, here at homet'erect Trophees of their blood, which of thine should bee? Or was the date of thine affliction out, And so (by course) was ours to come about?
42 But, that vntimely death of this great King, . 5.  9. yeares and  , and died in the 36 yeare of . Whose nine yeeres Raigne so mightie wonders wrought, To thee thy hopes; to vs despaire did bring; Not long to keepe, and gouerne, what was got: For, those that had th'affayres in managing, Although their Countries good they greatly sought; Yet, so ill accidentes vofitly fell, That their dessignes could hardly prosper wel. 43 An infant King doth in the State succeed, Hen. 6.  one yeere old when    , was committed to the charge of the two good Dukes,  and  his . one yeere old, left vnto others guide: Whose  trust, though such as shew'd indeed, They weigh'd their charge more then the world beside, And did with dutie, zeale, and loue proceed; Yet (for all what their trauaile could prouide) Could not woo Fortune, to remaine with vs, When this her Minion was departed thus: 44 But, by degrees first this, then that, regain'd, The turning tide beares backe, with flowing chaunce Vnto the Dolphin, all we had attain'd, And filles the late lowe-running hopes of Fraunce; When Bedford (who our onely hold maintain'd) Death takes from vs, their fortune to aduance: And then home-strife (that on it selfe did fall) Neglecting forraine care, did soone lose all. 45 Neere three score yeeres are past since Bulling brooke Did first attaine (God knowes how iust) the Crowne: And now his race,  right possessors tooke, Were held of all, to hold nought but their owne: When Richard, Duke of Yorke, begins to looke Into their right, and makes his  knowne; Wakening-vp sleeping Right (that lay as dead) To , how his race was .
46 His fathers end, in him, no feare could moue T'attempt the like, against the like of might; Where long possession now of feare, and loue, Seem'd to prescribe euen an innated Right. So that, To proue his state, was to disproue Time, law, consent, oath, and allegeance quight: And no way, but the way of blood there was, Through which, with all confusion hee must passe. 47 And how much better for him, had it beene, T'indure a wrong with peace, then with such toyle " T'obtaine a bloody Right? since Right is sinne, " That is ill sought, and purchased with spoyle. But, this so wretched state are Kingdomes in, Where one mans Cause, shall all the rest imbroyle: And oft, t'aduance a Tyran to a Crowne, Men runt' vndoo the State, that is their owne. 48 And yet that opportunitie, which led Him to attempt, seeme  him t'excuse: A seeble spirited King that gouerned, (Who ill could guide the Scepter he did vse) His enemies (that his worth maliced; Who, both the Land, and him, did much abuse) The peoples loue, and his apparant Right, May seeme sufficient motiues to incite. 49 Besides; the now ripe wrath (deferd till now) Of that sure and vnsayling Iusticer, That neuers suffers wrong so long to growe, And to incorporate with right so farre, As it might come to seeme the same in showe (T'incourage those that  minded are By such successe) but that at last he will Confound the branch, whose root was planted ill.
50 Else, might the impious say (with grudging spight) Doth God permit the Great to riot free, And blesse the mightie though they do vnright, As if he did vnto their wrongs agree? And onely plague the weake and wretched wight, For smallest faults, euen in the high'st degree? When he, but vsing them for others scourge, Likewise of them at lēgth the world doth purge. 51 But could not yet, for blood-shed, satisfie The now well-ruling of th'ill-gotten Crowne? Must euen the good receiue the penaltie Of former sinnes, that neuer were their owne? And must a iust Kings blood, with miserie Pay for a bad, vniustly ouerthrowne? Well; then wee see, Right in his course must goe: And men, t'escape from blood, must keepe it so. 52 And, sure, this King, that now the Crowne possest (Henrie the sixt) was one, whose life was free From that command of vice, whereto the rest Of most these mightie Soueraignes subiects bee; And numbred might haue beene, among the best Of other men, if not of that degree: A right good man, but yet an euill King; Vnfit for what hee had in managing. 53 Of humble spirite, of nature continent: No thought t'increase he had; scarce keep his owne: For pard'ning apter, then for punishment, He chokes his powre, to haue his bountie knowne. Farre from reuenge, soone wonne, soone made content; As fitter for a Cloyster then a Crowne: Whose holy minde so much addicted is On th'world to-come, that he neglecteth this.
54 With such a weake-good, feeble-godly King, Hath Richard, Duke of Yorke, his Cause to trie: Who, by th'experience of long managing The warres of Fraunce, with supreame dignitie; And by his owne great worth, with furthering The common good against the enemie, Had wrought, that zeale and loue attend his might, And made his spirit equall vnto his Right. 55 For, now the Duke of Bedford beeing dead, The  Yorke made  Fraunce,  the death of the D. of . He is ordain'd the Regent to succeed In Fraunce for fiue yeeres: where, he trauayled With ready hand, and with as carefull heed, To seeke to turne backe Fortune (that now fled) And hold vp falling power, in time of need: And got and lost, and reattaines (againe) That which againe was lost, for all his paine. 56 His time expir'd, he should for fiue yeeres more Haue had his charge prolongd: but Sommerset Edmond, Duke of , a great enemie of the Duke of Yorke. (That still had enui'd his command before) That place, and honor, for himselfe did get: Which ads that matter to th'already store Of kindled hate, which such a fire doth set Vnto the touch of a confounding flame, As both their bloods could neuer quench the same. 57 And now the weakenesse of that feeble Head (That doth neglect all care, but his soules care) So easie meanes of practice ministred, Vnto th'ambitious members, to prepare Their owne desires, to what their humors led; That all good actions coldly followed are, And sev'rall-tending hopes do wholly bend To other now, then to the publique end.
58 And, to draw-on more speedy miserie, The King vnto a fatall match is led With Rayners daughter, King of Sicilie; This Ravner was Duke of , & onely inioyed the ti∣tle of the K. of . Whom, with vnlucky starres, he married: For, by the meanes of this affimtie, Was lost all that his father conquered; Euen as if France had some Erynnis sent T'auenge their wrongs, done by the insolent. 59 This marriage was the Earle of Suffolkes deed, William dels  E. of Suffolke, after created D. of Suff. the   in this mariage: which was , An. Reg. 23.  the King & the Lady , daughter to Rayner D. of ; to whom was deliuered vp the Duchy of Aniou, & the Conty of Maine,  the conclusion of this match. With great rewardes won to effect the same: Which made him that hee tooke so little heed Vnto his Countries good, or his owne shame; It beeing a match could stand vs in no steed For strength, for wealth, for reputation, fame: But cunningly contriv'd for others gaine; And cost vs more, then Aniou, Mauns, and Maine. 60 And yet (as if he had accomplished Some mightie benefit vnto the Land) He got his trauailes to be registred In Parlement, for euermore to stand A witnes to approue all what he did: To th'end, that, if hereafter it were scand, Authoritie might yet be on his side; As doing nought but what was ratifi'd: 61 Imagining, th'allowance of that Place Would make that good, the which he knew was naught; And so would his negotiation grace, As none might think it was his priuate fault. Wherein, though wit dealt wary in this case; Yet, in the end, it selfe it ouer-raught. Striuing to hide, he opened it the more; His after-care, shew'd craft had gone before.
62 Deare didst thou buy, ô King, so faire a Wife, So rare a spirit, so high a minde, the-while: Whose  was destruction; dowry, strise: Whose bed was sorrow; whose embracing, spoyle: Whose maintenance cost thee and thine, their life; And whose best comfort, neuer was but toyle. What Paris brought this booty of desire, To set our mightie Ilium here on fire? 63 I grieue, I should be forc't to say thus much, To blame her, whom I yet must wonder at; Whose so sweete beautie, wit, and worth, were such, As (though she Fortune lost) she glory gat: Yet doth my Countries zeale so neerely touch, That here my Muse it doth exasperate; Although vnwilling, that my pen should giue Staine to that sex, by whom her fame doth liue. 64 For, sure, those virtues well deserv'd a Crowne. And, had it not beene ours, no doubt she might Haue beene among the Worthies of renowne, And now sat faire with fame, with glorie bright: But, comming in the way where sinne was growne So foule and thicke, it was her chaunce to light Amidst the grosse infection of those times; And so came stain'd with black disgrace-full crimes. 65 For, some the world must haue, on whom to lay The heauie burthen of reproche and blame; Against whose deedes, th'afflicted may inuay, As th'onely Authors, whence destruction came: When yet, perhaps, 'twas not in them to stay The current of that streame, nor help the same; But, liuing in the eye of Action so, Not hindring it, are thought to draw-on wo.
66 So much vnhappie do the Mightie stand, Who stand on other then their owne defence, When-as destruction is so neere at hand, That if by weakenesse, folly, negligence, They do not coming miserie withstand, They shall be deemed th'authors of th'offence, And to call in, that which they kept not out; And curst, as they who brought those plagues about. 67 And so remaine for euer rigistred In that eternall booke of Infamie; When yet how many other causes led As well to that, as their iniquitie? The worst complots oft lie close smothered: And well-meant deedes fall out vnluckily; Whil'st the aggrieu'd stand not to waigh th'intent; But euer iudge according to th'euent. 68 I say not this t'excuse thy Sinne, ô Queene, The pride and hau∣tinesse of this Queene Margaret gaue the first origi nall to the  that so lowed by the death of Humsrey Duke of Gloster . Nor cleare their faults who mightie Actors are: I cannot but affirme, thy pride hath been A speciall meanes this Common-wealth to marre: And that thy weyward will was plainely seene, In vaine ambition, to presume too farre; And that, by thee, the onely way was wrought The Duke of Gloster to his death was brought: 69 A man, though seeming in thy thought to sit Betweene the light of thy desires and thee; Yet did his taking thence plainely permit Others to looke to that they could not see During his life, nor would aduenture it: When his Remoue quite made that passage free; That, by his fall, thinking to stand alone, Thou scarce could'st stand at all, when he was gone.
70 For, this Duke (as Protector) many yeeres, Had rul'd the Land, during the Kings young age; And now the selfe same charge and title beares, As if hee still were in his pupillage: Which, such disgrace vnto the Queene appeares, That (all incenst, with an ambitious rage) Shee doth conspire to haue him made-away; As one, that stayd the Current of her sway: 71 Thrust thereinto, not onely with her pride; But, by her fathers counsell and consent: Who griev'd likewise, that any one beside, Should haue the honor of the gouernment: And, therefore, he such deepe aduice appli'd, As forraine craft and cunning could inuent, To circumuent an vnsuspecting wight, Before he should discerne of their despight. 72 And many ready hands shee straight doth finde, To ayde her deed, of such as could not brooke The length of one mans office, in that kind; Who, all th'especiall Charges vnder-tooke, Rul'd all, himselfe: and neuer had the minde T'impart a part with others; who would looke To haue likewise some honor in their hands, And griev'd at such ingrossing of Commands. 73 For, had he not had such a greedy loue , quàm breuem  esse qua magna sit. To intertaine his Offices too long, Enuie had beene vnable to reproue His acted life, vnless shee did him wrong: But, hauing liv'd, so many yeeres, aboue, He grieues now to descend, to belesse strong, And kils that fame that virtue did beget; Chose to be held lesse good, then seene lesse great.
74 " For, could the mightie but giue bounds to pride, " And weigh backe Fortune, ere shee pull Them downe; " Contented with inough, with honors satisfi'd, " Not striuing how to make so much their owne, " As to leaue nothing for the rest beside, " Who seeme by their high-spreading ouer-growne " (Whil'st they themselues remaine in all mens sight, " The odious marke of hatred and despight) 75 " Then neuer should so many tragedies " Burthen our knowledge, with their bloody end: " Nor their disgrac't confounded families, " From so high pride, to solowe shame descend; " But, planted on that ground where safetie lyes, " Their braunches should to eternitie extend: " But euer, they, who ouer-looke so much, " Will ouer-see themselues; their state is such. 76 Seuere he was, and strictly did obserue The Virtues of Humsrey D. . Due forme of Iustice towards euery wight; Vnmoueable, and neuer won to swerue For any cause, in what he thought was right: Wherein, although he did so well deserue; In the licentious, yet, it bred despight: " So that euen Virtue seemes an Actor too, " To ruine those, Fortune prepares t'vndoo. 77 Now, such, being forward, who (the Queene well knewe) Hated his might, and glad to innouate; Vnto so great, and strong a partie grew, As it was easie to subuert his State: And onely hope of alteration drew Many to yeeld, that had no cause to hate. " For, euen with goodnesse men growe discontent, " Where States are ripe to fall, and virtue spent.
78 And, taking all the Rule into her hand (Vnder the shadow of that feeble King) The Duke sh'excludes from Office and Command, And in the reach of enmitie doth bring, From that respected height where he did stand (When malice scarce durst mutter any thing): And now the worst of him comes all reueal'd, Which former feare, or rigor kept conceal'd. 79 Now is he taxed, that he rather sought His priuate profit, then the publique good; And many things presumptuously had wrought; Other, then with our lawes, and customes stood: As one, that would into the Land haue brought The Ciuile forme, in cases touching blood; And such poore Crimes: that shew'd, their spight was soūd; But yet be wrayde, their matter wanted ground. 80 Yet serv'd they well the turne, and did effect That which is easie wrought in such a case: Where, what suborned Iustice shal obiect, Is to the purpose, and must passe with grace; And what the wretched bring, of no effect: Whose haynous faultes his matter must deface. " For, where Powre hath decreed to finde th'offence, " The Cause is better still, then the defence. 81 A Parlement, at Berry summoned, The D. of  comming to this Parlement from his Castle of the Viez  .   by  L.  high , the Dukes of Bucking∣ham and Somerset, with others;  he appointed certaine of the Kings  to attend vp∣on him: but he died  he was brought to his an swere, some say of sorrow, others of a , or an , An. , 25. The D. of Suffalke was a principall instrument in this businisse. Dispatcht the deed, more speedily then well. For, thither came the Duke without all dread, Or oughtimagining of what befell: Where, now the matter is so followed, That he conuented is,  he could tell He was in danger, or had done offence; And presently to prison sent, from thence.
82 Which quicke, and so daine action gaue not time For men to waigh the iustice of the deed; Whil'st looking onely on the vrged crime, Vnto the farther drist they take no heed. For, these occasions taken in the prime Of courses new, that old dislikes succeed, Leaue not behind that feeling touch of wrong. Satietie makes passions still lesse strong. 83 And yet they seem'd some mutinie to doubt, For thus proceeding with a man of might; Consid'ring hee was popular and stout, And resolute would stand vpon his Right: And therefore did they cast this way about, To haue him closely murdred out of sight; That so, his trouble, and his death hereby, Might come togither, and togither die: 84 Reckning it better, since his end is ment, And must be wrought, at once to rid it cleere, And put it to the fortune of th'euent; Then by long doing, to be long in feare: When, in such courses of high punishment, The deed, and the attempt, like daunger beare: And oft, things done (perhaps) do lesse annoy, Then may the doing, handled with delay. 85 And, so, they had it straight accomplished. For, next day after his commitment, he Is dead brought forth; being found so in his bed: Which was by sodaine sickenesse sayd to bee, That had vpon his sorrowes newly bred; As by apparant tokens men might see. And thus ô Sickenesse, thou art oft beli'd; When death hath many wayes to come, beside.
86 Are these the deedes, high forraine wittes inuent? Is this that Wisedome whereof they so boast? Well; then I would it neuer had beene spent Heere, amongst vs, nor brought from out their coast: Let their vile cunning, in their limits pent, Remaine amongst themselues, that like it most: And let the North (they count of colder blood) Be held more grosle, so it remaine more good. 87 Let them haue fairer citties, goodlier soyles, And sweeter fieldes, for beautie to the eye, So long as they haue these vn godly wyles, Such detestable vile impietie: And let vs want their Vines, their Fruites the-whyles, So that wee want not fayth and honestie: We care not for those pleasures; so we may Haue better hearts, and stronger hands then they. 88 Neptune, keepe-out, from thy imbraced Ile, This foul contagion of iniquitie: Drowne all corruptions, coming to defile Our faire proceedings ordred formally: Keepe vs meere English: let not craft be guile Honor and Iustice, with strange subtilties Let vs not thinke, how that our good can frame, Which ruin'd hath the Authors of the same. 89 But, by this impious meanes, that worthy man Is brought vnto this lamentable end. And, now, that Current with maine furie ran (The stop remov'd, that did the course defend) Vnto the full of mischiefe, that began T'a vniuersall ruine to extend; That Isthmus fayling, which the Land did keep, From the intire possession of the Deepe.
90 And now the King, alone, all open lay; No vnder prop of Blood, to stay him by. None, but h mselfe stands weakely in the way Twixt Yorke, and the affected sov': Gone is that barre, that would haue beene the stay T'haue kept him backe, from mounting vp so hie. " But see (ah!) see: What state stand these men in, " That cannot  without, nor with their kin? 91 The Queene hath yet, by this, her full desire; And now she with her Minion, Suffolke, raigns:  Pole   of , . Reg. 26 and is , and , the next year: after. Now she hath hath all authoritie intire; And all  vnto her selfe retains: And onely Suffolke is a luaunced , He is the man rewarded, for his pains; He, that did her in stead most chiefly stand; And more aduanc't her, then hee did the Land. 92 Which when they saw, who better did expect, Then they began their error to ; And well perceiue, that onely the defect Was in their iudgements, passion-drawne awry; Found, formall rigor fitter to direct, Then pride and insolent inconstancie. " Better seueritie, that's right and iust, " Then impotent affections, led with lust. 93 And thereupon, in sorrow thus complaine; " What wondrous inconuenience do they feele, " Where as such imbecillitie doth raigne, " As so neglects the care of Common-weale? " Where, euer one or other doth obtaine " So high a grace thus absolute to deale; " The-whilst th'aggreeued subiect suffers, stil, " The pride of some predominating will?
94 " And euer, one remov'd, a worse succeedes: " So that the best, that we can hope, is Warre, " Tumults, and stirres, that this  breedes: " The sword must , what Insolence doth . " For, what rebellions, and what bloody deedes, " Haue euer followed, where such courses are? " What oft-remoues? what death of Counsailers? " What murder? what exile of Officers? 95 " Witnesse the Spencers, Gauestone, and Uere, " The mighty Minions of our feeblest Kings; " Who euer Subiects to their subiects were, " And onely the procurers of these things: " When worthy Monarchs, that hold honour deare, " Maister themselues, and theirs; vvhich euer brings " That vniuersall reuerence, and respect. " For, who waighes him, that doth himselfe neglect? 96 " And yet our case is like to be farre worse; " Hauing a King, though not so bent to ill, " Yet so neglecting good, that giuing force " By giuing leaue, doth all good order kill; " Suffring a violent Woman take her course, " To manage all, according to her will: " Which, how she doth begin, her deedes expresse; " And, what will be the end, our selues may ghesse. 97 Which after followed, euen as they did dread, The Duchy of Nor∣mandy was lost, in the  1449.  it had been held 30  conque∣red by . . Ann. Reg. 27.  obiected  de la , Duke of . When now the shamefull losse of Fraunce, much grieues: Which vnto Suffolke is attributed; As who in all mens sight most hatefull liues: And is accus'd, that he (with lucre led). Betraies the State, and secret knowledge giues Of our designes; and, all that we did hold, By his corruption, is or lost, or sold.
98 And, as hee deales abroad, so likewise here, He robs at home, the Treasurie no lesse; Here, where he all authorities doth beare, And makes a Monopoly of Offices: He is inricht, His rais'd, and placed neare; At the Parlia∣mēt at Leicester, the lower House besought the K. that such persons as assented to the rendring of  and Maine, might bee duelie pumshed: of which fact, they accused as prin∣cipals, the D. of Sufsolke, the L. Say, Treasurer of Eng. with o∣thers. Where vp∣on, the K. to ap∣pease the Com∣mons, sequestred them from their offices & rooms; and aster, bani∣shed the D. for 5 yeeres. And onely he, giues counsaile to oppresse: Thus men obiect, whil'st many, vp in Armes, Offer to be reuenged of these harmes. 99 The Queene, perceiuing in what case she stoode To lose her Minion, or ingage her State; (After with long contention in her blood, Loue and Ambition, did the Cause debate) Shee yields to Pride: and rather thought it good, To sacrifice her Loue vnto their hate; Then to aduenture else the losse of all: Which (by maintaining him) was like to fall. 100 Yet, seeking at the first to temporize, Shee tries if that some short Imprisonment Would calme their heat: when that would not suffize, Then to exile him she must needs consent; Hoping, that time would salue it in such wise, As yet at length they might become content, And shee againe, might haue him home at last, When this first furie of their rage was past. 101 But, as he to his iudged exile went, Hard on the shore he comes incountered As the D. vvas  into France, hee was  with  of Warre,  to   of :  tooke   him back to : where his head was  off, and his body left on the sands. Ann. reg. 27. By some, that so farre off his Honour sent, As put his backe-returne quite out of dread: For, there he had his rightfull punishment, Though wrongly done; and there he lost his head: Part of his blood hath Neptune, part the Sand; As who had mischiefe wrought by sea and land.
102 Whose death, when swift-wingd Fame at full conuaid To this disturbed Queene, misdoubting nought; Despight, and Sorrow such affliction laid Vpon her soule, as wondrous passions wrought. " And art thou Suffolke, thus, said she, betraid? " And haue my fauours thy destruction brought? " Is this their gaine, whom Highnesse fauoureth, " Who chiefe preferd, stand as preferd to death? 103 " O fatall grace! without which, men complaine, " And with it perish; what preuailes that we " Must weare the Crowne, and other men must raigne, " And cannot stand to be, that which we be? " Must our owne Subiects limit and constraine " Our fauours, wher-as they themselues decree? " Must we, our loue, at their appointment, place? " Do we commaund, and they direct our grace 104 " Must they our powre, thus from our will, diuide? " And haue wee might, but must not vse our might? " Poore Maiestie, which other men must guide; " Whose discontent can neuer looke aright: " For, euer-more wee see those who abide " Graciousin ours, are odious in their sight, " Who would all-maistring Maiestie defeat " Of her best grace; that is, to make men Great. 105 " But, well; We see, although the King be Head, " The State will be the Heart. This Soueraigntie " Is but in place, not powre; and gouerned " By th'equall Scepter of Necessitie. " And we haue seene more Princes ruined, " By  imoderat fauouring priuatly, " Then by seuerity in generall. " For, best h'is lik't, that is alike to all.
106 Thus stormes this Lady, all disquieted; The Commons of Kent assembled thē selues in great nū∣ber: and had to their Captains lack Cade, who named himselfe Mortimer, Cosen to the Duke of :  purpose to redresse the aluses of the gouernement. When-as farre greater tumults now burst out: Which close and cunningly were practiced, By such, as sought great hopes to bring about. For, vp in Armes in Kent were gathered A mighty insolent rebellious rout, Vnder a dangerous Head; who, to deterr The State the more, himselfe nam'd Mortimer. 107 The Duke of Yorke, that did not idle stand (But seekes to worke on all aduantages) Had like wise in this course a secret hand, And hartned on their chiefest complices; To try how here the people of the Land Would (if occasion serv'd) b'in readiness To aide that Line, if one should come in deed To moue his Right, and in due course proceed; 108 Knowing himselfe to be the onely one, That must attempt the thing, if any should: And therefore, lets the Rebell now run-on With that false Name, t'effect the best he could; To make a way for him to worke vpon, Who but on certaine ground aduenture would. For, if the Traitor sped, the gaine were his; If not, yet he stands safe, and blamelesse is. 109 T'attempt' with others dangers, not his owne, He counts it wisedome, if it could be wrought: And t'haue the humour of the people knowne, Was now that, which was chiefely to be sought. For, with the best, he knew himselfe was growne In such account, as made him take no thought; Hauing observ'd, in those he meant to proue, Their wit, their wealth, their cariage, and their loue.
110 With whome, and with his owne alliances, He first begins to open (in some wise) The Right he had; yet, with such doubtfulnes, As rather sorrow, then his drift descries: Complayning of his Countries wretchednes, In what a miserable case it lies; And how much it imports them to prouide For their defence, against this womans pride. 111 Then, with the discontented he doth deale, In sounding theirs, not vttering his intent; As be'ing aduis'd, not so much to reueale, Whereby they might be made againe content: But, when they grieued for the Common-weale, He doth perswade them to be patient, And to indure; there was no other course: Yet, so perswades, as makes their malice worse. 112 And then, with such as with the time did run, In most vpright opinion he doth stand; As one, that neuer crost what they begun, But seem'd to like that which they tooke in hand: Seeking all causes of offence to shun, Prayses the Rule, and blames th'vnruly Land; Works so with gifts, and kindely offices, That, euen of them, he serues his turne no lesse. 113 Then, as for those, who were his followers (Being all choyce men for virtues, or desearts) He so with grace, and benefits prefers, That he becomes the Monarch of their hearts. He gets the learned, for his Counsaylers; And cherishes all men of rarest parts: " To whom, good done, doth an impressiō strike " Of ioy and loue, in all that are alike.
114 And now, by meanes of th'intermitted warre, Many most valiant men, impov'rished, Onely by him fed and relieued are; Onely respected, grac't, and honoured. Which let him in, vnto their hearts so farre, As they by him were wholly to be led. " He onely treads the sure and perfect path " To Greatnesse, who loue and opinion hath. 115 And, to haue one some certaine Prouince his, As the maine body that must worke the feate, Yorkeshire he chose, the place wherein he is By title, liuings, and possessions great. No Country hee preferres, so much as this: Here, hath his Bountie, her abiding seat: Here, is his Iustice, and relieuing hand, Ready to all, that in distresse do stand. 116 What with his tenants, , followers, friends, And their alliances, and amities, All that Shire vniuersally attends His hand, held vp to any enterprize. And thus farre, Virtue with her power extends: The rest, touching th'euent, in Fortune lies. With which accomplements, so mightie growne, Forward he tends, with hope t'attaine a Crowne. The ende of the fift Booke.
THE SIXT BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. The bad successe of Cades rebellion: Yorkes open practise and conspiracie: His comming in, and his submission: Th' effect of Printing and Artillerie. Burdeux reuolts; craues our protection: Talbot, defending ours, dyes gloriously. The French warres end: and Yorke begins againe; And, at S. Albones, Sommerset is slaine. 1 THE furious traine of that tumultuous rout, The Commons of Kent with their Leader lacke Cade  their many : amongst which,  the King was driuen to  onely on his Commons; & other men to  the Re  of the ;      Maiestic, and the great payments of  people, now late  to the King  Parlement. Also they desire, that the King would  all the false  and  of the late D. of  which be  , and them to punish, and to take about  person the  Lords of  royall bloud; to wit, the mightie Prince the D. of Yorke, late exiled by the traytrous motion of the false D  Suffolke, and  , &c. Whom close sub-ayding power, and good successe, Had made vnwisely proud, and fondly stout, Thrust headlong on, oppression to ; And now, to fulnesse growne, boldly giue out, That they the publique wrongs meant to redresse: " Formelesse themselues, reforming doc pretend; " As if Confusion could Disorder mend.
2 And on they march, with their false-named Head, Of base and vulgar birth, though noble fayn'd: Who,  with vaine desires, to London led His rash abused troupes, with shadowes train'd: When-as the King, thereof ascertained, Supposing some small power would haue restrain'd Disordred rage, sends with a simple crew Sir Humfrey Stafford; whom they ouer-threw. 3 Which so increast th' opinion of their might, That much it gaue to do, and much it wrought, Confirm'd their rage, drew on the vulgar wight, Call'd foorth the timorous, fresh partakers brought: For, many, though most glad their wrongs to right, Yet durst not venture their estates for nought: But, see'ing the Cause had such aduantage got, Occasion makes them stirre; that else would not. Also they  that they who con∣triued the death of the high and mighty Prince, Humfrey 'D of Glocester, might haue punishment. 4 So much he erres, that scornes, or else neglects The small beginnings of arysing broyles; And censures others, not his owne defects, And with a selfe-conceite himselfe beguiles; Thinking small force will compasse great effects, And spares at first to buy more costly toyles: " When true-obseruing prouidence, in warre, " Still makes her foes, farte stronger then they are. 5 Yet this good fortune, all their fortune mard; " Which, fooles by helping euer doth suppresse. For, wareless insolence (whil'st vndebard Of bounding awe) runnes on to such excesse, That following lust, and spoyle, and blood, so hard, Sees not how they procure their owne distresse: The better, lothing courses so impure, Rather will like their wounds, then such a cure.
6 For, whil'st this wilde vnrained multitude (Led with an vnfore-seeing greedy mind Of an imagin'd good, that did delude Their ignorance, in their desires made blind) Ransacke the Cittie, and (with hands imbru'd) Run to all out-rage in th'extreamest kind, Heaping-vp wrath and horrour, more and more, They adde fresh guilt, to mischiefes done before. 7 And yet, se'ing all this sorting to no end, But to their owne; no promis'd ayde t'appeare; No such partakers as they did attend; Nor such succesles as imagin'd were; Good men resolv'd, the present to defend; Iustice, against them with a brow seuete: Themselues, feard of themselues, tyr'd with excesse, " Found, mischiefe was no fit way to redresse. 8 And as they stand in desperat comberment, Enuirond round with horror, blood, and shame: Crost of their course, despayring of th'euent A pardon (that smooth bait for basenesse) came: Which (as a snare, to catch the impotent) Beeing once pronounc't, they straight imbrace the same: And, as huge snowy Mountaines melt with heat; So they dissolv'd with hope, and home they get: 9 Leauing their Captaine to discharge, alone, The shot of blood, consumed in their heate: Anno Too small a sacrifice, for mischiefs done, Reg. 29. Was one mans breath, which thousands did defeat. Vnrighteous Death, why art thou but all one Vnto the small offender and the great? Why art thou not more then thou art, to those That thousands spoyle, and thousands liues do lose?
10 This furie, passing with so quick an end, The D. os York, who at this time was in Ireland (sent thither to appease a Rebel∣lion: which hee effected in such sort, as got him & his linage ex∣ceeding loue and  with that people euer after) returning home, and pretending great iniuries to be offered him,  whiles hee was in the K. ser∣uice, & likewise vpon his landing in North-wales, combines himself  Ric. Neuile E. of Salis. secōd son to Ralph, E. of Westmerland (whose daughter hee had maried) & with Ri. Ne∣uile the son, E. of Warw. with o∣ther his especiall friēds; with whō he consults, for the reformation of the gouern∣ment, after hee had complained of the great dis∣orders therein: Laying the blame, for the losse of Normādy vpō the D. of Sommers. whom,  his retur∣ning thence, hee caused to be ar∣rested and com∣mitted. Disclos'd not those that on th'aduantage lay: Who, seeing the course to such disorder tend, With-drew their foote, asham'd to take that way; Or else preuented, whil'st they did attend Some mightier force, or for occasion stay: But, what they meant, ill-fortune must not tell; Mischiefe be'ing oft made good, by speeding well. 11 Put-by from this, the Duke of Yorke dessignes Another course to bring his hopes about: And, with those friends affinitie combines In surest bonds, his thoughts he poureth-out: And closely feeles, and closely vndermines The faith of whom he had both hope and doubt; Meaning, in more apparant open course, To try his right, his fortune, and his force. 12 Loue, and alliance, had most firmly ioynd Vnto his part, that mighty Familie, The faire distended stock of Neuiles kind; Great by their many issued progenie: But greater by their worth (that clearely shin'd, And gaue faire light to their nobilitie) So that each corner of the Land became Enricht with some great Worthy, of that name. 13 But greatest in renowne doth Warwicke sit; That braue King-maker Warwicke; so farre growne, In grace with Fortune, that he gouerns it, And Monarchs makes; and, made, againe puts downe. What reuolutions, his first-mouing wit Heere brought about, are more then too well knowne; The fatall kindle-fire of those hot daies: Whose worth I may, whose worke I cannot praise.
14 With him, with Richard, Earle of Salisbury, Courtny and Brooke, and other his deare friends; He intimates his minde; and openly The present bad proceedings discommends; Laments the State, the peoples misery, And (that which such a pitier seldom mends) Oppression, that sharp two-edged sword, That others wounds, and wounds likewise his Lord. 15 " My Lord; (saith he) how things are caried heere, " In this corrupted State, you plainely see; " What burthen our abused shoulders beare, " Charg'd with the waight of imbecillitie: " And in what base account all we appeare, " That stand without their grace that all must be; " And who they be, and how their course succeedes, " Our shame reports, and time bewraies their deedes. 16 " Aniou and Maine (the maime that foule appeares; " Th'eternall scarre of our dismembred Land) " Guien, all lost; that did, three hundred yeares, " Remaine subiected vnder our Commaund. " From whence, mee thinks, there sounds vnto our eares " The voice of those deare ghosts, whose liuing hand " Got it with sweat, and kept it with their blood, " To doe vs (thankless vs) their of-spring good: 17 " And seeme to cry; What? can you thus behold " Their hatefull feete vpon our Graues should tread? " Your Fathers Graues; who gloriously did hold " That, which your shame hath left recouered? " Redeeme our Tumbs, O spirits too too cold: " Pull-backe these Towres, our Armes haue honored. " These Towres are yours: these Forts we built for you: " These walles doe beare our names; and are your due.
18 " Thus, well they may vpbraid our retchlesnes; " Whil'st wee, as if at league with infamie, " Ryot away, for nought, whole Prouinces; " Giue-vp, as nothing worth, all Normandie; " Traffique important Holdes, sell Fortresses " So long, that nought is left but misery, " Poore Calais, and these water-walles about, " That basely pownd vs in, from breaking out. 19 " And (which is worse) I feare, we shall in th'end " (Throwne from the glory of inuading Warre) " Before't our proper limits to defend; " Where, euer, men are not the same they are: " The hope of conquest, doth their spirits extend " Beyond the vsuall powres of valour, farre. " For, more is he that ventureth for more, " Then who fights, but for what hee had before. 20 " Put-to your hands, therefore, to reskew now " Th'indangered State (deare Lords) from this disgrace: " And let vs in our honour, labour how " To bring this scorned Land in better case. " No doubt, but God our action will allow, " That knowes my right, and how they rule the place, " Whose weakeness calls-vp our vnwillingnesse; " As opening euen the doore to our redresle. 21 " Though I protest, it is not for a Crowne " My soule is moov'd (yet, if it be my right, " I haue no reason to refuse mine owne) " But onely these indignities to . " And what if God (whose iudgements are vnknowne) " Hath me ordain'd the man, that by my might "  Country shall be blest? If so it be; " By helping me, you raise your selues with me.
22 Those, in whom, zeale and amity had bred The D. of Yorke  an Army in the marches of Wales, vnder pretext to re∣moue diuers  sellers about the King, and to re∣uenge the mani∣fest iniuries don to the Common∣wealth: & with∣al,  publisheth a declaratiō of his loyalty, and the wrongs done him by his aduersa∣ries; offering to take his oath vpō the blessed Sa∣crament, to haue been euer true liege-man to the K. and so euer to continue. Which declaration, was written from his Castle of Lud∣low, the 9 of . An. reg. 30. A fore-impression of the right he had, These stirring words so much incouraged, That (with desire of innouation mad) They seem'd to runne-afore, not to be led; And to his fire doe quicker fuell adde: For, where such humors are prepar'd before; The opening them, makes them abound the more. 23 Then counsell take they, fitting their desire: (For, nought that fits not their desire is waigh'd) The Duke is straight aduised to retire Into the bounds of Wales, to leauie ayd: Which vnder smooth pretence he doth require; T'amoue such persons as the State betray'd, And to  th'oppression of the Land; The charme, which Weakenesse seldome doth with stand. 24 Ten thousand, straight caught with this bait of breath, Are towards greater lookt-for forces led: Whose power, the King, by all meanes, trauaileth In their arising to haue ruined: But, their preuenting Head so compasseth, That all ambushments  are fled; Refusing ought to hazard by the way, The 16 of Febru. the K. vvith the D. of Sōmerset, & other LL set forward towards the Marches: but the D. of Yorke, took other waies, and made vp to∣wards . Keeping his Greatnesse for a greater day. 25 And to the Citte straight directs his course; The Cittie, seate of Kings, and Kings chiefe grace: Where, hauing found his entertainement worse By farre, then he expected in that place; Much disappointed, drawes from thence his force, And towards better trust, marcheth apace; And downe in Kent (fatall for discontents) Neere to thy bankes, faire Thames, doth pitch his tents.
26 And there, intrencht, plants his Artillerie; Artillerie, th'infernall instrument, The vse of Guns, and great Ordi∣nance, began a∣bout this time, or not long before. New-brought from hell, to scourge mortalitie With hideous roaring, and astonishment: Engine of horrour, fram'd to And teare the Earth, and strongest Towres to rent: Torment of Thunder, made to mocke the skies; As more of power, in our calamities. 27 If that first fire (subtile Prometheus brought) Stolne out of heauen, did so afflict man-kinde, That euer since, plagu'd with a curious thought Of stirring search, could neuer quiet finde; What hath he done, who now by stealth hath got Lightning and thunder both, in wondrous kinde? What plague deserues so proud an enterprize? Tell Muse, and how it came, and in what wise. 28 It was the time, when faire Europa sate This principall part of Europe, which contained the    of Chri∣stendom, was at this time in the hands of many seuerall , and Common∣wealths, which   the : for, be∣ing so many, and none ouer-great, they were  attemptiue to di∣sturbe , & more  to keepe their owne, with a mutuall correspondēce of amitie. As Ita∣ly had thē many more principali∣ties & Common∣wealths then it hath:  was diuided in∣to many king∣doms, France consisted of di∣uers free Prin∣ces: Both the  of many more Go∣uernments. With many goodly Diadems addrest; And all her parts in florishing estate Lay beautiful, in order, at their rest: No swelling member, vnproportionate, Growne out of forme, sought to disturbe the rest: The lesse, subsisting by the greaters might; The greater, by the lesser kept vpright. 29 No noise of tumult euer wak't them all: Onely, perhaps, some priuate iarre within, For titles, or for confines, might befall; Which, ended soone, made better loue begin: But no eruption did, in generall, Breake downe their rest, with vniuersall sin: No publique shock disioynted this faire frame, Till Nemesis from out the Orient came;
30 Fierce Nemesis, mother of fate and change, Sword-bearer of th'eternall Prouidence (That had so long, with such afflictions strange, Confounded Asias proud magnificence, And brought foule impious Barbarisme to range On all the glory of her excellence) Turnes her  looke at last vnto the West; As griev'd to see on earth such happy rest. 31 And for Pandora calleth presently (Pandora, Ioues faire gift, that first deceiv'd Poore  imbecillitie, That thought he had a wondrous boone receiv'd; By meanes whereof, curious Mortalitie Was of all former quiet quite bereav'd): To whom, beeing come, deckt with all qualities, The wrathfull Goddesse breakes out in this wise; 32 Doost thou not see in what secure estate Those florishing faire Westerne parts remaine? As if they had made couenaunt with Fate, To be exempted free from others paine; At-one with their desires, friends with Debate, In peace with Pride, content with their owne gaine, Their bounds containe their minds, their minds appli'd To haue their bounds with plentie beautifi'd. 33 Deuotion (mother of Obedience) Beares such a hand on their credulitie, That it abates the spirit of eminence, And busies them with humble pietie. For, see what workes, what infinite expence, What monuments of zeale they edifie; As if they would, so that no stop were found, Fill all with Temples, make all holy ground.
34 But wee must coole this all- zeale, That hath enioy'd so faire a turne so long; And other reuolutions must reueale, Other desires, other designes among: of this, first by degrees shall steale Vpon the soules of men, perswaded wrong: The Church. And that abused Power, which thus hath wrought, Shall giue herselfe the sword to cut her throat. 35 Goe therefore thou, with all thy stirring traine Of swelling Sciences, the gifts of griefe: Go loose the links of that soule-binding chaine; Inlarge this vninquisitiue Beliefe: Call-vp mens spirits, that simplenes retaine: Enter their harts, & Knowledge make the thiefe To open all the doores, to let in light; That all may all things see, but what is right. 36 Opinion Arme against Opinion growne: Make new-borne Contradiction still to rise; As if Thebes-founder, Cadmus, tongues had sowne, Instead of teeth, for greater mutinies. Bring new-defended Faith, against Faith knowne: Weary the Soule with contrarieties; Till all Religion become retrograde, And that faire tire, the maske of sinne be made. 37 And, better to effect a speedy end, Let there be found two fatall Instruments, The one to publish, th'other to defend Impious Contention, and proud Discontents: Make, that instamped Characters may send Abroad, to thousands, thousand mens intent; And in a moment may dispatch much more, Then could a world of Pennes performe before.
38 Whereby, all quarrels, titles, secrecies, May vnto all be presently made knowne; Factions prepar'd, parties allur'd to rise, Sedition vnder faire pretentions sowne: Whereby, the vulgar may become so wise, That (with a self-presumption ouer-growne) They may of deepest mysteries debate, Controule their betters, censure actes of State. 39 And then, when this dispersed mischiefe shall Haue brought confusion in each mysterie, Call'd-vp contempt of states in generall, Ripened the humor of impiety; Then haue they th'other Engin, where-with-all They may torment their selfe-wrought miserie, And scourge each other, in so strange a wise, As time or Tyrants neuer could deuise. 40 For, by this stratagem, they shall confound All th'antient forme and discipline of Warre: Alter their Camps, alter their fights, their ground, Daunt mightie spirits, prowesse and manhood marre: For, basest cowardes from a far shall wound The most couragious, forc't to fight afarre; Valour, wrapt vp in smoake (as in the night) Shall perish without witnesse, without sight. 41 But first, before this generall disease Breake foorth into so great extreamitie, Prepare it by degrees; first kill this ease, The many States of Christendom reduced to a few. Spoyle this proportion, marre this harmonie: Make greater States vpon the lesser seaze: Ioyne many kingdomes to one soueraigntie: Rayse a few Great, that may (with greater power) Slaughter each other, and mankinde deuour.
42 And first begin, with factions to diuide The fairest Land; that from her thrusts the rest, As if she car'd not for the world beside; A world within her selfe, with wonders blest: Raise such a strife as time shall not decide, Till the deare blood of most of all her best Be poured foorth; and all her people tost With vnkinde tumults, and almost all lost. 43 Let her be made the sable Stage, whereon Shall first be acted bloodie Tragedies; That all the neighbour States, gazing thereon, May make their profite, by her miseries: And those, whom she before had marcht vpon, (Hauing, by this, both time and meane to rise) Made martiall by her Armes, shall growe so great, As (saue their owne) no force shall them defeat: 44 That when their power, vnable to sustaine And beare it selfe, vpon it selfe shall fall, She may (recouered of her wounds againe) Sit and behold their Parts as tragicall: For, there must come a time, that shall obtaine Truce for ; when make-peace Hymen shall Bring the conioyned aduerse powers to bed, And set the Crowne (made one) vpon one head. 45 Out of which blessed vnion, shall arise A sacred branch (with grace and glory blest) Whose Virtue shall her Land so patronize, As all our power shall not her dayes molest: For, snee ( shee) the Minion of the skies, Shall purchase (of the high st) to hers such rest ( betweene the wrath of heauen and them) As no  shall touch her Diadem:
46 And, from the Rockes of Safetie, shall descrie The wondrous wracks, that Wrath layes ruined; All round about her, blood and miserie, Powres betray'd, Princes slaine, Kings massacred, States all-confus'd, brought to calamitie, And all the face of Kingdomes altered: Yet, she the same inuiolable stands, Deare to her owne, wonder to other Lands. 47 But, let not her defence discourage thee. For, neuer one, but shee, shall haue this grace, From all disturbs to be so long kept free, And with such glorie to discharge that place. And therefore,  by such a Power thou bee Stopt of thy course, reckon it no disgrace; Sith shee alone (being priuiledg'd from hie) Hath this large Patent of her dignitie. 48 This charge the Goddesle gaue: when, ready straight The subtill messenger, accompayned With all hercrew of Artes that on her wait, Hastes to effect what she was counsailed: And out she pours, of her immense conceit, Vpon such searching spirits as trauayled In penetrating hidden secrecies; Who soone these meanes of miserie deuise. 49 And boldly breaking with rebellious minde Into their mothers close-lockt Treasurie, They Mineralls combustible do finde, Which in  concaues placed cunningly They fire: and fire, imprisoned against kinde, Teares out a way, thrusts out his enemie; Barking with such a horror, as if wroth With man, that wrongs himselfe, and Nature both.
50 And this beginning had this cursed frame, The D. of Yorke being not admitted into the , passed  King  Bridge, and so into , an en Brent heath  .   . The K. makes after, and  vpon Blacke heath: from whence be  the 'B. B. of  and Ely  the E E. of  & War∣wike to mediat a peace. Which Yorke now planted hath against his King; Presuming, by his powre, and by the same, His purpose vnto good effect to bring; When diuers of the grauest Councell came, Sent from the King, to vnderstand what thing Had thrust him into these proceedings bad, And what he sought, and what intent he had. 51 Who, with words mildly-sharpe, gently-seuere, Wrought on those wounds that must be toucht with heed; Applying rather salues of hope, then feare, Least corrasiues should desperat mischiefes breed. And, what my Lord (sayd they) should moue you here, In this vnseemely manner to proceed? Whose worth being such, as all the Land admires, Hath fairer wayes then these, to your desires. 52 Wil you, whose means, whose many friends, whose grace, Can worke the world in peace vnto your will, Take such a course, as shal your Blood deface, And make (by handling bad) a good Cause, ill? How many hearts hazard you in this case, That in all quiet plots would ayde you still? Hauing in Court a Partie farre more strong, Then you conceiue, prest to redresse your wrong. 53 Phy, phy! forsake this hatefull course, my Lord: Downe with these Armes; that will but wound your Cause. What Peace may do, hazard not with the Sword: Lay downe the force that from your force with-drawes; And yeeld: and we will mediate such accord As shal dispense with rigor and the lawes; And interpose this solemne fayth of our Betwixt your fault, and the offended Power.
54 Which ingins of protests, and proffers kinde, And  the   not to   expec∣tation,  the kings    then his, he   to con∣ditions of .  D.   of the  of   from Iohn of Gante,  the  man      qua. . Vrg'd out of seeming griefe and shewes of loue, So shooke the whole foundation of his Minde, As they did all his resolution moue: And present seem'd vnto their course inclin'd, So that the King would Sommerset remoue; The man,  most intolerable pride Trode downe his worth, and all good mens beside. 55 Which, they there vow'd, should presently be done: For, what will not peace-louers willing graunt, Where dangerous euents depend thereon, And men vnfurnisht, and the State in want? And if with words the conquest will be won, The   small: and who holds breath so scant As then to spare, though with indignitie? " Better descend, then end, in Maiestie. 56 And here-upon the Duke  his force, Submits him to the King, on publique vow: The rather too, presuming on this course, For that his sonne, the Earle of March, was now With mightier powers abroad: which would inforce His peace; which else the King would not allow. For, seeing not all of him, in him, he hath, His death would but giue life to greater wrath. 57 Yet, comming to the King, in former place (His ) the Duke of Sommerset he findes: Whom openly, reproching to his face, Hee charg'd with treason in the highest kindes. The Duke returnes like speeches of disgrace; And fierie wordes bewray'd their flaming mindes: But yet the triall was for them deferd, Till  time allow'd it to be heard.
58 At Westminster, a Counsell, sommoned, Deliberates what course the Cause should end Of th'apprehended Duke of Yorke; whose head Doth now on others doubtfull breath depend. Law fiercely vrg'd his act, and found him dead: Friends fayl'd to speake, where they could not defend: Onely the King himselfe for mercy stood; As, prodigall of life, niggard of blood. 59 " And, as if angrie with the Lawes of death, " Ah! why should you, sayd hee, vrge things so far? " You, that inur'd with mercenarie breath, " And hyred tongue, so peremptorie are; " Brauing on him whom sorrow prostrateth: " As if you did with poore Affliction warre, " And prey on frayltie, folly hath betray'd; " Bringing the lawes to wound,  to ayd. 60 " Dispense sometime with sterne seueritie: " Make not the Lawes still traps to apprehend: " Win grace vpon the bad, with clemencie. " Mercie may mend; whom malice made offend. " Death giues no thankes; but checkes authoritie: " And life doth onely Maiestie commend. " Reuenge dies not; Rigor begets new wrath: " And blood hath neuer glorie; Mercy hath. 61 " And for my part (and my part should be chiefe) " I am most willing to restore his state: " And rather had I win him with reliefe, " Then lose him with despight, and get more hate. " Pittie drawes loue: blood-shed is natures griefe; " Compassion followes the vnfortunate: " And, losing him, in him I lose my power. " We rule who liue: the dead are none of our.
62 " And should our rigor lessen then the same, " Which we with greater glorie should retaine? " No; let him liue: his life must giue vs fame; " The childe of mercie newly borne againe. " As often burials are Physicians shame; " So, many deaths argue a Kings hard Raigne. " Why should we say, The Law must haue her vigor? " The Law kills him; but quits not vs of rigor. 63 " You, to get more preferment by your wit, " Others to gaine the spoyles of miserie, " Labour with all your powre to follow it; " Shewing vs feares, to draw-on crueltie. " You vrge th'offence, not tell vs what is fit; " Abusing wrong-informed Maiestie: " As if our powre, were onely but to slay; " And that to saue, were a most dangerous way. 64 Thus, out of Pittie, spake that holy King: Whom milde affections led to hope the best; When Sommerset began to vrge the thing With words of hotter temper, thus exprest: " Deare soueraigne Lord, the Cause in managing " Is more then yours; t'imports the publique rest: " We all haue part; it toucheth all our good: " And life's ill spar'd, that's spar'd to cost more blood. 65 " Compassion, here, is crueltie my Lord; " Pittie will cut our throates, for sauing so. " What benefite enioy we by the sword, " If mischiefe shall escape to draw-on mo? " Why should we giue, what Law cannot afford, " To be accessaries to our proper wo? " Wisedome must iudge, 'twixt men apt to amend, " And mindes incurable, borne to offend.
66 " It is no priuat Cause (I do protest) " That moues me thus to prosecute his deede. " Would God his blood, and mine, had well releast " The dangers, that his pride is like to breed. " Although, at me, hee seemes to haue addrest " His spight; 'tis not the end hee hath decreed. " I am not he alone, hee doth pursue: " But, thorow me, he meanes to shoot at you. 67 " For, thus, these great Reformers of a State " (Aspiring to attaine the Gouernment) " Still take aduantage of the peoples hate, " Who euer hate such as are eminent. " (For, who can great affaires negotiat, " And all a way ward multitude content?) " And then these people-minions, they must fall " To worke-out vs, to work themselues int'all. 68 " But note, my Lord, first, who is in your hand; " Then, how he hath offended, what's his end: " It is the man, whose Race would seeme to stand " Before your Right, and doth a Right pretend: " Who (Traitor-like) hath rais'd a mightie Band, " With colour, your proceedings to amend. " Which if it should haue hapned to succeed, " You had not now sate to adiudge his deed. 69 " If oftentimes the person, not th'offence, " Haue beene sufficient cause of death to some, " Where publique safety puts in euidence " Of mischiefe, likely by their life to come; " Shall hee, whose fortune, and his insolence, " Haue both deserv'd to die, escape that doome; " When you shall saue your Land, your Crowne thereby; " And since You cannot liue, vnlesse He die?
70 Thus spaketh' aggrieued Duke, that grauely saw Th'incompatible powers of Princes mindes; And what affliction his escape might draw Vnto the State, and people of all kindes: And yet the humble yeelding, and the aw, Which Yorke there shew'd, so good opinion findes, That (with the rumor of his Sonnes great strength, The D. was suffred to go to his Castle at Wigmore. And French affaires) he there came quit at length. 71 For, euen the feare t'exasperat the heat Of th'Earle of March, whose forward youth and might Well follow'd, seem'd a proud reuenge to threat, If any shame should on his Father light: And then desire in Gascoyne to reget The glorie lost, which home-broyles hinder might, Aduantaged the Duke, and sav'd his head; Which, questionlesse, had else beene hazarded. 72 For, now had Burdeux offered (vpon ayd) The Cittie of Bur∣deux send their Ambassadors os∣sring to reuols from the French part if ayd might be sent vnto them: where∣upon, Iohn L.  . of  was imployed with a powre of 3000 men, and surprised the  of . Present reuolt, if we would send with speed. Which faire aduantage to haue then delay'd, Vpon such hopes, had beene a shamefull deed. And therefore this, all other courses stayd, And out wardly these in ward hates agreed; Giuing an interpause to pride and spight: Which breath'd, but to breake-out with greater might. 73 Whil'st dreadfull Talbot, terror late of Fraunce, (Against the Genius of our Fortune) stroue, The downe-throwne glorie of our State t'aduance; Where, Fraunce far more then Fraunce he now doth proue: For, friends, opinion, and succeeding chaunce (Which wrought the weake to yeeld, the strong to loue) Were not the same, that he had found before In happier times; when, lesse would haue done more.
74 For, both the Britaine, and Burgonian now, The Dukes of  and   great meanes   for the conquering of France. Came altred with our lucke, and won with theirs (Those bridges, and the gates, that did allow So easie passage vnto our affaires) Iudging it safer to endeuour how To link with strength, then leane vnto despaires. " And, who wants friends, to backe what he begins, " In Lands far off, gets not, although he wins. 75 Which too well prov'd this fatall enterprize, The last, that lost vs all wee had to lose, Where, though aduantag'd by some mutinies, Aud pettie Lords, that in our Cause arose: Yet those great fayl'd; whose ready quick supplies, Euer at hand, cheer'd vs, and quail'd our foes. Succours, from far, come seldome to our minde. " For, who holds league with Neptune, and the winde? 76 Yet, worthy Talbot, thou didst so imploy The . of Shrews.  accompayned    Sir  I albot, L.  by the right of  , with the L L. Mohn, , and Came∣is, Sir   Sir Iohn  & , recouered  townes in Gaseony: amongst other, the towne, and Castle of Chastillon in  which the French looue after besieged. The broken remnants of disscattered power, That they might see it was our destiny, Not want of spirit, that lost vs what was our: Thy dying hand sold them the victorie With so deare wounds, as made the conquest sowre: So much it cost to spoyle who were vndon; And such adoe to win, when they had won. 77 For, as a fierce courageous Mastiue fares; That, hauing once sure fast'ned on his foe, Lyes tugging on that hold, neuer forbeares, What force soeuer force him to for go: The more he feeles his woundes, the more he dares; As if his death were sweet, in dying so: So held his hold this Lord, whil'st he held breath; And scarce, but with much blood, lets goe in death.
78 For, though he saw prepar'd, against his side, Both vnlike fortune, and vnequall force, Borne with the swelling current of their pride Downe the maine streame of a most happy course: Yet standes he stiffe, vndasht, vnterrifi'd; His minde the same, although his fortune worse: Virtue in greatest dangers being best showne; And though opprest, yet neuer ouer-throwne. 79 For, rescuing of besieg'd Chatillion (Where hauing first constraind the French to fly, And following hard on their confusion) Comes (lo) incountred with a strong supply Of fresh-arriuing powers, that backe thrust-on Those flying troupes, another chaunce to trie: Who, double arm'd, with shame, and fury, straine To wreake their foyle, and win their fame againe. 80 Which seeing, th'vndaunted Talbot (with more might Of spirit to will, then hands of power to do) Preparing t'entertaine a glorious fight, Cheeres-vp his wearied Souldiers thereunto. " Courage, sayth hee: those brauing troupes, in sight, " Are but the same, that now you did vndo. " And what if there be come some more then they? " They come to bring more glory to the day. 81 " Which day, must either thrust vs out of all; " Or all, with greater glorie, backe restore. " This day, your valiant worth aduenture shall, " For what our Land shall neuer fight for, more. " If now we faile, with vs is like to fall " All that renowne which we haue got before. " This is the last: if we discharge the same, " The same shall last to our eternall fame.
82 " Neuer had worthy men, for any fact, " A more faire glorious Theater, then we; " Whereon true Magnanimicie might act " Braue deedes, which better witnessed could be. " For, lo, from  Turrets, yet vnsackt, " Your valiant fellowes stand, your worth to see, " T'auouch your valour, if you liue to gaine; " And if we die, that we  not in vaine. 83 " And euen our foes (whose proud and powreful might " Would seeme to swallow vp our dignitie) " Shall not keep-backe the glory of our right; " Which their confounded blood shall testifie: " For, in their wounds, our goarie swords shall write " The monumentes of our eternitie: " For, vile is honor, and a title vaine, " The which, true worth and danger do not gaine. 84 " For, they shall see, when we (in carelesse sort) " Shall throwe our selues on their despised speares. " Tis not despaire, that doth vs so transport: " But euen true Fortitude, that nothing feares; " Sith we may well retire vs, in some sort: " But, shame on him that such a foul thought beares. " For, be they more, let Fortune take their part, " Wee'll tugge her too, and scratch her, ere we part. 85 This sayd; a fresh infus'd desire of fame Enters their warmed blood, with such a will, That they deem'd long, they were not at the game; And, though they  apace, thought they stood still, And that their lingring foes too slowely came To ioyne with them, spending much time but ill: Such force had wordes, fierce humors vp to call, Sent from the mouth of such a Generall.
86 Who yet, his forces weighing (with their fire) The Lord Lisle was aduised by his fa∣ther to retire him  of the . Turnes him about, in priuate, to his Sonne (A worthy Sonne, and worthy such a Sire) And telleth him, what ground hee stood vpon, Aduising him in secret to retire; Considering how his youth, but now begun, Would make it vnto him, at all, no staine: His death small fame, his flight no shame could gaine. 87 To whom, th'aggrieued Sonne (as if disgrac't) " Ah Father, haue you then selected me " To be the man, whom you would haue displac't " Out of the roule of Immortalitie? " What haue I done this day, that hath defac't " My worth, that my hands worke despis'd should be? " God shield, I should beare home a Cowards name. " He long enough hath liv'd, who dyes with fame. 88 At which, the Father, toucht with sorrowing-ioy, Turnd him about (shaking his head) and sayes; " O my deare Sonne, worthy a better day, " To enter thy first youth, in hard assayes. And now had Wrath, impatient  delay, Begun the fight, and farther speeches stayes: Furie thrustes on; striuing, whose sword should be First warmed, in the wounds of th'enemie. 89 Hotly these small, but mightie-minded, Bands. (As if ambitious now of death) doe straine Against innumerable armed hands, And gloriously a wondrous fight maintaine; Rushing on all what-euer strength withstands, Whetting their wrath on blood, and on disdaine; And so far thrust, that hard 'twere to descry Whether they more desire to kill, or dye.
90 Frank of their owne, greedy of others blood, No stroke they giue, but wounds; no wound, but kills: Neere to their hate, close to their work they stood, Hit where they would, their hand obeyes their wills; Scorning the blowe from far, that doth no good, Loathing the cracke, vnlesse some blood it spils: No wounds could let-out life that wrath held in, Till others wounds, reueng'd, did first begin. 91 So much, true resolution wrought in those Who had made couenant with death before, That their smal number (scorning so great foes) Made Fraunce most happie, that there were no more; And Fortune doubt to whom she might dispose That weary day; or vnto whom restore The glory of a Conquest dearely bought, Which scarce the Conqueror could thinke well got. 92 For, as with equall rage, and equall might, Two aduerse windes combat, with billowes proud, And neither yeeld; Seas, skies maintaine like fight, Waue against waue oppos'd, and clowd to clowd: So warre both sides, with obstinate despight, With like reuenge, and neither partie bow'd; Fronting each other with confounding blowes, No wound, one sword, vnto the other owes: 93 Whil'st Talbot (whose fresh ardor hauing got A meruailous aduantage of his yeares) Carries his vnfelt age, as if forgot, Whirling about, where any need appeares: His hand, his eye, his wits all present, wrought The function of the glorious Part he beares: Now vrging here, now cheering there, he flyes, Vnlockes the thickest troups, where most force lyes.
94 In midst of wrath, of wounds, of blood, and death, There is he most, where as he may do best: And there the closest ranks hee seuereth, Driues-back the stoutest powres, that forward prest: There makes his sword his way: there laboreth Th'infatigable hand that neuer ceast; Scorning, vnto his mortall wounds to yeeld; Till Death became best maister of the Field. 95 Then like a sturdy Oke, that hauing long, The death of Iohn L. Talbot E. of Shrewesburie; who had serued in the  of  most  for the space of 30. yeeres. Against the warres of fiercest windes, made head, When (withsome forc't tempestuous rage, more strong) His down-borne top comes ouer-maistered, All the neere bordering Trees (hee stood among) Crusht with his waightie fall, lie ruined: So lay his spoyles, all round about him slaine, T'adorne his death, that could not die in vaine. 96 On th'other part, his most all-daring  The death of the  , Sonne to  worthy  Shrewesburie. (Although the inexperience of his yeares Made him lesse skild in what was to be done; And yet did carrie him beyond all feares) Into the maine Battalion, thrusting on Neere to the King, amidst the chiefest Peeres, With thousand wounds, became at length opprest; As if he scorn'd to die, but with the best. 97 Who thus both, hauing gaind a glorious end, Soone ended that great day; that set so red, As all the purple Plaines, that wide extend, A sad tempestuous season witnessed. So much adoe had toyling Fraunce to rend, From vs, the right so long inherited: And so hard went we from what we posseft, As with it went the blood wee loued best.
98 Which blood, not lost, but fast lay'd vp with heed In euerlasting fame, is there held deere, 1453. . 32.  was the  of Aquitaine lost; which      the Crow of England, by the space almost of 300 yeares. The  whereof came  the  of K Hen. 2. with , daughter to  D. of . To seale the memorie of this dayes deed; Th'eternall euidence of what we were: To which, our Fathers, wee, and who succeed, Doe owe a sigh, for that it toucht vs neere: Nor must we sinne so much, as to neglect The holy thought of such a deare respect. 99 Yet happy-hapless day, blest ill-lost breath, Both for our better fortune, and your ownel In this , are 4. , 24. , 50. , 202. Baro∣nies, and aboue a 1000. , and . For, what foul wounds, what spoyl, what shamefull death, Had by this forward resolution growne, If at S. Albons, Wakefield, -heath, It should vnto your infamie beene showne? Blest you, that did not teach how great a fault Euen Virtue is, in actions that are naught. 100 Yet, would this sad dayes losse had now beene all, That this day lost: then should we not much plaine, If hereby we had com'n but there to fall; And that day, ended, ended had our paine: Then small the losse of Fraunce, of Guien small; Nothing the shame to be turn'd home againe, Compard with other shames. But now, Fraunce, lost, Sheds vs more blood, then all her winning cost. 101 For, losing warre abroad, at home lost peace; Be'ing with our vnsupporting selues close pent; And no dessignes for pride (that did increase) But our owne throats; and our owne punishment; The working spirit ceast not, though worke did cease, Hauing fit time to practise discontent, And stirre vp such as could not long lie still: " Who, not imploy'd to good, must needes do ill.
102 And now this griefe of our receiued shame, Gaue fit occasion, for ambitious care, To draw the chiefe reproche of all the same On such as obuious vnto hatred are, Th'especiall men of State: who, all the blame Of whatsoeuer Fortune doth, must beare. For, still, in vulgar eares delight it breeds, Yorke procures the hatred of the people, against the Duke of : and so wrought (in a time of the Kings sicknes) that hee caused him to be arrested in the Qu. great Chā∣ber, and sent to the Towre of Lō don; accusing him to haue been the occasiō of the losse of France: but the K. being recouered, he was againe  at li∣berty, Ann. reg. 32. The D. of Yorke,  his accusa∣tions not to  against the D. of Som. re∣solues to  his purpose by o∣pen war: and so being in Wales, accōpanied  his special , assēbled an Ar∣mie, & marched towards Londō. To haue the hated, authors of misdeeds. 103 And therefore, easily, great Sommerset (Whom enuie long had singled out before) With all the vollie of disgraces met, As th'onely marke that Fortune plac't therefore: On whose ill-wrought opinion, Spight did whet The edge of wrath, to make it pearce the more: And grief was glad t'haue gotten now on whom To lay the fault of what must light on some. 104 Whereon, th'againe out-breaking Yorke beginnes To build new modules of his old desire. And se'ing the booty Fortune for him winnes, Vpon the ground of this in kind ledire, He takes th'aduantages of others sinnes To ay de his owne, and help him to aspire. For, doubting, peace should better scanne deeds past, Hee thinkes not safe, to haue his sword out, last: 105 Especially, since euery man (now prest To innouation) doe with rancor swell: A stirring humor gen'rally possest Those peace-spilt times, weary of beeing well: The weake with wrongs, the happy tyr'd with rest, And many mad; for what, they could not tell: The World, euen great with Change, thought it vvent wrong To stay beyond the bearing-time, so long.
106 And therefore now these Lords confedered (Beeing much increast in number and in spight) So shap't their course, that gathering to a head, They grew to be of formidable might: Th'abused world, so hastily is led (Some for reuenge, some for wealth, some for delight) That Yorke, from small-beginning troups, soone drawes A world of men, to venture in his Cause. 107 Like as proud Seuerne, from a priuat head, With humble streames at first, doth gently glide, Till other Riuers haue contributed The springing riches of their store beside; Where-with at length high-swelling, she doth spread, Her broad-distended waters lay'd so wide, K. Hen. sets for∣ward  Londō with 20000 mē of war, to encoū∣ter with the D. of Yorke; atten∣ded with Hums. D. of Buckingh. and Humfry his son, E. , Edm. D. of Sō∣mers. Hen. , E. of North. Ia. Butler. E. of . & Or∣mond, Iasper, E. of Pembrooke, the sonne of Ow∣en Tewder, halfe brother to the K. Tho. Courtney, E. of Deuonsh. Ioh. L. Clifford, the L L. Sudley, Barnes, Ross, & others. That comming to the Sea, shee seemes, from farre, Not to haue tribute brought, but rather warre: 108 Euen so is Yorke now growne, and now is bent T'incounter with the best, and for the best. Whose neere approach the King hastes to preuent, With hope, farre off to haue his power supprest; Fearing the Cittie, least some insolent, And mutinous, should harten on the rest To take his part. But hee so forward set, That at S. Albones both the Armies met. 109 Where-to, their haste farre fewer hands did bring, Then else their better leysure would haue done: And yet too many for so foul a thing; Sith who did best, hath but dishonour won: For, whil'st some offer peace, sent from the King, Warwicks too forward hand hath Warre begon; A warre, that doth the face of Warre deforme: Which still is foul; but foulest, wanting forme.
110 The D. of York, with the L L. pitched their bat  without the towne, in a place called Keyfield: and the K. power (to their great disaduantage) tooke vp the towne: where being  & wanting roome to vse their pow∣er, were  ouerthrowne & slaughtered. On the K. side, were  Edm. D. of Sommers. who  behind him 3 sons, Hen. ry, Edm. & Ioh. Heere was also slaine, the E. of , the E. Stafford, the L. Clifford, Sir Rob. Vere, with diuers o∣thers to the nū∣ber of 5000: & on the L L. part, but 600. And this was the first battell at S. Al∣bones, the 23 of May, Ann. reg. 33. The D. of Yorke, with o∣ther L L. came to the K. where hee was, and  grace &  nesse on their knees, of that that they had done in his presence, intending nothing but for the good of him and his kingdome: with whō they remooued to London; concluding there to hold a Parliament, the 9 of Iuly following. And, neuer valiant Leaders (so well knowne For braue performed actions done before) Did blemish their discretion and renowne In any weake effected seruice more; Bringing such powres into so straight a Towne, As to some Citty-tumult or vp-rore: Which, slaughter, and no battaile, might be thought; Sith that side vs'd their swords, and this their throat. 111 But this, on th'error of the King, is lai'd, And vpon Sommersets desire t'obtaine The day with peace: for which they longer staid Then wisedome would, aduent'ring for the Maine: Whose force, in narrow streets once ouer-laid, Neuer recouerd head: but euen there slaine The Duke and all the greatest Leaders are; The King himselfe beeing taken prisoner. 112 Yet not a prisoner to the outward eye, For-that he must seeme grac't with his lost day; All things beeing done for his commoditie, Against such men as did the State betray: For, with such apt deceiuing And seeming order, Yorke did so allay That touch of wrong, as made him make great stealth In weaker minds, with shew of Common-wealth. 113 Long-lookt-for powre thus got into his hand, The former face of Court doth new appeare: Ric. E. of . made L. .  the E. of Warwicke. Gouernour of . And all th'especiall Charges of Commaund, To his partakers distributed were: Himselfe is made Protector of the Land. A title found, which couertly did beare All-working powre vnder another stile; And yet the soueraigne Part doth act the while.
114 The King held onely but an emptie name, Left, with his life: whereof the proofe was such, As sharpest pride could not transpearce the same, Nor all-desiring greedinesse durst touch: Impietie had not inlarg'd their shame As yet so wide, as to attempt so much: Mischiefe was not full ripe, for such foul deedes; Left, for th'vnbounded malice that succeedes. The end of the Sixt Booke.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. The King's repriz'd: Yorke, and his side retires; And making head againe, is put to flight: Returnes into the Land, his right requires: Hauing regain'd the King, confirmes his right: And, whil'st his rash improuidence aspires, Is  at Wakefield, by Q. Marg'rets might: Who, at S. Albones, backe her Lord regaines; Is forc't frō thence: & March the Crowne attaines. 1 The D. of York, in respect that K. Hen. for his  of life, and clemencie, vvas highly esteemed of the Commons, durst not attēpt any violēt course against his per∣son: but onely labors to streng∣then his owne partie: which he could not do, but by the oppression and displacing of many woorthy men; with com∣mitting other violencies, wher∣vnto  inforced him, for the preserment of his friends. which raisd a greater partie against him, then that he made. DIsordinate Authoritie, thus gaind, Knew not at first, or durst not to proceed With an out-breaking course; but stood restraind Within the compasse of respectiue heed: Distrust of friends, and powre of foes, detaind That mounting will, from making too much speed: For, though he held the powre he longd to win, Yet had not all the keyes to let him in.
2 The Queene abroad, with a reuenging hand (Arm'd with her owne disgrace, and others spight, Gath'ring th'oppressed partie of the Land) Held ouer him the threatning sword of might; That forc't him, in the tearmes of awe, to stand (Who else had burst-vp Right, to come t'his right) And kept him so confus'd, that he knew not To make vse of the meanes, which he had got. 3 For, either by his fearing to restraine The person of the King; or by neglect Of guarding him with a sufficient traine, The watchfull Queene, with cunning, doth effect A practice that recouers him againe (As one that with best care could him protect:) And h'is conuaid to Couentry, to those Who well knew how of Maiestie dispose. 4 Though this weake King had blunted thus before The edge of powre, with so dull clemencie, And left him nothing else was gracious, more Then euen the title of his Sov'raigntie; Yet is that title ofso precious store, As it makes, golden, leaden Maiestie: And where, or how-soeuer it doth sit, Is sure t'haue the world attend on it. 5 Whether it be, that Forme, and Eminence, Adorn'd with Pomp and State, begets this awe: Or, whether an in-bred obedience To Right and Powre, doth our affections drawe: Or, whether sacred Kings worke reuerence, And make that Nature now, which was first Law, We know not: but, the Head will draw the Parts; And good Kings, with our bodies, haue our harts.
6 For, lo, no sooner was his person ioyn'd The Queen with her Party, ha∣uing recouered the K. and with∣drawing him far frō Lon. (where they foūd the D. of Yorke was too much fauored by the Cittizens) grew to bee very strong, by means that so many Ll. and much people, oppressed & dis∣contented with these proceedings of their enemies, resorted dailie vnto thē. Wher∣vpon, the K. sō∣moned the D. & his adherents, to appeare before him at Couentry: but they, finding their present strength, not suf∣ficient to make good their an∣swer, retired thē selues into seue∣rall parts. The D. of York with∣drawes him to Wigmore, in Wales: the E. of Salisb. into the North, the E. of Warw. to Calais. With this distracted body of his friends; But, straight the Duke, and all that faction find, They lost the onely Engin for their ends: Authoritie, with Maiestie combin'd, Stands bent vpon them now, and powrefull sends Them summons to appeare, who lately held That powre themselues, and could not be compeld. 7 Where-with confus'd, as either not prepar'd For all euents; or se'ing the times not fit; Or mens affections, failing in regard; Or their owne forces, not of powre as yet: They all retire them home; and neither dar'd T'appeare, or to stand-out to answere it. This vnfore-thought-on accident, confounds All their dessignes, and frustrates all their grounds: 8 As vsually it fares, with those that plot These machines of Ambition, and high pride; Who (in their chiefest counsels ouer-shot) For all things saue what serue the turne, prouide; Whil'st that, which most imports, rests most forgot, Or waigh'd not, or contemn'd, or vndescri'd; That some-thing may be euer ouer-gone, Where courses shall be crost, and men vndone. 9 Yorke into Wales, Warwicke to Calais hies, Someto the North, others to other parts; As if they ran both from their dignities, And also from themselues, and their owne harts: " (The mind decay'd, in publique ieopardies, " To th'ill at hand, onely it selfe conuerts) That none would thinke, Yorkes hopes, being so neere dry, Could euer flowe againe, and swell so hie.
10 And yet, for all this ebbing Chance, remaines The spring that feedes that hope (which leaues men last): Whom no'affliction so entire restraines, But that it may remount, as in times past: Though he had lost his place, his powre, his paines; Yet held his loue, his friends, his title fast: The whole frame of that fortune could not faile; As that, which hung by more then by one naile. 11 Else might we thinke, what errour had it bin, These parts thus sev'red, not t'haue quite destroy'd; But that they saw it not the way to win. Some more dependances there were beside: Which, Age, and Fate, keeps vs from looking in, That their true Counsells come not right descri'd; Which, our presumptuous wits must not condem: They be'ing not ignorant; but we, of them. 12 For, heere, we looke vpon another Crown, An other image of Nobilitie (Which ciuile Discord had not yet brought down Vnto a lower range of dignity); Vpon a Powre as yet not ouer-flowne With th'Ocean of all-drowning Sov'raintie. These Lords, who thus against their Kings draw swords, Taught Kings to come, how to be more then Lords. 13 Which well this Queene observ'd; and therefore sought Diuers graue persons were sent to the  York to mediat a : and a great Councell was called at London, Ann. reg. 36, to agree all disserences: Whither cam the E. of Salis. with 500. men, the D. os Yorke with 400. and was lodged at his house, at Bai∣nards Castle. To draw them in, and ruine them with Peace; Whom Force (she saw) more dangerous had wrought, And did their powre and malice but increase: And therefore, to the Citty hauing got, A Counsell was convok't, all iarres to cease: Where come these Lords at length; but yet so strong, As if to doe, rather then suffer wrong.
14 Here Scottish border broyles, and feares of Fraunce, Vrg'd with the present times necessity, Brought forth a suttle-shadowed countenance Of quiet peace, resembling Amitie; Wrapt in a strong and curious ordinaunce, Of many Articles, bound solemnly: As if those Gordian knots could be so , The Dukes of Excester, and Somerset, with 800. men, lodged without Temple Bar. The E. of Northū. the I. L Egremōt & Clif ford with 1500, & lodged with∣out the Cittie: The E. of War∣wick from Calais with 600. men al in his liuery. The L. Mayor kept continuall watch with 2000. men in armor during the treaty. Wher in by the great trauaile & ex∣bortation of the  of Canterbury, with other graue Pre∣lates, a reconcili∣ation was , and celebra∣ted with a solēne procession. As no impatient sword could them diuide: 15 Especially, whereas the selfe same ends Concur not in a point of like respect; But that each party couertly intends Thereby their owne designments to effect: Which Peace, with more indangering wounds, offends, Then Warre can doe; that stands vpon suspect, And neuer can be ty'd with other chaine, Then intermutuall benefite and gaine. 16 As well by this concluded Act is seene: Which had no power to holde-in minds, out-bent; But quickly was dissolv'd and canceld cleene, Either by Warwicks fortune or intent. How euer vrg'd, the Seruants of the Queene Assaulted his, as he from Counsell went: Where, his owne person, egerly , Hardly (by Boate)  the multitude. 17 Which deed, most heynous made, and vrg'd as his, The Queene (who soone th'aduantage apprehends) Thought forthwith  committed him on this: But, he preuents,    friends, Shewes them his danger, and   there is The E. os War. wicke is set vpon by the Queenes seruants. In her, that all their ouerthrowes ; " And that these  th'effects of this Peace are: " Which giues more deadly wounding blowes, then war.
18 Strooke with his heate, began the others fire (Kindled with danger, and disdaine) t'inflame: Which hauing well prepar'd, to his desire, He leaues the farther growing of the same, And vnto Calais (to his strong retire) With speed betakes him, to preuent the same Of his impos'd offence; least, in disgrace, He might be dispossessed of that place. 19 Yorke straight aduis'd the Earle of Salsbury, T'addresse him to the King: and there vpon, With other grieuances, to signifie Th'iniurious act committed on his Sonne; And there, to vrge the breach of th'Amitie, By these sinister plots to be begun: But, he so strongly goes, as men might ghesse, He purpos'd not to craue, but make redresse. 20 Whom, the Lord Audly, hasting to restraine,  Tuichet L. Audly slaine at Blore heath and his army discomfited by the E. of Salisb. with the losse of 2400. men. An. reg. 38. (Sent, with tenthousand men, well furnished) Encountred on Blore-heath; where he is slaine, And all his powre and force discomfited: Which chaunce, so opened and let-out againe The hopes of Yorke (whom Peace had fettered) That he resolues, what-euer should befall, To set vp's Rest, to venture now for all. 21 Fury, vnti'd, and broken out of bands, Runnes desp'rate presently to either head: Faction and Warre (that neuer wanted hands For Bloud and Mischiefe) soone were furnished: Affection findes a side: and out it stands; Not by the Cause, but by her int'rest led: And many, vrging Warre, most forward are; " Not that't is iust, but only that 'tis Warre.
22 Whereby, the Duke is grownet'a mighty head In Shropshire, with his Welsh and Northren ayde: To whom came Warwicke, hauing ordered His charge at Calais; and with him conuay'd Many braue Leaders, that aduentured Sir Andrew Trollop, after∣warde fled to the King. Iohn Blūe remainde  the Lords. Their fortunes on the side that he had lay'd: Whereof as chiefe, Trollop and Blunt excell'd: But, Trollop fayld his friends; Blunt faithfull held. 23 The King (prouok't these mischiefes to preuent, Follow'd with Sommerset and Excester) Strongly appointed, all his forces bent, Their malice to correct or to deterre: And, drawing neere, a reuerent Prelate sent The King, beeing at Worcester, sends the B. of   to the L L. to induce  them to peace, & to offer pardon. To proffer pardon, if they would referre Their Cause to Peace; as being a cleaner course Vnto their ends, then this foule barb'rous force. 24 " For, what a warre, sayd he, is here begun, " Where euen the victory is held accurst? " And who-so winnes, it will be so ill won, " That though he haue the best, he speeds the worst. " For, here your making, is, to be vndon; " Seeking t'obtaine the State, you lose it first: " Both sides being one, the bloud consum'd all one; " To make it yours, you worke to haue it none. 25 " Leaue then with this, though this be yet a staine " T'attempt this sinne, to be so neere a fall. " The doubtfull Dye of warre, cast at the Maine, " Is such, as one bad chaunce may lose you all. " A certaine sinne, seekes an vncertaine gaine: " Which, got, your selues euen wayle and pitty shall. " No way, but Peace, leades out from blood and feares; " To free your selues, the Land, and vs, from teares.
26 Whereto the discontented part replyes; " That they, hereto by others wrongs inforc't, " Had no way else but these extremities, " And worst meants of redresse, t'auoide the worst. " For, since that peace did but their spoyles deuise, " And held them out from grace (as men diuorc't " From th'honors, that their fortunes did afford) " Better die with the sword, then by the sword. 27 " For, if pacts, vowes, or oaths, could haue done ought, " There had enough been done: but, to no end " Saue to their ruine, who had euer sought " To'auoide these broyls, as grieuing to contend; " Smothring disgraces, drawing to parts remote, " As exil'd men: where now they were, to attend " His Grace with all respect, and reuerence; " Not with the sword of malice, but defence. 28 Whereby, they shewed, that words were not to win: The Bishop of Salisbury offred pardon, to all such as would submit them∣selues But yet the Pardon works so feelingly, That to the King, that very night, came-in Sir Andrew Trollop, with some company, Contented to redeeme his sinne with sinne; Disloyalty, with infidelitie: And, by this meanes, became discouered quite All th'orders of th'intended next dayes fight. 29 Which so much wrought vpon their weakened feares, The D. of York, with his youngest sonne the E of Rutland, with∣drew him into Ireland where he was exceedingly beloued. That presently their Campe brake vp, ere day; And euery man with all his speed prepares, According to their course, to shift their way. Yorke, with his youngest Sonne, tow'ards Ireland beares; Warwicke to Calais, where his safety lay; To that sure harbor of conspiracie, Enuies Retreit, Rebellions nursery.
30 Which fatall place, seemes that with either hand Is made t'offend. For, Fraunce sh'afflicts with th'one: The  of Calais at that time. And with the other, did infest this Land; As if ordained to doe good to none: But, as a Gate to both our ills did stand, To let-out plagues on vs, and int'her owne: A part without vs, that small good hath bin; But to keepe, lesse intire, the whole within. 31 And there, as in their all and best support, Is Warwicke got, with March and Salsbury; When all the Gates of England, euery Port And Shore close-shut, debarres their ; Lockt out from all; and all left in that sort, As no meanes seemes can ay de their misery. This wound, giuen without blowe, weakens them more, Then all their losse of blood had done before. 32 For, now againe vpon them frowningly Powre with Fortune, trampling on their Sates; And brands them with the markes of Infamy; Rebellions, Treasons, and Assassinats; Attaints their Bloud, in all Posteritie; Ransacks their Lands, spoiles their Confederats; And layes so hideous colours on their crimes, As would haue terrified more timorous times; 33 But, heere could doe no good: for why? this Age, Being in a course of motion, could not rest, Vntill the reuolution of their rage Came to that poynt, whereto it was addrest. Misfortune, crosses, ruine, could not swage That heate of hope, or of reuenge, at least. " The World, once set a-worke, cannot soone cease; " Nor euer is the same, it is in peace.
34 For, other motions, other int'rests heere, The acting spirits vp and awake doe keepe: " Faith, friendship, honour is more sure, more deere, " And more it selfe, then when it is asleepe: Worth will stand-out, and doth no shadowes feare: make impressions far more deepe; When Ease,  it will stirre, or breake her rest, Lyes still, beares all, content to be opprest. 35 Yorke, and his side, could not, while life remain'd, Though thus disperst, but worke and interdeale: Nor any sword, at home, could keepe restrain'd Th'out-breaking powres of this innated zeale. This humor had so large a passage gain'd, On th'inward body of the Common-weale; That 'twas impossible to stop, by force, This current of affections violent course. 36 Hen. the young D. of Sommers. was, in An. reg. 37, made Cap∣tain of  & a  seal sent to the E. os , to dis∣charge him os that place: who, in respect he was made Captaine there by  , would not obay the  . Yet they at home (disorder to keepe forth) Did all what powre could doe, or wit inuent; Plac't, in th'auoided roomes, men of great worth; Young Sommerset, with strength to Calais sent; Northumberland and  to the North; (Whereof They onely had the gouernment) Defend all landings, barre all , Striue to redresse the publique grieuances: 37 And, to this end, summon a Parlement: Wherein, when-as the godly King would not, Vnto th'attainder of the Lords, consent; The Queene in griefe (and in her passions hot) The Parliament at Couentry. Breakes out in speech, louingly violent: " And what (saith shee) my Lord, haue vou forgot " To rule and be a King? Why will you thus " Bemilde to them, and cruell vnto vs?
38 " What good haue you procur'd by clemencie, " But giuen to wilde presumption much more head? " And now what cure, what other remedie " Can to our desp'rat wounds be ministred? " Men are not good, but for necessitie; " Nor orderly are euer borne, but bred. " Sad want, and pouertie, makes men industrious: " But, Law must make them good, and feare obsequious. 39 " My Lord; Hee gouerns well, that's well obayd: " And temp'rat Rigour euer safely sits. " For, as to him, who Cotis did vpbraid, " And call'd his rigor, madnesse, raging fits; Cotis, a Tyrant of Thrace. " Content thee, thou vnskilfull man, he said, " My madnesse keepes my Subiects in their wits: " So, to like course my Lord, y'are forc't to fall; " Or else you must, in th'end, vndoe vs all. 40 " Looke but, I pray, on this deare part of you; " This branch (sprung frō your blood) your owne aspect: " Looke on this Childe, and think what shal ensue " To this faire hope of ours, by  neglect. " Though you respect not vs, wrong not his due, " That must his right, left you, from you expect; " The right of the renowned Lancasters, " His fathers fathers, and great grand-fathers. 41 " Then turnes t'her sonne: O sonne! dost thou not see? " He is not mov'd, nor toucht, nor weighes our teares. " What shall I doe? What hope is left for me, " When he wants will to help, & thou wantst yeares? " Could yet these hands of thine but partners bee " In these my labours, to keep-out our feares, " How well were I? that now alone must toile, " And turne, and tosse; and yet vndone the while.
42 " I knowe, if thou could'st helpe, thy mother thus " Should not beyond her strength endure so much; " Nor these proud Rebels, that would ruine vs, " Scape with their hainous treasons, without touch: " I knowe, thou would'st conceiue how dangerous " Mercy were vnto those, whose hopes are such; " And not preserue whom Law hath ouer-throwne, " Sauing their liuely-hood, to lose our owne. 43 " But, sith thou canst not, nor I able am, " Thou must no more expect of me, deare Son; " Nor yet, in time to come, thy Mother blame, " If thou, by others weakenesse be vndon. " The world, with me, must testifie the same, " That I haue done my best, what could be done; " And haue not fail'd, with hazard of my life, " The duetie of a mother and a wife. 44 " But well; I see which way the world will goe: " And let it goe: and so turnes her about, " Full, with stout griefe, and with disdainefull woe; " Which, now, her words shut-vp, her lookes let-out. " The cast of her side-bended eye, did showe " Both sorrow and reproofe; se'ing so great doubt, " And no powre to redresse, but stand and vex, " Imprisoned in the setters of her sex. 45 Yet, so much wrought these mouing arguments At this Parlia∣ment at Couen∣try, in the yeere 1459, in the 38 of Hen. 6.  . D. os Yorke, with his son Edw. and all his posteritie, and partakers, attainted, to the ninth degree, their goods and  escheated,  te∣nants spoiled of their goods, the Towne of   to the D. of Yorke , and the Dutchess of Yorke sporled of her goods.  D.  Som∣merset with the L L. Audly, and Rosie attempted the towne  ,  were repulst;     to the E. of War and himselfe hardly escaped. (Drawne from that blood, where Nature vrg'd her Right) As his all-vpward tending zeale relents; And, downeward to his State,  his sight: And so, to their Attainders he consents; Prouided, He, on their submission, might Out of his Princely powre, in his owne name, Without a Parlement, reuoke the same.
46 Whil'st Sommerset with maine endeuour lay To get his giuen (but vngot) gouernment, The stout Calisians (bent another way) Fiercely repell him, frustrate his intent: Yet takes he Guines, landing at VVhit sandbay: Where-as the swordes, hee brought, would not consent To wound his foes: the fight no rancor hath: Malice was friends: and Warre was without wrath. 47 Though hee their hands, yet VVarwicke had their hearts: To whom both men and shipping they betray'd; Whilst Englands (though debarred) shore imparts, To him, herother-where intended ay de: For, the Lord Riuers, passing to those parts, The . , and his sonne Sir  , were taken by Iohn , at Sand∣wich; whether they were sent to guard the towne, and sup∣ply the D. of . T'haue fresh supplies vnto the Duke conuay'd; At Sandwich, with his Sonne accompayned, Staying for winde, was taken in his bed. 48 Whose shipping, and prouisions, VVarwicke takes For Ireland, with his Chieftaine to conferre: And within thirtie dayes this voyage makes, The E. of Warwick sayled into Ireland to conserre with the D. of Yorke. And backe-returnes, ere knowne to haue beene there: So that the heauens, the sea, the winde partakes With him; as if they of his faction were; Or that his spirit and valour were combin'd, With destinie, t'effect what he design'd. 49 Which working, though without, and on the shore, Reacht yet vnto the centre of the Land; Searcht all those humors that were bred before; Shakes the whole frame, whereon the State did stand; " Affection, pittie, fortune, feare being more " Farre off and absent, then they are at hand. " Pittie becomes a traytor with th'opprest: " And many haue beene rays'd, by being supprest.
49 For, they had left, although themselues were gone, Opinion and their memorie behinde. Which so preuayles, that nought could here be done, But straight was knowne as soone as once design'd: Court, Councell-chamber, Closet, all were won, To be reuealers of the Princes minde: So false is Faction, and so smooth a lyer, As that it neuer had a side entire. 50 Whereby, th'exil'd had leasure to preuent,  L. Faulcon∣bridge, sent to Sand∣wich, tooke the Towne and Sir Simon Monfort Gouernor thereof. And circumuent, what-euer was deuiz'd: Which made, that Faulconbridge, to Sandwich bent, That Fortresse and the Gouernour surpriz'd; Who, presently from thence to Calais sent, Had his vnguiltie blood there sacrifiz'd: And Faulconbridge, returning backe, relates Th'affection here, and zeale of all estates. 51 Drawne with which newes, and with a spirit that dar'd T'attempt on any likelihood of support; They take th'aduantage of so great regard; Their landing here secur'd them in such sort, By Faulconbridge; the fatall bridge prepar'd To be the way of blood, and to transport Returning furie to make greater wounds Then euer England saw within her bounds. 52 And but with fifteene hundred men do land, Vpon a Land, with many millions stor'd: So much, did high-presuming Courage stand On th'ayde, home-disobedience would afford. Nor were their hopes deceiv'd: for, such a hand Had Innouation ready for the sword, As ere they neere vnto the Cittie drew, Their powre beyond all former greatnesse grew.
53 Muse, what may we imagine was the Cause That Furie workes thus vniuersally? What humor, what affection, is it, drawes Sides, of such powre, to this Nobilitie? Was it their Conscience, to redresse the Lawes; Or malice, to a wrong-plac't Sov'raintie, That caus'd them (more then wealth, or life) desire Destruction, ruine, bloud-shed, sword and fire? 54 Or was the Powre of Lords (thus inter-plac't Betwixt the height of Princes, and the State) Th'occasion that the people so imbrac't Their actions, and attend on this Debate? Or had their Greatnesse, with their Worth, imbas't The Touch of Royaltie to so lowe rate, As their opinion could such tumults moue? Then Powre, and Virtue, you contagious proue. 55 And Perianders leuell'd Eares of Corne Shew what is fittest for the publique Rest; And that the hyest Minions which adorne A Common-weale (and doo become it best) Are Zeale and Iustice, Law, and Customes, borne Of hye descent; that neuer do infest The Land with false suggestions, claymes, affrights, To make men lose their owne, for others rights. 56 But now, against this disproportion, bends The King, from Couentry  the L. , the L. Louel, the E. of Kendal, to London, with others,  keep the  . The feeble King all his best industrie: And, from abrode, Skales, Louell, Kendall, sends, To hold the Cittie in fidelitie; The Cittie, which before (for others ends) Was wrought to leaue the part of Royaltie: Where, though the Kings commaund was of no powre; Yet worke these Lords so, that they tooke the Towre:
57 And, from thence, labour to bring-in againe The E E. of March, , and , landing at , were met by the Archb. of Cant. who with his Crosse borne be∣fore him accompay∣ned them to Londō. An. reg. 38. The out-let will of disobediencie; Send terror, threates, intreaties; but in vaine: VVarwicke, and March, are with all iollitie And grace receiv'd. The Citties loue did gaine The best part of a Crowne: for whose defence, And intertaining still, stayes Salsburie, Whil'st March, and VVarwicke other fortunes try; The affection which the Citie of London bare to the D. of Yorke was an espe∣ciall meane for the raysing of that line, to the Crowne. The E. of Salisbury left to keepe the Cittie. 58 Conducting their fresh troupes against their King (Who leaues a woman to supply his steed): And neere Northhampton, both imbattailing, Made, now, the very heart of England bleed: Where, what strange resolutions both sides bring, And with what deadly rancour they proceed, The Batte'l of Northhampton. Witnesse the blood there shed, and fowlly shed; That cannot, but with sighes, be registred. 59 There, Buckingham, Talbot, and Egremont, The D. of Bucking. the E. of : the L. Bgremont, Iohn Vicont , Sir William Lucy . Bewmont, and Lucy; parts of Lancaster (Parts most important, and of chiefe account) In this vnhappy day, extinguisht are. There, the Lord Grey, (whose fayth did not amount The L. Edmond Grey of  who led the  of K.  withdrew himself and tooke part with the L L. Vnto the trust committed to his care) Betrayes his King, borne to be strangely tost; And, late againe attain'd, againe is lost. 60 Againe is lost this out-side of a King Ordain'd for others vses, not his owne: The King in  to London, the Towre yeelded vp to the Lords, and the L. Skales who kept it, is . Who, to the part that had him, could but bring A feeble body onely, and a Crowne; But yet was held to be the dearest thing Both sides did labor-for, so much; to crowne Their Cause with the apparency of might: From whom, and by whom, they must make their Right;
61 When he himselfe (as if he nought esteem'd The highest Crowne on earth) continues one; Weake to the world: which, his Religion deem'd Like to the breath of man; vaine, and soone gone: the stout Queene, by speedy flight redeem'd The safety of her selfe, and of her Sonne: And, with her, Sommerset to Durham fled; The D. of Sommerset. Her powres, supprest, her heart vnuanquished. 62 So much for absent Yorke, is acted here, Attending English hopes, on th' Irish coast. Which when, vnlookt-for, they related were, Ambition (still on horse-backe) comes in poast, And seemes with greater glory to appeare; As made the more, by be'ing so long time lost: And to the Parlement with state is led, Which his associates had fore-summoned. 63 And, com'n into the Chamber of the Peeres, He sets himselfe downe, in the chayre of State: Where, such an vnexpected face appeares Of an amazed Court, that gazing sate With a dumbe silence (seeming, that it feares The thing it went about t'effectuate) As if the Place, the Cause, the Conscience, giue Barres to the words, their forced courso should haue. 64 Tis strāge, those times, which brought such hāds for blood, Had not bred tongues to make good any side; And that no prostituted conscience stood, Any iniustice to haue iustifid (As men of the forelone hope, onely good In desperatest acts to be imploy'd) And that none, in th'assembly there, was found, That would t'ambitious descant giue a ground:
65 That euen himselfe (forc't of necessitie) Must be the Orator of his owne Cause. For, hauing viewd them all, and could espie None proff'ring once to speake (all, in a pause) On this friend lookes with an inuiting eye, And then on that (as if he woo'd applause) Holding the cloth of State still in his hand; The signe, which he would haue them vnderstand. 66 But se'ing none moue; with an imperiall port, Gath'ring his spirits, he ryses from his seat; Doth, with such powre of wordes, his Cause support, As seemes all others Causes to defeat. " And, sure, who workes his Greatnesse in that sort, " Must haue more powres, then those that are borne great: " Such Reuolutions are not wrought, but when " Those spirits doe worke, which must be more then men. 67 He argues first his Right, so long with-held By th'vsurpation of the Lancasters; " The Right of a direct Line, alwayes held " The sacred course of Blood; our Ancestors, " Our Lawes, our reuerent Customes haue vp-held " With holy hands. Whence, when disorder crres, " What horrors, what confusion, do we see, " Vntill it be reduc't where it should bee? 68 " And how it prospers with this wretched Land, " Witnesse the vniuersall miserie, " Wherein (as if accurst) the Realme doth stand; " Depriu'd of State, wealth, honor, dignitie; " The Church, and Commons, vnderneath the hand " Of violence, extortion, robberie; " No face of order, no respect of Lawes: " And thus complaynes of what himselfe is cause;
69 " Accusing others insolence, that they " Exhausted the Reuenues of the Crowne: " So that the King was forc't onely to prey " Vpon his Subiects, poore and wretched growne) " And that they now sought Ireland to betray, " And Calais to the French; which hee had knowne, " By th' intercepted notes of their owne hand, " Who were the onely Traytors of the Land: 70 " And yet procur'd th'Attaynders most vniust, " Of others guiltlesse and vnspotted blood; " Who euermore had labour'd, in their trust " And faithfull seruice for their Countries good: " And who with extreame violence were thrust " Quite out of all, spoyl'd of their liuelihood, " Expos'd to all the miseries of life: " Which they indur'd, to put-off blood and strife. 71 " But since (sayth he) their malice hath no ende, " But t'end vs all, and to vndo the Land: " (For which, the hatefull French gladly attend, " And at this instant haue their swords in hand) " And that the God of heauen doth seeme to bend " Vnto our Cause, whereto the best men stand; " And that this blood of mine, so long time sought, " Reserued seemes, for something to be wrought; 72 " It rests within your iudgements, to vp-right, " Or else to ruine vtterly the Land. " For, this be sure, I must pursue my Right " Whil'st I haue breath, or I and mine can stand. " Thinke, whether this poore State, being in this plight, " Stands not in need of some vp-raysing hand: " Or whether 'tis not time we should haue rest, " And this confusion, and our wounds redrest.
73 This said, he turnes aside, and out hee goes; Leaues them to counsell what was to be done. Where, though the most part gath'red, were of those Who with no opposition sure would run; Yet some, more temp'rate, offred to propose That which was fit to bee considered on: Who, though they knew his clayme was faire, in sight; Yet thought, it now lackt the right face of Right; 74 Since, for the space of three score yeeres, the Crowne Had beene in act possest, in three descents; Confirm'd by all the Nobles of renowne, Non confirmatur tractu , quod de  ab  non . The peoples suffrages, Oathes, Parlements; So many Actes of State, both of our owne, And of all other foraine Gouernments: " That Wrong, by order, may grow Right by this; " Sith Right, th'obseruer but of Order is. 75 " And then considring, first, how Bullingbrooke, " Landing in Yorkeshire but with three score men, " By the consent of all the Kingdome, tooke " The Crowne vpon him, held for lawfull then; " His Vncle Yorke and all the Peeres betooke " Themselues to him, as to their Soueraigne; when " King Richards wrongs, and his propinquitie, " Did seeme to make no distance in their : 76 " Nor was without example, in those dayes: " Wherein (as in all Ages) States do take " The side of publique Peace, to counterpayse " The waight of wrong; which, time may rightfull make. " No elderhood, Rufus and  stayes, W. Rufus and Hen. 1.  before their elder brother. " The imperiall Crowne of England t'vndertake: " And Iohn, before his nephew Arthur, ; " Whom, though depriv'd, Henry his sonne succeedes.
77 Edward the third, made Sov'raigne of the State, Vpon his fathers depriuation, was: All which, though seeming wrongs, yet fairely sate In their succeeders, and for right did passe. And if they could so worke, t'accommodate, And calme the Peeres, and please the Populasse; They wisht, the Crowne might, where it stood, remaine, Succeeding inconuenience to restraine. 78 Thus th'auncient Fathers of the Law aduise; Graue Baron Thorpe and learned Fortescue: Who, though they could not fashion, otherwise, Those strong-bent humors, which auersiue grew; Yet seem'd to qualifie th'extreamities, And some respect more to their Sov'raine drew; That, during life, it was by all agreed, He should be King, and Yorke should him succeed: 79 Which, presently enacted, was (beside) Proclaym'd through-out with all solemnities; And inter mutually there ratifi'd With protestations, vowes and oathes, likewise; Built-vp, with all the strength of forme, t'abide What-euer oppositions could aryse; And might haue seem'd sure and authenticall, Had all this bodie of the State beene all. 80 But Trent, thou keptst a part; Thames had not all: The North diuided honor, with the South: And like powre held like Greatnes seuerall: Where other Right, spake with another mouth; Another Heire, another Prince they call, Whom naturall succession follow doth; The branch of Kings, the true sonne of the Crowne: To whom, no father can but leaue his owne.
81 The King, as husband to the Crowne, doth by The wiues infe offement hold; and onely here Inioyes the same for life, by Curtesie; Without powre to dispose it other-where (After his death) but as th'authoritie, Order, and custome of Succession beare: And therefore Henries Act cannot vndo The right of him, whom it belongs vnto. 82 And this vnnaturall intrusion, here, Of that attainted Blood, out of all course, Effected with confusion and with feare, Must be reduc't to other tearmes, of force, These insolencies Iustice cannot beare: The sword (whereto they onely had recourse) Must cut this knot, so intricately ty'd; Whose vaine contriued ends are plaine descry'd. 83 Thus they giue-out; and out the sword in hand Is drawne for blood, to iustifie the same: And by a side, with many a Worthie, mand; Great Sommerset, Excester, Buckingham, With Clifford Courtney, and Northumberland (Lords of as mightie courage as of name) Which all, against Yorkes forced courses, bend; Who, hauing done, yet had not made an end: 84 But, to another worke, is forc't to go; The last turmoyle lab'ring Ambition had: Where Pride and Ouer-weening led him so (For fortunes past) as made the  sad: For, whether safer counsell would or no, His yet vnfurnisht troupes he desp'rat led From Sandall Castle, vnto VVakefield Greene, Against far mightier forces of the Queene.
85 Where, round inclos'd by Ambushments fore-lay'd, The Battel of Wakefield, where the D. of Yorke is slaine: the E. of Salsburie taken & beheaded at Yorke: Edmond E. of Rutland, youngest sonne to the D. of Yorke murthered after the Battell, by the L. Clifford. Hard-working for his life (but all in vaine) With number and confusion ouer-lay'd, Himselfe and valiant Salsbury are slaine: With whome, the most and dearest blood decay'd Of his couragious and aduenturous traine: So short a life had those long hopes of his; Borne not to weare the Crowne, he wrought for thus; 86 But, in the ryse of his out-springing lust, Now in the last of hope, receiv'd this fall; Now, that his working powres so far had thrust, That his desires had but this step to all: When, so neere home, he seem'd past all distrust, This vnexspected wracke doth him befall: This successor th'inheritor fore-goes; The play-game made of Fortune, and his foes. 87 Whose young sonne, Rutland (made the sacrifice For others sinnes, ere he knew how to sinne) Brought only but to see this exercise Of blood and wounds, endes ere he did beginne: Whose teares, whose mone, whose lamentable cryes, Could neither mercie nor compassion winne: The branch of such a tree, though tender now, Was not thought fit should any longer growe. 88 Which turning Chaunce, t'a long vngraced side, Brings backe their almost quayled hopes againe; And thrust them on, to vse the present Tide And Flowe of this occasion, to regaine Th'inthralled Monarch, and to vndecide The late concluded Act they held for vaine; And mooues their Armies, new refresht with spoyle, For more confusion, and for more turmoyle:
89 Victoriously proceeding vnwithstood, Till at S. Albones VVarwicke forc't a stand: The 2.  S. . Where-as (to make his owne vndooing good) The King is brought against himselfe to band: His Powre  Crowne is set against his Blood; Forc't on the side, not of himselfe, to stand. Diuided King, in what a case thou art! To haue thy hand, thus bent against thy hart. 90 And here this famous fatall place, againe, Is made the stage of blood; againe these streets, with slaughter, cov'red with the slaine, Witness what desp'rat wrath with rancor meets. But, Fortune now is in an other vaine; Another side her turning fauour greets: The King, heere lately lost, is now heere won; The King is againe  by the . Still sure t'vndoe the side that he was on. 91 VVarwicke, with other Genius then his owne, The  of Warwick     , put to , and Sir Iohn   on the Kings . Had heere to doe: which made him see the face Of sad misfortune, in the selfe same Towne, Where prosp'rous winning lately gaue him grace: And Marg'ret heere, this Martiall Amazon, Was, with the spirit of herselfe, in place: Whose labors, Fortune, euen to pittie, stir; And, being a woman, could but giue it her. 92 The reputation and incouragement Of  glory, wakened them to this. And this seemes now the full accomplishment Of all their trauell, all their combrances. For, what can more disturbe this Gouernment, When Yorke extinct, & VVarwick conquered, is? Directing Salsburie, left without a head, What rests there now, that all's not finished?
93 Thus, for the sicke, preseruing Nature striues Against corruption, and the loathsome Graue; When, out of Deaths colde hands, she backe repriues Th'almost confounded spirits, she faine would saue: And them cheeres vp, illightens, and reuiues; Making faint Sickenesse, words of health to haue, With lookes of life, as if the worst were past; When strait comes dissolution, and his last. 94 So fares it with this late reuiued Queene: Whose Victories, thus fortunately wonne, Haue but as onely lightning motions beene, Before the ruine that ensu'd thereon. For, now another springing powre is seene; Whereto, as to the new arysing Sunne, All turne their faces, leauing those lowe rayes Of setting Fortune, which no Climer waighes. 95 Now is yong March, more than a Duke of Yorke. For, youth, loue, grace and courage make him more. All which, for Fortunes fauour, now do worke, Who graceth freshest Actors euermore; Making the first attempt, the chiefest worke Of any mans designes, that striues therefore. " The after-seasons are not so well blest. " For, those first spirits make their first actions best. 96 Now as the Libyan Lion, when with paine The wearie Hunter hath pursu'd his prey From Rockes, to Brakes, from Thickets to the Plaine, And at the point, thereon his hands to lay, Hard-by his hopes, his eye vpon his gaine, Out-rushing from his denne rapts all away: So comes yong March, their endes to disappoint, Who now were growne so neere vnto the point.
97 The loue of these important southerne parts, Of Essex, Surry, Middlesex, and Kent, The Queene had wholly lost; as they whose hearts Grew ill affected to her gouernment, Vpon th'vnciuile and presumptuous parts, Play'd by the Northerne troupes, growne insolent: Whom, though she could not gouerne otherwise, Yet th'ill that's wrought for her, vpon her lies. 98 So wretched is this execrable Warre, " This ciuile Sworde: wherein, though all wee see " Be foul, and all things miferable are; " Yet most distresse-full is the : " Which is, not onely th'extream ruiner " Of others; but, her owne calamity: " Where, who obtains, what he would cannot do: " Their powre hath part, who holpe him thereunto. 99 The Citty, whose good-will they most desire, The Queene, af∣ter the battaile of S. , sent to the Ma∣ior of London for certaine pro∣uisions: who  to   therewith all, the Commons of the Citie stayed the same, and would not permit the carts to . Whereupon, the L. Mayor sent to excuse , and to ap∣pease the displea∣sure of the Queene. (Yet thereunto durst not commit their state) Sends them not those prouisions they require; Which seem'd restrained by the peoples hate: Yet Marches help farre off, and neere this fire (To winne them time)  them to mediate A reconcilement: which, well entertain'd, Was fairely now growen-on, and neerely gain'd: 100 When, with a thousand tongs, swift-wing'd Fame coms, And tells of Marches gallant Victories: Who, what withstands, subdues; all ouercomes; Making his way through fiercest enemies; As hauing now to cast, in greater Summes, The Reckning of his hopes, that mainly rise. His fathers death, giues more life vnto wrath: And vexed valour, greater courage hath.
101 And now, as for his last, his lab'ring worth Works on the coast which on faire Seuerne lyes: Whereto his Father (passing to the North) Sent him, to leuie other fresh supplies: But, hearing now what Wakefield had brought forth; Imploring ayde against these iniuries, Obtains from Gloster, Worster, Shrewsburie, Important powres, to worke his remedie. 102 Which he, against Pembrooke and Ormond, bends; Iasper E. of Pē∣brok, and Iames Butler E. of Or∣mond & . Whom Margaret (now vpon her victory) With all speed possible from VVakefield sends; With hope to haue surpris'd him suddenly. Wherin, though she all meanes, all wit extends, To th'vtmost reach of wary policie; Yet nothing her avayles: no plots succeed, T'avert those mischiefes which the heauens decreed. 103 The battell of Mortimers cross wher Owen Teu∣ther, father to the E. of Pem∣brooke, who had married K Hen. mother was ta∣ken & . For, neere the Crosse ally'd vnto his name, He  those mighty forces of his foes; And with a spirit, or day'nd for deeds of fame, Their eager-fighting Army ouer-throwes: Making all cleer behind, from whence he came; Bearing-downe, wholly, what before him rose; Like to an all-confounding Torrent seemes: And was made more, by VVarwicks mighty streames. The E. of . after his ouer∣throw at S. Alb. retires with all the forces hee could make, and ioines with the yong D. of York: who comming to , and re∣ceiued with all ioie, a great Councell was  called of the L L. spiritu  all and temporall: where King  was   : for the  of the , and to be   all  author ; & the D os  ele∣cted  K and   by the name of Edward the 4. the 4 of March, 1460. at the age of 18. 104 With th'inundation of which Greatnesse, he (Hauing no bounds of powre to keepe him backe) Marcht to the Citie: at whose entrance free, No signes of ioy, nor no applaudings lacke. Whose neere approach, when this sad Queene did see, (T'auoyde these rocks of her neere threatning wrack) With her griev'd troupes North-ward she hence departs; And leaues, to Youth and Fortune, these South-parts.
105 Glory, with admiration, entring now, Opened that easie doore to his intent, As that there needes not long time to allow The Right he had vnto the Gouernement; Nor Henries iniuries to disauow, Against his oath, and th'Act of Parlement. " For, heere the speediest way he takes t'accord Difference in law, that pleades it with the Sword. 106 Gath'red to see his mustred Companies, Stoode all the flocking troopes of London streets; When Faulconbridge, with gentle feeling, tries How strong the pulse of their affection beates; And so Hen. 6. after he had raigned 38. yeares 8. , was deposed. And (reckning vp the grieuous miseries, And desolation, which the Country threats) Askt them, whom they would haue to be their King, To leade those troopes; and State in forme to bring. 107 Whereto, with such an vniuersall showt, The Earle of March, the multitude replyes, As the rebounding Eccho streight through-out (From Towre to Towre reuerberated) flyes To th'eares of those great Lords, who sate about The consultation for this enterprise. Whose care is sav'd, which most they stood vpon: For, what they counsell how too doe, is done. 108 And nothing now, but to confirme him king, Remaines (which must not long remaine) to do. The present heate doth strait dispatch the thing, With all those solemne rites that long thereto: So that, what Yorke, with all his trauay ling, Force and intrusion, could not get vnto, Is now thus freely layd vpon his sonne; Who must make faire, what  was begunne.
109 Whose end, attayn'd, had it here made an end Of foule destruction, and had stay'd the bloud Which Towton, Exham, Tewksbury did spend With desp'rate hands, and deeper wounds with stood; And that none other Crowne, brought to contend With that of his, had made his seeme lesse good; How had this long-afflicted Land been blest! Our sighes had ended, and my Muse had rest. 110 Which now (but little past halfe her long way) Stands trembling at the horrors that succeed; Weary with these embroylements, faine would stay Her  course, vnwilling to proceed: And, faine to see that glorious holy-day Of Vnion, which this discord reagreed; Knowes not as yet, what to resolue vpon; Whether to leaue-off here, or else go-on. The end of the seauenth Booke.
THE EIGHTTH BOOKE. THE ARGVMENT. King Edward, Powre against King Henry led; And hath at Towton-field the victory. From whence, King Henry into Scotland fled: Where he attempts his States recouery; Steales into England; is discouered; Brought Prisoner to the Towre disgracefully. And Edward, whiles great Warwick doth assay A Match in France, marries the Lady Grey. 1 ON yet, sad Verse: though those bright , from whence Thou hadst thy light, are set for euermore; And that these times do not like grace dispense To our indeuours, as those did before: Yet on; since She, whose beames do reincense This sacred fire, seemes as reseru'd in store To raise this Worke, and here to haue my last; Who had the first of all my labours past.
2 On (with her blessed fauour) and relate, Edward beeing proclaimed, and acknowledged for King, pre∣sently   towards the North, to encounter with K. Hen. 6. who in York shire had assembled a puissant armie, of neere 60000. men, and at a place called Towton, about 4. miles from Yorke, both their powers met: where was soght the greatest bat∣taile our stories mention, in all these ciuill wars. Where both the Armies consisted of aboue a 100000. men, & all of our own nation. With what new bloud-shed, this new chosen Lord Made his first entry to th'afflicted State, Past his first Act of publique, with the sword, Ingor'd his new-worne Crowne, and how he gat Possession of affliction, and restor'd His Right vnto a Royall miserie; Maintained with as bloudy dignitie. 3 Shew, how our great Pharsalian Field was fought At Towton in the North; the greatest day Of ruine, that  euer brought Vnto this Kingdom: where, two Crownes did sway The worke of slaughter; two Kings Causes wrought Destruction to our People, by the waie Of their affections, and their loyalties; As if one, for these ills, could not suffise. 4 Where Lancaster and that couragious side (That noble constant Part) came furnished With such a Powre, as might haue terrifi'd And ouer-run the earth; had they been led The way of glory, where they might haue tri'd For th'Empire of all Europe, as those did The Macedonian led into the East; Their number being double, at the least. 5 And where braue Yorke comes as compleatly mand, With courage, valour, and with equall might; Prepar'd to trie with a resolued hand, The metall of his Crown, and of his Right: Attended with his fatall fier-brand Of Warre, Warwicke; that blazing starre of fight, The Comet of destruction, that portends Confusion, and distresse, what way he tends.
6 What rage, what madness, England, do we see? That this braue people, in such multitude Run to confound themselues, and all to be Thus mad for Lords, and for meere Seruitude. What might haue been, if (Roman-like, and free) These gallant Spirits had nobler ends pursu'd, And strayn'd to points of glory and renowme, For good of the Republique and their owne? 7 But, here no Cato with a Senate stood For Common-wealth: nor here were any sought T'emancipate the State, for publique good; But onely, headlong, for their faction wrought. Here, euery man runs-on to spend his bloud, To get but what he had already got. For, whether Pompey, or a Caesar wonne, Their state was euer sure to be all one. 8 And, first, before these fatall Armies met, Had forward Warwicke lay'd the passage free, At Ferry Brigges: where the Lord Clifford (set The L. Clifford slaine at Ferry . With an aduentrous gallant companie To guard that streight, Yorkes farther march to let) Began the Scene to this great Tragedie; Made the first entrance on the Stage of blood: Which now, set wide for wounds, all open stood. 9 When, Edward to exhort his men began, With words, where to both spirit and Maiestie His pers'nage gave; for-that he was a man (Besides a King) whose Crowne sate gracefully. Com'n is the day, sayd he, wherin who can Obtaine the best, is Best: this day must try Who hath the wrong, and whence our ills haue beene: And tis our swords must make vs honest men.
10 For though our Cause, by God and men allow'd, Hath in it honor, right, and honestie: Yet all, as nothing, is to be avow'd, Vnless withall, we haue the victorie. For, Iustice is (we see) a virtue proud, And leanes to powre, and leaues weake miserie. And therefore, seeing the case we now stand in, We must resolue either to dy or winne. 11 So that if any here doth finde his heart To fayle him, for this noble worke, or stands Irresolute this day; let him depart, And leaue his Armes behind, for worthier hands. I knowe, e now will stay to doo their part, Here to redeeme themselues, , children, landes, And haue the glory that thereby shall rise, To free their Country from these miseries. 12 But here, what needed wordes to blowe the fire In flame already, and inkindled so As when it was proclaym'd, they might retire Who found vnwillingnes to vnder-goe That ventrous worke; they all did so conspire To stand out Fortune, that not one would goe, To beare away a hand from bloud; not one Defraud the Field of th'euill might be done. 13 Where VVarwicke too (producing, in their sight, An argument, whereby he did conclude The E.  War; ,  the   began, with  own hands   . There was no hope of , but by fight) Doth sacrifize his horse, to Fortitude: And thereby did the least conceipt of flight, Or any succour, by escape, exclude; " Se'ing, in the streight of a necessitie, " The meanes to win, is t'haue no meanes to flye.
14 It was vpon the twi-light of that day (That peacefull day) when the Religious beare The Oliue-branches as they go to pray, (And we, in lieu, the blooming Palmes vse here) When both the Armies, ready in array Forth' early sacrifize of blood, appeare Prepar'd formischiefe, ere they had full light To see to doo it, and to doo it right. 15 Th'aduantage of the time, and of the winde (Which, both, with Yorke seeme as retayn'd in pay) Braue Faulconbridge takes hold-on, and assign'd William . L. Faulconbridge, .  created E. of . The Archers their flight-shafes to shoote away: Which, th'aduerse side (with sleet and dimnesse, blinde, Mistaken in the distance of the way) Answere with their sheafe-arrowes; that came short Of their intended ayme, and did no hurt. 16 But, gath'red by th'on-marching Enemy, Returned were, like clowdes of steele; which powre Destruction downe, and did new-night the sky; As if the Day had fayl'd to keepe his howre. Whereat, the ranged horse breake-out, deny Obedience to the Riders, scorne their powre, Disrank the troupes, set all in disarray, To maketh' Assay lant owner of the day. 17 Thus, thou peculiar Ingine of our Land (Weapon of Conquest, Maister of the Field) Renowmed Boaw (that mad'st this Crowne command The towres of Fraunce, and all their powres to yeeld) Art made at home to haue th'especiall hand In our dissensions, by thy worke vp-held: Thou first didst conquer vs; then rays'd our skill To vanquish others; here our selues to spill.
18 And now how com'st thou to be out of date, And all neglected leav'st vs, and art gone? And with thee, th'ancient strength, the manly state Of valor, and of worth, that glory wonne? Or else stay'st thou, till new-priz'd shot abate? (That neuer shall affect what thou hast don) And oneiy but attend'st some blessed Raigne, When thou and Virtue shalt be grac't againe. 19 But, this sharp tempest draue Northumberland, (Who led the vant-guard of king Henries side) With eger heatioine battaile, out of hand; And this disorder, with their swords to hide. In this battaile of Towton on K. Hen. side, were  Hen  E. of North. the EE. of Shrewsbury and Deuonshire. Iohn I. , the I. L. Bewmond, Neuile, Willouh∣by, Wells, Roos, Grey, Dacres, Fitz-bugh, Mo∣lineux, Becking∣ham: Knights, the 2. base sons of Hen. Holland D. of Excester, Richard Percie,  Cliston, Andrew Trollop. &c. Where, twice siue howres, these furious armies stand; And Fortunes Ballance weigh'd on neither side; Nor either did but equall bloud-shed gayne, Till Henries chiefest leaders all were slaine. 20 Then, lo, those spirits, which from these heads deriue Their motions, gaue off working; and, in haste, Turne all their backs to Death, and mainely striue Who from themselues shall run-away most fast. The after-slyers on the former driue: And they againe, by the pursuers chac't, Make bridges of their fellowes backs, to pass The Brooks and Riuers, where-as danger was. 21 Witnes O cleare-stream'd Cock: within whose banks, So many thousand, crawling, helpless lay, With wounds and wearinesle; who, in their rankes, Had valiantly behav'd themselues that daie: And might haue had more honour, and more thankes The whole num∣ber  were accompted, by som', 33000. by others, 35091. By standing to their worke, and by their stay. " But men, at once, life seeme to loue and loath; " Running to lose it, and to saue it both.
22 Vnhappy Henrie, from a little Hill, Plac't not  off (whence he might view the fight) Had all th'intire full prospect of  ill, With all the scattered slaughter, in his sight: Saw how the victorrag'd, and spoil'd at wil, And left not off when all was in his might: Saw, with how great adoo himselfe was wonne; And with what store of blood Kings are vndone. 23 We are not worth so much, nor I, nor he, As hath beene spent for vs, by you this day, Deare people, said he: therefore, O, agree, And leaue off mischiefe, and your malice stay. Stay, Edward, stay. They must a People bee, When we shall not be Kings: and it is they, Who make vs with their miseries. Spare them, For whom thou thus dost seeke a Diadem. 24 For me, I could be pleas'd t'haue nought to doe With Fortune; and content, my selfe were ill, So England might be well; and that t'vndoe Me, might suffice the sword, without more ill. And yet perhaps, these men, that cleaue vnto The parts of Princes, with such eger will, Haue likewise their owne ends, of gaine or hate, In these our strifes, and nourish this debate. 25 Thus stood he (drawing lines of his discourse) In contemplation; when, more needfully, Queen Marga∣ret with her sonn were in the City of Yorke, expect∣ing the euent of this Battaile. It did import him to deuise a course, How he might shift for his recouery: And had beene taken had not some by force, Rescu'd, and drawne him off, more speedilie; And brought him vnto Yorke, in all maine poste: Where he first told his Queen, the daie was lost.
25 Who, as compos'd of that firme temp'rature Which could not bend to base complaynts, nor wayle As weakenes doth (fore-knowing howt'indure) Fayl'd not hersolfe, though Fortune did her fayle; But, rather casts-about how to procure Meanes to reserue her part, and to preuaile Of that poore time, left her to saue her owne; As one though ouer-come, not ouer-throwne: 26 Now, when she had of fatall Lancaster Seene all the pillars crusht and ruined, That vnder-set it; all that followed her Of those heroicke personages, dead, Saue onely Sommerset, and Excester (Who from this last destruction hardly fled) And saw all lost, and nothing in her might, But onely that which must be sav'd by flight: 27 Now, when there was no North left, of their owne, To draw vnto; no side, to gather head; No people to be rays'd, t'an emptie Crowne; Nor yet the ground their owne, whereon they tread. When yet your faith (worthy of all renowne) Constant Northumbrians, firme continued: And, though you could not render succors fit Vnto your Sov'raigne, you would saue him yet; 28 And be (as few men, in this world, are) true Vnto affliction, and to miserie: And would not basely purchace and renew Your peace, and safetie, by : But wrought, that though the Victor did pursue, With greedy care and egre industrie, To haue surpriz'd him; yet was all in . Till he recouered Berwicke, with his .
29 Where now, he was at some more vacancie To vnderstand, and see himselfe vndone: Which, in this sodaine-comming misery, He had no leasure to consider-on. And now  he that poore company, Attending on himselfe, his wife, and sonne; Sees how that all the State, which serv'd his Crowne, Was shut within the walls of one small towne: 30 there, what a poore distressed thing, A King without a people was; and whence The glory of that Mightinesse doth spring, That ouer-spreds (with such a reuerence) This vnder-world: whence comes this furnishing And all this splendor of Magnificence: He sees, what chayre so-euer Monarch sate Vpon, on Earth, the People was the State. 31 And yet, although he did contayne no more Then what he saw; yet saw a peece so small Could not containe him. What he was before, Made him vncapable of any wall, To yeeld him succour now: he must haue more, Then onely this small Holde, or none at all. And therefore, this (se'ing it auayl'd him not, Nor could he keepe) he renders to the Scot; 32 As th'Earnest, to confirme and ratifie Hen. 6 deliuers the towne of Berwicke to the K. of Scots. The league betweene them two, newly begun. Whereof to make more sure and faster tye, He promist, too, th'alliance of his sonne: And all that might secure their amity, With willingnesse, on either side was done. And heere they practise, all they can deuise, To turne reuenge vpon their Enemyes.
33 Thus, England, didst thou see the mightiest King Thou euer hadst (in Power and Maiesty Of State, and of Dominions; gouerning A most magnificent Nobility; With an aduent'rous people, flourishing In all the glories of felicitie) Chac't from his kingdom, forc't to seeke redresse In parts remote, distrest and succourlesse. 34 Now Bullingbrook, these miseries, heere showne, Doo much vnlode thy sinne; make thy ill, good. For, if thou did didst by wrong, attaine the Crowne, T'was without cryes; it cost but little bloud: But, Yorke, by his attempt hath ouer-throwne All the best glorie wherein England stood; And did his state by her vndooing winne: And was, though white without, yet red within. 35 And thus he hath it: and is now to deale For th' intertaining and continuance Of mens affections; and to seeke to heale Those foul corruptions, which the maintenance Of so long wars bred in the Common-weale. He must remunerate, prefer, aduance, His chiefest friendes; and prosecute, with might, The aduerse part; doo wrong, to doo men right: 36 Whil'st Martiall Margaret, with her hopefull Sonne, Is trauailing in France to purchase ayde; And plots, and toiles, and nothing leaues vndone; Though allin vaine. For, being thus ouer-layd By Fortune and the Time, all that is done Is out out of season. For she must haue stay'd Till that first heate of mens affections (which They beare new Kings) were laid, and not so much.
37 When they should finde, that  had gayn'd no more, Then th'Asle,  changing of his Maisters, did; (Who still must labour as he vs'd before) And those expectancies came frustrated, Which they had set vpon th'imag in'd score, Of their accounts; and had considered, How that it did but little benefite The Doues; To change the Falcon, for the Kite. 38 Queene Marga∣ret, furnished with a great power of Scots and French, to the number of 20000, with her  entred into Northum∣berland, took the Castle of Bam∣brough and af∣ter came for∣ward to the Bi∣shoprick of Dur∣ham. Wher Hen.  D. of Somerset who had lately  reconciled to K. Ed. 4 ioined with them, and also brought  with him Sir Ralph Per∣cie,  man of great courage & worth: who were taken in the bat∣taile of Exham, and executed in An. 3. Ed. 4. 1464. And yet braue Queene, for three yeares of his Raigne, Thou gau'st him little breathing time of rest; But still his miseries didst entertaine With new attempts, and new aslauts addrest: And, at thy now-returne from France againe, (Suppli'd with forces) once more gatheredst An Army for the Field, and brought'st, to warre, The scattered parts of broken Lancaster. 39 And once againe, at Exham, ledst them on With Scots, and French t'another bloody day; And there beheldst thy selfe againe vndone, With all that Rest, whereon thy fortunes lay. Where, Somerset (late to King Edward gone, And got his pardon) hauing scap't away, With noble Percie, came to bring their blood Vnto thy side, whereto they first had stood. 40 Where, the Lords, Molines, Rosse, and Hungerford, With many else of noble Families, Extinguisht were; and many that daies sword Cut-off their names, in their posterities. Where fled, againe, their lucklesse followed Lord; And is so neere pursu'd by th' enemies, As th'Ensigne of his Crowne was seiz'd vpon, For him who had before his Kingdome wonne;
41 And shortly after, too, his person gat. For, he, now wearied with his long exile, And miseries abrode, grew passionate, With longing to returne t' his natiue soyle. And se'ing he could not do the fame, in State; He seekes, disguis'd in fashion, to beguile The world a time, and steale the libertie And sight of his deare Country, priuately: 42 As if there were, for a pursued King, King Hen. was  in , and  to Lon∣don, with his legs bound to the , , in  company,  Doctor Man∣ning, Deane of Windzor, with another Diuine: who were taken with him and committed to the Tower. A couert left on earth, wherein to hide; When Powre and Iealousie are trauailing, And lay to catch affliction, on each side. Misfortune serues, we see, for euery thing. And soon he comes, God knows, to be descry'd: And Edward hath the booty he desir'd: For whose establishment, all things conspir'd. 43 Yet, long it was not, ere a fire began To take, in th'inwardst Closet, where he lay'd The treasure of his chiefest trust; and ran From thence, through al his State, before it staid. For, be'ing a King, who his whole fortunes wan With others handes, must many leaue vnpay'd: And could not fill vp that vast greedinesse Of Expectation, which is bottomlesse: 44 Though he did all the best that in him lay K. Ed. 4. sate on the Kings Bench, in open Court, 3  together, in Michaelmas Terme An. 2. of his raigne, to vn∣derstand how his lawes were executed. (As a most actiue Prince) to satisfie The int'rest of their trauayles, and The bands contracted twixt his soueraignty And the Republick: seeking to allay All greeuances; reorder equity; Reform the Barres, that Iustice did abuse; Lay easie on the State, as new Kings vse.
45 As he, who, hauing found great Treasury, The first yeare offers, with most gratefull cheere, A sheepe of gold,  Iunoes deity; And next, of siluer, for the second yeare; The third, of brasse; and then, neglectiuely, Nothing at all: So those respects, which were Borne of a present feeling, mov'd him most; But soon were with their times and motiues lost. 46 And, what his bounty could not recompense, He payes with honors, and with dignities. And (more to angle the beneuolence, And catch the loue of men, with curtesies) He oft would make his dignity dispense With his too lowe familiarities; Descending, from his Sphere of Maiesty. Beneath himselfe, very submissiuely. 47 The Earle of Warwicke was sent into France to treat of a mariage between King Edward and the Ladie Bona, daughter to Loyse D. of Sauoy and sister to the La. Car∣lote Queene of France: which was there a∣greed vpon; and Monsieur Damp Martin with o∣thers appointed to be sent into Eng. for the full accomplishing thereof. And when he had dispos'd, in some good traine, His home affaires; he counsells how t'aduance His forraine correspondence, with the chaine Ofsome alliance that might countenance His Greatnesse, and his quiet intertaine. Which was thought fittest with some match, of France; To hold that Kingdome, from subayding such Who else could not subsist, nor hope so much. 48 Nor was it now a time to haue contrast With any forrain mighty Potentate; But keep the outer doores of each side fast, Hauing so much to doo within his State. And, therevpon, was Warwicke (by whose cast All must be wrought) imploy'd to mediate A present Marriage, to be had betweene Him, and the sister of the yong French Queene.
49 Which was not long, nor hard to bring to passe But in the mean , (the first of ) the K. ma∣ried the La. Eli∣zabeth Grey, daughter to the Dutchess of Red∣ford, late wife to Sir Iohn Grey  at S.  on King Henries part. Where like respects met in a point alike. So that the same as euen concluded was, And all as done; Lady and friends all like: When , the Lord of Kings (by whom must passe This Act of our Affections) tooke dislike That he was not made  thereunto; And therfore, in his wrath, would all vndoe. 50 For, whiles this youthfull Prince, at his disport In Grafton woods, retyr'd from publick care, Attending how his sute in France did sorte (Whereon his cogitations onely were) He comes, at home, surpris'd in other sort; A neerer fire inflam'd his passions heere; An English Beautie, with more worth indu'd Then France could yeeld, his royall heart subdu'd. 51 A wofull widdow, whom his quarrell had (As it had many moe) made desolate, Came to his Court, in mournfull habit clad, To sue for Iustice, to relieue her state. And entring as a suppliant all sad; With gracefull sorrow, and a comely gate She past the Presence: where, all eyes were cast On her more stately presence, as she past. 52 Her lookes, not let-abrode (but carefully Kept in, restraind) held their : Obseruing none but her owne dignity, And his, to whom she did her selfe addresse. And, drawing neere his royall Maiesty, A blush of reuerence, not bashfulnesse, Lightned her louely cheeks, and downe she kneeles; Giues her Petition, for the wrongs she feeles.
53 And, in deliv'ring it, lifts vp her eyes (The mouingst Mediatours shee could bring) And strait withdrawes them, in submissiue wise; Not fixing them directly on the King: Who, mov'd with her sweet fashion, bade her rise, With gentle language full of comforting; Read her request: but thought not what he read. The lines, hee view'd, her eyes had figured. 54 Then paus'd a while, and mus'd; as if he weigh'd The substance of her sute. The which, God wote, Was not the thing he mus'd. And, hauing stay'd, Seem'd to read on againe; but yet reades not: And still a stealing -cast looke conuai'd On her sweet face; as if he had forgot To be else-where, then where he did behold: And thought not what he did; but what he would. 55 But, least his sodaine passion might haue, there, More  then he would wish to haue; He tooke vp his desires, which posting were Beyond their stages; and this answere gaue: Madam, we will our selfe take time to heare Your Cause at large: wherein we wil you haue No other reference, but repaire to vs: Who will accommodate this businesse. 56 She, that expected present remedie (Hearing this dilatory answer) thought, The King found scruple in the equitie Of her request; and thereupon he sought To put her to delayes of Court, whereby She might be tyr'd, and in the end get nought. And that, which her opinion made more strong, Was that he studied, and was mute, so long.
57 Which forc't from her these wordes: My Lord, Let not my being a Lancastrian bred Without mine owne election, disafford Me right, or make my Cause disfigured; Since I am now the subiect of your sword: Which God hath (with your Right) established, To doo vs right: and let not what wee were, Be now the cause to hurt vs as we are. 58 Ladie, mistake me not: neuer did I Make war with women, nor vs'd womens war, Reuenge; but prosecuted honestly My Right, not Men. My quarrels ended are, With my obtayning of the victorie. And (Lady) knowe, your Cause moues me thus far, As you shall finde, sayd hee, I doo desire To doo you greater right then you require. 59 With this, they part; both, with their thoughts full charg'd: She, of her sute in hand; and he of her: Wherein, he spends that night, and quite discharg'd All other cogitations; to confer, First, how he might haue her estate inlarg'd: Then, in what sort her seruice to prefer Vnto his new exspected Wife and Queene: Then, how to maske his loue, from being seene. 60 For, yet, Lust was not growne to that degree To haue no limits; but that shame kept-in The greatest Greatnes, from this being free To hold their Wantonness to be no sinne. For, though Kings cannot ouer-maistred bee, They will be ouer-lookt, and seene within: And, though they could their  make sure; Yet crymes, though safe, can neuer be secure.
61 Sometimes, he thinks it better to prouide A place retyr'd, and haue her from the Court: And then, with what pretentions he might hide His priuat comming, and his oft resort: Then, by his Queene, if it should be espid, How he might cleare with her, and stop report. And thus consumes the night: and if hee slept, He slept those thoughts that with these  kept. 62 The morning being com'n (and glad he was That it was com'n) after so long a night He thought would haue no morning (time did passe So , and his desires ran-on so light) A  with speed dispatched was, Of speciall trust, this Lady to inuite To come t'his presence; though before the time That Ladies rise: who rarely rise betime. 63 Yet soone shee hastes: and yet that soone seem'd long, To him whose longing went so swift a pase: And frets, that such attyring should belong To that which yeelds it selfe sufficient grace; Consid'ring how these ornaments may wrong The set of beautie: which, we see, doth grace Th'attire it weares, and is not grac't thereby; As be'ing that onely, which doth take the eye. 64 But now, be'ing com'n, that quarrell of delay Streight ended was: her presence satisfies All, what Expectance had layd out for stay: And he be held more sweetnesse in her eyes, And saw her more then she was yesterday: A cheerliness did with her hopes arise, That lamped  then it did before, And made her spirit, and his affections, more.
65 When, those who were about him, presently Voyded the roome, and left him to confer Alone with his faire Suter priuatly (As they who to his courses conscious were) And he began: Madame, the remedie Which you (in your Petition) sue-for here, Shall be allow'd to th'vtmost that you craue, With th'expedition you would wish to haue. 66 And here I haue another sute to you: Which if you please to grant, wee both shall now Rest equally content. Wherewith, there grew That sodaine alteration in her brow, As all were ouer-cast; and so with-drew That freedome from her lookes (least they should 'low More then her heart might meane) as they reflect A narrower and a carefuller aspect. 67 That when he saw this barrier of dislike Thus inter-set, to keepe his forwardnes Backe from presumptiue pressing; it did strike That reuerence, as it staide him to expresse His farther will. And she replies: 'Tis like, When Kings to subiects sue, they meane no less Then to command; nor must they be withstood; For-that good Kings will seeke but what is good. 68 And, in that faire respect, your Maiestie, According to your will, both must and may Command my seruice; who most reuerently Your royall pleasure euer shall obay. With which word, pleasure (though it doubtfully In that hard  of condition lay, Vnder the locke of goodnesse) he was cast In hope, he might obtaine the same at last.
69 And thus  My pleasure only shall Be, Madame, for your good; please it but you To make it so. And, here to tell you all, I loue you; and therein I tell you true. What honour may by Kings  fall, Must light vpon your fortunes, as your due. And though France shall a Wife, for fashion, bring: You must be th'onely mistress of the King. 70 Streight might you see, how Scorne, and Feare, & Shame All intermixt in one aspect) returne The message of her thoughts, before words came. And first, within her brow, in state sate Scorne; Shame in her Cheekes; where also Feare became An In-mate too; and both appeare, by turne: Blushes did paleness, paleness blushes chace; As scorning, fearing, shaming such disgrace. 71 She scornes to be addeem'd so worthlesse-base As to bee mov'd to such an infamie. She shames to thinke, that ought, within her face, Should breed th'opinion of immodestie. Shee feares the  daunger of the place, Her'loneness, and the powre of Maiestie: And so (confus'd) in feare, in shame, in scorne, This Answere to his Motion doth returne: 72 My sov'raigne Lord, it grieues me that you deeme, Because I in this sort for Iustice sue, I would the same with mine owne wrong redeeme, And by dishonour reobtaine my due: No: I would hate that right, which should but seeme To be beholding to a wanton view Or motiue of my person, not my Cause; That craues but right, from Iustice, and your lawes.
73 And knowe, great Monarch, that I more doo waigh My Distaffe with mine honour, then I doo The mightiest Scepter, King did euer sway Vpon the earth, or Nations bow'd vnto. I owe ; which I humbly pay, With all the out ward seruice I can doo: But, Sov'raigne, in the region of my hart I raigne sole ; no King can force a part. 74 Here,  a little interpos'd a touch, To warne her violence to temporize With Powre, and State: and she concludes her speach, With crauing pardon in more humble wise; Yet, in proud humble wise: which shew'd, how much She did her honor aboue Greatnes prise. And so, being full of what she did conceiue, Desires to be dismist, and takes her leaue. 75 Here, Mary Pembrooke (by whose generous brow, And noble graces, I These shapes of others virtues) could I showe In what a desperat and confus'd estate She left this disappointed King; and how Loue and Ambition in their glory sate, And tyranniz'd on his diuided hart, Warring each other with a powrefull part. 76 How first, Loue vnderneath his Colours brought The strength of all her gracefull worthinesse; And sets them in th'aduantage of his thought, Vpon the side of Youth and Wantonnesse: Then how Ambition, that for glory wrought, Comes with his State, his Crowne, and Powrfulnes, And plants her on the side of prouidence, To beat vnfit Affections off from thence.
77 But, I must ouer-goe these passages; And hasten-on my way, to ouer-take Mine endes, in sad and grauer businesses; Wherof I shall to you relation make: And yet my zeale here forc't mee thus t'expresse Elizabeth, forour Elizaes sake; Who grac't the Muses (which her Times became): For, they who giue them comfort, must haue fame. 78 And I must tell you now, when this great fight Of counter-passions had beene throughly try'd, How in the ende the victorie did light Vpon Loues forces, as the stronger side; And beat downe those respects of benefite, Of honor, greatnes, strength, and all beside; And neuer graunted rest vnto his strife, Till mariage rites had her confirm'd his wife. 79 Which, that place, where he saw her first, saw donne, Ere he remov'd his foot: for, Loue is stil In haste, and (as a Lord, that rules alone) Admittes no Counseller, in good norill. For, He and Kings gladly giue eare to none, But such as smooth their wayes, and sooth their will. And who will not desire to giue his voyce (Be what it will) to prayse a Princes choyce? 80 Which was (indeed) in virtue, beautie, grace, And all but fortune, worthy of his bed: And in that too, had hee but liv'd the space Thaue seene her plentious issue fully bred; That they might haue collated strength and grace On her weake side: which ( and maliced) Lay-open vndefenc't, apt to b'vndon By proud vsurping Powre, when he was gon.
81 But now, when fame of this home-chosen Match Arriu'd in France (for there it did arriue, Ere they could heere attend to make dispatch T'impart the same to Warwick, or contriue Some colour that in any sort might fetch Him fayrely off, and no dishonor giue) It so much stird the humors in those parts, As marr'd the whole complexion of their hearts. 82 The French King scornes such an indignity. VVarwick disdaines imployment in this case. The Queene (inrag'd) with extreame vehemency, Stormes at her sisters and her owne disgrace. The Lady Bona takes most tenderly To be so mockt, with hope of such a Place: And all blame Warwick, and his fraud condem; Whil'st he himself, deceiu'd, suffers with them: 83 And could not (by all meanes might be deuiz'd) Vntaste them of this violent disgust; But that they still held, something lay disguis'd Vnder this treaty. So that now he must Bring-home his reputation cauteris'd With th'idle marke of seruing others lust In friuolous imployments, or be sent Out of the way to colour some intent. 84 " Which, to himselfe, made him, with griefe inueigh " Against distemp'red kings: who often are " Ill warrants for their owne affaires; and waigh " Their lusts, more then their dignity, by far: " And what a miserie they haue that sway " Their great designes; what danger, and what care; " And often must be forc't, be'ing at their becks, " To crack their reputation, or their necks.
85 " How their high fauours like as fig-trees are, " That growe vpon the sides of rocks; where they " Who reach their fruit, aduenture must so far " As t' hazard their deep down-fall and decay. " Their grace, not fixt; but, as a blazing star " Burnes out the present matter, and away: " And how the world could too wel witnesse , " That both their loues and hates like dangerous were. 86 Thus he complaynes, and makes his home-retire; All disappointed of his purposes. For, hoping, by this Match, to hold intire That Lady, with her great alliances; And haue the King more  to his desire, By managing of both their bus'nesses; He, by this Match (thus made without his mean) Comes barr'd from al those tying int'rests cleane. 87 For, well he knew, that all his seruice past Was past; and would not be a future tye To hold him in, vnlesse that he could cast To introduce some neerenecessity Of his imployment, that were like to last, And shut-out all other concurrency. Without which, nor his Greatnes, nor his Wits, Could ward him from the Kings vnconstant fits. 88 Which more perplext him, and in neerer sort, Then what France might by his ambassage ghesse, Or England deeme, But, being arriu'd at Cort, He drawes a Trauerse 'twixt his greeuances; Lookes like the time: his eye made not report Of what he felt within: nor was he lesse Then vsually he was, in euery part; Wore a cleere face, vpon a clowdy hart:
89 Congratulates the Queene; commends the King For his rare choice; protesting her to be Far beyond all, the world beside could bring To fit his liking; and that he did see The Lady Bona was a peeuish thing, Sullayne, and proud; and would in no degree Haue pleas'd his humor, or in any sort Haue satisfi'd the Ladies of this Cort. 90 And, after hauing finisht all the rite Of complement and interuisiting; He humbly craues  that he might Retyre a while, t' attend the managing And setting of his country-bus'nesse right; Whereby the better to attend the King: From whom he parts; and neuer seem'd more deere, More , nor yet himselfe offre'er cheere. 91 First, VVarwick-Castle (that had seldome knowne The Maister there) he visits; and from thence Goest' other goodly Mannours of his owne. Where seene with ioy, with loue, with reuerence; (King of him selfe,) he findes that there is show'n The vse of life, the true magnificence, his Greatnesse: which, at Corte, in vaine Mentoyle-for, and yet neuer doo attaine. 92 Which, his religious Confessor (who best Could cast, with what a violent accesse, This seuer of Ambition did molest His still-sick minde) takes hold-on; to addresse (Vpon th'aduantage of this little rest) Some lenitiues, t'allay the firynesse Of this disease; which (as a maladie, Seiz'd in the Spirits) hath seldom remedy.
93 " And thus sets on him: See, my Lord, how heere " Th'eternall Prouidence of God hath brought " You to the Shore of safetie (out of feare) " From all the waues of misery, that wrought " To ouer-whelm you; and hath set you cleare, " Where you would bee; with hauing (which you sought " Through all these hazards of distresse) a King " Of your owne making and establishing. 94 " And now, my Lord, I trust you will sit downe, " And rest you, after all this passed thrall, " And be your selfe (a Prince within your owne) " Without aduent'ring any more at all " Your state in others Bottomes; hauing knowne " The dangers that on mighty Actors fall; " Since, in the foot of your accompts, your gaynes " Come-short to make euen reck'ning with your paines. 95 " Inioy now what you wrought-for, in this sort " (If great-mens Endes be to enioy their Endes) " And knowe, the happiest powre, the greatest port, " Is onely that which on it selfe depends. " Heere haue you State inough to be a Cort " Vnto your selfe; here, where the world attends " On you, not you on it, obserued sole: " You, else-where but a part, are heere the whole. 96 " Th'aduantages of Princes, are (we see) " But things conceiu'd imaginarily. " For, euery state of fortune, in degree, " Some image hath of principalitie: " Which they inioy more naturall and free, " Then can great Powers, chain'd with observancie, " And with the fetters of respect still ty'd; " Being easier far to follow then to guide.
97 " And what are Corts, but Camps of misery? " That doo besiege mens states, and still are prest " T'assaile, prevent, complot, and fortifie; " In hope t'attaine, in feare to be supprest: " Where, all with shewes, and with apparancie, " Men seeme, as if for stratagems addrest: " Where, Fortune, as the Woolfe, doth still prefer " The fowlest of the traine that followes her. 98 " And where, fayre hopes are lay'd (as ambushments) " To intercept your life, and to betray " Your liberty to such intanglements, " As you shal neuer-more get cleare away: " Where, both th'ingagement of your owne intents, " And others recknings, and accounts, shall lay " Such waights vpon you, as you shal not part, " Vnlesse you breake your credit, or your heart. 99 " Besides: as exiles, euer from your homes " You liue perpetuall in disturbancy; " Contending, thrusting, shuffling for your roomes " Of ease or honor, with impatiency: " Building your fortunes, vpon others tombes, " For other then your owne posterity. " You see, Corts few aduance; many vndoo: " And those they do aduance, they ruine too. 100 " And therefore now, my Lord, since you are heere, " Where you may haue your rest with dignitie; " Worke that you may continue so: and cleare " Your selfe, from out these streights of misery. " Hold your estate and life, as things more deare " Then to be throwne at an vncertainty. " Tis time, that you and England haue a calme; " And time, the Oliue stood aboue the Palme.
101 Thus the good Father, with an humble thought (Bred in a Cellularie lowe retyre) According to his quiet humor, sought T'auert him from his turbulent desire; " When the great Earle began: Father, I note " What you with zeale aduise, with loue require: " And I must thanke you, for this care you haue, " And for those good aduertisements you gaue. 102 " And truely, Father, could I but get free " (Without being rent) and hold my dignitie; " That Sheep-cot, which in yonder vale you see " (Beset with Groues, and those sweet Springs hard-by) " I rather would my Palace wish to bee, " Then any roofe, of proudest Maiestie: " But, that I cannot dooe; I haue my part: " And I must liue, in one house, with my hart. 103 " I knowe, that I am fixt vnto a Sphere " That is ordayn'd to moue. It is the place " My fate appoints me; and the region where " I must, what-euer happens, there, imbrace, " Disturbance, trauaile, labor, hope and feare, " Are of that Clime, ingendred in that place. " And action best, I see, becomes the Best. " The Starres, that haue most glorie, haue no rest. 104 " Besides: it were a Cowards part, to fly " Now from my Holde, that haue held out so well; " It being the Station of my life, where I " Am set to serue, and stand as Sentinell: " And must, of force, make good the place, or dy, " When Fate and Fortune (those great States) compell. " And then, we Lords in such case  are, " As peace can cut our throats aswell as war.
105 " And hath her griefes, and  : " And doth with idle rest, deforme vs more " Then any  can, or sorceresse, " With basely wasting all the Martiall store " Of heat and spirit (which graceth Manlinesse) " And makes vs still false images adore: " Besides profusion of our faculties, " In grosse dull glutt'ny, vap'rous gourmandise. 106 " And therefore since I am the man I am, " I must not giue a foote, least I giue all. " Nor is this Bird within my breast so tame, " As to be fed at hand, and mockt with-all. " I rather would my state were out of frame, " Then my renowne should come to get a fall. " No, no: th'vngratefull boy shall neuer think, " That I, who him inlarg'd to powre, will shrink. 107 " What is our life, without our dignitie? " Which oft, we see, comes lesse by liuing long. " Who euer was there worth the memorie, " And eminent indeed, but still dy'd young? " As if worth had agreed with destinie, " That time, which rightes them, should not doo thē wrong. " Besides; Old-age doth giue, by too long space, " Our soules as many wrinkles as our face. 108 " And as for my inheritance and state " (What euer happen) I wil so prouide " That Law shall, with what strength it hath, collate " The same on mine, and those to mine ally'd: " Although I knowe, she serues a present State, " And can vndoo againe what shee hath ty'd. " But, that we leaue to him, who poynts-out heyres: " And howsoeuer, yet the world is theirs.
109 " Where, they must worke it out; as borne to run " Those Fortunes, which as mightie Families " (As euer they could be) before haue donne. " Nor shall they gaine, by mine indignities, " Who may without my courses be vndonne. " And who-so makes his State, and life, his tyes " To doo vnworthily, is borne a slaue: " And let him with that brand go to his Graue. 110 Here, would the reuerent Father haue reply'd, That it were far more Magnanimitie, T'indure, then to resist: that we are ty'd As well to beare the inconueniencie And straynes of Kings and States; as to abide Vntimely raynes, tempests, sterilitie, And other ills of Nature that befall: Which we, of force, must be content withall: 111 But that a speedy messenger was sent To shewe, the D. of Clarence was hard-by. And, thereupon, VVarwicke breakes-off, and went (With all his traine attending formally) To intertaine him, with fit complement; As, glad of such an opportunitie To worke vpon, for those high purposes He had conceiv'd in discontentednes. The ende of the eightth Booke.
Faults escaped. Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 40. 24. all call 61. 9. This Tis 204. 14. our one.
