8221 99850690 15914
¶ By the Queene. ❧ A Proclamation for adiournment of part of Michaelmas Terme. 1592. FOrasmuch as the Queenes Maiestie our soueraigne Ladie is crediblie informed that the infec∣tion of the plague is at this present in sundry places in and about the Citie of London, and in o∣ther places neere adioyning to the same: Whereas by the continuance thereof, through the grea∣ter repaire and resort of her louing subiects, great perill and danger might not onely ensue vnto her most royall person, but also to her most louing subiects repayring thither for their sutes and causes, and thereby also giue occasion of dispersing of the same into other parts of the Realme: Her Maiestie for the said necessarie considerations, and hoping that the same will by the good∣nesse of Almighty God, with the coldnes of the yeere, & such wholsome orders as are taken in her d City, the rather cease by the adiournment of part of this next Terme of S. Michael now at hand, from the Vtas of the same vntill the fourth returne of the said Terme called Mense Michaelis next comming: Her Maiestie therefore of her especi∣all fauour and clemencie is pleased and contented to adiourne the said Terme of S. Michael, (that is to say,) from the Vtas thereof vnto the said fourth returne of the said Terme called Mense Michaelis next comming, which her Maiestie signifieth to all and singular her louing subiects of this her Realme, to the intent that they and euery of them, which hath cause or commandement to appeare in any of her Highnesse Courts at Westminster, in or at any day or time from and after the sayde Vtas of S. Michael, may tarie at their dwellings, or where their businesse otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any of the said Courts for that cause before the said Mense Michaelis next comming, and that without daunger of forfeyture, penalty, or contempt to incurre towards her highnesse in that behalfe. And neuerthelesse her Maiesties pleasure is, that two of her Justices (that is to say,) of eyther Bench one, shall the first day of Michaelmasse Terme, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order of the lawes, keepe the Essoynes of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which Vtas of S. Michael writs of ad∣iournment shall be directed to the said Justices, giuing them authority to adiourne the said Terme of S. Michael, that is to say) from the Vtas therof vntil the fourth returne, as before is said: And the said adiournment shal be made in the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the day of the Essoynes. And further her Maiesties pleasure is, that al matters, causes and sutes depending in any of her other Courts betweene partie & partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chancerie, Star∣chamber and Eschequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, Duchie of Lancaster and Court of Requests, shall haue continu∣ance, and the parties shall haue day from the date of these presents, vntill the fourth returne, as before is sayd. Prouided alway, and her Maiesties pleasure and commandement is, that all Collectors, Receiuers, Sherifes, d other Accomptants, and all other persons that should or ought to accompt or pay any summe or summes of money in any of her Maiesties Courts of Eschequer, Court of Wards and Liueries, or of her Duchie of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any account in any of the said Courts, shall repaire vnto her Maiesties house of Sion, where her Highnesse hath ap∣pointed such officers and ministers as for that purpose her Maiestie hath thought expedient, and there to pay and doe in euerie behalfe as though no such Proclamation of adiournment had bene had or made. And her Highnesse further plea∣sure and commandement is, that all Sherifes shal returne their Writs & Proces against all such Accomptants and debters at the dayes therin appointed: And if any person or persons, who ought to accompt or pay any summe or summes of money to her Maiestie in any the Courts and places aforesaid, do make default therein, That then her Highnes Writs, & Proces, shalbe awarded and sent forth against euery such person and persons, and the same to be duely & orderly serued and returned by the Shiriffes and officers therunto appointed in such like maner and forme as the same should haue bene, if this present Proclamation had not bene made. And if any Shirife or other officer shall make default or be negligent in seruing, execu∣ting, or returning of any the writs and Proces aforesaid, That then euery such Shirife and other officer shall incurre such paines and penalties, as by the said Courts or any of them shalbe taxed & assessed. Willing and commanding all and euery her Maiesties Shirifes, Officers, ministers and Subiects, to whom it doth, or shall apperteine, to obserue and keepe their assemblies and apparances, with all their Returnes and Certificats in her Highnes said Courtes at Westminster in Mense Michaelis next comming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there to doe their offices and dueties in euery behalfe, in like maner and forme as they should or ought to haue done if this present Proclamation had not bene had or made, as they will answere to the contrary at their perils. Giuen at our Mannour of Woodstocke the xviii. day of September 1592. and of our raigne the xxxiiii. yeere. God saue the Queene. ¶ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
