A4315 12384055 60800
THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF Capt. BARTH. SHARP And others, in the South Sea: BEING A JOURNAL of the same. ALSO Capt. Van Horn with his Buccanieres sur∣prizing of la VERA CRUZ. To which is added The true Relation of Sir Henry Mrgan his Expedition against the Spaniards in the West-Indies, and his taking Panama. Together with The President of Panama's Account of the same Expedition: Translated out of Spanish. And Col. Beeston's adjustment of the Peace be∣tween the Spaniards and English in the West Indies. Published by P. A. Esq LONDON Printed by B. W. for R. H. and S. T. and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. MDCLXXXIV.
THE PREFACE. THE Reader may well wonder at the disposing thus, the several Rela∣tions in this small Vo∣lume: I shall therefore for his satis∣faction give this following account. That the Exploits of Captain Sharp, and others in the South Sea, in ser∣vice of the Emperour of Darien,
being the first that came to my Hands, at the time the late History of Buc∣canieres was published; and I find∣ing it to be a plain Journal, not unpleasant, and much of the same kind, writ by a Seaman, though not learned and accurate in his stile; yet one that certainly was very skilful and industrious in the Art of Sailing, who seems to have given a true and just Relation of what befel them in that Expedition: most of which I have heard confirmed by others, who were actually present in all those Adven∣tures: For that reason I thought it might not be unacceptable to the world. To which I have only this to add, That this Emperor of Darien had been formerly surprized by the Spaniards, and by them carried to Panama, where he learnt indiffe∣rently the Spanish Language, and was called by them Sennordon An∣dreas:
But he, after his escape, for their kind treatment of him, has never ceased making War upon them, always falling on whereever he sees any good opportunity; and when like to be overpowered, he retreats amongst his Hills, Woods, and Rivers, with which last his Countrey is very well stored, and so baffles the industrious revenge of his Enemies. The exact limits of that which is properly called the Province or District of Darien (which our Author has omitted to give us) are thus described. It is bounded on the South by the Kingdom of New Granada; by the Gulf of Uraba or Darien on the East; by the South Sea on the West; and on the North by the Province of Panama; to which Government this is now annexed, I mean, so much as the Spaniards have of it.
It took its name from the River so called, running into the South Sea, and has a small Town, though once a great City, called Santa Maria del Da∣rien, but more commonly, Santa Maria only, and sometimes la An∣tigua, signifying the Ancient Ci∣ty. The next thing which is a short Account of Van Horns taking la Vera Cruz, being more Modern, and of the same nature, I added; to∣gether with the destroying the French Pyrates by Captain Carlisle, that it may be seen what care is taken to suppress such as molest so considerable a support of our Nation, as is our Trade and Commerce with Foreign Countries; of which that with Spain is not the least: for by it more of our Manufactures are taken off, than by any other whatsoever. Besides
this of Captain Carlisle's, if I had the leasure, I could have given an account of several others, both Men of War, and Merchant-Ships, fit∣ted and manned out as such, by the Goverours of Jamaica, Barbados, and the Leeward Islands, on pur∣pose for scouring the Seas of the Buccanieres or Pyrates, who being a mixture of divers Nations, but the greatest part of them French and Dutch, make Prize of all they meet. The third Relation is of Sir Hen∣ry Morgan, which according to me∣thod ought to have been placed first, but I had no intentions of printing that, till I had read over and considered the said History of Buccanieres, and then thought my self obliged no lon∣ger to conceal such an Authentick ac∣count of that Expedition: To which
I have adjoyned the President of Panama's Letter, which was inter∣cepted, going for Spain, and con∣firms (if need were) the Credit of the precedent Relation. As to the last Paper, in which is mentioned the settling the Peace in those parts, with a Description of the City of Carthagena; since it related somewhat to the foregoing Pieces, I thought it not improper, with it to conclude these Miscella∣nies. But I confess, I had yet another design in printing that one Expediti∣on of Sir Henry Morgan, which was, That I might in some measure rescue the Honour of that incom∣parable Souldier and Seaman, from the Hands of such as would load him with the blackest infamy. I could not
therefore forbear making some few re∣flections on the aforementioned Hi∣story of Buccanieres, but more especially that part which concerns Sir Henry Morgan and the Eng∣lish. For it is against them, the Authors Malice seems most to be aim∣ed, endeavouring on all occasions to represent them the most Lewd, Perfi∣dious, and Barbarous People in the World. And whereas the Translator, who, I confess, seems to have performed his part well enough, in having ren∣dered it from the Spanish Trans∣lation, does in his Encomiums of the Author, comparing him to the ad∣mirable Historian Comines, very much extoll his Candour, and fide∣lity, in recording the Actions and Valour of the English; then at large he commends his Stile and Me∣thod;
and highly applauds the Truth and Sincerity of his Histo∣ry. I will not trouble my self to shew the inequality of the Parallel, with the incomparable Comines: And as for his faithful recording their Actions, and Valour, I must al∣low him to have writ some of their heroick Exploits well enough, which of themselves were so Eminent, that had he gone about to have les∣sened, it would have taken away all credit from his History: But he has most maliciously stigmatized them all the while, as valiant Thieves and Murderers. So that there is no Man that reads them, who does not conceive a horrour a∣gainst the barbarous Actors of those Cruelties.
Neither will I find fault with the Authors Stile, and Method; But it is chiefly the boasted Truth and sin∣cerity of the History which I am most concerned to expose, being therein able to detect innumerable Falsities; and for Vouchers of what I affirm, can produce a whole Cloud of Wit∣nesses; many of which Romances are so palpable, that the Author could not possibly write them by mistake, but has inserted them on purpose, certainly as embellishments to set off his Story. To begin then with Sir Henry Mor∣gan's Parentage; He makes him the Son of a Yeoman, and that be sold himself for Barbados; when it is sufficiently known he was de∣scended of an honourable Family in Monmouthshire, and went at first
out of England, with the Army commanded by General Venables for Hispaniola and Jamaica. Then his cruel usage of the Spani∣ards at Puerto Velo, Maracàibo, Gibraltàr and Panamà, Murdering many in cold blood; Racking and torturing some to confess where their Treasure lay, till they dyed; Star∣ving others in Prison; Ravishing Women, and the like barbarities; which this Dutch Comines affirms he saw him not only suffer his Men daily to commit, but acted himself as their example. All those Cru∣elties, contrary to the nature and temper of an Englishman, I have heard absolutely contradicted by per∣sons of infallible credit; and any may be convinced of the fouluess of the Scandal thrown on this Excellent Man, who are but acquainted with
such as then lived in Jamaica, ma∣ny of whom are now living in Lon∣don. Nay the English Merchants of Cadiz, who resided ther at the time these Spaniards of Panama returned from the Indies, affirm, that those very persons confessed, Sir Hen∣ry Morgan was so far from doing any such base Actions, That they highly applauded his Generosity, and the Care he took, That none of those severe things should be practised by his Men, as are usual by a Con∣querour, when he has his Enemies at his mercy, after an obstinate resi∣stance. This makes me think that our Dutch Author, having the Idea of the Business of Amboina in his Head, has endeavoured to copy out that, and lay it on the Eng∣lish, to render them as infamous to Posterity, for these supposed villa∣nies in the West-Indies, as some of his
Countreymen have by their real ones in the East. I am also assured by good Au∣thority, That the Tale of Sir Hen∣ry Morgan his ill usage of the Spanish Lady at Panama, is al∣together a Romance; for so careful was he, that as soon as he had ta∣ken the Town, and quenched the fire, he caused most of the Women of the City to be brought to one place, where he set a strict guard over them, to prevent the Souldiers, or any others abusing them, and gave out his Or∣ders, prohibiting all men the offering them the least violence or injury, on pain of a severe punishment. And under what loose government soe∣ver his men are represented to have lived; I affirm, That few Generals have kept their Armies with a more strict Discipline, than he. Nor can I think
it possible for him to have done all those great Actions with Men of so base and dissolute tempers, as our Dutch Hi∣storian paints them to be: But, Pien∣sa el Ladron, quetodos son de su Condicion. And for confirmation of what I have now asserted; At his return from Pa∣nama, when he brought the Priso∣ners to la Cruz, in his way to Chagre Castle, to induce them to pay their Ransomes; the Women, espe∣cially such as seemed to be of any qua∣lity, and could ride, were set on Horses, Mules, or Asses, and had Men appoin∣ted to attend them with all respect. And our Dutch Mandevil says that such as were not able to redeem themselves, were transported; which is of equal cre∣dit with the rest of his villanous Tales. For I am assured that no one person, Man, Woman or Child (the Slaves
only excepted) were so much as ever carried a shipboard, but were acquit∣ted and set at liberty, when he embar∣ked. Moreover this Celebrated Buccanier Historian, relating these Acts of Ho∣stility done in the Indies against the Spaniards, insinuates all along, That these were all Robberies and savage Butcheries, committed by Sir Henry Morgan and the rest of his Crew, who were a parcel of Thieves, Mur∣therers and Pyrates; Men who did all this for the sake of Plunder, Blood-shed, and Rapine, without any other colour or pretext whatsoever; filling the World with horrour and amazement at the reading his terrible Stories: So that out of Malice, or at best, Igno∣rance, he omits to tell us, That though we had not formally a War proclaimed against the Spaniards there in the In∣dies,
yet would not they listen to any proposals of Peace with us, beyond the Tropick, till about the year 1670. that it had been concluded in Ma∣drid by Sir William Godolphin his Majesties Ambassador there, and the Articles sent over from hence by Sir Thomas Linch to Jamaica; before which time, there daily happened great Acts of Hostility and Depredations on either side, done as well by the Spa∣niards against us, as by the English against them; and o doubt but Revenge spurred on many that had been sufferers, to the committing some severe things, and to heightening the Rage on both sides. For the Spaniards all this while were ot idle, they took our Merchants ships; Plundred and spoiled our Plantations, particularly at Jamaica; Used our Men with all the severity and rigour, that an enemy could do, throwing them over board, exposing them in Boats,
and on Rafts, without Provision, to the mercy of the Sea; Turning them on uninhabited Islands; Leaving them on Countreys to be destroyed by the Indi∣ans, keeping and starving them in Dungeos, and making slaves of them. All which severities might well incense such as out-lived these miseries, if they ever escaped, to put in practice all manner of Revenge. Now if I have rightly stated this point, then neither Sir Henry Mor∣gan, nor any that fought under him, can be said to be Pyrates or Buccanieres; I mean, if he acted by Commission from Sir Thomas Muddiford, or any Governour of Jamaica before him; as, if I mistake not, I have heard he really did; which if true, though done without the Kings allowance or knowledge, I presume it justifies him, though not the Governour; So that any
Fleet, might in time of War as well be called Pyrates; and an Historian de∣scribing the miseries attending a War between two Princes, might term the men slain in Battle, to be murdered; and the Calamities befalling a Town taken by storm, to be cruelties exer∣cised by Thieves and Robbers, for the sake of Plunder, and satiating their thirst after Blood. I would not have any judge me so vain, to think my self able to vin∣dicate these men from every ill Acti∣on, and imagine I could make them pass for Saints: But I still affirm, that those dismal Stories of Murdering in cold Blood, Torturing, Ravishing, Starving, and other such Barbarities, are foisted in by the Author, to lard his History with delightful variety, and to fix an odium on the English Nation in general, that they may be
hated by others. And I further say, That perchance never Man behaved himself with more true valour and re∣solution of mind to accomplish what he had undertaken, shewed more prudent and soldierly Conduct, nor took more care for preventing all ir∣regularities amongst his Men, by his own example, than the renowned Sir Henry Morgan, who has been thus scandalously affronted by these Sourrilous Pens: For I cannot call otherwise either the Dutch Author, or Spanish and English Transla∣tors. Since there is no doubt but that if he had been the Pyrate, and ill Man, he is by them painted out to be; he would have been punished as such a one, instead of being ho∣noured with a Knighthood, as he was at his coming home to Eng∣land: and since that made Deputy Governour of Jamaica, under the
Right Honourable the Earl of Car∣lisle, and Lieutenant-General of the said Island. There is one absurd story more, amongst many others, which I had like to have passed over without re∣mark; that is, His firing the Ci∣ty of Panama just at his entring in to it, as this French-Hollander affirms; which if he did, it was but ill Policy, to burn the Town he came so far to plunder, 'ere he was well got within it. But this is own∣ed by the President, in his Letter, to have been done by the Spaniards themselves, on purpose to disappoint the English of their Booty. By this ridiculous falsity, may the Credit of the rest of that History be conje∣ctured. Many errours could I point out in
that which is his Natural History of the Indies; as for instance, his Story of seeing the Caymanes or Co∣codrills suffer their young ones to play and run into their Bellies; for which Fancy he must have been, I suppose, obliged to Pliny or Aelian; for I dare say, no Man that has lived in the Indies will vouch for him. But these being besides my business, I pass by: and have only this more to say, That I forbear to print any more, at present, than that one Expedition of Sir Henry Morgan, thinking that sufficient to convince the Falsities of that scandalous History of Buccanieres. What acts of Hostility have been committed since the Peace made in the year 1670. betwixt the Spa∣niards, and the Privatiers of seve∣ral Nations; have been many and
considerable, amongst which we have had no small loss fallen on our Merchant men, trading there in the West-in∣dies, causing a great obstruction to our Trade. The number of our Ships taken since then, as I am informed, is no less than one Hundred and Twenty, a List of at least one half of which, I am able to have here inserted; which thing I fear increases the number of Privatiers, in those Seas.
THE ADVENTURES OF Capt. Barth. Sharp, And Others, in the South Sea. THAT which often Spurs men on to the undertaking of the most difficult Adventures,An. Dom. 1680. April. is the sacred hunger of Gold; and 'twas Gold was the bait that tempted a Pack of merry Boys of us, near Three Hun∣dred
in Number, being all Souldiers of Fortune, under Command (by our own Eletion) of Captain Ihn Coxon, to list our selves in the Service of one of the Rich West Indian Monarchs, the Em∣perour of Darien or Durian. Which Country has its Name from a River so called, running into the South Sea, al∣most a cross the Imus, which is be∣tween the two formerly Great Empires of Mexico and Peru, and joyns the Nor∣thern and Southern America. These Emperours of Darien hereto∣fore commanded a large Tract of Land, lying about the Bay of Darien, but are now reduced to much narrower limits by their Enemies the Spaniards, with whom they have continual Wars. The Seat of this Empire is now in a Place called by us the Golden Island in the said Bay of Darien, not very far distant from Porto Belo, where the Spaniards ship their Treasure on board their Gal∣lions for Spain. After a kind invitation from the In∣dians, and Treaty with the Emperour in Person, he gladly listned to our Propo∣sitions and accepted us into his Service, resolving with us to attempt the reco∣very
of some of those Places, the Spa∣niards had taken, and kept from him; particularly Santa Maria, once the Bi∣shop's See of that Diocese, which was since removed to Panam. It is now but a small Town with a little Fort, which serves for a Guard to the Spa∣niards while they gather their Gold∣dust, brought down on the Sands of a River running into the Darien. The thoughts of a rich Booty encouraged us to this Design, but we were all firmly resolved, that in case we missed of good success in this, to undertake a more ha∣zardous Enterprize; which was to go down the River Darien, and in our Ca∣noes attempt the surprise of the City of Panama, and Ships lying there; this be∣ing the Port where the Spaniards unlade their Vessels, which bring their Treasure from Ciudd de los Reyes, or Lima, as we still call it, and from all other parts there on the South Sea; as they like∣wise from thence export all their Mer∣chandise coming from Europe, which is landed at Porto Belo, and brought over land thither to Panama. Though the Undertaking seemed ve∣ry imprudent, we having no shipping
of our own there, and there being no other way home for us (as we then had ever heard of) but round about through the Streights of Magellan, or Le Maire, when we should have made our selves Masters of some of their Vessels, yet the incouragement we had, in the ex∣pectation of raighting home our Cof∣fers with Spanish Gold, and Pieces of Eight, overcame all difficulties; toge∣ther with the hopes the Indians gave us of our getting to Panama e're the Spa∣niards could have intelligence of our co∣ming, and the satisfaction we had of the promise of having along with us, the Company of our Emperour, under whose Commission we fought. These I say were the allurements that induced us to list our selves into this Service. 5. Mund. All things being thus con∣cluded on, upon Munday the fifth day of April we landed about Seven a Clock in the morning, and began our march with our Emperour in the head of us till two in the afternoon, and took up our Quarters for that night in some Indian Houses. 6. Tuesd. At the first appearance of day we began our march; our last
nights Lodging, (Chambers and Silk Beds being as much out of Fashion here, as they were in Adam's time) was no∣thing better than the cold Earth cover∣ed by the Starry Canopy, which gave us but small encouragement to stay long∣er, and travelled up a steep Mountain till about three, at which hour we came to a fresh Spring of Water where we sat∣down and rested our selves, then march∣ing about six miles further we took up our Lodgings by a River-side. 7. Wedn. Early in the morning we continued our march to King Goldencaps Court; going till four we met two In∣dians loaden with Fruit which the King had sent us as a present, which we thank∣fully accepted, and marching an hour longer we came to the King's Pallace, where he with his Nobility and Men of the best Quality gave us a kind Recep∣tion and Entertainment. These Inhabi∣tants are very handsome people though Tawny, but clean limbed and well fea∣tured, and are very obliging and affable, as those of our Men who afterwards marcht back again, over Land, experienced. 8. Thursd. This day finding such good Entertainment we staid at the Court,
being Favourites not inconsiderable, and so well Armed and Resolute, as our par∣ty was. 9. Frid. In the morning we took our leave, and our path being bad, were for∣ced to wade a River fifty or sixty times, which almost foundered us, at last we came to three large Indian Houses where we had free quarter, and found all things convenient for refreshment (by the Em∣perors and Kings command) ready pro∣vided, as Plantins, Bonanoes and Moria Flesh, but the same Lodging that Nature affords Animals, less mischievous than our selves, the Earth. 10. Saturd. We continued our march, and at night took our Lodging, (where the Poets fancy so many delicacies and advantages of sensual enjoyment, but for my part I would not envy their pas∣time had I had the Poets Bed in Ex∣change, for the Green Bank of a River on which we lay, whether perfumed with Roses or Jessamines; our tired limbs had not leisure to search, or our sences any vacancy for meer weariness from sleeping to perceive.) 11. Sund. Early in the morning, our Indian consorts having a few small Ca∣noes,
some of our Men embarked and going down the River met with several inconveniences, both Natural and Arti∣ficial: As first great falls, and then the Spaniards throwing great Tees cross the Rivers, by which we lost several of our Canoes, the rest of our Men marching by Land to the place where the Empe∣rour had ordered our Rendezvouz. 12. Mund. This day the remainder of our Men embarked at a place where the Emperour had provided more Canoes, and had a pleasant Voyage. About four in the afternoon we arrived at the ap∣pointed place, but not finding our fel∣low Souldiers there, who embarked the day before us, as we expected, it crea∣ted in us a jealousie that the Indians had thus divided us, the better to execute some treachery, by the assistance of the Spaniard, the Emperor perceiving by our Caballing and Whispering among our selves, that we had some cause of dissatisfaction, Commanded a Canoe to row up another arm of the River in search of our Men, and meeting two Canoes with some of them, they re∣turned with all expedition to us, and in∣formed us of their safety, and that they
had been honourably treated by the In∣dians, and would be with us the next morning; so here we staid for them this night. 13. Tuesd. This day all our party met, which not a little confirmed us in the good opinion we had of the Indians fi∣delity; we staid here all day to rest our selves, and fit our Arms and Necessaries for our next days proceedings, the Em∣peror acquainting us we were near the Town, which we were glad to hear; our tedious march put us quite out of fancy of walking to take the Air any more, now we were fallen so low down the River; the Emperour and the King had provided Canoes, &c. enough for us all. 14. Wedn. We rose with the day, and all embarked, also the Emperour and King with us; the Emperour was Cloathed with a loose Robe or Mantle of pure Gold, which was extraordinary Splen∣did and Rich. The King was in a White Cotton Coat fringed round the bottom, about his Neck a Belt of Tygers Teeth, and a Hat of pure Gold, with a Ring and a Plate like a Cockle Shell hanging at it of Gold in his Nose, which is the
Fashion in this Country for the people of Quality, and which for what I could perceive was the only distinction. We rested not this day or night, and at two in the morning we landed within two miles of Santa Maria, and shrowded our selves in the Woods till day light. 15. Thursd. About six this morning we attacqued the place and carried it with little difficulty, it being a Stockadoe Fort, and a small Town o Thatched Houses. This Fort of Santa Maria was kept by the Spaniards for the conveniency of gathering Dust-Gold, which the River affords plenty of, and the poor Natives are the Drudges to gather it for them. We designed to make no further pro∣gress, being told there was a sufficient quantity of Gold-dust at this place to enrich us all, but the wary Spaniards had carried it away two days before, as thinking a conveyance of their own con∣triving safer than ours, though not so well guarded as it would have been by us. 17. Saturd. Disappointment is an in∣centive to Revenge, and good Resolution the commander of Success; these being now our cheifest directors, we fitted our
Canoes, and got what Provisions we could, being loth to return empty han∣ded, and at the tide of Ebb designed to fall down, to see what fate would afford in the Southern Ocean. At this place it flows near two fathom perpendicular. The River is else very showly and full of Banks, which are dry at low Water. A∣bout twelve in the night we came to a Watering place, where we got drink, the River being Salt, here we staid till morn∣ing filling Water, it being very dark, and the mouth of the River wide, one branch of it coming from the Golden Mines; but having no Chymist to re∣fine the Ore, we thought it best to go look for it where it was to be had with the King of Spains Arms on it, for we like other Children loved Pictures strangely. 18. Sund. This morning we proceed∣ed on our intended Voyage, and about eleven in the forenoon we saw the South Sea; then coming to a small Isle near the mouth of the River Darien we rest∣ed our selves; from this we went to an∣other about two Leagues distant, and took our Lodging there. 19. Mund. At day light we put from
this Isle, and rowing not above half an hour, the Wind blew very hard and against the tide of Ebb, which made a great Sea, and had like to have put a period to all our atcheivements: One of our Canoes being overset with seven Men in her; but it pleased God, that with extream danger even to those that rescued them, they were all saved. It being a certain truth that those who are born to be hang'd shall never be drown'd, it proving so with us, one of our Com∣pany being hang'd at Iamaica on Port Royal; And we were very near it here in London; After this having a violent storm of rain we were forced on shoar upon a long sandy bank, where we built a House and were content to Lodg in it this night. 20. Tuesd. This morning it being fair weather again, we put to Sea with our Fleet of Canoes. Towards noon it be∣gan to blow hard, yet nothing is diffi∣cult to a willing mind, so we proceed∣ed; About two in the after noon we put ashoar at an Isle to look some Water to drink, and finding some in the stinking holes of the Rocks we drank it as hearti∣ly as Canary. This Island is high, round,
and Rocky, and here is plenty of Sea-Fowl; we staid not long here, but about four of the Clock we came to Planting Isle, where finding a Bark, and we stand∣ing in need of Shipping, put some of our Men on board here; At this place we took Quarters for this night; There was on board the Bark 130. Men, so this was now our Admiral, the rest being Canoes that carried from six to fifteen Men. 21. Wedn. In the morning we depar∣ted from this Isle, with the Bark and Canoes, being bound for the Island of Chipila for Provisions, we in our way met with one of the Spaniards Armadillo Barks, or little Men of War, who fell foul of us, Killing one Man and Woun∣ding five more, so left us. Having no Provisions, and perceiving we should be continually Skirmishing, we went on shoar at this Island, and lay there that night 22. Thursd. Finding but small supply for our wants on this Isle, we were re∣solved to seek further, so we stood to the Westward, rowing along the shoar all that day and the night following, in hopes to reach another Island where we
were informed we might accommodate our selves with neeessaries. 23. Frid. We parted with our Bark and 130. Men in her, whom we had sent to look some Water for us, where they could find it, early in the morn∣ing; And soon after we met with three Armadillo Barks with 280 Men on board them, which engaged our Fleet of Ca∣noes, having in all scarce above 200 found Men in them. These three Barks were fitted out of Panama, who by this had notice from Santa Maria of our approach, on purpose to cut us off, thus unprovided of Shipping, or convenience of defence, being in Canoes that carried some six, some eight and ten, to fifteen Men, which leaning on one side might overset the biggest; however nothing daunted at the disadvantage of Fight, we made a resolution rather than drown in the Sea, or beg Quarter of the Spaniard, whom we used to Conquer, to run the ex∣treamest hazard of Fire and Sword, and after a sharp Contest, still birding with our Fusees as many as durst peep over Deck, we boarded one of them, and car∣ried her; so with her we took the second; and the third had certainly run the same
fate, had not she scoured away in time, (though to speak without diminution of the Commanders courage) he staid as long as he could, and we plyed him very warmly, so that though we know not certainly how many Men they lost on board, yet are confident but few found Men returned to their City. In this engagement we had eleven Men Killed right out, and thirty four more Wounded dangerously. These Vessels being purposely fitted out for this design, afforded but small conveniency for our Wounded Men; so we went in chase of a larger Ship which we soon after took, put our Wounded Men on board her, and lay before the City of Panama, as well to refresh our tired Men, as to show them, they were not like to be rid of us so. 25. Sund. Captain Iohn Coxon, with fifty Men perswaded the Indians to re∣turn back, being a little in disgrace a∣mongst our Men, as something tainted with cowardize in the late action, which made him leave us, and take with him his Chyrurgeon, and most of our best Medicines, not having any consideration or respect for our Wounded Men which
we had on board, being forty in num∣ber, as a Man of moral honesty ought to have had: Thus making our retreat the more unsafe by taking away fifty sound Men, and then leaving us desti∣tute of remedies for the recovery of our Wounded and Sick; but this last thing was unknown to the rest of our Com∣pany. 26. Mund. Captain Coxon being gone, Captain Sawkins and Captain Sharp ha∣ving full Commission from our said Em∣perour of Darien, agreed to stay in those Seas till our Wounded Men were cu∣red; After this we had lay some time before Panama, and took some of their Ships, one of which slipt by us in the night, but we followed her with an Oy∣ster Bark into the Harbour; and so near the shoar that we could hear the Spa∣niards talk, and fetched her out again. She came with money to pay off the Souldiers, but we eased them of it; it being 60000 pieces of Eight, which we divided amongst us the next day, com∣ing to 247 pieces of Eight per Man; Then we went to a small Island which they call Taboga for Wood, Water, and other Necessaries, and staid there till May the 13th.
May 13.An. Dom 1680. May After we had thus for so ma∣ny days blocked up the Harbour of Pana∣ma, and having maturely debated the Condition we were in, beginning to want Provisions, we designed to take some Town on the Main that might supply our Necessities; so we weighed and stood along shoar till the 23. of May, at which time we arrived at the Isles of Quiblo. 25. We landed some of our Men here to look for Provisions, where Cap∣tain Sawkins being too rash, and landing before the rest of our Men, who were in other Canoes with Captain Sharp, and running up to the Town, which having timely notice of our coming, had made several Brest-works for our recep∣tion, entertained him very hotly, yet he being a man that nothing upon Earth could terrifie, ran eagerly up to the end of their works, and though at that time not one fourth part of our men were landed, fell in amongst a thousand of them, as they that retreated informed us, and was there unfortunately killed with two men more, and five wounded; the remainder drew off, still skirmishing till they came to their Boats, by which
time the rest of our Men were landed. Thus Rashness and Want of conduct overthrew our design, yet we took a Bark at the Rivers mouth loaden with Montego and Indian Corn. As affairs were now with us, we took this for good Provisions, and so returned to our Ships; When we came on board there hapned a great distracti∣on amongst our Men, which was occa∣tioned by the death of Captain Sawkins. In this mutiny seventy five more of our Men left us, and returned over Land as they came, delivering up their Com∣missions to our Emperour. Captain Cooke who was Commander of a Ship, not finding things answering to his desire and expectation, laid down his Com∣mission and went on board Captain Sharp At this juncture, things lookt with a very bad aspect: But Captain Sharp, who was created by us Captain, or ra∣ther General, made head against all dif∣ficulties, and resolved to stay by our Poor Wounded Men and make a further discovery in those Seas. For perform∣ance of which he ordered Mr. Iohn Cox to fit out the May-flower, and put for∣ty
Men on board her,An. Dom. 1680. Iune which he did, and we now design'd to find a place where we might carreen our Vesels; thus we spent our time till the sixth of Iune fol∣lowing. Iune the sixth, We set fail from Qui∣blo in the afternoon, bound for the Gal∣lipagoes, which are seven Islands that lie under the Aequinoctial, and about 100 leagues from the main. 8. Tuesd. This day at twelve the Eastermost lsle of Quiblo bore N. 6 leagues dist. lat. 7 deg. 30 min. wind South West, much rain. The winds hung at South West, and South West and by South so long, with very much rain, that we could not go to the Southward, but fell in with an lsle called Gorgony which lies in 3 deg. 10 min. N. where we found pretty good conveni∣ence to fit our Ships; we arrived here the 17th. Inst. 17th. Here we lay and carreened the Trinity, but could not bring her Keil up, because she had sprung her Main∣mast, but the May-flower Captain Cox his Vessel we laid ashoar, and gave her a Coat of Tallow; this is a good Isle for Wood, Water, Timber, Pearl, Oysters,
Conies,An. Dom. 1680. Iuly Monkies; and some rank Turtle, with which we feasted our selves till Iuly the 25th. 1680. 25. Iuly. Being Sunday, we set Sail from Gorgony, bound to the Southward, wind West, and West South West. 26. and 27 Plying along shoar, wind West, and South West. 28. Wedn. This day and night we had the wind round the compass, with very much rain; in the night we lost sight of the Trinity, we lower'd our Top-sails and halled up our Courses, judging our selves to windward of her, and staid for her a whole watch, but not seeing her we made Sail and plied to windward. 29. Thursd. This twenty four hours we had the wind in the day at West, at night South East▪ that we laid very good slants along the shoar; we had very much rain, and saved seven Jarrs of Wa∣ter, and in carrying Sail sprung our Main-top-mast. 30. Frid. This twenty four hours we lay very well along shoar, and carried our Main-top-mast by the board, we got out our Mizon and made a Top-mast of that. 31. Saturd. We had fair weather, the wind
wind between the South, and West South West,An. Dom. 1680. August. we kept close under the Land in, five to ten fath. Water, the Land high with reddish Cliffs. August the 1st. Sund. We plied under the high Land, clear weather, lat. 1 deg. 40 min. N. by a good Observation. 2. Mund. We kept plying under the shoar, the wind South, and South South East. 3. Tuesd. We stood about 10 leag. from the shoar, and in standing in, weather∣ed Cape Francisco eight leag. we had a strong Current which set to the South∣ward. 4. Wedn. We kept plying under the shoar, fair weather, lt. 00 deg. 20 min. South. 5. Thursd. We still ply to windward under the shoar, sometimes five or six leag. off, the wind South South West, Cloudy. 6. Frid. We ply under the shoar, wind South West. 7. Saturd. We plied still to wind∣ward in a Bay called Manta, where is seated an Indian Town of the same name, which affords plenty of Indian Corn and Fowls.
8. Sund. This twenty four hours we got under Cape Lawrence; it is pretty high Land: And a little way up in the Country lies a high Hummock of Land like a Sugar-loaf which is called Monte de Christo. 9. Mund. We got about the Cape. 10. Tuesd. This morning we came to an Anchor on the North East side of the Island of Plate, alias Drakes Isle; which is the place for Ships to Ride. This Island affords plenty of Goats, of Fish, and of Turtle, little Water, and no Tim∣ber, but small shrubby Bushes. It is a smooth level and lies five leag. South West by South from Cape Lawrence, we rid in 10 fath. Water, clear ground, and the Bay pretty steep too. 11. Wedn. I sent our Canoe round the Isle, for discovery, at night they return∣ed on board, bringing some Fish that they had caught with hooks and lines. 12. Tursd. We dugg a hole by the side of a Rock, and filled some Water. 13. Frid. This day Captain Sharp, to our great joy, Arrived in the Trini∣ty, but we had Sailed away the night before, had not our Men in fetching Goats from the windward side of the
Isle, sunk our Canoe, for we all judged the Trinity had gone to windward upon the Coast of Peru. 14. Saturd. Our Men turned nine Turtle, and continued filling Water night and day, by reason of its scarcity. 15. Sund. Our Men feasted on shoar with Barbakude, Goats and Fish, &c. 16. Mund. We heilded our Ship, and gave her a pair of Boot-hose-tops, and took in two or three Tun of Ballast. 17. Tuesd. This day we set Sail from Drakes Isle, the wind at South South West, fair weather; This lies in 1 deg. 25 min. South lat. Here it is reported Sir Fran∣cis Drake shared his mony: And here a great many of our Men plaid theirs a∣way, and were fit for new adventures. 18. Wedn. We got little to wind∣wards this twenty four hours, by rea∣son of a Leeward Current, wind at South, and South South West. 19. Thursd. This twenty four hours we stood on and off the shoar, but got little to windward, Cloudy weather, wind South and South West. 20. Frid. We kept plying along shoar, but a strong Leeward Current, wind at South small gales.
21. Saturd. This twenty four hours we plied along shoar, wind South, to South West, Cloudy weather. 22. Sund. This twenty four hours we find the Current is abated, and the wind has this night favoured us, that we lay well along shoar, the wind at East South East, Cloudy weather. 23. Mund. This twenty four hours we had the wind at West South West, good weather, we made Point St. Hel∣lena, which makes like an Island as we Sail along shoar, but when you come within a league or two, like a Ship on the Carreen. 24. Tuesd. This twenty four hours we met with a strong Currant which sets to the Southward, at twelve a Clock Point Hellena bears North North East, 4. leag. distance, our Ship being out of her trim, Captain Sharp took us in a Tow. 25. Wedn. On Tuesday night about nine a Clock, we stood to the West∣ward and saw a Sail; the Trinity then cast us off, and gave chase, and in a short time came up with her, and af∣ter a short dispute with our small arms we took her, she was a small Man of
War, fitted out of Guiaque or Wyake by a parcel of merry Blades, Gentlemen, who drinking in a Tavern, made a Vow to come to Sea with that Vessel and thirty Men, and take us; but we made them repent their undertaking. The captains name was Don Thomas d' Algondony, whom after we had severely School'd for his sawcy at∣tempt we entertained on board our Admi∣ral. In this conflict we had three of our Men Wounded; what they lost we knew not, because it was night; the next day we sunk the Vessel, and plied to the Southward. 26. This day Captain Sharp took me in a Tow, lat. 2 deg. 46 min. we have had a Current which has carried us very far into Wyake Bay, wind at South West to North West, little winds. 27. Frid. This day we had a good ob∣servation, In lat. 3 deg. 15 min. the wind at North West, and West North West, the Current sets South West; this morning, examining some Prisoners, they told us that one of our Barks that left us at Quibloa Nova, came to the Isle of Gallea, where the Men going on shoar, were all Killed but one; we suppose it was the Bark that Mr. Edward Doleman was in and seven Men more.
In the night the Trinity put a stays, and they not halling their main Sail in time the Ship, backt a stern and carried our Boltspreet by the board. 28. Saturd. This morning the Trini∣ty came to an Anchor, in 9 or 10 fath. Water under the shoar, so we laid her aboard with our Ship, and took out the best of her Apparel and sunk her, for that Country could not afford us a Tree large enough to make us a new Bolt∣spreet. In the afternoon we got up our Anchor and stood to the Southward. 29. Sund. We kept plying under the shoar, not standing above 5 or 6 leag. off, expecting a Land wind, but found none; This is high Land with white Cliffs, and green shrubs growing in the Vallies, wind at South West, a hard breaze between ten and two in the af∣ternoon, a strong South West Current which makes a great Sea. 30. Mund. This twenty four hours we got about Cape Blanco, the wind West South West, hard gales and two reifs in our Main-top-sail. 31. Tuesd. We kept plying under the shoar; this day we saw a pair of Bark loggs but came not near them for descrying
our selves,An. Dom. 1680. Septem. lat. 4 deg. 45 min. the wind South West, fair weather. Sept. 1. Wedn. We plyed to windward 6 or 7 leagues off shoar, wind South West. 2. Thursd. This twenty four hours we plied under the shoar, and this morn∣ing saw a Sail about 6 or 7 leag. to windward of us, lat. 5 deg. 34 min. wind South West, to West South West. 3. Frid. We still kept plying to wind∣ward in chase of the Ship, a fresh gale of wind between South East and South South West. 4. Saturd. We came up with her and took her, she came from Wyake, loaden with Timber, some Bail Goods and Cocoa, bound for Lyma, which they now call Ciudad de los Reyes. 5. Sund. We began to take out her Goods that we wanted. Moderate gales at South East, and South South West. 6. Mund. We finisht our business, and took out all that was valuable in her, cut her Main-mast by the board, put most of our Prisoners on board her, gave them six packs of Flower, and all the Provisions that were taken in the Ship, and turned them loose. Now we judged our selves 45 leag. to the West∣ward
of the High Land of Payta in lat. deg. 12 min. South, the wind be∣ween South East and South West, our eparture West is 45 leag. 7. Tuesd. The wind South South East, ir weather, lat. 7 deg. 35 min. departure leag. West 50 leag. 8. Wedn. The wind South South East South. Fresh gales lat. 8 deg. 5 min. eparture 15 leag. West. This day we bu∣ed Robert Mongomery, who died of his ounds, West 65 leag. 9. Thursd. We have gone but a leag. o the Westward, lat. 8 deg. 12 min. Wind South to South South East fair eather, West 66 leag. 10. Frid. 12 Leag. West lat. 9 deg. min. wind South South East, West 78 eag. 11. Saturd. We have run 8 leag. West at. 10 deg 19 min. the wind from South East to South South East, foggy weather. 12. Sund. We have run 13 leag. West at. 11 deg. 49 min. the wind from South East to East. West 99 leag. 13. Mund. We have run 19 leag. West at. 13 deg. 24 min. a fresh gale at South and South South East, the Sun was E∣clipsed
this afternoon, our departure West 118 leag. 14. Tuesd. We have run 7 leag. West, lat. 14 deg. 9 min. very hard gales that put us by our Top-sails, West 125 leag. 15. Wedn. 13 Leag. West. lat. 15 deg. 21 min. moderate gales, West 138 leag. 16. Thursd. 13 Leag. West lat. 16 deg. 33 min. fresh gales at South to South East, fair weather, West 151 leag. 17. Frid. We have run 4 leag. West, lat. 18 deg. 5 min. fresh gales; this night we had a gust of wind that made us hand our Top-sails for the space of two hours; our departure west is 155 leag. 18. Saturd. This twenty four hours we have run 3 leag West, lat. 19 deg. 35 min. small rain with a gust of wind at East, West 158 leag. 19. Sund. This twenty four hours we have run 5 leag. West, lat. 20 deg. 8 min. small winds at South South East; by this account we are departed from the Meridian of Payta, 163 leag West. Finding Water will be scarce with us, we are put to an allowance, of not full a pint each Man for four and twenty hours, the Captain having but the same
with another Man, our other Provisi∣on was only Flower, of which we had five ounces per day. 20. Mund. This twenty four hours we have run 10 leag. East lat. by obser∣vation 19 deg. 48 min. the wind at West. East 10 leag. 21. Tuesd. We have run 31. leag. East lat. 20 deg. 12 min. the wind West fresh gales, in the morning it came to South South East, fair weather. East 41 leag. 22. Wedn. This twenty four hours we have run 22 leag. East lat. 19 deg. 38 min. the wind at South South East very hard gales, East 63 leag. 23. Thursd. We have run 2 leag. East lat. 20 deg. 40 min. a hard gale at East and East South East. East. 65 leag. 24. Frid. This twenty four hours we have run 4 leag. East lat. 21 deg. 39 min. the wind at East south East to North East. East 69 leag. 25. Saturd. We have run 4 leag. East. lat. 21 deg. 58 min. windy. East 73 leag. 26. Sund. 5 Leag. East lat. 22 deg. 12 min. wind North West. East 71 leag. 27. Mund. This twenty four hours we have run 35 leag. East lat. 22 deg. 29 min. fair weather, wind North to
West a strong Southern current.An. Dom. 1680. Octob. 113 leag. 28. Tuesd. 21 Leag. East lat. 22 deg. 35 min. wind South with rain. East 134 leag. 29. Wedn. We have run 20 leag. East lat. 22 deg. 18 min. fair weather, the wind South to South East. East 154 leag. 30. Thursd. 26 Leag. East in lat. 21 deg. 45 min. wind at South East and East South East fresh gales. East 180 leag. October the 1st. We have run 17 leag, East lat. 21 deg. 12 min. the wind at South East. East 197 leag. 2. Saturd. We have run 22 leag. East lat. 20 deg. 39 min. the wind at South East, cloudy weather. 3. Sund. We we have run 23 leag East lat. 19 deg. 37 min. very freh gales of wind at South East, cloudy wea∣ther. East 242 leag. 4. Mund. We have run 16 leag. East, lat. 19 deg. 00 min. this night we han∣ded our Top-sails for wind. East 258 leag. 5. Tuesd. This twenty four hours we have run 15 leag. East lat. 18 deg.
30. min. hard gales of wind at South East, and South South East. East 273 leag. 6. Wedn. 7 Leag. West lat. 19 deg. 00 min. wind East South East, my last Weting was 163 leag. this 7 added makes Wst 170 leag. 7. Thursd. This twenty four hours we have run 7 leag. West lat. 19 deg. 30 min. fresh gales at South East, clou∣dy weather, we went with our courses; here I find a strong North West Current for which we allowed 20 leag. West which makes 170. 7. 20. West 197 leag. 8. Frid. We have run 13 leag. East lat. 19 deg. 25 min. little wind at South East and air weather. East 216 leag. 9. Saturd. We have run 11 leag. East lat. 19 deg. 3 min. Cloudy weather. East 297 leag. 10. Sund. 4 Leag. East lat. 19 deg. 50 min. wind South to East. East 301 leag. 11. Mund. 21 Leag. Eastlat. 19 deg. 8 min. wind South East. East 322 leag. 12. Tuesd. 11 Leag. East lat. 18 deg. 1 min. hazy weather. East 333 leag.
13. Wedn. 4 Leag. East lat. 18 deg. 26 min. wind round the compass. East 337 leag. 14. Thursd. 2 Leag. East lat. 18 deg. 20 min. little wind at South East. East 339 leag. 15. Frid. 16 Leag. East lat. 17 deg. 57 min. wind South East. East. 355 leag. 16. Saturd. 15 Leag. East lat. 17 deg. 19 min. wind South South East to South East. East. 370 leag. 17. Sund. We have run 11 leag. East lat. 16 deg. 49 min. the wind at South East to East South East. This morning we made Land it bore North East 6 leag. distance. East 381 leag. 18. Mund. By this account Heloe lies to the Eastward of Payta. Our Easting 381 leag. Our West. 197 leag. The remainder which is our distance is 184 leag. East. 19. Tuesd. We turned up along shoar, the wind by day South and South South East, at night at East. 20. Wedn. We still continued plying along shoar, the current sets here North West very strong, the shoar lies North
West and S. E. lat. 17 deg. 42 min. and little wind. 21. Thursd. We kept plying to wind∣ward a long shoar lat. 18 deg. 2 min. the wind at S. to E. very high land. 22. Frid. We plyed along shoar in lat. 18 deg. 8 min. the wind from E. to S. E. fair weather. 23. Saturd. We had no benefit of the land wind, we lay so near the high land in lat. 18 deg. 10 min. 24. Sund. This twenty four hours we kept plying under the land, and this morning saw the South shoar, lat. 18 deg. 16 min. 25. Mund. This day at twelve a Clock we made the White Hill that is by Aryca, we made small Sail to spend away the day, at night we manned our Canoes and Boat and went to the shoar side, where the Sea ran so high, that we could not land. 26. Tuesd. Being thus unfortunately disappointed of landing our Men, we bore up the Helm for a port called Heloe. At this time Water was worth 30 pieces of Eight per Pint to those that could spare their allowance, and he that bought it thought he had a great peny-worth;
from Aryca to Heloe, the Coast lies N. W. and S. E. 27. Wedn. This day about six or seven of the Clock we manned our Canoes, and in the dawning of the day landed our Men. There is but seven or eight Indian Houses by the Water-side, and a Spaish Village upon a Hill about half a mile from the landing place, with a Church in it. 28. Thursd. This morning our Ship came to an Anchor in the Road, in 14 fath. Water, where we lay till Wednes∣day following, when we had examined our Prisoners, they told us that two miles up the Vally, there was a Sugar work, to which, when we had set some of our Men to fill us fresh Water, we marched, and finding the People all gone to hide themselves for fear of us; we loaded our selves down to the Water∣side, with Sugar and some Wine, and then returned to the work to keep Pos∣session, and lay there that night. 29. Frid. This day we had some Gentlemen came to speak with us, bring∣ing with them a Flag of Truce, which persons we treated very Civilly; they desired we would not demolish their Su∣gar
work, and they would bring us Eighty Beefs, to the Water-side and some Hoggs, which they promised should be rought us in 48 hours, so having Feast∣ed our selves with fresh Pork, Sallads,  &c. we returned to the Water-side. 30. Saturd. Here we took up our Lodging ashoar, filling Water and pull∣ing old Houses down, to carry on board for fire wood. After we had lain the time out that the Beefs should have been brought thither, came a Spaniard and told us the wind blew so hard that they could not drive their Cattle; but that all expedition should be used to bring them to us, so we continued till Tues∣day the second of November. November the 2d. This morning we expected our Beefs, but in lieu of them the Spaniard sent us 300 Horsemen to to fight us, so we drew out our Men in a plain ground for fear of Ambuscades, and resolved to stand the shock; for we had left a select Guard to receive our Canoes, and Boat, when they should come to shoar. The Enemy came rid∣ing at full speed toward us, that we thought their Horse would have been in with our body and charged us home;
but when they came within reach of our Fuzees,An. Dom. 1680. Novem. we dismounted most of their Front with a Volly of small Shot, which put a stop to their carreer and courages, and not finding it safe to come nearer, fairly wheeled off to the left, and took shelter amongst the Hills. This confirmed us that we should get no other Beefs; so having filled our Water, we that night went on board, our Ships; leaving the starched Spaniards room to stalk about their empty Houses, for at this time we had no other so good firing as old Hous∣hold stuff made us. 3. Wedn. This morning having dis∣patched our affairs at Heloe, we weighed and stood to Sea, wind South West, we run 2 leag. 4. Thursd. We had little wind at South: We have run 4 leag. West. In all West 6 leag. 5. Frid. This twenty four hours we have run 5 leag. West, little wind at S. S. E. to E. S. E. and fair weather. 6. Saturd. This twenty four hours we have run 15 leag. W. wind S. and S. E. and by S. 7. Sund. This twenty four hours we
have run 4 leag. West, little wind at S. and S. E. 8. Mund. We have run 4 leag. W. little wind at S. 9. Tuesd. We have run 2 leag. E. little wind at S. 10. Wedn. We have run 3 leag. E. little wind at S. 11. Thursd. We have run 13 leag. W. wind S. and E. S. E. 12. Frid. We have run 19 leag. W. wind S. S. E. 13. Saturd. We have run 3 leag. West lat. 21 deg. 37 min. we have now run in all 64 leag. to the Westward of Heloe. 14. Sund. We have run 14 leag. West, lat. 22 deg. 44 min. fair weather, West 78 leag. 15. Mund. We have run 15 leag. West, at. 23 deg. 28 min. the wind from S. to E. West 93 leag. 16. Tuesd. We have run 5 leag. East, lat. 23 deg. 33 min. wind at South, the 5. leag. Easting deducted, our departure West is 88 leag. 17. Wedn. We have run 8 leag. West, at. 23 deg. 35 min. wind S. to S. W. air weather. VVest 96 leag. 18. Thursd. We have run 16 leag. West,
lat. 24 deg. 15 min. wind S. E. West. 112. 19. Frid. We have run 13 leag. West, lat. 25 deg. squally weather, West 125 leag. 20. Saturd. We have run 12 leag. West lat 25 deg. 57 min. the wind from S. E. to S. good weather. West 137 leag. 21. Sund. We have run 14 leag. West lat. 26 deg. 57 min. squally weather with drisling rain, wind S. E. West 148 leag. 22. Mund. We have run 8 leag. West lat. 27 deg. 30 min. West 156 leag. 23. Tuesd. We have had very little wind at N. W. and W. N. W. lat. 27 deg. 41 min. 1 leag. West. West 157 leag. 24. Wedn. We have run 19 leag. East, lat. 28 deg. 39 min. wind at N. W. fair weather. East 19 leag. 25. Thursd. We have run 23 leag. East, lat. 29 deg. 50 min. wind N. W. a very great N. W. Sea. East 42 leag. 26. Frid. We have run 25 leag. East, lat. 30 deg. 9 min. wind S. W. East 67 leag. 27. Saturd. We have run 23 leag. East, lat. 30 deg. 16 min. fair weather the wind at S. and S. S. E. East 90 leag. 28. Sund. We have run 26 leag. East,
lat.An. Dom. 1680. Decem. 30 deg. 8 min. wind S. East 116 leag. 29. Mund. We have run 20 leag. East lat. 30 deg. 17 min. wind S. and S. S. E. smooth water, a fresh of winds. East 136 leag. 30. Tuesd. We have run 16 leag. East, lat. 30 deg. 23. min. East 152 leag. Decemb. the 1st. We have run 15 leag. East, lat. 30 deg. 30 min. East 167 leag. 2. Thursd. We have run 12 leag. East, lat. 30 deg. 36 min. very hard gales of wind at South all night under our Courses, after we had done observing this day we made the Land, it was high and barren, we bore up and steered N. E. by N. 12 leag. East. in all 179 leag. 3. Frid. About two of the Clock in the morning we Manned our Canoes and Boat, with eighty five stout Fel∣lows, and away we went for the Town of Coquimbo, resolving not to return without plundering it in revenge of the affront the Heloe Men put upon us. The Canoes wherein were thirty five Men out-rowed the Boat, and Landed before day, and just upon day light they dis∣cerned the Patroule, which is kept on
the Bay; and at this time did consist of about 150 Horse, who deriving Cou∣rage from their advantage in numbers, hemmed us in a ring, not doubting but to have an easie conquest over so few Men, and rid boldly up to us; our Com∣mander considering we were but thirty five, ordered that but six Men should Fire at once on the Enemy, to keep the longer from a close Fight; being provided of no other Arms then a Fuzee and a Pistol, as also knowing our Party would in a little time come up to our res∣cue, but whether they did or no, this was our resolution, to turn our backs on the water-side and every Man maintain his ground, or fall upon the spot he stood on. By this time they were come pretty near, and I believe scarce a shot flew in vain, and so quick, having Cartridges alway fitted for our small Arms, that scarce two Vollies were fired before those that had discharged were ready loaded for them a∣gain, that he was happiest amongst them that got furthest behind; thus we bat∣tered them severely, which they, after they had made a stand to carry off their dead, not liking, retreated in disorder, do∣ing no other damage then the Wounding
one Man. We followed the chase, though but leisurely, that our Men who had been set on shoar by the Boat, might come up with us, which in a little time they did, following us, by the track of our Feet and tops of the Cartridges, coming with full speed to our Assistance if there had been occasion; Then we followed the Enemy as close as we could, think∣ing they had retreated into the Town, but they decoyed us (to give the peo∣ple time to secure their Valuable Com∣modities) a contrary way, and led us a∣mongst Ditches and watry Swamps; yet at last we got to the Town, and in a short time made our selves Masters of it, with little or no loss on our side. Here we staid four days to refresh our selves, finding plenty of Hogs, Fowls, Mutton, and Sallads, with very good Wine, which is made here, also great store of Wheat, Barly, and all European Grain, and many large Orchards as they have in Kent, of Apples, Pears, Cher∣ries, &c. Likewise delicate Gardens of Apricocks, Peaches, Strawberries, Goose∣berries, and other Fruit. The Town of Coquimbo, Scituate upon a Hill, is three quarters of a mile square,
and has nine good Churches in it;An. Dom. 1680. Septem. and it is distant from the Road for Shipping about Eight Miles. The chief Manu∣facture of the place is Copper, which they have in abundance. Here is also Gold-dust, which washes out of a great River that runs into the Sea, at the foot of the Hill whereon the Town stands, the latitude of the place is 29 deg. 50 min. South. The second day that we were in the Town, there came six Gentlemen to us, with a Flag of Truce, desiring that we would send their Governour some Wine, for he had none in the Fields where he lay, which we did, together with some Fowls. And this Compliment; That if either Himself or his Lady wanted any thing that they had left behind them, Gold, Silver, and Jewels excepted, they might with freedom command it. Af∣ter this, finding we were such so∣ciable Enemies, and so good Natured Victors, he Invited our Captain to drink a glass of Wine with him at the top of a Hill just by the Town side, and de∣sired our Captain to come without Arms, and but with one Man, and he would do the same, which our Commander
consented to, and met the Governour with two Bottles of VVine,An. Dom. 1680. Decem. where they drank and were merry together, and where amongst other discourse our Inte∣rest was not forgotten. Our Comman∣der agreeing with the Governour, who was unwilling the Town should be de∣molished, to Ransom it for 95000 pieces of Eight, which he promised to send us the next day. So having drank their VVine, they parted; we receiving the Captain into the Town with a Volly of small Arms. The next day our fancies being filled with the expectation of so much money, we were at a pitch of mirth higher then ordinary, when we received a Letter from on board our Ship, intimating that there was an Indian with a couple of Seal Skins blown like Bladers, of which he made a float, and in the dead of the night came under the Stern of our Ship, with a Ball of Pitch, Sulphur, Oakum, and such combustible matter, and stuck it between the Ruddr and Stern-port, and set it on fire with a Brimstone match, after this he left his new Fashioned Boat and swome on shoar. This fire made such a stench that almost choaked the
Men in the Ship, who else, it is possi∣ble, had not awaked, for had they kept a good look out, the Indian could not have effected so great a part of his de∣sign, some leaped into their Canoes and others searched within board, and at last found the fire before it had taken hold of the Ship. This piece of Trea∣chery made us despair of our money; However it wrought this effect upon us, that ever after, we kept so strict a watch, that we had prevented any such other mischiefs, had they attempted the like against us. And truly as our cir∣cumstances were, it was a deliverance, no Serious Man will be ever unmindful to give God Thanks for. For at that time, had our Ship been burnt, not one man of us had escaped, the Spaniards being not easily reconciled to us, for those ill Offices we had done them since our visits there on the South Sea Coasts, and some of us also not unknown to them in the North Seas; That they would have hanged the rest if they had been Saints. The Spaniards perceiving their pro∣ject had not operated to burn our Ship, they Early in the morning tur∣ned
all the water sluices into the Town, which in an hours time, made the streets almost Ankle deep in water, which before was dry dust. This they did, either to drive us out of the Town, or to have water at hand to quench it, in case we set it on fire, which (resolving to keep our word with the Enemy) we did, firing it in se∣veral Places at once, and Packing up our Luggage, after we had staid till the greatest part of it was in Flames, we marched out of it down to the water side; But the Governour had drawn all his men from the tops of the Hills, down into the Vally, by the water side into the way that we should pass; So we detached out a small party for a forlorn, supposing we must have fought our way through; But as soon as we began to pink some of their Jackets for them with our Fu∣zees, they got out of our reach, and went to their ruin'd Town leaving us to go peaceably on Board our Ship. When we came on Board, we sent a shoar a great number of our Prisoners, and amongst the rest Don Thomas d'Al∣gondony, Captain Peralta, Captain Don Iuan,
and many others, some of them being Merchants, which we had taken and kept on board, to learn them to eat Montego and Doeboys. Yet had they no reason to complain of their entertainment amongst us, they being very civilly treated with the best our Ship could afford, which if they do not justly acknowledge, let them have a care we call them not to an account for their ingratitude, when they least think of it. 7. Tuesd. This day we weighed from Coguimbo, wind at South. 8. Wedn. Little wind at South, we stood to the Westward, and made three Islands that Lye North West, a little distance from the Harbour of Coquimbo. 9. Thursd. At 12 a Clock the Souther∣most Isle bore West 12 leag. distance. 10. Frid. Very little wind at South we have run 2 leag. VVest. VVest 14 leag. 11. Saturd. VVe have run 3 leag. VVest, wind N. E. VVest, 17 leag. 12. Sund. VVe have run this 24 hours 13 leag. VVest wind South. VVest 30 leag. 1. nd. Plying between Coquimbo
and Iuan Fernandoes. This 24 hours we have run 11 leag. VVest, lat. 30 deg. 2 min. the wind at S. E. fair weather. VVest 41 leag. 14. Tuesd. VVe have run 4 leag. East, lat. 30 deg. 29 min. wind S. S. VV. with rain the 4 leag. East deducted makes our departure VVest 37 leag. 15. Wedn. VVe have run 7 leag. VVest, lat. 30 deg. 40 min. very hard gales at S. and S. S. W. West 44 leag. 16. Thursd. VVe have run 20 leag. VVest, lat. 30 deg. 40 min. VVest 64 leag. 17. Frid. VVe have run 11 leag. VVest, lat. 30 deg. 30 min. VVest 75 leag. 18. Saturd. We have run 12 leag. West, lat. 30 deg. 54 min. wind S. to S. E. squally weather. West 87 leag. 19. Sund. We have run 15 leag. VVest, lat. 31 deg. 39 min. wind S. E. VVest 102 leag. 20. Mund. VVe have run 17 leag. VVest, lat. 32 deg. 21 min. VVest 119 leag. 21. Tuesd. VVe have run 12 leag. VVest, lat. 32 deg. 13 min. VVest 131 leag.
22. Wedn. VVe have run 3 leag. East, lat. 32 deg. 10 min. the wind round the Compass. East 3 leag. 23. Thursd. VVe have run 3 leag. East lat. 32 deg. 43 min. the wind from N▪ W. to S. E. East 6 leag. 24. Frid. We have run 15 leag. East lat. 33 deg. 33 min. wind at N. to N. N. VV. this day we made the VVestermost Isle of Iuan Fernando's, it bears S. VV. East 21 leag. 25. Saturd. VVe have run 10 leag. East, lat. 33 deg. 42 min. at six a Clock in the Evening we came to an anchor at the Southermost part of this Island in 11 fath. water, where we lay very smooth, in the N. VV. Bay. VVe lay at this Place until Tuesday following, but not finding it a good road we went to Leeward of the Island, where we lay very smooth in the N. W. Bay. Here we lay and refresht our men, with Goats Flesh and fresh Fish, of both which here is plenty; and as it is usuall amongst the generality of men, that plenty of all things, breeds an increase of ill humors, Faction and Di∣sturbances so it had the same effect
upon our men, for now they are for a new Commander. A party of the disaffected to Captain Sharp got ashoar and subscribed a Paper to make Iohn Wutling Commander, pre∣tending liberty to a free election as they termed it, and that Watling had it by vote. The reason of this mutiny was, that Sharp had got about 3000 pieces of Eight, and was willing to come home that year, but two thirds of the Com∣pany had none left; having lost it at play; And those would have Captain Sharp turned out, because they had no mind as yet to return home. This Fewd was carried on so fiercely, that it was very near coming to a civil VVar, had not some prudent men a little modera∣ed the thing; Yet all this while we all oined in the ready Fitting our Vessel, and used all diligence imaginable to get o Sea again. It pleased God as our Ship was newly made clean and ready to Sail, there came three Men of War to look for us; Now we had at that time two Canoes
at the windward side of the Isle,An. Dom. 1680. Ianuar. setching Goats, who saw the three Men of War, and gave us notice of them, so that we had just time to get our Men on Board, who were most of them at that time on shoar, cutting wood and washing their clothes. As soon as they were got on Board, the Ships came in sight, so we got up one Anchor, and left the other behind us. We heysted in our Canoes and Boat, and clapt close by the wind, for at this time those Ships were to Leeward of us about two miles; their Admiral sailed well, so that in chase of us, the other two were two leagues distant from him; now knowing we could deal well enough with him, tho he had twelve great Guns, and we not one, we went about-Ship, resolving to Board him before the other two could come up with us, and then we should be ready for them. But so soon as he saw us put a stays, he bore up the Helm and went to his consorts. This was the twelfth of Ja∣nuary 1680.
Iuan Fernandez at Queen Katherines Isle, as we called it, is very high Land, well wooded, and has plenty of fresh Water, Goats and Fish, with a whole∣some Air, and Lyes in 33 deg. 40 min. South lat. and about 100 leag. from the Main Land. 13. Thursd. We keep plying to wind∣ward, to see the motion of these three Ships; we saw one plying for the Island, the other two we judged were got to an Anchor under the Island. Our Men being mutinous and full fed, Resolved to surprise the City of Aryca, so in the night we bore up the Helm, and left the Spaniards to cast a figure to know where to meet us next. 14. Frid. We have run 15 leag. East, lat. 32 deg. 33 min. the wind at S. and S. S. E. 5 leag. distance from the Isle when we bore up, which makes East 20 leag. 15. Saturd. Between Iuan Fernandez and Aryca; We have run 21 leag. East,
lat. 30 deg. 36 min. wind South East 41 leag. 16. Sund. We have run 20 leag. East, lat. 29 deg. 23 min. East 61 leag. 17. Mund. We have run 18 leag. East lat. 29 deg. 49 min. wind S. S. E. we differ by dead reckoning and cor∣ret it by Observation 7 leag. which being deducted out of our Easting, there remains East 7 leag. 18. Tuesd. We have run 22 leag. East lat 26 deg. 13 min. wind at South and S. S. E. clowdy weather. East 94 leag. 19. Wedn. We have run East 20 leag. lat. 25 deg. 7 min. wind South. East 114 leag. 20. Thursd. We have run 22 leag. North lat. 24 deg. the wind at South; this morning we saw the Land which was very high and mountainous, and bore E. N. E. 14 leag. distance. East 114 leag.
21. Frid. We have run 26 leag. North lat. 2 deg. 43 min. wind South. 22. Saturd. We have run 12 leag. West, lat. 21 deg. 26 min. wind South and S. S. E. 12 leag. West from 114 East make our departure. East but 102 leag. 23. Sund. We have run 11 leag. East, lat. 20 deg. 42 min. the wind in the day at South, by night East, a strong Current that sets to the Northward. East 113 leag. 24. Mund. VVe sent our Canoes to an Island that lyes a little from the shoar to take some prisoners, that might inform us how the City of Aryca was fortified, so we lay on and off the shoar for this day. 25. Tuesd. VVe plyed to windward, for our Canoes at night they came on Board, but had mist of the Island, so we put in a fresh gang of Men and away they went on the same errand this night.
26. Wedn. Our Canoes came on bard at night, bringing with them two old Indian Men, who informed Captain Iohn Watling who now was comman∣der in Chief, and took their examinations in Private, that there was seven Com∣panys of Kings Soldiers in the Town, and that the Place was well fortisied with Breast-Works, besides a strong Fort of thirteen Copper Guns, but for fear of discouraging us in the at∣tempt he discovered nothing of this to us, but swore he would have the Town or that should have him, which proved a prophecy; with this resolution he commands the Helm to be bore up. 27. Thursd. Little or no wind, lat. 20 deg. 20 min. 28. Frid. We went with our Boat and Canoes, wherein we had 92 Men that we could Land, leaving a small Guard on our Boats. We rowed along shoar till 29. Saturd. morning, and lay still all this day for fear of being des∣cried, and on Saturd. night we rowed most part of the night.
Ianuary the 30. Sund. Being the Anniversary day in commemoration of the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, for which I believe the English both have and will suffer severely, and Seas of our Blood be shed for Sacrifi∣ces to expiat the Murther of the best of Princes, we landed our Men, and advanced towards the Town of Aryca, but as we marched we divided our Men nto two Parties, of which 40 were designed for the Fort, and the rest for the City. When we drew near the Town, we saw a great number of Men drawn up without their works, in a plain Sandy Ground, who fired at our Party that marched towards the Town, and our Men returning their compliment kept on their way; our other Party that were for the Fort seeing us ingaged, hasted down the Hill, with a Shour, and cried, They run, they run, and then firing on their Flank, made them run in good Earnest, and with what haste they could, get into their Breast-works.
When we were united into one body the Enemy played their Cannon briskly upon us; So we resolved to attaque their Breast-works, which were out of the Bearing of their Fort, but we had a smart Asault of it, for we being all open to their, fire and naked Men, and they secured in their works, they by this advantage, killed us a great many Men. At last some of ours got to the End of their biggest Breastwork, which galled us most and then we plyed them well with small Shot, which was a Cartridge fit for the Bores of our Fuzees with a full Shot in it and 7 or 9 Swan Shot loose upon that. This kept them in play till our Men in the Front began to Storm the wall; upon which they cryed for quar∣ter, which our unwary Commander too readily granted, it afterwards pro∣ving the ruin of our design. In this junture we received many a Volly from three other Breastworks, that this great one lay within command of; and we being for dispatch faced a∣bout with a party of ours, and took them all by assault without giving any quarter
to those that were in them, they being Creolians, a people half Spaniards and half Indians, of a Copper colour'd Com∣plexion, and Men that never give it themselves. From hence we advanced to the Town and took it, that now we had nothing to do but to give a general assault to the Fort, but Captain Watling delaying his time, in the Breastwork where he staid to give quarter; Those we drove out of the Town got into the Fort; whom, had it not been for the Guns to put into our Ship, we would not have troubled our selves with; for we knew that ha∣ving once possession of the Town, there was more Coined money then we could tell how to bring away, in case we had not been disturbed, which Plunder would have made us what we could de∣sire; but we wanted their Cannon, to secure it on board when we should get it there. At length the Captain march∣ed into the Town with his Prisoners and called us all together, where being come, we found we had more Prisoners then Men of our own. So that after
we had sent our Wounded Men to the Hospital, got the Doctors to dress them, and set a Guard upon our Prisoners and Wounded, which took up above an hours time, we marched to the Fort, and then too plainly saw that had we not been so hasty in giving quarter, but as soon as we had taken the Town, rallied again and made an attempt on the Fort, no doubt but we had carried it in spight of all Opposition. We then contrived to set some of the Prisoners before us, to secure us the bet∣ter in our approach to the walls of the Fort, but they fired as well upon them, as us, and on a sudden at a signal given, they all run from us into a Sally Port, Which was hastily shut with some of them left out, whom we knocked on the head. Yet we undauntedly got un∣der the walls, and began to throw over our Hand-granadoes, which proved bad and were altogether Unserviceable. Now while we were under the wall, and consulting how we should get a∣mongst them, though a Prisoner told us there were three hundred Kings Soul∣diers,
in the Garison. The Country people came in so ast upon us, that we could do no good on the Fort, so we retreted towards the Twn. In which action Captain Watlin was Shot into the Reins, and Killed; and to add to our loss & disappointment we found both the Town, and Breast-works, new manned by the Country people, which while we were engaged with, they Sallyed out of the Fort upon us, so that we were forced to quit our attempt on the Town and betake our selves to the plain Field, leaving our Doctors, and some Wound∣ed Men in the Hospital behind us. When we came into the Field, and saw such a small remainder of our Men, and our Enemies Horse quite round us, we got our Wounded Men into the middle, and casting our selves into a circle or ring, Fought our way through. Not one Man of us offering to run, and thus marched down to our Boats, but with heavy Hearts, to think we should leave so much Plate behind us. And not∣withstanding we were so few, and this few almost Choaked for want of wa∣ter, having been ingaged from eight a
Clock in the morning till two in the afternoon, yet durst they not break in with our Body, which at this time con∣sisted but of forty seven Fighting Men, and they at least twelve hundred in the Field, besides what were in their Fort, Town, and Breast-works; and our Ca∣noes lay full three miles from the Town. All which way we charged through and through them, and lost not one Man in the retreat, though some of us were Wounded; what damage we did them we never knew, but it could not but be considerable. In this Fight we had eight and twenty Men Killed, seven∣teen Wounded, and the Doctors taken Prisoners, who had quarter given them as we were afterwards told. This Arica is seated in a very pleasant Vally by a River side, and is the Bar∣kador or place for Shipping off the Trea∣sure which comes from the Mines of the Mountain of Potosy, is a good Harbour, and secure, and lies in eighteen deg▪ and twenty min. South latitude, and a Healthy Air, the people of a good Complexion and Stature. The Mountains by the City
afford good Salt, which the Inhabi∣tants digg in Cakes of a hundred weight per peice. Here is also a very good Harbour. This night about nine a Clock we got on board. 31. Mund. We stood to the West∣ward. Little wind at S. and S. S. E. February the Ist. We plied to the Southward under the shoar. 2. Wedn. We kept plying under the shoar till afternoon, then stood off to Sea. The high land in 19 deg. bears East 10 leag. distance; West 10 leag. 3. Thursd. Little wind all day. 4. Frid. We have run 6 leag. West, wind E. and E. S. E. West 16 leag. 5. Saturd. We have run 2 leag. West, at. 20 deg. 53 min. wind S. S. E. West 18 leag.
6. Sund.An. Dom. 1680. Februa. We have run 17. leag. West lat. 21 deg. 22 min. West 35 leag. 7. Mund. We have run 19 leag. West, lat. 21 deg. 34 min. wind South. West 54 Leag. 8. Tuesd. We have run 9 leag. West, lat. 21. deg. 49 min. clowdy weather. West 63 leag. 9. Wedn. We have run 19 leag. West, lat. 22 deg. 20 min. wind S. S. E. West 82▪ leag. 10. Thursd. We have run 18 leag. West, lat. 23 deg. 5 min. a Southern great Sea. West 100 leag. 11. Frid. We have run 15 leag. West, lat. 23 deg. 50 min. wind S. E. West 115 leag. 12. Saturd. Lat. 25 deg. 12 min. a great Sea wind E. S. E. and S. E. 13. Sund. We have run 15 leag. West, lat. 25 deg. 50 min. wind South East,
with some rain. West 130 leag. 14. Mund. We have run 3 leag. West lat. 26 deg. 6 min. West 133 leag. 15. Tuesd. 14 leag. West, lat. 26 deg. 0 min. West 147 leag. 16. Wedn. We have run 2 leag. West, lat. 27 deg. 44 min. wind South and E. S. E. we are run in all West. 149 leag. 17. Thursd. We have run 8 leag. West, lat. 28 deg. 7 min. West 157 leag. 18 Frid. We have run 10 leag. West, lat. 28 deg. 44 min. West 167 leag. 19. Saturd. We have run 14 leag. West, at. 29 deg. 29 min. West 181 leag. 20 Sund. We have run 15 leag. West, at. 31 deg. 1 min. West 196 leag. 21. Mund. We have run 24 leag. West, lat. 31 deg 34 min. squally weather. West 220 leag. 22 Tuesd. We have run 2 leag. West, at. 31 deg. 50 min. wind S. E. to S. W. hazy weather. West 222 leag. 23 Wedn. We have run 5 leag. West, lat. 32 deg. 11 min. wind S. E. to South. West 227 leag.
24. Thursd. and 25. Frid. We have lain becalmed, lat. 32 deg. 26 min. 26. Saturd. We have run East 16▪ leag. in lat. 3 deg. 50 min. the wind a North West to West clear weather▪ East 16 leag. 27. Sund. We have run 15 leag. East, lat. 33 deg. 18 min. the wind at VV. S. VV. at night the wind took us a stays at S. E. with rain. East 31 leag. 28. Mund. We have run 6 leag. East, lat. 34 deg. 4 min. the wind from E. to S. E. clowdy weather. East 37 leag. March the 1st. Tuesd. We have lain becalmed in lat. 34 deg. 13 min. 2. Wedn. We have run 16 leag. East, lat. 34 deg. 2 min. the wind at VV. to S. E. with rain; at this time water grew scarce, and our Men mutinied about a Commander, for the former Dissenters had not forgot their Old Cant, so we proposed standing over for the main to get water and fresh Provision; this ap∣peased them for a while, nothing else was capable to do it but only finding them employment for their stirring Spi∣rits and unruly Humours. We have run East 53 leag.
3. Thursd.1680/1. March. We have run 6. Leagues East Latitude, 33. Degr. and 35. Min. Wind at S. E. to E. S. E. East 59. Leagues. 4. Frid. We have run 17. Leagues, East Latitude 32. Degr. and 35. Min. the Wind at S. E. and very cloudy wea∣ther. East 76. Leagues. 5. Saturd. We have run 15. Leagues East, Latitude 31. Degr. 27. Minut. East 91. Leagues. 6. Sund. We have run 12. Leagues East, Latitude 30. Degr. 20. Minutes. East 103. Leagues. 7. Mund. We have run 13. Leagues East, Latitude 30. Degr. 36. Min. Good weather. East 116. Leagues. 8. Tuesd. We have run 21 Leagues East, Latitude 30. Degr. 22. Min. Wind S. W. East 137 Leagues. 9. Wedn. We have run 28. Leagues East, Latitude 29. Degr. 35. Min. Fair weather. East 165. Leagues. 10. Thursd. We have run 38. Leagues East, Latitude 29. Degr. 45. Min. Wind S. East 203. Leagues. 11. Frid. We have run 32. Leagues East, Latitude 29. Degr. 45. Min. the wind at S. and S. S. W. we went with
our Courses for Wind. East 235. Leagues. 12. Saturd. We have run 27. Leagues East, fresh gales at S. Latitude 29. Degr. 17. Minutes. This Morning we saw the Land. East 262. Leagues. 13. Sund. We have run to the North∣ward along the Shoar, about 7. Leagues, where we went into our Canoes to go ashoar at a place called Gwasko; but the Sea breaze came in so fresh they could not get ashoar. About three of the Clock in the Afternoon our Ship got into the Harbour, and came to an Anchor in 17. fthom Water; sandy ground. At Night we landed 45 Men, and marched up into the Countrey about seven Miles; but could find nothing but Provisions, as Wheat, &c. About eleven of the Clock we came back three Miles, where there was a Church, where we dressed some Sheep, and Goats for Supper, and kept our Court of Guard there that Night. In the Morning Captain Sharp went with ten Men down to the water-side, to hasten our filling of Water, the rest staid behind to bring down some Sheep
and Goats; which we did, driving be∣fore us a drove of 150. that served for fresh meat for our wounded men a great while. During this time, our people were at the River to fill Water, but the Sea ran so high, they could not get any off the Shore. In the Morning we went about fifty Men on Shoar again, to fill Water, and were forced to carry our Jarrs a quarter of a Mile, because the Sea ran so high we could not get our Canoes into the shoar, to take it in at the River, but filled them at a Pond; thus we got on Board one hundred and fifty Jarrs. This Gwasko is a very good Harbour, and clear Ground with the Land, in the Wind three quarters of the Compass, a Land wind in the Night, and Sea breaze all day: here we lay till the 15. Instant. 15. Tuesd. About three of the Clock in the Afternoon, we set sail from Gwasko, the Wind S. W. and S. S. W. 16. Wednes. We have run 4. Leagues West, Wind S. West 4. Leagues. 17. Thursd. We have run 9. Leagues West, Latitude 27. Degr. 45. Min. West 13. Leagues.
18. Frid. We have run North, La∣titude 26. Degr. 33. Min. Wind at S. 19. Saturd. We have run 10 Leagues East, Latitude 25. Degr. 21. Minut. fresh gales; the 10. Leagues Easting de∣ducted, makes our Westing but three Leagues. 20. We have run 10. Leagues East: More a Morania bears East 6. Leagues distance. The 3. Leagues Westing de∣ducted, leaves our departure East 7. Leagues. 21. Mund. We have run 3. Leagues East, Latitude 22. Degr. 52. Min. the Wind at S. to S. E. This day we made the point of Land like a Sugar-Loaf; by report here is a Harbour that lyes in South about the Point, good Anchor Ground, in 15. Fathom Wa∣ter, but neither fresh Water nor Wood. 22. Tesd. This day we have lain by with our Ship, and sent our Canoes to look for the River Loa, but they cme on board without discovering it. East 10. Leagues. 23. Wednesd. These 24. hours we have lain by, while our Canoes went on Shoar, in Latitude 21. Degr. 21. Min. The
River bears E. by S. about two of the Clock our Canoes came on Board. 24. Thursd. We sent our Boat on Shoar. This River of Loa issues out of the high Land, and scarce discernable▪ it being but a small running Stream like an English Brook; on the North side of which is a small Chappel, which by report of the Inhabitants, was built by Sir Francis Drake, when he was in those Seas. Two Leagues North from this, is a Fish Rainge, which the Spaniards keep for the Natives to fish for them. These miserable Natives are kept in great subjection, and do not generate as or∣merly, though they are a stout people, and have amongst them good comely Women: the reason of it, as we con∣jecture, is, the depressure of their Spirits, by the tyranny of the Saniards, which causes this failure of Generati∣on; the means of Propagation not ta∣king its natural effect upon people so absolutely dejected with oppression, as they most certainly are. These 24. Hours we have run 12. Leagues West, Latitude 20. Degr. 55. Min. Wind E. S. E.
25. March. These 24. Hours we have run 12 Leagues West, Latitude 20. Degr. 15. Min. West 24. Leagues. 26. Saturd. These 24. Hours we have run North, Latitude 18. Degr. 19. Minutes, the Wind S. to E. S. E. this day we made the high Land of He∣loe. 27. Sund. This Morning we made a small sail to spend away the day. In the Afternoon, about five of the Clock, we made what sail we could; and about 11. in the Night, we landed about 50. Men upon a point of Rocks, which lies two Leagues from the Town of Heloe, or Hilo, and about break of the day, our Men took most of the Inhabitants that were in that place: And were not al∣together unmindful of their Horse flesh, they sent us for Beefs, when we made them a visit before. The Prisoners, we took, told us, that at Arica, our Do∣ctors had had good quarter given them, for the sake of their skill; but that the wounded were knockt on the Head; and that one Negro, who had his Leg shot off, being offered quarter, refused it, and killed four or five of their Men, before he was shot dead on the spot.
This fellow had been a Slave, whom our Commander had freed, and brought from Iamaica. What they lost at Aryca, they would not confess, only said, that a great ma∣ny were killed, and that the wounded Men came fast out of the Countrey to be cured by our Doctors, we had left behind us. Here we filled fresh Water, got some good new Wine, store of Figgs, and plenty of fresh Provisions for our Men. This Heloe is in Latitude 17. Degr. 49. Min. South, and stands in an extraordi∣nary fruitful Valley, with fine Olive Yards, two pretty Vineyards, a great Sugar work: They have a Corn Mill, and plenty of Wheat, Beef, Mutton, Pork, also Fish, and all manner of ne∣cessaries both for life, and for recrea∣tion. Here we stayed till Tuesday the 29. and at nine of the Clock at Night, we weighed, and stood to Sea, the Wind at S. E. Wedn. 30. We have run 12. Leag. West, Wind S. S. E. West 12. Leagues. 31. Thursd. We have run 14. Leag. West, Wind S. a great Current which sets N. W. West 26. Leagues.
April 1.1681. April. We have run 22. Leagues West, Latitude 17. Degr. 13. Min. the Wind at S. S. W. to S. W. West 48. Leagues. 2. Saturd. We have run 22. Leagues West, Latitude 16. Degr. 46. Min. Wind S. E. to E. fair weather. West 70. Leagues. 3. Sund. We have run 25. Leagues West, Latitude 16. Degr. 16. Min. the Wind S. E. cloudy weather. West 95. Leagues. 4. Mund. We have run 15. Leagues West, Latitude 14. Degr. 28. Min. West 110. Leagues. 5. Tusd. We have run 10. Leagues West, Latitude 12. Degr. 52. Min. West 120. Leagues. 6. Wedn. We ran due North, Lati∣tude 10. Degr. 56. Min. the Wind S. E. this day we saw the Land very high 15. Leagues distance. 7. Thursd. We have run 10. Leagues West, Latitude 9. Degr. 38. Min. the Wind at S. E. a great Currant that sets to the Southward▪ this small of the Moon, we keep Land too, in hopes to take some Shipping. West 130. Leagues.
8. Frid. We have run 9. Leagues West, Latitude 8. Degr. 44. Min. Wind S. W. 138. Leagues. 9. Saturd. We have run due North, Latitude 7. Degr. 38. Min. the Wind at S. a strong South easterly Currant. 10. Sund. We have run due North, Latitude 6. Degr. 33. Min. Wind S. and S. S. E. thick foggy weather. This Morning we made Land, it was one of the Northermost Isles of Lobos, which lye in Cheripe-Bay. 11. Mund. 12. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 5. Degr. 57. Min. Wind. S. E. foggy weather. West 150. Leagues. 12. Tuesd. We have run 13. Leagues West, Latitude 5. Degr. 8. Min. Wind S. E. West 163. Leagues. 13. Wednes. We have run . Leag. West, Latitude 3. Degr. 48. Min. West 168. Leagues. 14. Thursd. We have run 9. Leagues East, Lat. 2. Degr. 48. Min. Wind. S. a N. W. Currant East 9. Leagues. 15. Frid. We have run 8. Leagues East, Latitude 1. Degr. 58. Min. Wind S. S. E. very great riplings, and a strong N. W. Currant. East 17. Leagues.
16. Saturd. We have run 5. Leagues East, Latitude 1. Degr. 38. Min. The Isle of Plate bears N. 5. Leagues distant. East 22. Leagues. Here by our account, Heloe or Hilo, lyes to the Eastward of the Island of Plate 146. Leagues, this Island lyes in 1. Degr. 23. Min. S. Latitude. 17. Sund. This day about Noon, to our great trouble, 45 of our Men left us, quitting our Emperours service, and went away with our Boat and two Canoes, with what necessary things they wanted for their journey over Land. They would have stayed if we would have chosen a new Commander, but would not serve longer under Captain Sharp. When they put away from the Ship, Cape Passado bore N. E. 10. Leagues distance. This was a great weakning to our party, and a hindrance to our designs: Ne∣vertheless we bore our loss as chearfully as we could, and resolved not to quit those Coasts till we had got the Booty we expected, and weakened the Spani∣ards as much as we could, as our Em∣peror had obliged us to do.
18. Mund. We have run 9. Leagues West, Lat. 0. Degr. 20. Min. North, the Wind at S. W. fair weather. 19. Tuesd. We have gone North, by reason of a N. E. Currant, Latitude 1. Degr. 48. Min. N. the Wind at S. W. good weather. 20. Wedn. We have run 18. Leagues West, Latitude 3. Degr. 16. Min. the Wind S. W. cloudy weather. West 27 Leagues. 21. Thursd. We have run 23. Leag. N. N. W. a strong Currant. 22. Frid. We have run 76. Miles N. W. by N. Wind W. S. W. much rain, and we saved 40. Jarrs of Wa∣ter. 23. Saturd. We have run 25. Leag. N. W. by N. a strong Currant which sets to the Westward. 24. Sund. We have run 26. Leagues N. W. by N. no observation; a strong Currant. Since we parted from our Men, these five days, we have had plenty of Turtle and Fish. 25. Mund. These 24. Hours we have had the Wind round the Compass, we have run 12. Leagues N. we made the Island Caynia, a different observa∣tion,
Latitude 7. Degrees 40. Mi∣nutes. 26. Tuesd. We came to an Anchor at the Island, it affords good Timber, Hogs, Fish, and Cocoe Nuts: while we lay here, we sent our Canoe to the Main to look for a Harbour to lay our Ship in, but could find none; the ancho∣ring is on the North end of the Island, where we filled some Water, and lay till the 30. 30. Saturd. We weighed about 11. a Clock in the Forenoon, and stood to the West. May day.May. We stood to the Westward, Latitude 9. Degr. 1. Min. the Wind off Shoar in the Night, by Day S. W. with Rain. 2. Mond. To Thursday the 5. we kept plying along the Shoar; very much Rain, with Thunder and Lightning, the Wind S. in the Day, at Night N. W. 6. Frid. We came to an Anchor in the Gulf of Nicoya, in 11. Fathom Wa∣ter, ouzy Ground, the first Key with a Rock at the North end, bears S. by E. from us, very much Rain.
7. Saturd.1681. May. We weighed with the Tide of flood, and got up to the next Key, which lyes N. W. 12. W. 5. Leag. distance. 8. Sund. Our two Canoes went to the Island Chero with 20. Men, and took a Family of Indians that lived there, who told us, there were two Barks in the next River, loading of Tallow. In the Afternoon-Tide, our Ship got up to the Isle of Cheroe. 9. Mund. Our Canoes went up the Flood, and took the two Barks, and the next Ebb brought them down to the Ship. Those Indians told us, That up ano∣ther River, lived a Shipwright, who was building two new Ships. This was wel∣come news to us; so we went up to the Carpenters Yard, and friendly desired the chief Builder, and seven of his Workmen, to go on Board us, and help us to cut down our Ship: He also helped us to a Canoe load of Spikes, and Iron Work, which our Ship want∣ed to fit her with; but some of our Men being drunk, they over-set her coming on Board, and drowned one of the Men: But it being but low Water,
next day at low water we got her again with all our Utensils. On Wednesday we set our Carpen∣ters to work to chalk out our lower Deck. On Thursday our drowned Man came swimming by the Ship, so we took him up, and buried him the next Morn∣ing. We fell this day with our Ship to the mouth of a Vogue about a League off, which we thought convenient to lay our Ship in, out of the Tides way, and this day unrigged her, got our Yards and Topmasts down, and made preparation for our Carpenters to shor∣ten our low Masts. On Saturday we laid one of the Barks on shoar, and took out her Tallow. It rained all Day, and continued raining till Tuesday following. We made an awning over the other Bark, and turn∣ed Tallow Chandlers, making Candles for our Bidacle, &c. On Wednesday the eighteenth it held up, fair weather till Wednesd. the 25. at which time we began to rig our Ship, and on Thursd. were ready to sail. We gave the Carpenter and his Men one of the Barks, and sent them
home; who returned us many thanks for our generosity, and using them so civilly; and with them, we turned away some Prisoners which we had on Board, resolving to keep no more but Negroes to do our drudgery. During our stay at Cheroe we did this work: We shortned our Main-Mast six foot, made new Cross and Trussel-trees to it. Shortned our Fore mast 5. Foot, and made new Cross and Trussel-trees. by the Head. Made our Main, our Fore-Top-Mast, our Fore, our Main▪ Top-Mast. Cut off her upper Deck, and sunk her quarter Deck; she was six Foot ten Inches high, between Decks, and we left her something more than four Foot in the Waste. All this we did in 10. Days, and she was fit for the Sea, and we had done sooner had not wet weather hindred us. 26. Thursd. After we had sent away our Prisoners, we fell down with our Ship to the Isle of Cavalla, where we
lay filling Water till Sunday follow∣ing. On Saturday Iacobus Marquess our Truchman or Interpreter, and an Indi∣an Boy ran away from us to the Spa∣niards; this person was a Dutchman, who was a good Linguist, and left behind him 2200 ps. . besides Jewels and Goods: But we had one Mr. Ring∣rose with us, who was both an ingeni∣ous man, and spake very well several Languages. 29. Sund. We weighed from Cavalla, and fell down to Tortuga: North from this Isle lyes a parcel of Rocks like a Church with a Steeple. 30. Mond. We weighed and stood to Sea, little Wind at S. W. 31. Tuesd. Very little Wind at S. W. Cape Blanco at 12 a Clock bears North 3. Leagues distance. IuneIune. the 1. Wedn. We have run 13. Leagues West, Wind S. E. Latitude 10. Degr. 26. Min. 2. Thursd. We have had the Wind at N. W. and got a little to the Westward. 3. Frid. This Morning debating the thing in Council, and our mens run∣ning away being maturely considered,
we judged we should be discryed at Re∣hela,1681. Iune. which was the place we were de∣signed for; we therefore bore up the Helm, and stood to the Eastward, to look an Harbour to lay our Ship on Shoar; for all this while we had not cleaned her bottom. Latitude 9. Degr. 56. Min. 4. Saturd. We have run 20 Leagues East by South, Latitude 9. Degr. 48. Min. Wind S. W. and W. N. W. East 18. Leagues. 5. Sund. We have run 7 Leagues E. S. E. The Isle Caynia bears S. E. by E. 5 Leagues distance, Wind S. W. to N. W. 6. Mund. These 24 hours we had ve∣ry much Rain, we lay by all Sunday Night for the Gulf of Dulcia; and this Evening we got to an Anchor in the mouth of the Gulf, in 13. Fathom Wa∣ter, the Wind at South, and much Rain. 7. Tuesd. We sent our Canoe up the Gulf, to look a place to lay our Ship on Shoar in, but they found none. 8. Wednesd. We weighed our An∣chor, and sailed three Leagues higher up the Gulf, then sent our Canoe and
Bark up before the Ship: The Canoe going on Shoar, took an Indian Man and two Boyes, and brought them on Board. Here finding a place for our purpose, we came to an Anchor in 24 Fathom Water, close by the Shoar; and rainy weather. 9. Thursd. We halled our Ship near the Shoar, and mored her; and some of us built an House, while others landed our Goods with all expedition; fair weather. 10. Frid. Here we lay till Munday the 13. which Night had like to have pro∣ved fatal to us, for our Cable gave way, and our Ship went ashoar, that we al∣most despaired of saving her; but ha∣ving many Hands, we shoared her pret∣ty upright, and on Wednesd. the 15. got her off again, without much damage: here we continued until Thursday the 23. 23. Thursd. This day having cleaned our Ship and Bark, and gave them a Coat of Tallow, we weighed and in∣tended to have gone a League higher, but it proving little Wind, we had like to have drove out at the Gulfs mouth.
24. Frid. We got up to the Water∣ing place; fair weather. 25. Saturd. We began to fill our Water, and left our Bark with some Hands cutting Wood where we cleaned our Ship. 26. Sund. and 27. Mund. These days we made an end of filling our Water, and came to an Anchor a mile below the Bark. 28. Tuesd. We weighed and stood to Sea, the Wind at S. with much Rain. This Gulf of Dulcia has plenty of Wood and Water, store of Fish, is very bold, and void of all danger but what is in fight. It has an Island on the North Shoar, which makes a good Harbour: it lyes in 8. Degr. 30. M. and is 6. Leagues distance N. N. W. from Point Berica, which Point is high, with a low tract of Land running into the Sea with a small Cape, a little distance from it; at the West side of the Gulf lye two small Rocks close to the West Point. 29. Wednesd. Very much Rain all Day, at 6. a Clock Point Berica bears N. E. 5. Leagues distance.
30. Thursd.1681. We have run 25. Leag. South, the Wind W. Cloudy wea∣ther. IulyIuly. the 1. We have run 17. Leag. South, Latitude 6. Degr. 13. Min. Wind West. 2. Saturd. We have run 8. Leagues East, Latitude 5. Degr. 35. Min. Wind S. S. W. 3. Sund. We have run 28. Leagues East, Latitude 4. Degr. 23. Min. Wind S. S. E. Here we had plenty of Dolphins. 4. Mund. We have run 23. Leagues East, Latitude 3. Degr. 14. Minutes. little Wind at S. S. W. to W. N. W. fresh gales. East 23. Leagues. 5. Tuesd. We have run 21. Leagues East, Latitude 2. Degr. 30. Min. little Wind at S. W. and S. S. W. This day we made the Isle of Galloe. 6. Wedn. We plyed to windward un∣der the Shoar. 7. Thursd. This Morning we wea∣thered the Point of Manglas, as the Spa∣niards call it, which is no more than a Point of high Mangrows. To wind∣ward of it is a small Bay.
8. Frid. We kept plying to wind∣ward, along Shoar. 9. Saturd. We kept plying along Shoar, and got under the high Land, to the Eastward of Cape Franco, which makes with White and Redish Cliffs. 10. Sund. This Morning we saw a Sail 6. Leagues to Windward of us, and about 7. at Night came up with him, so we made sail to get under the Cape with our Prize. 11. Mund. We made the best of our way to get under the Cape. 12. Tuesd. This day we got to an an∣chor under the Cape, about 2. Leagues from the Shoar, in 6. Fathom Water, stiff sandy Ground; to the Eastward of this Cape lyes the River of S. Matthias, where live several Indians, Negroes, and Creolians, which are a mungrel breed of Spaniards and Indians mixt. 13. Wednes. and 14. Thursd. We began to rummage our Prize, which was loaden with Cocoa, and some Plate. On Thursday we cut away her Main-Mast, and turned her be∣fore the Wind for Paama, it being but requisite that a light Ship should have
less sail; we put her not out of her Road neither, but sent her to proceed on her Voyage she was bound for, which was for Panama. 17. Sund. This Night our small Ca∣noe broke loose, but we got her again next Morning. As they rowed along the Shoar, they saw an Indian Man, but could not pursue him, for want of Arms. After they came on Board we man∣ned both our Canoes, and went on Shoar, where we found a delicate fresh water River; so we sent thither our Bark and Canoes to fill Water, which took up our time till Tuesday, when they came on Board; after we had unloaden the Bark, we sunk her. 20. Wedn. This Morning we weighed, and stood to Sea, the VVind at S. W. Very hazy weather. 21. Thursd. VVe plyed to wind∣ward, VVind at W. S. W. and S. W. cloudy weather, with drisling Rain. 22. Frid. This 24 Hours we had a great S. W. Sea, the VVind shifting from E. S. E. to W. S. W. out of sight of Land.
23. Saturd. This day we came in sight of Cape Saint Francisco, the Wind between S. W. and S. hazy wea∣ther. 24. Sund. These 24. hours we had the Wind at S. to S. W. thick hazy wea∣ther with drisling Rain. 25. Mund. These 24 hours we hd the Wind at S. S. W. After we had wea∣thered the Cape to the Southward, is a great Bay, then a high land, but not so high as the Cape, Latitude 0. Degr. 34. Min. North. 26. Tuesd. The Wind S. to S. W. we got within 6. Leagues of Cape Pas∣sado. To the N. E. of this Cape is high Land, with white Cliffs like those of Beachy. 27. Wedn. In the Morning we saw a Sail close by the Shoar; so we gave her chase, she came to an Anchor, and most of the people got on Shoar, but we followed them, and took them all but a Fryer and four Negroes, who made their escape. The next day we sent them for Pana∣ma, from whence they came bound for Payta, with advice from Old Spain. At Payta they always land ther Pacquets,
to be sent to the City of Lyma. Next day we turned her away, and plyed to windward, the Wind at S. to S. W. 29. Frid. This day we saw a Sail, and in a short time came up with her, the Spaniard began to fire some small Arms at us, but our way being to come Board and Board, and never to fire a Shot at randome, when we came up close with her, we warmed their Decks so that they soon struck, and called for Quarter; but the Captain was killed first, and one Man more, and several others wounded. On Saturd. we came to an Anchor under Cape Passado, in 14. Fathom Water. The Prize was loaden with Wine, Brandy, Oyl, and Fruit, and 670. Piggs of Metal, which we (such was our dulness) supposed to be Tin. All the Arguments some of us could use, would not perswade our Captain and rest of our men to take them in; only one was brought away to make Bullets; part of which we gave to a Bristol Man, being about a third part of a Pigg, when we came to Anteg, and he sold it at Bristol for 75. l. Sterl. for it was Silver, though not refined
to the purity it should have been. On Sund. Night the Men positively resusing to take in those Piggs, we turned away to Sea our Prize, that might have sufficiently enriched us all, and having stored our selves with Wine and Brandy, and considering our small number of Men left, and good stock of Provisions, we thought it best to re∣turn home with what Booty we had; not over Land as our Comrades had done, but round by the streights of Ma∣gellan: So on Wedn. Morning we weighed, and stood to Sea, the Wind S. S. E. AugustAugust. 4. We keep plying to Wind∣ward, the Wind S. and S. W. very fresh gales. 5. Frid. We had fresh gales at S. and S. S. W. and very cloudy wea∣ther. 6. Saturd. We had small gales at S. S. E. to S. W. Monte a Christo bears S. 10. Leagues distance. 7. Sund. The Wind at S. S. E. to S. W. small gales and a le-ward Cur∣rant that we have got nothing. 8. Mund. A strong leward Currant, and smal Winds that we could get no∣thing.
9. Tues.1681. August. We had the Wind at S. and S. W. little Wind: But at 10 in the Day, it came to W. and blowed ve∣ry hard, which is the usual Course; we are in sight of Manta about 3. Leagues distance, a strong Cur∣rant. 10. Wednes. The Wind at S. W. in the Morning we had moderate gales, so we kept our own with Mata. 11. Thursd. We had the Wind at S. and W. S. W. moderate gales: Now the Currant sets as strong to windward as it did to leward. Cape Lawrence bears East, 1 League distance. 12. Frid. This Morning we got to an Anchor at the Isle of Plate, where we lay refreshing our selves till Tuesday the 16. It is high table Land, being le∣vel at the top; there is pretty plenty of Wood, Goats, and Fish, but no Wa∣ter, good anchorage in a sandy Bay, next the Main. 16. Tuesd. We set Sail about 2. in the Afternoon, the Wind at S. W. 17. Wednes. and 18. Thursd. Little Wind at S. S. W. and S. W. we got into Sancta Hellena Bay; the Currant setting to windward under the Shoar.
19. Frid. We had very moderate Winds at S. S. W. but a very great Sou∣thern Sea, Point Hellena bears S. S. E. 20. Saturd. Moderate gales at S. W. and S. in the Night Sacta Hellena bore E. S. E. 3 Leagues distance; this Day at 12. it bore East . Leagues distance. 21. Sund. We have had the Wind at S. to W. S. W. moderate gales. 22. Mund. We have had the Wind at N. W. moderate gales: This Morn∣ing we made the South Shoar, of Wye Bay. 23. Tuesd. We have kept plying to windward under the Shoar, the VVind at S. W. 24. Wedn. VVe have had the VVind at S. W. very fresh, in Latitude 4. Degr. 11. Min. S. Cape Blanko bears S. E. by E. 3. Leagues distance. 25. Thurs. The VVind came to S. and S. E. very fresh gales that we have weathered the Cape 7 Leagues. Cold cloudy weather. 26. Frid. VVe keep plying to wind∣ward under the Shoar; thick foggy weather, VVind S. to S. S. W.
27. Saturd. VVe keep plying to windward, the VVind from S. to S. E. thick foggy weather. At one of the Clock we made the high Land to wind∣ward of Payta. 28. Sund. This Morning we ran into Payta Bay with our Ship, and manned 2. Canoes with 32. Men to go on Shoar▪ but were descryed upon the Coast, and they provided so well against us, that it was madness to land. Their numbers of Horse and Foot upon the Bay, pre∣vented our running into further danger▪ so we returned on Board our Ship, and sailed away to Sea. 29. Mund. At 6. a Clock the high Land of Payta bears E. N. E. 10. Leag. distance. 30. Tuesd. These 24. hours we had the VVind at S. to S. S. E. thick foggy weather: We have run West five Leagues. 31. Wedn. VVe had fair weather and a good observation▪ Latitude 6. Degr. 32. Min. by our account we are departed from the Meridian of Payta 26 Leagues West. SeptemberSeptem. 1. VVe have run 8 Leagues West, Latitude 7. Degr. 38. Min, clou∣dy
weather,1681. Septem. Wind S. S. E. to S. W. West 34. Leagues. 2. Frid. Latitude 7. Degr. 29. Min. 11. Leagues West, the Wind at S. E. to E. S. E. Our Westing is 45. Leagues. 3. Saturd. Latitude 8. Degr. 17. Min. 16. Leagues West, Wind S. E. squally weather. West 61. Leagues. 4. Sund. 16. Leagues West, Lat. 9. Degr. 18. Min. Wind S. to S. E. West 77. Leagues. 5. Mund. 19 Leagues West, Latitude 10. Degr. 45. Min. Wind S. E. to E. S. E. cloudy weather, and hard flaws of Wind. West 96. Leagues. 6. Tuesd. 15. Leagues West, Latitude 11. Degr. 52. Min. West 111. Leag. 7. Wednes. 10. Leagues West, Latitude 13. Degr. 30. Min. moderate gales. West 121. Leagues. 8. Thursd. 10. Leagues West, Lat. 14. Degr. 42. Min. cloudy weather. West 131. Leagues. 9. Frid. 8. Leagues West, Latitude 15. Degr. 45. Min Wind S. E. to E. S. E. West 139. Leagues. 10. Saturday. 19. Leagues West, Latitude 16. Degrees 25. Minutes,
clear weather. West 158. Leagues. 11. Sund. 5. Leagues West, Latitude 16. Degr. 58. Min. Wind S. E. and E. S. E. a great Southern Sea, that we went with our Main-Top-Sail furled, and Sprit-Sail reifed. West 163. Leagues. 12. Mund. Still a great Sea, and we went with our low-Sails to ease our Ship, Latitude 17. Degr. 17. Min. Wind at S. E. 13. Leages West. West 176. Leagues. 13. Tuesd. A great Sea, and hard gale at S. S. E. Latitude. 18. Degr. 5. Min. West 16. Leagues. West 192. Leagues. 14. Wedn. 12. Leagues West Lati∣tude 18. Degr. 59. Min. hard gales at S. E. and a great Sea. West 204. Leagues. 15. Thursd. 10. Leagues West, La∣titude 19. Degr. 56. Min. moderate gales. West 214. Leagues. 16. Frid. 6. Leagues West, Latitude 20▪ Degrees 44. Minutes, the Wind round the Compass. West 220. Leagues. 17. Sat. Little Wind, We have run but one League West, Latitude 20,
Degrees 55. Minutes. West 221. Leagues. 18. Sund. 13. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 21. Degr. 23. Min. fair weather the Wind from S. to S. S. E. West 234. Leagues. 19. Mund. 12. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 22. Degr. 20. Min. Wind at S. E. squally weather. West 246. Leagues. 20. Tuesd. 8. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 23. Degr. 23. Min. Wind E. S. E. squally weather. 254. Leagues West. 21. Wedn. 7. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 24. Degr. 44. Min. Wind. E. S. E. to S. E. squalls of Wind and Rain. West 261. Leagues. 22. Thursd. The Wind at East, we steered Latitude 26. Degr. 14. Min. 23. Frid. We have run South Lati∣tude 27. Degr. 45. Min. the Wind S. E. to E. N. E. squally weather. 24. Saturd. Latitude 28. Degr. 49. Min. the Wind S. E. squally wea∣ther. 25. Sund. Latitude 29. Degr. 59. Min. cloudy weather, here we allow 20. Leagues from our departure for a N. W. Currant, which makes me 281 Leagues to the Westward of Payta.
26. Mund. 24. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 31. Degr. 11. Min. Wind at N. E. to N. East 24. Leagues. 27. Tuesd. 23. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 32. Degr. 23. Min. Wind N. E. to N. W. fair weather, East 47. Leag. 28. Wedn. 23. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 33. Degr. 21. Min. Wind N. E. to N. all day, at Night it came to S. W. in a gust, and blowed very hard with small Rain. East 70. Leagues. 29. Thursd. 21. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 34. Degr. 25. Min. Wind W. N. W. gusty weather. East 91. Leagues. 30. Fri. 18. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 35. Degr. 46. Min. Wind VV. N. VV. a great Sea. East 109. Leagues. OctoberOctober. 1. 8. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 36. Degr. 50. Min. Wind. N. VV. good weather. East 117. Leagues. 2. Sund. 18. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 38. Degr. 12. Min. Wind W. N. W. squally. East 135. Leagues. 3. Mund. 15. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 39. Degr. 21. Min. Wind VV. N. VV. to S. VV. in the Night we had a hard gust at VV. S. VV. close cloudy weather. East 150. Leagues.
4. Tuesd.1681. October 16. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 41. Degr. 18. Min. Wind VV. N. VV. East 166. Leagues. 5. VVedn. 14. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 43. Degr. 15. Min. fresh Winds. East 80. Leagues. 6. Thursd. 22. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 44. Degr. 57. Min. hard gales at VV. N. VV. thick weather, with rain: we went with a fore coarse only. East 202. Leagues. 7. Frid. 13. Leagues East, Latit. 45. Degr. 55. Min. hard gales at N. W. and VV. N. VV. with thick drisling Rain, under a fore coarse. East 215. Leagues. 8. Saturd. 11. Leagues East, by judgment, Latitude 46. Degrees 46. Min. very hard gales at VV. by N. at eight of the Clock we laid our Ship by, under a Mizon, ballanced; but the Wind came on so fiere that it blew away our Mizon, so we veered out two Hasers on an end made fast to a Spare∣yard, and a quoile of old Rope, and kept our Ships Head to the Sea. East 226. Leagues. 9. Sund. The Wind somewhat aba∣ted, that we could suffer a Mizon bal∣lanced,
but a very grown Sea, Lati∣tude by judgment 47. Degrees 1. Mi∣nute East, 7. Leagues. East 233. Leagues. In the Afternoon when the fierceness of the storm was overblown, we got in our drudge. 10. Mund. 12. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 47. Degrees 58. Mi∣nutes, wind from N. VV. to S. VV. hard gales, with very much Rain. East 245. Leagues. 11. Tuesd. 18. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 49. Degrees 52. Mi∣nutes, a very hard gale of Wind at N. to N. E. East 263. Leagues. 12. Wednesd. 5. Leagues East, La∣titude by judgment, 49. Degrees 59. Mi∣nutes, a hard gale of Wind, we un∣der a main coarse. This Morning at four of the Clock, we made land, it was very high and mountainous Land; at break of day we saw a Showle to Windward of us, which by Gods pro∣vidence we sell to Leward of in the Night, our Ship staying three times un∣der a Main Coarse, or else we had been certainly upon it. In the Day the Wid a little abating, we set our Fore-Sail,
and two Top Sails, and stood in for the Shoar; and seeing an opening, sent our Canoes in before the Ship, and found a very smooth place to anchor in, but deep Water: so we came to an Anchor in 45. Fathom Water. At going in, one of our Men fell out of the Sprit Sail-Top, and was drowned; his name was Henry Shergall. In the Night our Cable cut with the Rocks, that we were forced to look for a better Harbour, which finding, we got our Ship in, and mored her to the Shoar with Hassers, and laid two Anchors out, which were all we had left. Here we lay till Saturday, at which time our Ship brake loose, and her Stern grounded upon a Rock, which unshipt our Rudder, bowed three Pin∣tels, and broke the Goose-Neck. A∣bout eight at Night we got her off, and mored her the second time. On Monday we had a hard gust of Wind with Snow, On Tuesday we had good weather, and we observed with our Astrolabes Latitude 50. Degr. 37. Min. On Friday it rained with hard flaws of Wind, at N. VV.
It hailed and rained with hard gusts of Wind from Saturday to Thursday, the 27. at whichtime, it being pretty fair weather, our Canoe went out a fowl∣ing, and found a Canoe with 3 Indi∣ans in it; who being near the Shoar, one of them got away, another was shot, and the other taken and brought on Board; but we could not understand him, only perceived he used to eat raw Flesh and Fish. On Friday our Canoe went to see it they could find any more Indians, and by the help of our new Prisoner found several of their Houses, but the Inhabi∣tants were all fled, and their Goods with them, if they had any; so we came on Board without any further dis∣covery. NovemberNovem. 1. The Month and Wea∣ther changed together; so having fair weather we got up our Top-Masts, and bent our Sails: And on Friday the 4, we cast off our shoar Fass, and halled to our Anchors, and on Saturday went to Sea, the Wind at N. VV. and VV. N. VV. hard gales of Wind. 5. To this place we gave the name of the Duke of York's Island; we suppose
it to be a knot of Islands like that of Bermudas.1681. Novem. While we stayed here we spent little of our dry Provisions, but one half of our Ships company went on Shoar one day to gather Lympets and Muscles, and the other half the next; thus we lived with now and then some Geese, Ducks, and Penguins, which we thought good Fare, and were very well content with it. This place is in 50. Degrees 37. Minutes S. Latitude. 6. Snd. Since our coming to Sea, we have run 15. Leagues West, Lti∣tude 5. Degr. 34. Min. Wind N. W. 7. Mund. 16. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 52. Degr. 9. Min. Wind N. N. W. and N. W. good weather. west 31. Leagues. 8. Tuesd. These 24 hours we have run 16. Leagues East, in Latitude 53. Degr. 27 Min. Wind N. N. W. good weather. East 16. Leagues. 9. Wednesd. 18. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 53. Degr. 20. Min. Wind. N. East, 34. Leagues. 10. Thursd. A very hard storm of Wind, sometimes under a Mzon, and sometimes a Hull.
11. Frid. The storm continued from N. E. to N. with Rain. 12. Saturd. Fine moderate weather, and a good observation, Latitude 53. Degr. 27. Min. the Wind continuing at N. E. we were quite our of all hopes of recovering the Streights of Magellan, or Le Maire; so that we were forced to bear up the Helm, to seek for a pas∣sage further South. Here is a great S. W. Current. 13. Sund. Lat. 57. Degr. o, Min. great Currents. Variation 14. Degr. East 18. Leagues. 14. Mund. 22. Leagues East, La∣titude 57. Degr. 43. Min. Wind at W. East 43. Leagues. 15. Tuesd. 28. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 58. Degr. 19. Min. Wind at N. to N. N. E. very cold, with Snow and Rain. East 71. Leagues. 16. Wedn. 26. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 57. Degr. 52. Min. Wind at S, to S. S. E. very cold freezing wea∣ther. East 97. Leagues. 17. Thursd. 24. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by observation, 58. Degr. 10. Min. Wind at S. vv. This Morning we came up with two great Islands of Ice,
one about three Leagues long, the o∣ther smaller; about three in the After∣noon we came up with four more, but not so big: clear weather, but freezing cold. We find by this observation, and our last 24 hours run, that we hve been further Southerly by almost two De∣grees, than our computation by dead reckoning makes out, and by many Degrees, than ever any others have sail∣ed in that Sea, that have yet been heard of: for we were at about 60 Degrees South Latitude. We find diversity of Currents, but have not Provision to try them. 16. Degrees variation. East 121. Leagues. 18. Frid. 25. Leagues East, Lat. by judgment, 57. Degr. 25. Min. Wind at N. to N. N. E. East 146. Leagues. 19. Saturd. 20. Leagues East, la∣titude 57. Degr. 25. Min. Wind at N. to N. N. E. snowy, cold, freezing wea∣ther. East 166. Leagues. 20. Sund. 9. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 57. Degr. 13. Min. Wind at N. cold, thick, foggy wea∣ther. This Day the Water was cnang∣ed very green, like a River. East 175. Leagues.
21. Mund. 5. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 57. Degr. 13. Min. little Wind at N. sometimes calm, ve∣ry green Water, and great Sea, with thick foggs, East 180. Leagues. 22. Tuesd. This 24 hours, Wind at E. and E. N. E. we laid our Ships Head to the Northward, thick foggy weather. 23. Wedn. 3. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 56. Degr. 19. Min. the Wind round the compass. East 183. Leagues. 24. Thursd. 10. Leag. East, Lat. 56. Degr. 9. Min. the Wind shiting in the Northern board. East 193. Leagues. 25. Frid. 13. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 54. Degr. 50. Min. Wind N. E. to E. S. E. very hard gales under two Coarses: This Day we judged we saw the Land bear N. N. W. East 206. Leagues. 26. Saturd. 25. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 53. Degr. 43. Min. Wind E. S. E. blowing very hard with Hail and Snow. East 231. Leagues. 27. Sund. 21. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by a good observation, 52. Degr. 48. Min. the Wind at E. to E. S. E. blow∣ing hard. East 252. Leagues.
28. Mund. 21. Leagues East, Lat. by judgment, 51. Degrees 45. Minutes, Wind at S. W. good weather. East 273. Leagues. 29. Tuesd. 30. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by observation, 49. Degr. 41. Min. Wind at S. to W. fresh gales, and a N. E. Current. East 303. Leagues. 30. Wednesd. 30. Leagues East, La∣titude 48. Degr. 57. Min. good weather. East 333. Leagues. The 1. of DecemberDecem. We ran 9. Leag. East, Latitude 48. Degr. 35. Min. a very hard gale at N. N. W. to N. East 342. Leagues. 2. Frid. 39. Leagues East, Latitude 47. Degr. 35. Min. a very hard gale of Wind at S. W. we went with our fore-Course reift, and Sprit-Sail▪ we made good weather. East 381. Leagues. 3. Saturd. 31. Leagues East, La∣titude 46. Degr. 2. Min. hard gales of Wind at S. W. we went with our Fore-Coarse, and Fore-Top-sail low set. East 41. Leagues. 4. Sund. Latitude by observation, 43. Degr. 59. Min. Wind S. to S. E. fair weather, we have met with a N. W. Current that we made our way North.
5. Mund.1681. Decem. 32 Leagues East, Latitude 42. Degr. 27. Min. the Wind S. W. pretty warm weather. East 444. Leagues. 6. Tuesd. 33. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 40. Degr. 27. Min. Wind S. W. to W. S. W. fair weather. East 477. Leagues. 7. VVednesd. 27. Leagues East, La∣titude 39. Degr. 33. Min. a hard gale at VVest, about 10. at Night it came to N. VV. at 11. in the Day it came to W. with Rain; we being under a pair of coarses, and it came so violently with a hard showre of Rain, that it blew both our Coarses away. Though several of us had been in a Hurricane in the VVest Indies, yet eve∣ry one declared it was the greatest stress of Wind for the space of two Glasses that ever they were in in their lives. East 504. Leagues. 8. Thursd. 18. Leagues East, Wind at W. to N. W. a hard gale under a fore Coarse, Latitude by observation, 38. Degr. 36. Min. East 522. Leagues. 9. Frid. 21. Leagues East, Latitude 37. Degr. 42. Min. a moderate gale. East 543. Leagues.
10. Saturd. 22. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by observation, 37. Degr. 11. Min. good weather, Wind N. W. to N. N. E. 565. Leagues East. 11. Sund. 17. Leagues East, Latitude 36. Degr. 59. Min. Wind from N. N. E. to N. W. a great S. W. Sea, and a hard gale. East. 582. Leagues. 12. Mund. 13. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 36. Degr. 20. Min. the Wind at S. S. W. thick foggy weather. East 595. Leagues. 13. Tuesd. 9. Leagues East, Latitude by judgment, 35. Degr. 41. Min. Wind from E. S. E. very thick weather. East 604. Leagues. 14. Wedn. 2. Leagues East, Latitude 34. Degr. 29. Min. the Wind at N. W. very smooth Water. East 606. Leag. 15. Thursd. 25. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 33. Degr. 52. Min. Wind N. N. W. East 631. Leagues. 16. Frid. 20. Leagues East, Latitude 32. Degr. 5. Min. East 651. Leagues. 17. Saturd. 17. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 31. Degr. 2. Min. the Wind at N. W. by N. and N. W. East 668. Leagues.
18. Sund. 14. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 29. Degr. 39. Min. Wind W. N. W. and fair weather. East 682. Leag. 19. Mund. 22. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 28. Degr. 26 Min. Wind at W. and fair weather. East 704. Leagues. 20. Tuesd. 3. Leagues East, Latitude 27. Degr. 29. Min. Wind round the Compass. East 707. Leagues. 21. Wedn. 2. Leagues East, Latitude 27. Degr. 2. Min. the Wind round the Compass, and cloudy weather. East 709. Leagues. 22. Thursd. We have lain becalmed in 26. Degr. 36. Min. by observation. 23. Frid. 2. Leagues East, Latitude by judgment, 25. Degr. 39. Min. Wind at E. S. E. good weather. East 711. Leagues. 24. Saturd. 5. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 23. Degr. 51. Min. the Wind at E. S. E. fair weather. East 716 Leag. 25. Sund. 14. Leagues East, Latitude by observation, 22. Degr. 1. Min. the Wind at E. fair weather. When we took the two Barks at Ni∣coya, we had a little sucking Pigg in one of them, which we kept on Board ever since for our Christmas days Din∣ner,
which now was grown to be a large Hogg; so we killed it for Dinner, but thinking it not enough for us all, we bought a Spaniel-Dogg of the Quar∣ter-Master for forty pieces of Eight, and killed him; so with the Hogg and the Dogg, we made a Feast, and we had some Wine left, which made us merry: This being the only thing we had eaten that had blood in it since our departure from the Duke of York's Island. East 730. Leagues. 26. Mund. 5. Leagues East, Latitude 20. Degr. 28 Min. the Wind. at E. N. E. to E. S. E. fair weather. East 735. Leagues. 27. Tuesd. 6. Leagues East, Latitude by judgment, 18. Degr. 48. Min. East 741. Leagues. 28. Wednes. 5. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 16. Degr. 42. Min. Wind E. S. E. fresh gales. East 746. Leagues. 29. Thursd. 4. Leagues East, Lati∣tude 14. Degr. 26. Min. Wind E. S. E. East 750. Leagues. 30. Frid. 7. Leagues East, Latitude 12. Degr. 20. Min. Wind E. S. E. to S. E. East 757. Leagues.
31. Saturd.1681/2. 6. Leagues East, Lati∣tude by judgment, 10. Degr. 20. Min. Wind at E. fair weather. We have now run 763. Leagues East from the Duke of York's Isle. IanuaryIanuary the 1. Sund. We have run 33. Leagues West, Latitude 8. Degr. 41. Min. Wind S. E. 2. Mund. 30. Leagues West, Lati∣tude by observation, 6. Degr. 7. Min. Wind S. E. We here saw abundance of flying Fish. West 63. Leagues. 3. Tuesd. 31. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 4. Degr. 33. Min. Wind S. E. close cloudy weather. West 94. Leagues. 4. Wedn. 30. Leagues West, Lati∣tude by judgment, 3. Degr. 3. Min. Wind at S. S. E. fair weather. West 124. Leagues. 5. Thursd. 28. Leagues West, Lati∣tude by observation, 2. Degr. 10. Min. Wind at S. S. E. to E. S. E. fair wea∣ther. West 152. Leagues. 6. Frid. 25. Leagues West, Latitude by observation, 0. Degr. 53. Min. South, Wind S. S. E. We saw here abundance of Fowls. West 177. Leagues. 7. Saturd. 25. Leagues West, La∣titude by observation, 00. Degr. 33. Min.
North,1681/2. Ianuary Wind at S. S. E. West 202. Leagues. 8. Sund. 20. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 1. Degr. 33. Min. North, Wind at S. small gales. West 222. Leagues. 9. Mund. 16. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 2. Degr. 45. Min. West 238. Leagues. 10. Tuesd. 3. Leagues West, Lati∣tude by observation, 3. Degr. 17. Min. we lay becalmed most part of this 24. hours. West 241. Leagues. 11. Wednes. 11. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 4. Degr. 6. Min. the Wind round the Compass. West 252 Leagues. 12. Thursd. 10. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 5. Degr. 37. Min. Wind N. E. West 262. Leagues. 13. Frid. 28. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 6. Degr. 37. Min. Wind N. E. West 290. Leagues. 14. Saturd. 26. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 7. Degr. 27. Min. Wind E. N. E. and N. E. fair weather. West 316. Leagues. 15. Sund. 28. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 9. Degr. 1. Min. Wind N. E. clou∣dy weather. West 344. Leagues.
16. Mund. 27. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 10. Degr. 52. Min. Wind N. E. a great Northern Sea. West 371. Leagues. 17. Tuesd. 30. Leagues West, Lati∣tude by observation, 12. Degr, 17. Min. Wind N. E. and N. N. E. hazy wea∣ther. West 401. Leagues. 18. Wednes. 42. Leagues West, Lati∣tude by observation, 13. Degr. 17. Min. the Wind E. N. E. and N. E. West 443. Leagues. 19. Thursd. 52. Leagues West, La∣titude 12. Degr. 55. Min. Wind E. N. E. and N. E. West 495. Leagues. 20. Frid. 42. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 13. Degr. 4. Min. Wind E. N. E. West 537. Leagues. 21. Saturd. 44. Leagues West, La∣titude 13. Degr. 7. Min. Wind N. E. West 581. Leagues. 22. Sund. 48. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 13. Degr. 15. Min. Wind E. to N. E. West 629. Leagues. 23. Mund. 54. Leagues VVest, Lati∣tude 13. Degr. 8. Min. Wind E. N. E. clear weather. West 683. Leagues. 24. Tuesd. 52. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 13. Degrees 5. Minutes, Wind N. E. West 735. Leag.
25. Wedn. 54. Leag West, Lat. 13. Degr. 26. Min. Wind at N. E. hard squals of Wind and Rain. West 789 Leag. 26. Thursd. 52. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 13. Degr. 12. Min. Wind at E. to N. E. much Rain with squals. West 841. Leagues. 27. Frid. 56. Leagues West, Lati∣tude 13. Degr. 30. Min. the Wind at N. E. squally weather, with Rain. West 897. Leagues. 28. Saturd. This Morning about 4. of the Clock, we made the Island of Barbados, it bore W. by S. 3. Leagues distance; but we fell in with the North part of the Isle. This was the first Land we had seen in about three Months time, which was▪ from our leaving the Duke of York's Island, in the South Sea; we coming a Way that had never been known before, many Degrees South of the Magellan Streights. From Friday Noon, till the time of making Land, we have run 30. Leagues West. West. 927. Leagues. When we were about the North end of Barbados, we stood in for Spikes's Bay, and there coming a Boat off to us, who told us, they belonged to the Richmond Frigat,
we invited them on Board, being desi∣rous to know how affairs stood since our Maritime Pilgrimage; but they refu∣sing, and standing in to the Shoar, made us suspect, That the Frigat might make Prize of us; so we bore up the Helm for Antego, where we arrived the 31. instant. Our Commander sent a Letter to the Governour, and a Present of Jewels to his Lady: But the Governour refusing to let us come publickly on Shoar for common refreshment, the Lady return∣ed the Present; so we gave the Ship to 7. Men which had played away all their Money, and every Man shifted for him∣self. Some came into England, others went to Iamaica, New England, &c. I And those who came to London were committed by his Majesties Order, and tryed and acquitted at a Court of Admi∣ralty, where the Spanish Ambassadour was Prosecutor.
Captain Van Horn's taking of la Vera Cruz.1683. I Thought it might not be unaccep∣table to the Reader, to adjoyn this account from Iamaica of the late Acti∣on of certain Privateers under com∣mand of Captain Van Horn, a Hol∣lander, in taking of la Vera Cruz; be∣ing the Barrador or Port where the Spaniards land their Merchandise for conveyance up to the city of Mexico; and where they likewise ship off their goods on board the Gallions for Spain. Upon the 7. day of April 1683. The Buccaneers had a rendezvouz at Cape Catroche, being the South Cape of the Bay of Mexico with this force follow∣ing, Van Horn a Hollander, in an English Ship of 50. Guns, who was Admiral.
Laurence a Hollander, in a Prize of 26. Guns, Vice-Admiral. Christian a Hollander, in Van Horn's Patach of 40. Guns. Mitchel a French-man, in a Prize of Lau∣rences of 26. Guns. Tanchey, a Hollander, in a Prize of 16. Guns. Bloat a Hollander, in a Prize of 8. Guns. Iacob Hall, a Bermudean, in a small Vessel of 8. Guns. Spurre, an English-man, in a Sloop of Iamaica: And, A Barco Longo of Laurences. These Vessels had between nine hun∣dred and a thousand men, most of them French and Dutch, and some few Eng∣lish. On the 8▪ day of May, they came on the Coast of la Vera Cruz, and lay by; there the men that were to land, were put on Board Yanchy and Christian, and then stood off. On the 9. these two Ships stood in, and in the Night the Spaniards in the Castle and on Shoar, made fires to Pilot them in, supposing them to be two of their Flota; so they came to an An∣chor, and landed before one a Clock in
the Morning, about two Miles from the Town, seven hundred seventy and four Men. Van Horn had the Main Body, as Ge∣neral, & was to attack the Placa or chief part of the Town, where they expect∣ed the Court of Guard, but found only four Men: Laurence commanded the Forlorn, and with it attempted the two Forts, the one of twelve, the other of eight Guns, both close Forts, but they found them open, and the Centinel asleep; so with the loss of one man kil∣led by the Spaniards, and three by a mistake of the French, by break of day they had made themselves Masters of the Forts and Town; and had they, as Laurence advised, sent at the same time, but two Canoes and fifty Men, they had without doubt surprized the Castle, which stands upon a Rock in the Sea, three quarters of a Mile from the Town, and has in it seventy Guns mounted. But the Pyrates thinking it more safe and profitable to plunder the Town: set Guards at the Streets ends, and sent Parties to break open the Houses, where they found every body as quiet, as in their Graves, and for three days they
continued breaking of Houses, plun∣dering them, and dragging the mise∣rable Inhabitants to the Cathedral, and though at this time they got abundance of Jewels, Plate, &c. and about three hundred and fifty Bags of Co∣chenelle, each containing one hundred and fifty or two hundred pound weight, as they say; yet were they not satis∣fied, but put the considerable people to ransome, and threatned to burn the Cathedral and Prisoners in it, which were five thousand and seven hundred, if they did not immediately discover all they had; so that the fourth day they got more than the other three; and had seventy thousand pieces of Eight for the Governour Don Luis de Cordoua's Ransome, which Spurre found hid amongst Grass in a Stable. The Buccaneers feared the Spanish Flo∣ta, which had been two days in sight, consisting of twelve great Ships, and likewise apprehended succours might come to the Spaniards from los Angelos, a City thirty Leagues from la Vera Cruz, so they left the Town, and carryed their Prisoners and Plunder to a Cay, where the Ships rode, called
los Sacrificios, from a famous Indian Temple that was there; and at their passing by the Spanish Fleet, lying at the mouth of the Harbour, which they expected would have fought them; the Buccaneers perceiving that they suf∣fered them to go off with their Booty so quietly, resolved to have a Bout with them, but the Spaniards preparing to be gone away, it prevented their in∣gagement. Here at los Sacrificios the Pyrates stay'd eight dayes, to receive Ransomes, and to divide what they had got, which is generally said to be eight hundred pieces of eight, a share in Plate and Mony, and they made near twelve hun∣dred shares for Men and Ships; and Van Horn had about fourscore shares coming to him, for himself and his two Ships. But Laurence and Van Horn quarrel∣ling about the dividend, sought, and Van Horn being wounded in the Wrist, no body thinking it to be but a slight wound, they all embarked, and Van Horn once more proposed to attack the Flota, and engaged to board the Admiral; but Laurence utterly refusing
it, away they went, carrying also with them about a thousand Ne∣groes and Mulatos. About fifteen days after, Van Horn dyed of his Wound which had gan∣greened, and was thrown into the Sea off of Cape Iucatan, leaving his Son, a Youth of about ten or twelve years of Age, to the value (as they say) of twenty thousand Pounds Sterling on Board; and his Lieutenant Gramont, took upon him the command of the Ship, intending for Petit Guave. Laurence and the rest of the Fleet were seen not long after, off of the Island of Iamaica, and went for Guantanamo, a Port on the South side of Cuba: since that, Spurre and three or four hundred more of them, are said to be dead; and his excellency Sir Thomas Linch the Governour of Iamaica, was endea∣vouring to seize Spurre's Sloop. This Account was sent in August, 1683. from Iamaica.
Nevis in the West-Indies, August 18. 1683. Captain Charles Carlisle, Comman∣der of his Majesties Ship the Francis, having Orders from Sir William Staple∣ton, Governour in chief of the Leeward Islands, to go in search of several Py∣rates, who have infested these parts, came on the first of this Month into the Road of S. Thomas, one of the Virgin Islands, where he found at An∣chor the Ship la Trompeuse, comman∣ded by that notorious Pyrate Hamlin, (who had taken seventeen Ships of all Nations, of which eleven English, upon the Coast of Guinea, and most barba∣rously and inhumanely treated the Men belonging to the) but the Francis no sooner came within reach of the Pyrate, but she received a shot from him, which was followed by ano∣ther from the Castle: Captain Carlisle sent on shoar to know the reason, and to demand the Pyrate as a common Enemy; but receiving no satisfactory answer, he immediately prepared Fire∣works, and that Night fitted out his
Boats, and set the Pyrates Ship on fire, and then rowed betwixt her and the Shoar, to prevent any assistance that might come from thence to her relief; all the Men that were on board her, made their escape, except four which were taken Prisoners: The Fire took good effect, and when the Pyrates Ship was burnt down to the Powder, she blew up, one piece of Timber of her, which was all on fire, lighting on a∣nother Ship likewise in the Road, (that used to be helpful to them in Careening) burnt her also. The next Morning the Francis setting sail from thence, they espyed a Ship on Ground, about a League from them, which they made up to, and coming to her, found her a Ship laden with Cables, Cordage, and other necessaries for Shipping, and designed for supply of the Pyrates; wherefore they likewise set Fire to, and burnt her, and then again set sail for this Island, where they safely arrived with the four pyrate Prisoners, who upon Examination, confessed, That the day before the Trompeuse was burnt, they had landed in the Castle there, a very large Chest of Gold
Dust, 150 Piggs of Silver, 200 Baggs of Coined Money, besides Plate, Jew∣els, Elephants-Teeth, and other valu∣able Goods and Commodities. This service is very acceptable to all Traders in these parts, whose Trade is very much secured by the destruction of this Pyrate.
The true Relation of Admiral Hen∣ry Morgans Expedition against the Spaniards in the West-In∣dies, in the Year 1670.1670. ADmiral Morgan on the fourteenth day of August 1670. put to sea, with eleven Sail of Ships, and six hundred Men, and on the second day of September following, arrived at a small Island called the Isle of Ash, which was to be the place of Rendez∣vouz of all his Fleetfor that Expedi∣tion. From whence Vice-Admiral Collier upon the sixth of the same Month was dispatched with six Sail, and three hundred and fifty Men, for the Coast of the Main, to get Prisoners for Intelligence, and Victuals for the whole Fleet. The last day of Sep∣tember,
arrived Captain Morris in a small Ship ill manned, and brought with him Emanuel de Rivera his Ves∣sel of eight Sacres, who had lately burnt the Coas of Iamaica, and had sent a Challenge to dare out the best Ship of that Island to come and fight him; he was taken at the East end of Cuba. The seventh of October following, there happened so violent a Storm, in the Harbour, that it drove all the Fleet on Shoar, (except the Admi∣ral's Vessel) then consisting of ele∣ven Sail: All of which, but▪ three, got off again and were made service∣able. In this Month arrived three French Vessels, and conditioned to sail under the Admiral: And in November our Fleet was encreased with seven Sail more of English Ships. Upon the twenty eighth of the same Month, our Vice-Admiral Col∣lier, returned from the Main, with good quantities of Provision, and two
of the Spaniards Vessels, one of which called la Gallarda, was of Rivera's Company, assisting him to burn the Coafs of Iamaica. Some of the Prisoners, brought in this Ship, con∣fessed that the President of Panama, Don Iuan Perez de Gusman, had granted several Commissions a∣gainst the English: And that divers Spanish Ships with these Commissions, were already out, who had made Prize of as many English, as they could master; that they were still fitting out more; and that the Spa∣rds both at Land and Sea, were arming against the English. On the second day of December, Admiral Morgan commanded all the Capains on board him, being thir∣ty seven in number, and demanded their advice what place was prope. rest for them first to attack; and their Result, which they drew up, and gave him under their hands, was to this effect;
THAT having seriously consi∣dered, what place might prove most feasible to attack and car∣ry, and be most advantageous for the safety of the English, and in par∣ticular for the security of the Island of Iamaica, for preventing the a▪ noyances and invasions of the Spa∣niards, they did all unanimously conclude, That it would stand most for the general good of the English, trading to Iamaica, and the rest of his Majesties Plantations in the West∣Indies, to take Panama; The Pre∣sident whereof having granted seve∣ral Commissions against the Eng∣lish, to the great anoyance of Ia∣maica, and of our Merchant Men; as both by the Oaths of the Spa∣nish Prisoners, and the very ori∣ginal Commissions, taken with the afore mentioned Spanish Vessels, did most evidently appear.
To which the Admiral consented, and having called another time the Captains on board him, to consult of the manner of carrying on that at∣tempt, and where to find Prisoners to be our Guides for Panama: It was voted that from the Island of Providence, most of the people there being taken from Panama, that no place could be more fit. December the eighth, we sailed, and the fourteenth we arrived at Providence by eight in the Morning, and by two in the Afternoon, were possessed of the great Island without any resistance. The fifteenth the Admiral sent a a Summons to the Governour to de∣liver the Little Island, who willing∣ly submitted, upon Condition, That he might have good Quarter, and Transportation to any part of the Main; which was granted and duly performed: But four of his Souldiers voluntarily took up Arms with us, and became our Guides: And by
them understanding, The Castle of Chagre blocked our way.1670 Decem. The Admi∣ral called a Council of all the Cap∣tains, where it was resolved that we should attack this Castle of Chagre.
Of the taking the CASTLE OF CHAGRE. FOR this purpose were four hun∣dred and seventy men, in three Ships, forthwith dispatched away, under the command of Captain Ioseph Bdley, with three other Captains, and four Lieutenants. On the 27. they were safely landed within four Miles of the Castle, by twelve a Clock at Night; By two they had made their approach within Shot one of the other; and by three a Clock had got into their Tren∣ches, where they continued fighting till eight in the Morning: from whence they had returned without effecting their design, if in plying their Grana∣does, they had not set a Guard-house on fire, that stood upon the Walls, which caused a breach; where our Men
couragiously stormed, and the enemy as bravely defended, to the last Man; and obstinately refusing Quarter, it cost them the lives of three hundred and six∣ty Men. Of our side were thirty kil∣led out right, one Captain, and one Lieutenant, and seventy six wounded, whereof the brave Bradley was one, with two Lieutenants, who dyed with∣in ten dayes after, of their Wounds, to the great grief of the Admiral, and of all our Fleet in general.
Admiral Morgan's Expedition against Panama.1670. Ianuary JAnuary the second 1670/1 Admiral Morgan arrived with the whole Fleet, and understanding that the Ene∣my lay with Forces to endeavour the re-taking of the Castle of Chagre, he gave order for the Fleet to follow, him into the Harbour; but five of the foremost, had the ill fortune to be cast away, amongst which the Ship where in the Admiral himself was, was one, and four more, but they saved their Men. The rest of the Fleet being come in, they prepared to go up the River, where the Admiral understood our Enemies had entrenched themselves, and had six several Retreats, in Breast∣Works; whereupon he gave order,
That seven sail of the lesser Ships, should be fitted to go up the River, and fill'd them with Men, and great Guns, leaving three hundred to guard the Castle and the Ships, under the command of Captain Richard Nor∣man. Munday the ninth, Admiral Mor∣gan began to set forward with four∣teen hundred Men, in the said seven Ships, and thirty six Boats. The twelfth day he got to the first Intrenchment, which the Spaniards had basely quitted, and set all on fire, as they did all the rest without striking a stroak for it. Here he was forced to leave the Ships and Boats, (being unable to get them conveniently up further) with two hundred Men to guard them, under the command of Captain Ro∣bert Delander, and we betook our selves to our march through the wild Woods, where was no Road nor Path for four and twenty Miles together, but what our Pioneers cut and made for us.
The fourteenth, our Admiral with our Army, arrived within two Miles of Venta Cruz, the place where we should have landed, if we had been able to have got our Vessels up so high: And here we came to a narrow and dangerous Pass, which the Enemy thought to have secured, and put a stop to our further progress in that de∣sign; but indeed they were presently routed by our Forlorn, commanded by Captain Thomas Rogers, the rest of our Men never being put to the trou∣ble of firing one Shot, and without sustaining any loss, saving three Men slightly wounded, but the Enemies loss we could never learn. Ianuary the fifteenth, we arrived at Venta Cruz upon the River of Chagre, which is a very handsome Village, and the place where they land and embark all the Goods which come and go to Panama: And where we thought we might meet with some Provisions, having marched three days with but a very slender Dyet, but found this (as the rest of the places we had passed) all on fire, and the Inhabitants and Souldiers all fled.
The sixteenth we marched on for∣wards, the Enemy galling us from their Ambuscades, and by small Par∣ties, and we still beating them for a League together; although they had all the advantage of us that could be, by reason of the Ways being so narrow that we could seldom march above four a Breast, and was for the most part so deep and hollow, that the Enemy could keep over our heads to annoy us. About Noon we got safely to the Savanas or open Fields, with the loss but of three Men Killed out∣right, and six or seven wounded: and of the Enemy, twenty killed, and one Captain, besides many wound∣ed. About three Miles further, we took up our Quarters, to refresh our Men, and thank God for the suc∣cessful service of that day. The seventeenth we continued our march without any opposition, and about nine a Clock in the Morning saw that desired and long wished for sight, the South Sea and not far distant from us  parcel of
Cattle and Horses feeding. Where∣upon our Admiral commanded a general halt to be made; and gave our Men leave to kill Horses and Beeves enough to feast us all. At about four a Clock in the Af∣ternoon, our Men having refreshed themselves very well, we marched on again; and at five came within sight of the Enemy, where he was drawn up in Battalia, with two thousand and one hundred Foot, and six hundred Horse; but finding the day far spent, the Admiral thought it not fit to engage, but took up quar∣ters within a mile of them, where we lay very quiet; not being so much as once allarmed. The next Morning being the eigh∣teenth, our Admiral gave out ve∣ry early his Orders, To draw out his Men in Battalia; which was ac∣cordingly performed, and they were drawn up in form of a Tertia. The Vanguard, which was led by Lieu∣tenant Colonel Prince, and Major Iohn Morris, was in number three hundred Men. The main Body, con∣taining
six hundred Men, the right Wing thereof was led by the Admiral, and the Left by Colonel Edward Collyer. The Rere-Guard con∣sisting of three hundred Men, was commanded by Colonel Bledry Mor∣gan. Our Admiral, after having viewed his Men, and encouraged them, com∣manded the Officers all to repair to their respective charges. Mean while the Enemy being drawn up in an ad∣vantagious place, still kept their sta∣tion, nor would at all move, though often provoked by us, fearing to lose the security of their Ground. Which our Admiral perceiving, pre∣sently gave order, That our Officers should wheel our Body to the left, and endeavour to gain a Hill which was hard by, and which if once gain∣ed, we should then force the Enemy to engage, to their great disadvan∣tage; because he could not be able to bring out of his great Body, any more Men to fight at a time, than we should out of our small; and that we should likewise have the
advantage, both of the Wind and Sun. Our Officers streight put this com∣mand in execution, and in a small time we gained the Hill, together with a little dry Passage, of con∣venience for us. So the Enemy was constrained to fight us upon their hasty march, not having room enough to wheel their whole Body, by reason of a great Bogg, which was just at their Rear, and before which they had purposely drawn up, to en∣trap us: But we having thus Chan∣ged our Ground, that proved in the upshot to be of prejudice to them∣selves. We being thus advanced, Don Francisco de Haro, who commanded their Cavalry, with his Horse gave the first Charge to our Vanguard, which he did very furiously, coming up∣on the full speed; and we having no Pikes among us, our Admiral gave order, That we should double our Ranks to the Right, and close the Files to the Right and Left inward, to the close Order: But their fiery Com∣mander
could not stop his career till he dropt, losing his life in the Front∣Rank of our Vanguard. Upon this their Horse wheeled off to the Right, and their Foot ad∣vanced to try their Fortunes, but they proved as unsuccessful as their fel∣lows; for we being ready, with our main Body to receive them, with our first Volley gave them such a warm welcome, and pursued our work in hand, with that vigour and briskness, that our friends the Spaniards thought it safest to retreat, and by and by were so closely ply∣ed by our Left Wing also, who at first could not come to engage, (because of their hindrance by the Hills) which our Enemies not able to en∣dure, mended, though unwilling∣ly, their pace, and at last all in ge∣neral betook themselves to plain run∣ning. Just before which, they practi∣sed such a stratagem, as hath sel∣dom been heard. For while the Foot had engaged us in the Front and the Flanks, they had contrived to
force in, two great Droves of Oxen, of above a thousand in each, into the Right and Left Angles of our Rear, with intention to break and disorder us: Which design might probably have taken effect, had not our prudent Admiral, with great presence of mind, spoiled their pro∣ject, giving order to a small Party to fire at the Drivers, and not at the Cattle, which put the rest into so great a fear, that the Oxen were soon forced back with afe. So that this stratagem being thus defeated, they were in so great consternation, that happy was he that could get first into the City: There they had two hundred fresh men, and two Forts; in the one were fix Brass Guns mounted, and in the other eight. They had all their Streets barricadoed, and in many of them had also planted great Guns; the number of which amounted in all to thirty two Brass Guns: But instead of fighting after all this pre∣paration, the President caused the City to be fired, and his chiefest
Fort to be blown up, which was done with such hast, that he blew up forty of his Souldiers in it. We followed them into the Town, where in the Placa Mayor, or chief Mar∣ket place, they made a short re∣sistence, fring some of their great Guns at us, with which they killed us four Men, and wounded five. At three a Clock in the After∣noon, we had quiet possession of the City, although in Flames, with no more loss on our side in this days work, than five Men killed, and ten wounded; but of the Enemy about four hundred. And now were we forced to put all Hands to work for the quenching the Fire of our Ene∣mies Houses, which they themselves had kindled to disappoint us of the Plunder; but all our labour was in vain, for by twelve a clock at Night, all the whole City was burnt, ex∣cept a part of the Suburbs, which with our great industry, we made a shift to save, being two Churches, and about three hundred Houses.
Thus was that ancient and famous City of Panama consumed and laid in Ashes; being the greatest Mart for Silver and Gold in the whole World: for it receives all the Goods and Mer∣chandise coming from Old Spain, in the Kings great Fleet, which is first landed at Puerto Belo and Venta Cruz, and thence brought on Mules, and by other land-Carriage, hither; and likewise delivers to the Gallions of the Flota or Plate Fleet, all the Silver and Gold which comes from the Mines of Potozi, and all Peru. Here at this City we stayed eight and twenty days, making continual incursions upon the Enemy by Land, for twenty Leagues round about, with∣out having so much as one Gun shot at us in anger, although we took in this time near three thousand Priso∣ners of all sorts: And kept Barks like∣wise cruising in the South Sea, and fetching off Prisoner from Toboga and other Islands near that Coast, to which the Spaniards had fled with their Families.
February the fourteenth,1670. Febr. we quit∣ted Panama, and began our march to∣wards our Ship with all our Priso∣ners, and the next day came to Ven∣ta Cruz, at about two in the After∣noon, which is about fifteen English miles. Here we stayed refreshing our selves till the four and twentieth, giv∣ing the Spaniards, opportunity to ran∣som their Prisoners. The twenty sixth we got to Chagre; which we found in good order since our leaving it. And here we divided the Plun∣der amongst the Souldiers and Sea∣men, which amounted to about thirty thousand Pound Sterling. March the sixth, we fired the Castle of Chagre, having first spiked the Guns; and then embarked for our Voyage towards Iamaica; where in a short time, we safely arrived. The reason why we got no more wealth in that expedition, was, be∣cause they had two Months notice of us, before our coming, and convey∣ed most of their Treasure away on board their Ships, to be transported to Lima in Peru; one of which Ships
was laden with Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; which Ship contain∣ed seven hundred Tun: And there was likewise another of three hun∣dred Tun, laden also with Riches, both which made their escape from us. This, together with their firing the City of Panama, made us return so empty home.
Don Juan Perez de Guzman President of Panama, his Re∣lation of the late Action of the English there in the WestIndies. Being a Letter inter∣cepted by them, as it was go∣ing into Spain, and brought to Admiral Morgan. Ren∣dred into English, out of the Spanish.An. Dom. 1670. Ianuar. HAving had advice from the Go∣vernour of Carthagena, which he sent me by way of Darien, that the English of Iamaica, assisted by the French, intended with an Army of three thou∣sand Men, to Invade Carthagena and Panama, I presently orderded two hun∣dred Men to march to Puerto Velo, and to Chagre one hundred and fifty. And
to the Castillan Don Francisco Saludo I sent order that with five hundred Men he should guard the passage of the Ri∣ver, and fortifie it. About five months before this I had consulted Don Iuan de Aras, Capellan of the Audiencia, and other Intelligent per∣sons. And they perswaded me that the forts on the River as well as the Castle, were all impregnable; And in rei∣terated Letters which I had from Don Pedro de Lisardo, he assured me the same of Chagre, and that I needed not to take care for them, for that although six thousand Men should come against them, he should with the Fortifications, and Men he had, be able to secure himself and destroy them: The like those who were at the passages of the River confidently assured me. And now the Enemy being come those of the Castle of Chagre fought whole day, and defended themselves with great Valour and Resolution, Kill∣ing above two hundred Men, and re∣pulsing above six Assaults, until the Eng∣lish taking advantage of the night, and
by the help of their Fire-balls set on Fire the Fortifications, because the out∣sides were of Wood. They likewise burnt the Castellans or Governours House, being thatched with Palm, and consumed all the good Arms within. There was Killed above half the People, the Lieutenant also and the Castellan, who all had behaved themselves with great Valour, and had it not been for the Fire, the Enemy had never gain∣ed it. At the unhappy News of the loss of this considerable Castle, those on the River were extreamly astonished, and fearing the English would come up to them with two thousand Men, Luis de Castillo Captain of the Mulatto's, whom the Castellan Saludo, had ordered to his Post, a place called Barro Colorado, ha∣ving called a Council of War of those Officers under his Command, without having any Order of mine or power to do it, retired to Barbacoa, forsaking his Post, without fo much as ever seeing the Face of the Enemy: The Castellan Saludo did the same, quitting the For∣tifications of Barbacoa, and retired with
his Men to Cruzes. Before this, at the first notice I had of the loss of the Castle of chagre. Two mestises called the Sollices and a Negro of Vregoa, offered with a hundred Men to regain the Castle, or so to disorder the Enemy in case they should attempt to come up the Ri∣ver, as to hinder them: And for fear they should gain the Castle of Santos, I sent Gil de la Torre who had been Lieutenant there, to Govern and Defend it. But neither of these complied with their undertaking; for having sent two hundred and fifty chosen Men, instead of the one hundred they had desired; with the Sollices, who meeting the E∣nemy on the River, neither durst they stay to fight him, as they might have done, nor did they pass on to regain the Castle of Chagre: But rather went round by the Mountain, and came out at Capira, after which they all dispers∣ed without doing any good at all. In this conjuncture having had the misfortune to have been lately Blooded three times for an Erysipelas, I had in my right Leg, I was forced to rise out of my Bed, and march to Guiabal with
the rest of the People, which I had rai∣sed in Panama; where I slaid until I understood the exact course of the E∣nemies march, because I would be sure not to miss them, for they might have gone by Barbacoa, port Gilloa and Puerto de loes Naos. With me I took eight hundred Men, and three hundred Negroes, that were Vassalls, and Slaves of the Assentistaes. And from the aforesaid place, I sent to Cruzes three hundred Men, amongst whom went one hundred Indians of Darien, with their Commanders; Of these I had greater Credit and Opinion than of any others, yet had not these the courage to perform any thing. Having been a day in Guiabal, and my Men pretty well refreshed, I re∣ceived a Letter from a Negro Captain, called Prado, in which he assured me that the Enemy marched against us two thousand strong; which News so much discouraged my Men, that they ceased not to importune and press me to return to the Town, protesting they would defend themselves in it to the last.
But it being impossible then to fortifie it, it having many entrances, and the Houses all built of Wood; so soon as the Ene∣my should once make a breach, we should quickly be exposed to their fury, and forced miserably to shift for our selves; for which reasons I consented not to them. Next morning at break of day, I found my self with not above one third part of my Men, the rest ha∣ving deserted me. So that I was con∣strained to return back to the City, to perswade them to Fight there at Pana∣ma, there being no other remedy. I arrived on Saturday night at Panama, and Sunday morning went to the great Church, where having received the Ho∣ly Communion before our Blessed Lady of Immaculate Conception, with great Devotion. I went to the principal guard, and to all that were present, I expressed my self to this effect. That all those, who were True Catholicks, Defenders of the Faith, and Devoto's of our Lady of Pure and Immaculate Conception, should follow my Person, being that same day at four a Clock in the afternoon, resolved to march out to seek the Enemy, and with
this caution, that he that should refuse to do it, should be held for Infamous and a Coward, besely slighting so precise an obligation. All proffered me their assistance, ex∣cept those that had slunk from me at Guiabal; And when I had drawn them up in order, I carried the chief of them to the great Church, where in the pre∣sence of our Lady of Pure and Immacu∣late Conception, I made an Oath to die in her Defence; And I gave her a Dia∣mond Ring of the Value of forty thou∣sand pieces of Eight, in token of Com∣pliance with my word, and heartily in∣voked her aid. And all present made the same Oath, with much fervour. The Images of the Pure and Immacu∣late Conception ever since the day of the Fight at Chagre Castle, had been carried out in general Procession, attended by all the Religious, and Fraternity of the Cathedral of St. Francis, that of the Nuns of our Lady of the Rosario, those of San Domingo, and those of the Mer∣cedes, together with all the Saints and Patrons of the Religious. And always
the most Holy Sacrament in all Churches was uncovered and exposed to publick view. Masses were continually said for my happy success. I parted with all my Jewels and Relicks collected in my Pilgrimage, presenting them to the as∣foresaid images, Saints and Patrons. After this I marched with my Army about a League from Panama having with me three Field pieces covered with lea∣ther and charged. And from that place I ordered another Party with two o∣ther Guns, of the Men which came from the River, being above three hundred, to advance towards the Enemy, which neither did any good. This Body of Men which I had thus brought with me, was compounded of two sorts, Valiant Military Men, and faint hearted Cowards, many of them ha∣ving all their Estates, or pay due to them, left in the Castle of Chagre, and Puerto Velo, and a great part of my Men were Negroes, Nulattos and Indians, to the number of about twelve hundred, be∣sides two hundred Negroes more belong∣ing to the Astiento. Our Fire Arms were
few and bad, in comparison of those the Enemy brought: For ours were Carbins, Harquebusles and Fowling pieces, but few Muskets for they had likewise been left in Puerto Velo and Chagre. Now having formed the Army, into two double Squadrons, and the Caval∣ry which were two hundred, mounted on the same tired Horses which had brought them thither, and with two great Herds of Oxen and Bulls, drove thither by fifty Cow-keepers on purpose to disorder the Enemy. The Army all appeared brisk and courageous, desire∣ing nothing more than to engage; nor wanted there any thing of Regalo to infuse Spirit into them. So that it seemed to me, by what I saw, and what they told me, that they would be able to charge the Enemy like Lightning. On Wednesday morning, the Enemy appeared, seeming to direct their march towards our Rear in three Squadrons, wherein they had two thousand three hundred Men, as I understood for certain afterwards, but by and by they taking a compass, advanced to the Front of our
Army. I had put for Leader of our left Wing Dom Alonso Alcaudete, and for Leader of the right Wing the Governour of Be∣ragues, Don Iuan Portando Bargueno, and in the centre the Serjeant Major; To these I gave strict Command that none should move without my order, and that com∣ing within shot, the three first Ranks should Fire on their Knees, and after this charge, they should give place to the Rear to come up and Fire, and that although they should chance to see any fall Dead, or Wounded, they should not quit their stations, but to the last ex∣tremity observe these their Orders. I was at this time in the right Wing of the Vanguard, watching the Enemies motion, which was hasty, by the Foot of a Hill, in a narrow place, about three Musket shot from the left Wing of our Army. When on a sudden I heard a loud clamour, crying out, Fall on, fall on; For they Fly. At which Don Alonso de Alcaudete, was not able to keep them in their Ranks nor stop them from run∣ning away, though he cut them with his Sword, but they all fell into disorder; And I well knowing the Fatality of this
gave command that they should drive in the Herds of Cattle, and charge with the Horse, So putting my self in the Head of the Squadron of the right Wing, saying, come along Boys, there is no other remedy now, but to Conquer, or Die; Follow me. I went directly to the Enemy, and hardly did our Men se some fall Dead, and others Wounded, but they turned their backs, and fled; leaving me there with only one Negro, and one Servant that followed me. Yet I went forward to comply with my word to the Virgin, which was to Die in her Defence, receiving a shot in a staff which I carried in my Hand up∣right close to my cheek. At which mo∣ment came up to me a Priest of the great Church, called Iuan de Dios (who was wont to say Mass in my House) beseeching me to retire and save my self whom I twice sharply reprehended. But the third time, he persisting, telling me that it was meer desperation to Die on that manner, and not like a Christian. With that I retired, it being a miracle of the Virgin to bring me off safe from amidst so many thousand Bullets.
After this I endeavoured with all my industry to perswade the Souldiers to turn and face our Enemies, but it was impossible; so that nothing hindering them, they entred the City, to which the Slaves and Owners of the Houses had put Fire, and being all of Boards and Timber, 'twas most of it quickly burnt, except the Audiencia, the Gover∣nours House, the Convent of the Mer∣cedes, San Ioseph, the Suburbs of Ma∣lambo, and Pierde Vidas, at which they say, the Enemy fretted very much for being disappointed of their Plunder. And because they had brought with them an English Man, whom they called The Prince, with intent there to Crown him King of the Terra Firma. The English having thus got possessi∣on of the Relicks of our Town, found a Bark in the Fasca, although I had given order there should be none, yet had they not complied with my com∣mand, and when they would have set it on Fire, the Enemy came fast and put it out, and with it did us much damage, for they took three more with it, and made great havock of all they found in
the Islands of Tabaga, Otoque, and las Islas del Rey, taking and bringing from thence many Prisoners. After this misfortune, I gave order to all the People I met, that they should stay for me at Nata for there I intend∣ed to form the Body of an Army, once more to encounter the English. But when I came to that City, I found not one Soul therein, for all were fled to the Mountains. The same happened to me at the Town from whence I dispatched a Ves∣sel to Peru, with the sad News of our misfortune, as I had done by Land to Guatimala, Mexico, and by Puerto Velo to Sparue. And although I afterwards attempted several times to form an Army, yet I could not do any good of it, because no Man would be perswaded to follow me. So that I remained utterly desti∣tute of any Guard, till such time as the English marched back to the Castle of Chagre to make his Voyage for Ia∣maica.
There embarked themselves for Peru, without seeing the face of an Enemy, the Castellan Saludo, (whom I did not believe to be such a one) Don Iuan de Aras, Francisco Gonzales Caasco being a young lively Captain, and many O∣thers. This Sir, has been a Chastisement from Heaven, and the same might have happened to that great Captain Gensalo Fernando de Cordova, as did to me, if his Men had deserted him, for one Man alone can do little. In the middle of all this Torrent of Affliction, it was no small good fortune, to have the Fort of San Geromino in Pu∣erto Velo finished; And to have the Fortifications of those two Castles made there anew. Because their first intent was to have attaqued the said Castles, which are, as report goes, well furnished with Men and Ammunition. If all were lost, I hope God would give me patience to suffer so great a Pu∣nishment. But so it is, that all the Presi∣dents together that this Kingdom has
ever had; have not done the third part of what I have done, in order to the prevention of these mischiefs: But I know my self so unfortunate as not to have People sent me out of Spain that are paid; And so long as that shall hap∣pen not to be so in this Kingdom, and that Chagre and Panama shall not be for∣tified, they will be in perpetual danger of loseing the Indies. This is what has passed, omitting infinite particulars, not to enlarge too much, and which is all I have to say to you, whose Life God preserve many years. Panama, &c.
The Relation of Colonel Beeston, his Voyage to Carthagena, for adjusting the Peace made in Spain, for the West-Indies, &c.An. Dom. 1671. Iuly. COlonel William Beeston having re∣ceived Orders and Instructions from the Honourable Sir Thomas Linch Knight his Majesties Lieutenant Gover∣nour of the Island of Iamaica, to em∣bark on the Assistance Frigate, for his Negotiation to Carthagena, there to Con∣gratulate and Adjust with that Gover∣nour the Peace that had been made in Madrid for the West-Indies, by his Ex∣cellency Sir William Godolphin Knight his Majesty of Great Brittains Ambassador in the Court of Spain: And the Conde de Penneranda; And having also Power to demand all such Prisoners not only English but any other Nation, which
had been taken under the Colours of his Majesty in order to his Service. On Sunday, Iuly the sixteenth 1671. We went aboard, and immediately put to Sea; The Colonel having a hand∣some Train of Servants, and half a do∣zen Gentlemen, who went out of respect to wait on him, and a curiosity to see the Spaniards Country. We had also attending on us another Frigate called the Welcome, commanded by Captain Wilgresse. Wednesday the nineteenth, Captain Hubert having been sick some few days before, died at about four a Clock in the afternoon, in the latitude of fifteen de∣grees: And on the twentieth at ten in the morning, and in latitude fourteen degrees was decently, and with the usual Ceremonies of such persons dying there, buryed in the Sea. Sunday the twenty third in the morn∣ing, we fell in with the Land of Cartha∣gena and stood towards the City, which we came in view of at one a Clock; And being within about a league and a half of
it, the Colonel sent off the Pinnace, with a White Flag, and in her Mr. Wil∣liam Stone, and Mr. David Gomez, with these Orders: That after due respects paid to the Governour, they should tell him that the Ships that appeared before the City, were two of his Majesty of Great Britains Frigats, which were sent thither by the Honourable Sir Thomas Linch his Majesties Lieutenant Govern∣our of Iamaica. And that they were sent from a Gentleman on board to him, to let him know who he was, and fur∣ther to acquaint him, that he came by order of the said Governour to Congra∣tulate, and adjust with him, the Peace made in Madrid for the West-Indies. That the said Gentleman desired to know, whether they might have Liber∣ty to come on shoar, and return on board again with safety, as their business might require: The which if he would pro∣mise they would come ashoar, and im∣part what they had in Commission to him. The Colonel moreover ordered them to acquaint the Governour, that it was
not the Custom of his Majesties Ships of War, to salute any place where-ever they should come with their Ordinance, unless they were assured of a due re∣turn, which if he would please to promise by those Gentlemen at their coming back on board; We would salute the City. About five in the evening our Pinnace came off with their White Flag surled, and Mr. Stone at his coming aboard, brought this account: That the Go∣vernour entreated him to tell the Colonel, that he was very welcome; that he should have all the Liberty he could desire, both in coming ashoar and returning a∣board; that the City was ready to re∣ceive us with all respect, and where we should be with all manner of Freedom; and that the Colonel might asure him∣self, he should be treated, as a Person bearing that Character ought to be: And if we should think good to the City, they would retarn the with an equal number of Gvns. Which Civil answer having received, we ired from the Assistance twenty one and from the Welcome fifteen Guns, which they
answered from their Walls with forty. Munday the twenty fourth, we went ashoar, with both the Ships Pinnaces and for the more solemnity; had salutes from both the Frigates at our putting off. At our landing, which was at a small distance from the Town-wall, we were met by ten Coaches, a Company of Foot, the Serjeant Major of the Town, and the Captain Bocca Chica the Castel∣lan, or Commander of the Castle, with several other Gentlemen of Quali∣ty and saluted with those Ordinance, which lay on that part of the Wall next us, and thence conducted to the House of the Governour Don Pedro de Riba∣daneira, in our way to which, the streets were extreamly thronged with People, who wondred much at our Garb, be∣ing used to see none but those of their own Nation. When we came to the Governours, who received us at the stair head, en∣tring into a large Room, we found him waited on by about fifty of the Best
Gentlemen of the City, who as himself was, were richly habited, and adorn∣ed with Gold and Jewels, and many of them of the Orders of Saint Iago, Ca∣latrava, and Alcautara. After the Ce∣remony of our reception was over, all then fate down; The Governour with great compliment placing the Co∣lonel, and Captain Reide his Compani∣on, in the two first Chairs on the right hand, no Apologies on their parts serving to excuse it. After this the Colonel delivered his Letters and other Papers relating to the Affair he came about, which were given to the Secretary, to cause them to be transalted, and then they passed the time in publick Discourse, At noon we were treated with an extraordina∣ry Dinner, served all in Plate, and en∣tertained with Musick, much Chear∣fulness shown, and great expessions of their Satisfaction, by Drinking his Ma∣jesties Health, the Queens, his Royal Highness the Duke of Torks and others. Betwixt this, the Papers were translating; we spent most of the time in treating
such Gentlemen of Quality, as the Go∣vernour permitted to come on board, and see the Frigates; who gave him an account of the Strength and Beauty of them, with which, and their entertain∣ment, they were infinitely pleased. On Wednesday morning the Gover∣nour called his Council together, and having placed Colonel Beeston on his right, Hand, and Captain Reide on his left. The Papers were all read, and the business of the Peace was Discours∣ed, not without much resentment, for the taking of Panama, which was with great eagerness and dissatisfaction urged, as done after certain notice of the con∣clusion of the Peace, which they al∣ledged was published in Carthagena the second of March. All which the Colonel excused, as much as he could, acquainting them with our Ignorance of it in Iamaica, till the  of Sir Thomas Linch our Pre∣sent Governour. Then the Colonel demanded of them, our English Prisoners taken by them,
which were immediately delivered to us, to the number of three and thirty; And to pacifie in some measure their complaints, it was at length concluded on by us, That all Spanish Negroes, of the Provinces of Carthagena and Pana∣ma, which had been taken and could be found in Iamaica, and that could prove they were free in their own Country, should be set at liberty: And that all Negroes of the said Provinces, which were Slaves should be redeemed by their Masters, if they would come for them, at eighteen or twenty pounds per head. After we had quite finished our busi∣ness, The City invited us to Dinner, where we were nobly treated, as well with Feasting, as with their great Guns, and all other expressions of their Joy for the Peace. Though in the main, they seemed suspicious, as doubting whether or no we intended to keep it strictly; And to strengthen it, soon af∣ter Dinner, there came an Express to the Governour, from the wind-ward, giving him an account, that there were two Privateers come to an , near de Canu, which is about five leagues
from the City. At which they seemed infinitely dissatisfied, and confidently affirmed they must needs be English, and told us with all that there was but small likelihood the Peace should be long continued, when our Privateers came before the Town, whilst we were there treating with them, and owning the Peace. To appease which, the Colo∣nel, assured them, Sir Thoms Linch had called in all the Commissions, and that he was confident we had not on Privateer abroad. So that if there were any such Vessells out, they were French of Tor∣tuga; But for their better satisfaction, if the Governour desire it, he would send one of the Frigats to see what they were. Which offer he gladly accepted. And that he might see we intended no∣thing more than the Preservation of the Peace, the Colonel sent Captain Wil∣gresse to Sea, who returned again in twenty four hours, having been beyond the place, where they were reported to have been, but saw none, at which they were again satisfied. The remainder of the time we staid here, which was whilst the Governours
Papers were dispatching, we spent in view∣ing the Town, and treating several Gen∣tlemen of theirs a board, who were cu∣rious to see the Frigats and their strength. The City of Carthagena lies on a Bay by the Sea side, built on a Sand, but to Landward it is very boggy. It is in length about three quarters of a mile, and not full half a mile in bredath. `Tis walled all round with a thick stone wall of about four and twenty foot high, with Bastions built with Orillons, in some parts, in others they are plain: But has neither Graffs nor Ramparts. The Guns which are in number one hundred twenty six, are most Brass and Copper, and lie upon the Parapets, and looking over the tops of the walls, with∣out either Battlements, or common Base∣kets, to blind them. In the wall are three Gates; one to the South called San Domingo; one to the North East, called Santa Catalina, and one to the East, which goes to the Harbour, and into the Country. This City neverthe∣less is not strong, for there is neither Castle, nor any considerable place of strength in it; and moreover to the North
North West, which is the Bay, those winds have made in the wall three great Breaches, which may be entred with ease. The People likewise are not many be∣sides Church Men, and for the most part are Creolians who are half Spaniard and half Indian; There are also many Molatto's and Negroes amongst them. Their Souldiers are Armed (for Fire Arms) only with match Locks, in the use of which they are likewise very un∣expert. The City in general is well built with Stone, and covered with Tile; the streets are narrow, and the Houses for the most part contiguous, and most of them four or five stories high, with Balconies of Wood and great Wooden Lattices as they have in Spain. Here are many Beauti∣ful Churches, and other Publick Stru∣ctures. One of their greatest wants is fresh water, having none but what falls from the Clouds, for the reception whereof, they have large Cisterns in most Houses and likewise under the Bastions in the walls, where they keep and husband it till God send a fresh sup∣ply. The Town appears very Beauti∣ful
at a distance, for there are many Cocao Nut Trees which resemble Palms, grow∣ing promiscuously in several parts there∣of, and overtopping the Houses; which is a delightful Ornament to it. On the East side of it, about a mile distant, upon an Eminence stands a Castle called Santa Madalena, provided with many Guns of Brass, Copper and Iron, which they look upon, as of great strength, and able to do much in their defence, and for preservation of their City. Whilst we staid here some of our Company were desirous to treat with one Herman an Eminent Factor here for the Grillo's Genoese Merchants in Spain, in hopes to have sold him some Negroes from Iamaca, but he was so ill beloved by the People, and they were so suspici∣ous of us, left we should sell the Negroes which waited on us, that we could not have any discourse with him. On Friday the twenty eighth. We received our Letters and Dispatches, and in the afternoon took our leaves of
the Governour and City, and went on board, staying all Saturday to fit our Ships. Sunday morning we Sailed, saluting the City at our going off; which they with the same number of Guns answered. Tuesday, August the first, we met with the Santa Cruz. Captain Francisco Ga∣ribaldo Commander, a Ship of thirty two Guns. Sixteen Petreros, and a hundred and six Men, she belonged to the Grillo's and had on board a hun∣dred and twenty thousand pieces of Eight, with which she was going from Car∣thagena, to Corizo, to buy Negroes. Out of her we took Five Prisoners, which made our number thirty eight. After which we passed on; And without any thing worthy of remark in our Voyage, standing over for Iamaica; On Mun∣day August the seventh in the morning, we arrived, and came to an Anchor in Port Royal Harbour. FINIS.
