B1053 R13214 13586160 100542
A SERMON AT THE Warwick-shire MEETING, November 25, 1679. AT S. Mary-le-Bow in Cheapside, London. By William Basset, Rector of Brinklow, in Warwick∣shire. LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George near S. Dun∣stan's Church in Fleet-street. 1679.
TO THE Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT VINER, Baronet, and Alderman of the City of Lon∣don. CErtainly this Meeting justly claims a place among the considerable Benefits our Country doth enjoy, not only in regard of the correspondence the several members of it, that are removed to this City, hold one with another; but especially that by this means so many Plants are yearly removed from the barren parts of it to this richer Soil, where they are pruned and dressed, and having depth and fatness of earth grow into Trees, that yield Profit and Beauty to the whole. Nor is the advantage small to those, whose Lot doth not fall in this pleasant place: since the Coun∣try is yearly eased of so many, who, by reason of ill Circumstances, would be rather a Burden, than advantage to their Neighbours; especially those places that have more Hands than Work; where Men stand idle, perhaps, for no other reason, but because none have hired them. And I have some∣times known a Town at great expence, both of
time and Mony to keep out, it may be, some sin∣gle person from being an Inhabitant, because they had more than they could employ before. And where the younger do increase, the more ancient, while yet serviceable, being left without employ, are necessarily supported by the Contributions of the place. And in Corporations, and Market-towns, where some might have crept into little Trades, this is already divided into so many hands, that (some few in a Town excepted) they have little else to do, but to open and shut the Windows of their Shops, and when they have shut, are scarce able to set and keep them open. Whence we may take some measures of the Benefit, the Country doth receive from this Company. For should they lay down so good a Work, our poor, and therefore our payments would increase; more would die in∣debted to the world, leave Charge behind them, and each way oppress the living: and the business of all private and publick Sessions would yearly increase. Therefore certainly all the Inhabitants of that place are bound in point of policy, and reason, if not of duty too (according to their several Capa∣cities) to encourage and maintain so good a Work. Especially the Gentry, whose Abilities, Divertise∣ments, or other Concerns, calling them so oft to
Town, give them so fair an opportunity: especi∣ally considering these Benefits reach even the high places themselves are yet in. For Landlords thrive best, where Tenants prosper. And Rents usually fall, where the poor, and therefore payments, do in∣crease. I must therefore impute it to the non-con∣sideration of these things, and perhaps, in some to the want of Generous and Publick Spirits, or at least to the not kindling, those Sparks of Virtue into a frame of Love, and Bounty, which (how∣ever Titles go) are essential to a Gentleman, that we are in this Affair so far left by those whose pre∣sence would be an Honour to the Company, a Glory to the place of their Nativity, and would give new life and vigour to the business of this As∣sembly. Great Bodies move the lesser. And good Leaders in that Contribution, which is not (as some suppose) for the Stewards Pockets, but towards the Binding Children out to Trades, by their very example gain more from others, than the Sums themselves do give can amount to. And the more is thus collected, the more the Stewards are incouraged to a free and large addition; that for their own Fame, and the Childrens Good they may place them to the better Trades, which often proves as great a kindness, as the setting them out to any: for sometimes ingenuity is forced to creep, when it might run high, if placed in a better Cir∣cumstance.
And since the want of publick Spi∣rits prove a decay to a whole Society, to parti∣cular Companies, and smaller Bodies; we are the more obliged, where we sind them, to pay them due respects, and give a just applause. And since such a spirit appears so eminently in your self, not only from your publick Works and Monuments in the City, and our County Town of Warwick, in which your name shall live to future ages (He loves our nation, and hath built a synagogue) &c. But also from the Incouragement you are pleased to give this charitable Work: in having formerly vouchsafed to be Steward of this Company; and in the Yearly Honour you do it by your presence, not suffering any business, no, not the Burden, as well as Honour, you sustain'd, when Lord Major of this City, to deliver you from it; I thought my self in duty bound, by this Dedication, to let you know the Honour and Respects our Country ows you, as well as him, who is Your Worships Humble Orator, And Servant, W. Basset.
TO Mr. Richard Chandler, Job Vere, Thomas Grassingham, Henry Marshal, John Skipwith, William Brown, George Shettleworth, Richard Elborow. Stewards. WEll, your Charge and Trouble now is mostly over; but your Honour and Rewards, for having been Benefactors to your Coun∣try, still remain; and I hope, may out∣live the Funerals of Time. For indeed you are able to give so good an Account of your Stewardship, that, as many as look upon this Meeting
of our Country-men, as an Ensample to all the other Counties of England, so you are a fair Copy for all the follow∣ing Stewards of the same Company to write after. And such have been your repeated kindnesses to me, that I am bound to subscribe my self Your Obliged Country-man, And Servant, W. Basset.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Warwick-shire MEETING, November 25, 1679. ROM. 12.1. I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, accepta∣ble unto God, which is your reasonable service. IN the Foregoing Chapters the Apostle hath discoursed some things, which the largeness of our Subject will not suffer us to look into: and from which the Text is a con∣clusion, and for that reason is ushered in with the Illative Therefore.] I beseech you [therefore.] In the words themselves we shall observe
1. A kind and familiar compellation, Brethren. 2. An earnest Supplication: I beseech you. 3. A farther inforcement of the matter in hand: By the mer∣cies of God. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God. 4. The subject matter of this Discourse, That ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God. And 5. The equity and meetness of the thing, Which is your rea∣sonable service. I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. I begin with the 1. Brethren. We once all lay in that common matter, which Moses calls the void and formless earth, and others express by their materia pri∣ma; some by , and others by . Which though without form, was yet susceptive of any the great Creator should please to impress upon it. Out of this Infinite Power and Wisdom did produce all earthly Beings, and gave them a Law and Power of propogating their several kinds. Whence all Mankind were taken out of the same common matter, had all the same Maker; for which reason the Poet calls them, Chara Dei Soboles— The Off-sping of God. And are all descended from the same common Parents, which are the first, and most general grounds of this Relation. And when it pleased God by confusion of Languages (there∣by turning sin into an universal Blessing) to necessitate men to di∣vide themselves into many little Bodies, according to their seve∣ral Tongues, and so to disperse themselves over the face of the whole earth, that there might be the more room, incourage∣ments and necessity of Propagation; and that the several parts of the earth, by the industry of men, might communicate their good things one to another; whereupon mankind became diversi∣fied, as to Speech, Sentiments, Manners and Customs of Life,
according to the several Climes they did inhabit, and other cir∣cumstances they were placed in; yet they of the same Body were knit together by a nearer Relation, than those of different Societies. And, as one speaks, Jam cuncti gens una sumus— Noting that a new and nearer Relation doth arise upon the u∣nion of two different Nations, and therefore the several particu∣lars of the same Nation are more nearly related, than those of different Societies be. And when the same Country upon certain occasions, and for divers reasons, hath fallen under several divisions, as Parishes, Tythingries, Hundreds and Shires, they of the same part are more nearly related, than those of different Divisions. Nor doth a new, or nearer relation arise solely from the place of our Birth, but of our education, from our several Callings, Trades and o∣ther Circumstances. And if we look upon men as linked together in a Sacred Socie∣ty, we have all one faith, one baptism, one hope, one God and Father of all: whence we are said to be Heirs of God, and Co-heirs with Christ. And thus considered, we are all under the same Head, make up one and the same Body, which is the Church; and are Members one of another. This is the best, and most Honourable of all Relations; which the ancient Christians were ready upon all oc∣casions to express by the term of Brother and Sister. However of late it is fallen under reproach, and is seldom used, unless in Drollery, by reason it hath been so horribly abused by unreason∣able pretenders to Purity, and is made as a Characteristical dif∣ference, whereby to distinguish different Parties and Factions. So various and manifold are the Grounds and Reasons of this Relation, that there are no men, but what upon some accounts or other are Brethren. And by how many the more ways we are so related, by so many the more indearments we have one to a∣nother, and obligations to mutual love and kindness. This term hath been sometimes used, not only to a good end, but with good success too. For when the Romans were in Mu∣tiny,
and ready to tumult, they were all appeased and hushed into silence, by this one word Quirites, by which they were re∣minded they were all of the same Country, and had the same Captain, and Founder. To the like purpose, though not with like success, did Moses wage it, when he saw two Jews, Men of the same Nation, and same Religion contending together, Act. 7.26. Sirs, ye are bre∣thren, why do ye wrong one to another? Sometimes it is used to usher in a reproof, which otherwise might be apt to move some unruly passions, Jam. 1.16. Do not err, my beloved brethren. And otherwhiles to sweeten and smooth men into a more easie and ready reception of some important duty; which is the design and business of it in the Text, I beseech you, brethren,— that ye present your bodies, &c. Whence we come to the second part of the Text, I beseech you. S. Paul was one of the greatest of the Apostles, in regard of his extraordinary, and immediate Call from Heaven, his Suf∣ferings, his Labours, his Revelations, and his Learning, having been brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel, and skilled in all the Learning of the Jews. Yet writing to the Romans, who were but newly converted from Heathenism; and amongst whom there were many weak Christians, who were still intangled in the Rudiments of the World, and were subject to Ordinances: being so far from using their liberty, as a Cloak and Plea for Sin, as the manner of some is, that they suffered much for not under∣standing it, yet appears as their humble Supplicant, I beseech you. Which great condescension himself takes notice of to the Co∣rinthians, 2. Ep. 10.11. I Paul my self beseech you. Which form of speech is never used, unless in these, and such like Ca∣ses. 1. To express the vehemency of the speaker, and to shew the whole Soul is taken up, and filled with an earnest desire of suc∣ceeding in the affair before him. No Rhetorick so winning as such a passionate and courtly insinuation, which seems enough to melt down the affections, and form them to the mold, and me∣thods of such an Orator.
2. When the truth proposed, or duty pressed upon us, is of grand importance and concern, as Ephes 4.1. I beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. The matter of which exhortation comprises all the Duties of Christian Religion; and therefore justly calls for so earnest an importunity. For, as it is matter of prudence, as well as duty, to proportion our love, desire, and hope, according to the measures of good, that are in the things to which they are terminated; so it is all the reason in the world, that the Orator and Divine should suit his pains to the nature of the Subject: which is but like the giving a price according to the usefulness and worth of the thing pur∣chased. And indeed Nature and Revelation somewhat necessi∣tate to do so. For the less things concern us, the less capable they are of truth: as may be instanced in the plurality of worlds, the motion of the earth, the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and the rise of the River Nilus: and the remoter things are from the life, and essence of Religion, still the more contro∣versial, as appears from the manner of the traduction of Original Sin, the perpetual Virginity of the blessed Mary, &c. In which kind of points a man cannot be mighty earnest in pressing your belief, because the nature of the Subject will bear but little, if a∣ny certainty or weight, But where things are of some great im∣portance, there nature is more plain and satisfactory, and so is Revelation too: for whatever is absolutely necessary to Salvation, whether it be matter of faith or practise, is suited to the mode of all capacities. These so easily appear plain and reasonable, and the inducements to them so strong and weighty, that they both afford good ground for importunity; and likewise so warm the affections, and move the Speaker, that he is usually close and pressing. Therefore when the Apostle is putting us upon this great and reasonable part of our Religion, viz. the presenting our Bodies a Sacrifice to God, he both commands and courts us to it: I beseech you, that ye present your bodies, &c. 3. It may be further used, where men are not easily brought to comply with the matter proposed. There are some things indeed so readily received, and so tena∣ciously held by many men, that scarce any thing is able to check
their belief, or restrain from the practice of them, and such be the darling conceits of the lawfulness of resisting the lawful Ma∣gistrate, and of seeking our own preservation in forbidden, and therefore in unlawful ways: which must be accounted to proceed from their agreeableness to vile affections, and the debaucheries of nature. Whereas the clearest truths and indispensable duties, though indeed the more they are so, the more agreeable they be to natural light, and the reasons of men, as the resisting and mor∣tifying our own corruptions, yet still they are not so easily re∣ceived, and reduced to practice. But we have more need of un∣deniable arguments, and an importunate zeal to convince and perswade their reception, than others have to put off their false and counterfeit Wares. The reason of which is, these suit with evil inclinations, and therefore are easily received: while they are against, and for that reason opposed by natural corruptions; in the one, that enemy of all good helps forward, in the other, he en∣deavours to hinder us either in the whole, or in part; or else in the motive or end of our faith, or action. Therefore the Apo∣stle might the more earnestly press us to the presenting our Bodies, that by such means he might overcome all oppositions, and there∣upon perswade men to captivate their thoughts to the belief, and submit themselves to the practice of so great a Duty. I beseech you, brethren. And lest this should be too little, he adds, 4. A further inforcement of the same thing: By the mercies of God. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God. By which he means all those things, that the Ancients com∣prised under those three Heads: 1. The Goods of Fortune, as our Estates and Enjoyments in the world, which make our lives a blessing, and without which to live, would be at present to be miserable. 2. The Goods of the Body, as Health, Strength, Perfection, and due proportion of Parts. 3. The Goods of the Mind, as the use of all our Faculties, whereby we are able to reason, discourse and distinguish between good and evil, and make provision against present and future Exigencies. All which are so valuable, we know not what price
to set upon them; and the want of any one of them would ne∣cessarily infer the presence of some great evil. Nay, these Mercies include all those good and perfect gifts, which come down from the Father of Lights; the Redemption of the World, and that by a price of infinite value, as the giving his Son, and that to all the sinless infirmities of humane nature, which speaks the purchase, the just admiration of Men and An∣gels: that Omnipotency it self should condescend to be carried in the Arms of a feeble Woman! That he, who sate on the Throne of Heaven, should vouchsafe to lie in a dirty Manger! That he, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, should be wrapt up in Swadling Cloaths! That he, who gave life and being to all things, should lay down his life for the worst of Sinners! That Love it self should sit on a Thorny Bough, dying even for those that killed it! and to perfect the wonder, that this must be a death the most painful and ignominious in the world! That he should ever live, as the Scripture speaks, to make intercession for us, as if it was the sole end of his life to plead our Cause in Hea∣ven! And when after all we have lived unsuitable to his Mercies, that he should yet continue the means of Grace, and Tenders of Sal∣vation, and pursue us with all the glorious proposals of Bliss and Happiness! That he should strive with us by natural conscience, the motions and whispers of the blessed Spirit, as if he resolved to take no denyal, but would even force himself, and eternal Glories on us: these are Mercies of the greatest magnitude, the most winning endearments that love and kindness can lay upon us! Obligations that should make us plyable to all the significations of the Divine Will, and to turn our hands and hearts to every duty; especially considering the great design of them is, both to oblige, and also to inable us to a pious, and an holy life, for which cause the Apostle argues from them to the duty before us. I beseech you by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies, &c. which is the fourth part of the Text, viz. the subject of the Discourse. That ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God. This is an allusion to the Law of Sacrifices under the Mosaick
Dispensation, of which we shall observe some few things, that we may the better understand this Phrase, and the Duties it re∣quires of us, as 1. The perfection of those things that were to be offered to God, they must be the best of their kind: Levit. 22.19, 20, 21. Ye shall offer a male [without blemish] of the beeves, and of the sheep, and of the goats. But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer, for it shall not be acceptable for you. And Mal. 1.14. God lays a curse upon him, that shall presume to offer him a cor∣rupt thing. Now as these Sacrifices were typical of something that was to be under the Gospel, viz. that immaculate Sacrifice of the bles∣sed Jesus, which he was once to make for our Sins, whence he is called the Lamb of God, slain from the foundation of the World. So the perfection of them taught the purity, which God requi∣red of them that should offer themselves unto him under each Di∣spensation. That God, who would not allow of imperfections in the things offered, would by no means suffer the blemishes of Sin in the persons offering. For this is a greater provocation than the other, for that teaches the necessity of this: therefore as such Sacrifices were rejected, so were such Sacrificers too. And some∣times the spotless Offering was abhorred for the spots of him that offered it: Isai. 1.11. to vers. 16. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me? saith the Lord. I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts, I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination, &c. The reason of which is vers. 15. Your hands are full of blood. Now by this allusion the Apostle shews that the Sacrifices under the Gospel must be pure, which he expresses by that word holy; and because our Sacrifices now must be our persons, and not our beasts, he adds a living sacrifice, in opposition to the dead ones under the Law; therefore it is plain, that he that comes unto God, must come with a Conscience purged from dead works, and refi∣ned, as far as is possible, from all the dross and imperfections of corrupted nature. The necessity of which we are sometimes taught by more proper expressions, 2 Cor 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; perfecting Holiness.
Thus we must imitate that first good, and reach after some participations of the Divine Nature; becoming holy as the Lord our God is holy: and perfect even as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect. That so there may be some congruity and suitableness between God and those that worship him; and indeed this is the great condition of finding acceptance: for as God would not accept of a blemished Sacrifice, so the Text expresly declares, that we must present our selves a Sacrifice holy, if ever we mean to be acceptable to him. That ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, accepta∣ble to God. 2. These Sacrifices were made, and offered to God, which was part of the Divine Worship. And this viz. Wor∣ship is a standing and perpetual Duty. Though the Modus be changed, yet the thing still re∣mains. Therefore in that very place where our Saviour rejects the Temple, and the Service peculiar to it, he yet retains Worship still, and thereby makes it a Gospel-duty; Joh. 4.23. The true Worshipers shall worship. And the Father seeks such to worship him. So S. Paul, Tit. 2.12. comprises all Religion under these three Heads, viz. 1. Sobriety, which includes the Duties we owe to our selves, and forbids all intemperance and excess. 2. Righteousness, which contains all the Offices we owe to others, and is a doing to all men, as we would all men should do to us. And 3. Godliness, which comprises the several Duties we owe immediately to God, whereof Adoration or Worship is one, in the judgment of the Gentile World, who ever paid these Tributes of Honour to the Deity. Therefore when Epicurus, by denying Divine Providence, took the ready course to rob God of his Worship, he was char∣ged by others, and the better of the Philosophers, tollere Deos,
in effect to deny his very existence, and run the world into right down Atheism. And that Command that prohibits the worship of Gra∣ven Images, doth yet retain this worship as proper, and pe∣culiar to the true God. For as God is the most excellent of all beings, so he will have something reserved for himself, which no creature shall share with him in, and this is espe∣cially Worship which is forbid to the creature, for this very reason, that it is due to God only, and that both by virtue of Precept and Eminency. Which thing is here expressed by presenting, that ye pre∣sent your bodies, viz. in a way of Adoration and Wor∣ship. That Religion then must needs be lame and imperfect, which rests in some moral Virtues, but is deficient in this great point, that is willing to appear blameless to the world, but matters not by Divine Worship to give Praise and Glory to the Deity. For as it was not sufficient to the Jews to pre∣pare their Sacrifices, but not to offer them: so neither is it sufficient for us to make our bodies a living Sacrifice, and ne∣ver present them, as such, before God. The Metaphor must hold in these two points, else it would have been improperly used, and would reach but one part of that which other Texts in the New Testament make our du∣ty: and the word [Present] must be of no use and signifi∣cation. Nay, a thing is not properly and strictly a Sacrifice till it be offered, or at least in offering: before, when it is prepared, it is but for a Sacrifice, it is the offering that makes it such. Therefore by presenting our bodies a sacrifice, we are most certainly and clearly put upon the offering them to God in a way of worship: for so Sacrifices were. And indeed one great end of Religion is to give Praise and Glory to God, which is done very much, and, perhaps, in
nothing better than by worship; for in these very acts we own him the greatest, and best of all Beings; and our selves but poor and dependent creatures. God is never more magnified by men, than when they fall down and worship him. Therefore as the worshiping the Creature is said to be a giving God's glory to another, and his praise to graven Images; Isa. 42.8. So the not worshiping must needs be a with-holding from, or a denying him the same Praise and Glory. Therefore of what civil behaviour, what sober conversation, or how just soever men may be in their Societies and Commerce, yet if they do not present their bodies a living Sacrifice to God, they are no Worshipers, and therefore wanting in one of the best parts, and main ends of all Religion. 3. Sacrifices were not only offered, but in a publick place and manner: Deut. 16.5, 6. Thou mayst not sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. But at the place which the Lord thy God shall chuse to place his name in. Levit. 13.3, 4. Whatsoever man, &c. that kills an ox, or lamb, or goat, &c. and brings it not to the door of the Ta∣bernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering to the Lord, before the tabernacle of the Lord, blood shall be imputed to that man. And Deut. 12.17, 18. The tithe of corn, wine, oil, the firstlings of the herd, and of the flock, vows, free-will-offerings, and heave-offerings, were to be eaten before the Lord, in the place which the Lord should chuse. And though private Worship was required of the Jew, as well as of the Christian; yet the Old Testament, especially the Psalms, do so far prefer the publick before private wor∣ship, that a man would be almost apt to think all worship confined to this. For though David, when driven to and fro by Saul, and whilst among the Philistines, had opportu∣nity of private Adoration, and secret Devotions, yet speaks
of himself, as driven from the presence of God, when dri∣ven from his House and publick Worship: Psal. 84.1, 2. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cry out for the living God. Verse 3 he speaks the Swallow more happy than himself, in that, while he is ab∣sent, she is suffered to visit, and build her nest about the altars. Psal. 42.1, 2. As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God: When shall I come and appear before God! Now the Psalmist very well knew, he was al∣ways in the Divine Presence; and therefore Psal. 139.8. to Verse 13. proves by an induction of particulars, that there is no place of concealment from him; not in Heaven, nor in Hell; not in the utmost parts of the Sea, nor in the darkest night; therefore verse 7. Whither shall I flee from thy pre∣sence? Which being proposed by way of question, implies the stronger Negation. Therefore if we will make sense of those places, we must understand the Psal. as reaching after a more than ordinary presence, which is the presence of God in places of publick worship, which all sincere worshipers do enjoy. By which kind of speeches he seems so to value the presence of God in his publick worship, that he looks upon all things, without this to be worth nothing. And certainly where there is a spiritual life wrought in us, it will discover it self by reaching after the utmost participations of divine things. And the Gospel however a furtherer of private devotions, yet doth in an especial manner command and incourage a publick Service; as by the example of the Apostles, which as a tacite precept requires the like of us. To which end we find sometimes the place of their assembling recorded, Act. 1.13, 14. In an upper room they continued with one ac∣cord in prayer and supplication. And otherwiles the time is
mentioned, Joh. 20.26. After eight days the disciples again were within — which number includes two Sundays, according to a computation then in use, which was to take in the day from which they began their account, thereby putting two Sundays into one week. And when Christians began to grow cool, and negligent in the publick presenting their Bodies, the Author to the Heb. 10.25. both reproves this growing evil, and charges others to avoid it, not forsaking the assembling your selves together; as the manner of some is. And no wonder the Scripture is so round in this matter, since the neglect of publick, most certainly draws after it the neglect of all private duties; therefore those that excuse their not frequenting publick Ordinances by a pretence of serving God at home, are like those that will have every day a Sabbath, till at last they keep none at all. And good reason private devotions should give way to publick services, because these are the most ordinary, and beaten road to Heaven, and a more usual conveyance of Grace, than other Performances. For Faith is said to come by hearing, and this hearing such as is from Preaching. How shall they hear without a Preacher, Rom. Christ appeared to the first Christians, when assembled together; Joh. 20.26. The Holy Ghost descended upon them, when met together with one accord in one place; Act. 2. And our Saviour promises, Matth. 18.20. that when two or three are met together in his name, he will be in the midst of them. Which must be un∣derstood in a more peculiar and especial manner, than by his essential presence, in regard of which he is at all times present with all his Creatures. And no wonder this hath the greater blessing, since we do in this more than any other way, make a visible profession, and thereby give more praise and glory to God than in pri∣vate, and unseen services.
Therefore as God hath so entwisted his Honour, and our happiness together, that it is impossible to separate them, for the same Acts do both: so those acts that most advance his Glory, usually tend most to the advantage of him that doth them. Whence the Apostle seeing these two ends best attainable by a publick worship, doth press us to present our bodies a living sacrifice, and therefore to present them in that way that Sacrifices were offered, which was in the most solemn, and publick manner. 4. The Text fixes this Worship on the Body, That ye pre∣sent your Bodies. Which by a Synechdoche partis pro toto, is put for the whole man: That ye present your selves. Where observe That the Body is engaged in this work. Though indeed there is no Text that doth expresly ex∣clude it, yet because there is one that doth not in terminis include the Body, as John 4.23 The true worshipers shall wor∣ship in spirit, and in truth, Therefore some will have the Soul alone concerned, and not the Body at all in Divine Worship. But as out of the fulness of the heart the mouth speaks: so bo∣dily worship is in, and flows from that of the spirit: nothing being more natural than outwardly to express our inward sen∣timents; and especially the awfulness we have of the Deity. In most ordinary cases it is judged Hypocrisie to do other∣wise, and in this it cannot be without some violence offer∣ed to our selves: for it is certainly contrary to the reasons and experience of all observing men, that when we come to the place and Offices of a publick Worship, men should have any due and suitable thoughts of the presence they come
before, and not express the same in outward gestures and behaviour. I am sure none will believe that man hath any internal or mental reverence for his Superiours, who, when in their presence, doth not outwardly express the same. For we measure the thoughts by the actions, and guess at the Soul by the Body. Much more must we think thus in the case before us; for God being the greatest, and most excellent of all beings, if we have worthy thoughts of him, the mind is so struck, and the soul receives such deep impressions, that we much more necessarily in outward gestures discover the awful and reve∣rend thoughts, we have of the Deity, than we do our re∣spects to Superiors, who, being but fellow-creatures, differ from us, not in infinite, as God doth, but in some few and little distances: and doubtless our Saviour requiring a spiri∣tual worship, doth as much intend that of the Body too, as those Scriptures mean so many persons that speak only of so many souls, Gen. 12.5. And Abraham took Sarai his wife, &c. and all the Souls they had gotten, &c. And it seems very observable, that when men once ex∣clude the reverence of the Body, they quickly lose that of the Soul too: as appears from such mens expressions, who make their prayers familiar discourses with God Almighty, which must proceed from want of due thoughts of God, whereupon they make themselves too much like him; or him too much like themselves. Neither is it any wonder that our Saviour expresly re∣quires a spiritual worship, rather than a bodily. Because 1. This is the greater, and carries the other along with it: whereas that is the less, and may be, because it sometimes is without this.
2. Christ was here nulling the Mosaick Dispensation, which was called a Carnal Command Heb. 7.16. the reason of which we find Ch. 9, 10. because it stood in meats and drinks and divers washings, and carnal ordinances imposed upon them. Therefore being now to bring in a worship which rested not so much in bodily Exercises, it was most proper and sub∣servient to this present design, to call it a spiritual worship, not only because the denomination is now taken from the major part; but also that men might hereby be prepared by taking off their minds from those carnal Ordinances, to close with the proposals of a more spiritual Law. But yet this Text cannot in reason be supposed to exclude the body: because , from whence , and , Worshipers, and shall worship, do come, sig∣nifies to kiss, which implies an act of the Body; and the Septuagint uses the same word to express a worship, which was for the most part bodily, viz. that of Baal, 1 King. 19.18. I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth, , that hath not kissed, that is, that hath not worshiped him; and why the same word should in one place signifie a worship, which is mostly bodily: and in the other place, viz. this of S. John, should signifie a worship purely spiritual, or exclusive of the Body, I do not yet under∣stand. But it is a common rule in expounding Scripture, that that cannot be the meaning of one Text, which contradicts a∣nother, and such is this sense which excludes the Body from acts of worship. For in Exod. 20.5. Bowing down the Bo∣dy being the highest expression of our inward reverence; and therefore meetest for the worship of the great God, is
made an act of Divine Worship, and for that very reason is forbid to be paid to the creatures, as representations of the Deity. Therefore if we must not bow down to the true God, then we may bow down to Graven Images: and con∣trariwise, if we must not bow down to Graven Images, then we must bow down to the true God; and the reason is, because it is forbid to be paid to the one, upon this very ac∣count, that it is reserved as proper, and peculiar to the other; and therefore so long as it is forbid to be given to Images, so long it remains a debt to God, which is for ever, this Com∣mand being moral, and consequently perpetually obliging. It must needs therefore be, that those men who bow down to neither, as they are no Idolaters, so they are no Wor∣shipers, and because they would not be Redundants, will therefore be Defectives in their Religion. From this precept have flowed those Exhortations, Psal. 95.6. O come, let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker. Which are no parts of the Ceremonial Law, but streams from this Fountain. And since God made, redeemed, and promised rewards to the Body, as well as the Soul, it is all the reason in the world he should be worshiped by both: from which Topicks that great Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorifie God in your body, and your spirit, which are Gods. Whence we proceed to the fifth part of the Text, viz. the meetness and equity of the thing, It is your reasonable service. That ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, accepta∣ble to God, Which is your reasonable service. That is, a Service agreeable to the reasons of men, and dictates of nature, abstracting from her Corruptions.
And indeed it must needs be so, because it is a part of the natural Law. For as Cicero saith, consensio omnium gentium lex naturae putanda est. The consent of all Nations in any one thing must be reputed the law of nature. And truly as what nature teaches, must needs be known, and spread as far as humane nature it self: so when we find all Nations agreeing in any one thing, we cannot in reason assign any other teach∣er of that thing but the same nature. Now Jew and Gentile, Greek and Barbarian, did all a∣gree in this, according to their several Modes and Capaci∣ties, that it is a most meet and reasonable thing, that we should present our bodies a living sacrifice to God. Whence they had their Temples, their Priests and Sacreds. And in their moral Discourses, they taught the necessity and way of rooting out Vice, and acquiring Virtue, in order to their making themselves holy and acceptable to God. Neither can any think me too daring in this part of my Discourse, that considers that great and learned men hold there is nothing purely positive in the Gospel, but the two Sacraments; and some think these in part founded on nature, and reason too: because they find some shadows and foot∣steps of them in Gentile Writings, as Purification by Wa∣ter, and this before Homer, or at least by him mentioned; and their making Leagues inter vinum & epulas, with eat∣ing and drinking. Though indeed some men are so fansiful, that if they per∣ceive any the least likeness between the Notions and Customs of the Jews and Gentiles, (as especially T. G. in his Court of the Gentiles) it must needs pass as a clear Demonstra∣tion, that therefore the Gentiles had these things mediately, or immediately from the Jews. By which means I dare un∣dertake to make out to the reasons of men, that they may
as well make the History of one Nation but an imitation and corruption of the History of another. Whereas both Jew and Gentile having the same natural light, might be directed thereby to many the same notions and like customs. I would ask whether the Gentile by the natural light of the under∣standing might not hit upon some truth? Else to what pur∣pose doth that light serve? O what benefit is it to that part of Mankind, that had no further Directions? Then whe∣ther the Jews having the same light, together with the far∣ther addition of Revelation, might not hit upon the same truths, whether it necessarily follows, that the Gentiles had this from the Jews? Again, since each Light directs man∣kind to the Belief and Worship of the Deity, and because there can be no publick Worship without the appointment of persons, time and place, to that end, whence they must de∣scend to many particular Constitutions and Customs, as to these grand requisites of Worship, whether we can in rea∣son suppose that it is not likely there will be some similitudes, as to Persons, Habits, Sacreds, or one thing or other, be∣tween the worship of each, although these two Bodies of Men might never hear, or know any thing one of another? Whence let reason judge, what an irrefragable argument likeness of Notions, or Customs, is, to prove them all of Jewish Original. Though indeed moderate and rational Discourses on this Subject may much advance the Glory of Sacred Writings, yet to press them so far, as some have done, robs the great∣er part of Mankind of their very Reasons, detrudes them into lower Species, and therefore makes them like the Beasts that perish; leaving them without light, without any rule of life, without Law, and consequently without any thing whereby they may be judged at the last day.
But I know not how any man can deny the point before us to have been discovered by natural light, unless he will correct S. Paul, who affirms a Law written on our hearts by nature, and that Conscience accuses, or excuses, accord∣ing as Men have kept or broke it: Rom. 1.14, 15. which he speaks expresly of the Gentiles, Who being without law, viz. that of Revelation, do by nature the things contained in the law, having the law written on their hearts—For the presenting our selves a sacrifice holy, and acceptable to God, is the whole substance of all the practick part of natural Re∣ligion, which being taken away, we know not where to place such Religion, unless in mere notions, or speculations; and such can be neither a Religion, nor a Law, which doth not direct, and oblige us in matters of good and evil. Therefore the subject of, and duty pressed by the Text, being natural, and consequently a reasonable service, we have this advantage and incouragement to it, viz. When the Gospel proposes, and presses this duty upon us, Reason steps in, and speaks it good and eligible, and condu∣cive to our present and future safety. This is the main thing that makes his commands, as S. John speaks, 1 Ep. 5.3. That they are not grievous. For when reason can discover no good and necessity in the thing injoyned, as it is in pure positives, such as be Cir∣cumcision, Abstinencies from some sorts of Meat, and in divers other Mosaick Rights and Customs, nature draws back, and rejects these Precepts, as matters of toil and self∣denyal, but of no advantage, which perhaps is the reason, why the breach of some Positives under the Law was more severely threatened than sin in some points, that were intrin∣secally good and evil.
Whereas when the matter of a Precept is agreeable to our Reasons, we have an argument within, even the same reason which presses us to close with the external Precept. And that it is so in this case, I leave even your selves to judge. For what is more just and reasonable than this, that we should present our selves a living sacrifice to that God from whom we have received our Bodies, our Beings, toge∣ther with all the comforts and blessings of them? What more fitting than that we should live to his Glory, in whom we live and move? What more equitable, than that we should obey him, to whom we do belong by all the sacred ties of Creation, Redemption, Dedication, and voluntary Re∣signation of our selves? This is so clear and undeniable a thing, that all men that have, and will use their reason, must subscribe to it as our Reasonable Service. Therefore if men will not do so, the disadvantage lies here, that they sin not only against Revelation, but nature too. And therefore shall be self-condemn'd, as well as by that Judge of quick and dead. And thence go with shame and silence into those miseries that wait them, who know God, but will not call upon his name. Therefore, if there be any Virtue, any Praise, any Pity and Compassion for your selves, let the importunity of so great an Apostle prevail with us in a thing so just and reason∣able. Ibeseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye pre∣sent your bodies—which is your reasonable service. In fine.
One great reason why many live no better, and do no more good in their generations, is this, that they worship no more. Therefore S. Paul doth press us to the duties of the former Table, that is, to own and present our selves a sacrifice to God: and in case men are sincere in this one point, it will most certainly put them upon Sobriety and Righteous∣ness, Brotherly-kindness and Charity, injoyned by the latter Table; that by this means men may be not only a Sacrifice, but also holy and acceptable to God. For this part of our Re∣ligion doth sweetly influence our whole lives. For this wea∣kens corruptions, restores us more to our selves, and inables us to live up to the Rules and Dictates of right reason: and therefore disposed to all good Offices. And where men are not so much wanting in the thing, as mistaken in the ends, and motives of it, this rectifies all these errours too. Therefore it is chiefly from hence, that men become truly kind and affable, which is not only agreeable to our natures, as we are sociable creatures, but doth also capacitate us to become the greater Benefactors to our selves, and others. For by society and converse we come to understand the world, and thereby become more capable of advancing our own, and other mens interest, and therefore by the same means mutually inable, and incourage to do good to others, as God hath done good to us. Which is the great design of this days Assembly, as ap∣pears not only from the practises of former Stewards of this Company, who have yearly set out to Trades as many poor Children of our County of Warwick, as there be Stewards of the said Company, which be, in number, eight. But also from the generous inclinations of you, the present Stewards, who seem resolved not to fall short of any that have went be∣fore you.
And indeed as this is one of the first of all the Counties of England, that hath met in this nature, so you have from year to year in such measures out done them all, that you are looked upon as Ensamples to the rest. So true is it of your works, as S. Paul speaks of the Romans Faith, they are famous in the world. And since we may say, you have run well, though I do not fear it this present year, it is pity it should ever be said, Who hath hindered you? For to do good, and to communicate in any way, is wor∣thy of Men and Christians. But this is certainly one of the most generous and best methods of Charity we can think of. For to relieve sinking persons, and Families is a very good Office, and in no wise shall miss its reward, but is not likely to prove so advantageous to a Society as this; for by such means we keep those persons so relieved from some mea∣sures of Distress, but they are never likely hereby, unless in some rare instance, so to rise in the world, as to become serviceable to their Generations. Whereas this puts poor Children, who else might have lay as Vassals, unable to help themselves, or others, into a capacity of becoming men, and of making others so. Therefore you know not how extensive your Liberalities may prove, and what publick Blessings time and industry may make them; for who can say what great Traders, what large Estates, and what considerable Families may spring from these beginnings? Therefore as the main end of all Societies is the preservation of the whole, which is best done by preserving and advancing particulars, you do in this way admirably answer her main intendments.
And if we look back to former Ages, we shall find such publick spirits, even in the Gentile World, that the Roman Orator lays it down as a common Truth, Non nobis nati, we are born for the good of others, as well as our own. Which principle carried some of them so far, that they deemed it a happiness when need required, Pro patriâ mori— To give their lives for the Honour and Safety of that place where they first received them. Much less then should we be unwilling to part from some∣thing of our time, and other good things that God shall be pleased to give us, for the Glory, and Advantage of our Na∣tive Soil. And truly our County of Warwick is a Place so famous for Antiquities, and Marks of Honour; adorned at present as well as in former Ages, with so many Noble and Gentile Families, hath given breath to so many others, famous in their Generations, as even this Assembly in some good mea∣sure testifies; whose Piety and good Works so eminently ap∣peared in former times from the vast number of Religious Houses; and still doth from the many Hospitals, Free-Schools, and Augmentation of poor Vicaridges, that in these things we act by the measures, and follow the Footsteps of our gene∣rous Ancestors, and speak our selves Warwick-shire Men in Nature, as well as Name. Nor is it our Praise only, but our duty too, to do all the good we can. Therefore S. John 1 Ep. 4.11. argues from God's Bounty to us, to that Bounty and Kindness, we owe
to others. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Now as God's Love discovered it self, not in a fruitless pity, but in doing those good things to us which were most suitable to our wants; as the Redemption of the World, thereby rescuing Mankind out of the hands of mi∣sery and death: so our love ought to evidence it self, not barely in compassionate Speeches, and unprofitable wishes, like him in S. James 2.16. Depart in peace, be warmed, be filled: without giving those things, that be needful for the body. But in doing those good Offices which are most conducive to mens ease, and comfort, so far as opportunity and abilities will well allow. These are returns we make to God; and expressions of our thankfulness to him, for all the benefits he hath done unto us. This is the way to increase our present Enjoyments, and to secure them to posterity: for S. Paul compares this to sowing, thereby teaching us, that what we part from in such ways, will bring us (according to what we sow, whe∣ther more or less) a plentiful Harvest, and a blessed In∣crease. And truly every man that is born into the world, hath a natural right to a maintenance here, one as well another; for the world was made, not for some few persons, or Families, but for mankind in general. And though Providence hath wisely ordered divers distinctions, as to Honours and Estates, for if all were equal, none would serve, or obey others, which would necessarily run a Society into distractions, a State of War, and perhaps, into final Confusions. Yet this doth not take away any mans natural; for still a subsistance remains due, else many must be sent into the world, either to trespass upon other Rights, or else to perish at other mens pleasure; which neither Nature nor Religion
can allow. Therefore if any cannot help, or maintain them∣selves, they ought to be assisted by them that may. Whence Alms are somewhere called , our Righteousness, thereby shewing we do but what is just, and right in giving them. And hence that Judge of the world shews these works are so acceptable to God, that they shall receive from him an everlasting Recompense. I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat: thirsty, and ye gave me drink: naked, and ye cloathed me: inprison, and ye visited me. Therefore come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. To which place, God of his Mercy bring us, for Jesus Christ his sake. To whom, with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honour and Glory. Amen. FINIS.
ERRATA. IN: Epistle 1. page 3. line 3. for yet read set. l. 10. f. frame r. flame. p. 4. l. 17. f. deliver r. detain. Epistle 2. l. 7. take out the second as. In the Sermon, p. 4. l. 6. f. wage r. urge p. 5. l. 14. f. truth r. proof. p. 19. l. 7. f. o r. or. p. 25. l. 29. after natural r. right. l. 31. after o∣ther. r mens.
