B2884 R24805 8513383 41426
Biddle Dispossest, OR His Scripture perverting Ca∣techism reformed by Scripture. Wherein Those points of the Christian Religion blasphemed by Biddle, by wresting the Scripture, to answer his heresies Question-wise propounded, are vin∣dicated in several Anti-questions, resolving themselves by pertinent answers, taken word for word out of the Scripture, without either consequents or comments; And (which Bid∣dle could not say) no more is concluded in the Question, then what is really and plain∣ly contained in the Answer. Collected for their sakes who desire to be true Christians, and not of this sect of Bid∣dle, inasmuch as that Sect (not more or less but) hath altogether departed from the sim∣plicity and truth of the Scripture. Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor? 2 Pet. 3.17. Beware lest ye being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. London, Printed for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleet street, neer the Temple-Gate, 1654.
BIDDLES Mock-Preface. I Have wondred that there was no Catechism yet ex∣tant (that ever I could see or hear of) in which one might find the whole system of heresie, as the same is exactly contrary to the holy Scripture, as in this of Biddles, which is generally so stuffed, which abu∣ses, wrestings, and forcing the Scripture to answer his hereti∣cal, spurious, and lying Que∣stions,
that the least part thereof is at all consonant to, or deri∣ved from the Word of God; For thus it is, the Councels, Convocations, and Assem∣blies of Divines, having been attending to lesser things, not sufficiently watching, this en∣vious one, now whilest they sleep, endeavours to justle the sacred Scriptures out of their place in the Church; framing Articles, and Intruding them on our faith, according to his own fancy and Interest, which is to gain Disciples after him; as who is there that hath not heard of Biddles Disciples? And the Civil Magistrate, notwithstan∣ding his Authority, conniving at the same, we have at last a Catechism fitted to those Arti∣cles,
that Interest and design, wherein the Scriptures are some of purpose omitted, others wrest∣ed or brought in only for a shew, not one quotation amongst all the things controverted, being a whit to the purpose, as will soon appear to any man of Judge∣ment, who taking into his hands the said Catechism, shall examine the text, alledged with other Scriptures, and the ends they are alledged for; for if he do this diligently and imparti∣ally, he will find the Scripture and this Catechism to be at so wide a distance one from another, that he will begin to question whither, and proceed to believe that Biddle did not himself be∣lieve what himself wrote; or if he did so, will positively con∣clude,
that spiritual and Scrip∣tural understanding he hath none (notwithstanding all his pre∣tence to rational) and that he did believe (proudly supposing all men blind as himself) that his Readers had no more: In how miserable a condition then (as to spiritual things) must the Disciples of Biddle needs be; when thus trained up, not (as the Apostle adviseth) in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, but in the blind and crooked paths of ungodly men, deceived, or deceving, or both: and in the doctrine of Devils, not having onely no as∣surance of the reality, but the clearest Scripture-conviction of the non entity of their faith!
Into which sad condition, many notwithstanding are fallen into, being so unhappy as not to know, or having known, to forsake the way of Truth, and quite aban∣don all piety and honesty, ha∣ving departed from the Truth, the onely firm ground whereon to build the same; to prevent which mischief, for time to come, by reducing such to their prisline faith (I mean such of them as own the Divine autho∣rity of the Scripture) and withal to satisfie the just and pious de∣sire of some, and of my self, who delight to see the Scripture vin∣dicate its self, and maintain the Truth of our religion, to the end that they and all good men (especially such to whose hands this blasphemous piece hath
come) may consume themselves, their children and families, in that truth wherein they are al∣ready built up, and are yet buil∣ding up one another; I have therefore (not by the understan∣ding I have gotten, but that God hath given me) not com∣piled but collected certain Scripures, which may serve touching several wronged Truths of God, for a Scripture Catechism, wherein I have not, nor cannot, but the Spirit of God may bring the Reader to a sure and certain knowledge of the truth of our profession, and the Error of Biddles, touching great things, both touching be∣lief and practice, whilst I my¦self assert nothing; much less force the Scripture to answer
my lyes (as Biddle hath done before me) but onely introduce the Scripture, uttering its own assertions, which all Christains confess to be of undoubted Truth. Take heed therefore, whosoever thou art, of Biddles Sect or not, that lightest on this book, and there readest things quite contrary to the lyes propa∣gated by Biddle, and currantly received amongst his deluded, & (without grace lost followers; for I maintain, not onely the things here displayed but the many Scriptures alledged both in the Letter, and sense of them, not onely to have such a tendency, but a direct and flat opposition to those his abomi∣nations; I say take heed whoe∣ver thou art, that thou art not
once or again entangled or en∣snared with these his Hellish dia∣bolical insinuations; for if thou art fair with him, thou canst not be so, without falling foul upon the whole bulk of holy Scripture it self: inasmuch as all the Questions and answers thorough Biddles Catechism, are forced either to speak ano∣ther Dialect then themselves know, or at least then the cur∣rent of other Scriptures know; whereas the Scripture wars not against its self, but is in sense reconcileable one place to ano∣other, though in words perhaps may have another tendency: for how can a Kindom divided against its self stand? And for the Answers in this Anti-Cate∣chism now before thee, they are
faithfully transcribed out of the holy book, rightly appli∣ed to Question, and made fa∣ther no more in the Question then is really contained in the proof, if thou shalt make a dil∣ligent inspection into the seve∣ral texts with all their Circum∣stances: which (besides his pre∣tentions) Biddle could not say. To evince it that he could not say so, Take onely one Instance for many in his Catechism: In his 5. Chap. his first question is, How many holy spirits of Christians are there? He answers it by Eph. 4 4. One spirit. Put the Question and answer together, they make one entire proposition (whither true or false judge Reader.) There is but one holy Spirit of Christi∣ans:
This he does to take off the power of the word, which calls the holy Ghost the Spirit God; But neither here nor else∣where the Spirit of Christians: which yet as an answer to this Question this Scripture is made to say ex ungue Leonem: by this may you judge of many such; and yet Mr. Biddle gives you express Scripture without conse∣quent or comments (to save his credit we say so too, without true ones.) And let not Biddle say, or any for him, we need a mysti∣cal or figurative interpretation (though many texts of Scripture are of that nature) to make the doctrines of Truth in our hand, and the texts of Scripture al∣ledged to maintain their sence; for we do not as Biddle in this
Instance, draw the Scripture falsly to our doctrine, but our do∣ctrine truly from the Scripture: nor do we once take this liberty to impose our mystical and figu∣rative interpretations on the Scripture, without express war∣rant of the Scripture it self; and with that, they are no more our interpretations, but the Scrip∣tures: neither have we the less settled belief, nor are we the more liable to be turned aside by any one can Invent a new my∣stical meaning of the Scripture, there being as sure a rule to judge of such meanings as there is of the litteral ones, to wit, the spirit of Revelation in the knowledge of him; I say Reve∣lation conversant in, not with∣out and besides the Scriptures,
and that form of wholsome words, once to the Saints: nor is there any error how absurd or impious soever, can on such terms be accorded with the Scripture, nor the abominable Idolatries of the Papists, nor the superstitious fopperies of the Turks, nor the licentious opi∣nions and practice of the Ran∣ters, nor all these abominable and damnable heresies, the smoak belched out by Satan in several ages, from the bot∣tomless pit, and now all Epito∣mised in the Person and Cate∣chism of Biddle, may upon such terms be palliated, much less defended by the Word of God. Certainly we do not of our own heads figuratively interpret the Scripture, when the Letter
seemeth repugnant to our spiri∣tual sense, to the scope of the re∣spective Text, and to many plain Texts to the contrary; (for in such cases) Biddle himself confesseth we must of necessity admit figures in the sacred vo∣lume, as well as we do in pro∣fane ones, that the Scripture clash not with it self, or with our spiritual sense, which indeed as it hath the word for its founda∣tion, (and only so is of infalli∣ble certainty I say, if then we do admit a figure or spiritual meaning, in the plain word of God; neither do we make, as some blaspemously, and Biddle wickedly would make the Scrip∣ture a nose of wax: for Instance, its delivered in the Scripture that the heaven of heavens
cant contain God, that there is no flying from his presence, that he is present in heaven, and in hell, and in the uttermost parts of the Sea: that the Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his Foot stool, and alt these things hath his hand made, that he is a God at hand, and a God afar off, that no man can hide himself in secret places from God, and that he fills the heaven and the Earth: neither is any thing said in the Scripture to the contrary, (but that several places say, he is in heaven, none saying he is not elsewhere) I say now in this or such other cases, why should I thus stick to the Letter of the Word, and boldly affirm, with Biddle (having his understan∣ding darkened with vain Phi∣losophy,
of which we are bidden to beware that God is in a cer∣tain place? would not this be to use the Scripture as a nose of wax, and when of it self it looketh one way, to turn it ano∣ther at our pleasure? the like may be said of the similitude or shape of God: his Passions and affections, the Redemption of all men, and the falling from the faith, and such like, whatever is controverted in the ensuing Ca∣techism: And doth not God so speak to our capacity in his Word, (which is a sure refuge in many matters, concerning God in Scripture (as that he doth not render us uncapable of finding out his meaning, when he speaks one thing, and ex∣plains
himself by another? yea is not that way of his a di∣rect course, not to make us sub∣stitute an Idol in his place, but to prohibit our so doing when he tells in one place, our God is in the heavens, and explains himself in another, yea sundry other, that he is also in the Earth, in Hell, and in the fur∣thestmost parts of the Sea: for thus doth he in plain terms ex∣press himself, that we may not conceive amiss of him: Thus we see, that when sleep which plainly argueth weakness and imperfection, is ascribed to God, Psa. 44.23. the contrary is said of him; Psa 121. Thus does God in these forementioned things; he tells us he is in hea∣ven, but that he is in the Earth
and the Sea also: which is the manner of God in Scripture to explain himself in one place, what he means by another, which hath so much weight in it that it cannot be avoided; and he that shall deny it to any heretical end, does but take up one erroneous tenet, to maintain another; But its no wonder indeed this fellow doth so, who entertains himself, and would have us to entertain such conceipts of God and Christ, as are repugnant to the current of the Scripture, and far below the Divine Majesty, as he hath pleased to discover himself in the plain but certain Letter of sacred writ, which he doth in design to beguil the rude apprehensions of the vulgar, and instead of making them meer
Christians to make them worse then Heathens; the root whereof is pride desiring to be accounted a learned man, and able to speak more truly of God, and the things of God, then himself hath spoken in his word. This indeed hath brought that more then Babylonish confusion into the Church, whilst men, such men, (who being of their Father the Devil, his works they will do) have framed those horrid do∣ctrines under colour of Religi∣on and Truth, but in Truth to put a baffle on the simplicity of the Scripture, and usher in heresies, that so they may with the more advantage, carry on their designs, whither of ap∣plause or profit, by their sedu∣ced followers, which could not
be effected but by the ignorance of such people, and by wrapping up such dangerous conclusions in the guilded coverts of wrested & mis∣applied Scriptures, such things probably as our Author (for so he would, but shall not be called) doth not, and the first Inventors thereof; for he hath taken them all from the inventions of others indivers ages before him, who did not themselves believe, even then when they did (whither in design or in malice or both, I say not) first of all broach them; wherefore there is no possibility to keep the Christian Religion in its primitive purity, (a thing worthily boasted of in reformed Churches, as having been sin∣cerely indeavoured, and in some good measure effected, by the good hand of God upon the la∣bour
(among others) his Ser∣vants Luther and Calvin) but by detecting and cashiering those many false notions, and devised forms of lying, fathered on religion, and wholly keeping our selves to the plainness and Truth of the Scripture: for I have observed and find my observation to be true and cer∣tain, that when men to express matters of religion, wrest the words and phrases in Scripture contrary to the sense thereof, as explained by the holy Ghost, (the Author of the whole Divine writ) in other Scriptures they slyly under them couch false doctrines, and obtrude them on us: for without question the doctrines of the Scripture can be so aptly explained by no
Spirit, (no Scripture being of private interpretation as by the spirit of the Scripture it self; so that its not always safe to stick to the Letter of every Scripture, but onely as explained by other Scriptures; nor is it alwayes un∣safe to express matters of religi∣on in words and phrases un∣found in Scripture, as to the Letter of them, provided they be sufficiently warranted and al∣lowed as to the sense of them. This Liberty therefore has the Church unblameably taken to speak of the things God in the exact sense of Scripture in their own words: And he that blas∣phemes any such sentence, which in sense is the very language of Scripture, though the very words are not found in Scrip∣ture
blasphemes the Scripture its self, and so doth he who (not ignorantly but maliciously) opposes the expressions of Gods being infinite, and incomprehen∣sible, of his being a simple act subsisting in 3 persons, a Divine Circumcession, an eternal gene∣ration, eternal procession, in∣carnation, hypostatical union, communication of properties, original sin, Christs taking our nature upon him, of Christ making satisfaction to God for our sins, both past, and present, and to come, of Christs fulfil∣ling the Law for us, being pu∣nished by God for us, Christs merits, or his meritorious obedi∣ence, both active and passive, of Christs purchasing the King∣dome of heaven for us, of Christs
enduring the wrath of God, of Christs rising from the dead by his own power, of apprehending and applying Christs righteous∣ness to our selves by faith; of Christs being our surety, paying our debts, of our sins imputed to Christ, of his righteousness imputed to us, of Christs dying to appease the wrath of God, and reconcile him to us, of in∣fused grace, of free grace, of the world, of the elect, of Irresi∣stible workings of the Spirit in bringing men to believe, of carnal reason, of spiritual de∣sertion, of spiritual incomes, the out-goings of God, of sub∣mitting to, or taking up the or∣dinances, &c. some of which are in the same terms expressed in Scripture, all of them so own∣ed
by the Scripture, as that the things are expresly and fully contained in them, which all men know that are any thing acquainted in that sacred book; but for the terms, the mother of God, Transubstantiation, Con∣substantation, and the ubiquity of Christs body, we will add them to Biddles holy spirit of Christians, and confess them neither to be owned by Scrip∣ture, name, nor thing: There∣fore excellent was Pauls advice to Timothy, to hold fast the form of sound words; which if we once let go, we shall be in danger of corruption, by new coined words of some, and the new coined doctrines of others, which is many mens sad case, as woful experience teacheth us:
for wicked and ungodly men, in succeeding ages, from the Apo∣stles, have coined not onely words, but doctrines to: Hence it is, that Arrius began wickedly to blaspheme & oppose the Divinity of the second person, who is co∣essential with the father, for he is God blessed for ever, Amen: this opened a gap for other hereticks after him, (as at present Bid∣dle) like so many undershrubs taking life from the droppings of his heresie, under pretence of re∣turning to Truth, to propagate that accursed heresie: The like of others, which though it could not vitiate the chastity and simplicity of our faith delivered in the Scriptures, every point thereof yet remaining sound and entire, yet did there, or yet doth
remain not any one point there∣of uncontradicted and opposed; And those heresies of whatso∣ever kind, thus propagated from hand to hand, are so far from being like Theseus his old ship new mended, as that twas hard to say, whither twas the old ship or new; as that they are rather like the bird which was alterius or∣nata coloribus, so that though they may perchance vary their words, and new dress their ar∣guments, yet are they the same, and but the same, which were at first propounded, by this or that Master Heretick, and as often answered, so that this Master-Builder himself does here Jurare in verba Magistri, onely with this difference:
this o that Heretick, at this or that time, hath tacked this or that error to our Religion: but this would subvert the whole Religion, which Christ and his Apostles taught, and put this body of heresie in the room thereof; in this outstripping them, that what they do scat∣teringly, against this or that part of Religion, he Rallies and applies to the ruin of Reli∣gion it self; but thanks be to God through our Lord Iesus Christ, who amidst the present Inundation of heresies, hath preserved his written word in∣tire: (for had men corrupted it, they would have made it speak more favorably in behalf of their lyes and heresies then it doth) wh ch word if we with
prayer & humility pry into, resol∣ving sincerely to imbrace the do∣ctrine therein plainly deliver∣ed, though all the world should set themselves against the Truth (our minds being en∣lightned) we shall easily discern it, and be kept therein through the power of God unto salva∣tion. And thus much we shall see by experience, that a weak in∣strument of none, much less of no great abilities, hath suffici∣ently detected his wicked errors in the Body of heresie, by natu∣rall and pertinent Questions and answers, exactly transcri∣bed out of the Word of God; it having been already of much vantage to me and may (I que∣stion not) through the spirit be
so to all whosoever shall search the Scripture alledged, and make inquiry into the Ora∣cles of God: These Oracles, which all men that have (by the Spirit of Truth, which can onely lead into all Truth) studied the same, be enamored with, as breathing out the wis∣dom and Truth of God, and as being the exactest rule of a holy life, (which the true Religion acknowledges the way unto hap∣piness) whose Divinity notwith∣standing hath been, is, and will be Questioned by many, to the worlds end, who are unwilling to deny their wordly lusts, and obey the pure and perfect pre∣cepts thereof; which truly Biddle himself would not stick to do (might it advantage him
in his design against Truth) as well as the Divinity of that Spirit which made them Di∣vine: But he judges it the most Politick way, to stand on the foundation, to batter down the house, which is a stra∣tagem so perfectly devillish, as that in this life, and in that to come, twill (without repen∣tance) make him equal to the Prince of evil Angels.
CHAP. I. QƲest. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and more sharp then a two-edged sword: but is to so of it self, or with the spirits operation? Asw. 2 Cor. 3.6. Who also hath made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life. CHAP. II. QƲ. There is indeed but one God: but hath not that God declared himself to be as one in Essence, so three in subsistence,
the Father, the Word and the Spirit? Answ. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, there∣fore hath the Lord anointed me. Gen. 1.26. And God said let us make man in our Image, chap. 3.22. And the Lord God said, behold the man is become as one of us. chap. 11.6.7. and the Lord God said, let us go down. 1 Ioh. 1.1.7. for there are three which bear re∣cord in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one. Mat. 28.16. Go therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Ioh. 15.26. but when the Comforter shall come whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth of the father, he shall te∣stifie of me. Ioh. 14.26. But the Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. 2 Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. Titus 3.5, 6. But when the bountifulness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared, he saved us by the washing of the new birth and the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Saviour. Gal. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts. Quest. The Father indeed is God, and also the Son is God, and the Spirit is God: of which in its proper place; only here repeat one Scripture already named. Answ. 1 John 5.7. For there are three which bear record in hea∣ven, the father, the Word, and the Spirit, and those three are one.
Quest. When God is said to be in a certain place in Scripture, as Psal. 115.3. Our God is in the heavens, and such like places: is he so there as to be circumscribed, comprehended, as included? or so there as are the Creatures, there, and not elsewhere then there; how then is God infinite? or is he infinite? what saith the Scripture? Answ. 1 Kingt 8.27. 'But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded. Psal. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or Whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there: If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utter∣most parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. Isa. 66.1.
Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my Throne, and the earth is my footstool; where is the house that ye builded unto me, or where is the place of my rest? for all those things hath my hand made. Isa. 40.12. Who hath measu∣red the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out heaven with a span? and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure? and weighed the mountains in Scales? or the hills in a balance? Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord? Jer. 23, 24. Am I a God at hand saith the Lord, and not a God afar off? can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, saith the Lord? do not I fill heaven and earth, sa th the Lord? Quest. When we read of the Image of God, as Gen. 1 26, 27. Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness, &c. the simili∣tude of God; or the person of God in Scripture, doth it prove
that God is corporeal and visible as man is? what is meant by the Image of God? what say other Scriptures? Answ. Col. 3.10. Renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him: Ephes. 4.24. And put on the new man which after God is renewed in righteous∣ness and true holiness. Joh. 6.46. Not that any man hath seen the Father. Joh. 1.18. No Man hath seen God at any time. 1 John 4.12. No man hath seen God at any time. Exod. 33.20. Moreover he said, Thou canst not see my face. 1 Tim. 6.16 Who only hath immortality, and dwelleth in the light that no man can attain unto, whom never man saw, nor can see, to whom be honour and pow∣er everlasting, Amen. Quest. When we read in Scri∣pture of affections and passions,
as love, hatred, repentance, anger, &c. attributed to God in Scri∣pture, as the anger of the Lord was kindled, it repented the Lord, &c. may we think thereby that God is subject to change as is man, or else speaks the Scripture in order to our capacity and ap∣prehensions? what saith the Scri∣pture? Answ. 1 Joh. 1.5. God is light, and in him there is no darkness, Gen. 28.19 God is not as man that he should lye, neither as the Son of man that he should repent; hath he said, and shall he not do it? hath he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? James 1.17. Every good gi∣ving and every perfect gift is from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shaddow of turning: Psal. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages. Isaiah 46.10. My counsel shall
stand, and I will do whatsoever I will; as I have spoken so will I bring it to pass; I have purposed, I will do it. Quest. Touching expressions we meet with in Scripture, of Gods tempting of Abraham, and ha∣ving tried him, now he knew that he feared God, Gen. 22.1 to the 10. that God proves his people to see whither they will walk in his way or no; or repenting him of good and evil, upon his peoples sins, or return of trying them, to know what was in their heart, and such like places; do they prove any such free actions of ours, or that God knoweth not till they come to pass: or rather speaks the Scripture after the manner of men? would not such doctrine de∣stroy the Omnisciency of God? what saith the Scripture to this thing? Answ. Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature which in not mani∣fest
in his sight; but all thinge are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do, Psal. 139.2, 6, 7, 11, 13, 16. Oh Lord, thou understandest my thoughts afar off; thy knowledge is too won∣derfull for me; It is so high that I cannot attain unto it; If I say the darkness shall hide me even the night shall be light round about me; yea the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day, the darkness and light are both alike; My bones are not hid from thee, though I was not made in a secret place; thine eyes did see me, when I was without form: for in thy book were all things written which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of them before. Joh. 21.27. Peter said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; and Jesus said, when thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst wither thou pleasedst; but when thou shalt be old, another
shall girde thee, and lead thee whither thou wouldst not; and this he spake, signifying by what death he should glorifie God. Psal. 147. Great is our Lord, his wisdom is infinite. Isa. 40.28. there is no searching of his understanding. Acts. 2.3. The determined coun∣sel and fore knowledge of God. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the fore knowledge of God the Fa∣ther. Psal. 94.9, 10, 11. He that planted the ear, shall not he hear? and the eye, shall he not see? he that teacheth men knowledge, shall not he know? the Lord know∣eth the thoughts of a man. Jer. 17.9, 10. The heart is de∣ceitful and wicked above all things: who can know it? I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins. Eph. 1. He hath chosen us in him, ere the foundationn of the
world, that we should be holy: that in the dispensation of the ful∣ness of time, he might gather to∣gether in one, all things according to his purpose; who ruleth all things after the counsel of his own will. 2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal: the Lord knows who are his. James 1.17. With God is no va∣riableness or shaddow of change: Prov 19.21. Many devices are in mans heart, but the Lords coun∣sel shall stand. CHAP. III. QƲest. Whereas we read in Gen. 3. the curse denounced by God upon our Parents first sin, to be sorrow in conception, a curse on the ground, and mans labour in this life, is that the full extent of the curse, or in the question of Gods enemies? did not their sin
bring on them and us the guilt of hel-f re? deface the Image of God in us, darken our understand∣ings, enslave our wills, deprive us of power to do good, and cause mortality? did it, or did it not? what saith the Scriptures? Answ. Gen. 2.17. in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt dy∣ing dye: Rom. 5.12. By one man sin entred into the world, and death by sin, and so death went over all men: vers. 14. but death raigned from Adam to Moses. Verse 15. Through the offence of one, many be dead. 16. The fault came of one man to condemnation. 17. By the offence of one, death raigned. 18. By the offence of one, the fault came on all men to condem∣nation. 21. Sin raigned unto death. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things,
which are written in the book of the Law to do them. Rom. 3.9. We have proved both Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin; vers. 12. They are al∣together become unprofitable, there is none that doth good, no not one. Iohn 8.34. Whosoever committeth sin, is the servant of sin. Rom. 6.17.20. Servants to sin. Rom. 7.14. Sold under sin: 15. What I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do. 18. In me (that is in my flesh) there dwelleth no good thing: 19. For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. 23. But I see another Law in my members, bringing me into captivity of the Law of sin, which is in my members. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
2 Pet. 2.19 While they pro∣mise liberty, themselves are the ser∣vants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. Eph. 2.1. Dead in trespasses and sins. Iohn 8.41. You do the deeds of your Father; ye are of your Fa∣ther the Devil, and his deeds will ye do. James 1.14. Every man is temp∣ted of his own lust, and enticed. Rom. 8.7. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Gal. 3.22. The Scripture hath concluded all under sin; unless ye be born from above, you cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Titus 3.5. He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and the re∣newing of the holy Ghost. Psal. 54.5. Behold I was born in iniquity, and in sin hath my mo∣ther conceived me. Gen. 6.5. The Lord faw all that
all the imaginations of mans heart are evil continually. Quest. What saith the Scri∣pture concerning the under∣standing? 1 Cor. 2.4. For the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are fool∣ishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritu∣ally discerned. Eph. 4.17, 18. This I say there∣fore and testifie in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having their under∣standing darkned, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them; because of the blindnesss of their hearts. Rom. 8 5 They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: 7. The carnal mind is enmity with God. Luke 24.45. Then opened he
their understandings, that they might understand the Scripture. Isaiah 44.18. They have not known nor understood. God hath shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand. 19. None considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding. 10. A seduced heart hath decei∣ved him. Quest. What of the Will? Answ. Phil. 2.18. Its said, God worketh in us to will and to do. Rom. 7.23. But I see another Law in my members, bringing me into captivity into the Law of sin. Rom. 6.20. Being servants to sin, we are free from Righteousness. Rom. 8.7, 8. The carnal mind is enmity with God; for it is not sub∣ject to the Law of God, neither in∣deed can be; so then they that are
in the flesh cannot please God. Eph. 4.19. Have given them∣selves over to lasciviousness. CHAP. IV. QƲest. Whereas we find in the Catechism, of Gods enemies and ours, an endeavour to prove Christ the Lord by way of distin∣ction from the one God, as he blas∣phemes to that end several Scri∣ptures quoted, and many Questi∣ons stated; as that Jesus is the Lord born of his Mother Mary; that he dyed to be Lord over quick and dead; that God raised him up from the dead; that he was approved of God by miracles which God did by him; that the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do; that he abode in his Fathers house, because he abode in his Fathers commandments; that he is the Son of God; that the Father is greater then he; that he shall de∣liver
up his kingdom to his father; that at the same time Thomas cals him, and the Scriptures call him God, himself and the Scripture confess him to have a god; by these doth that wretched Creature prove what he intends; to wit, that the Lord Jesus Christ is so our Lord, as not our God, very God with the Father? or doth he prove that which we shall never deny him, the humanity of our Mediator, according to the Scri∣ptures; for such an high Priest it became us to have; let us hear what testimony the Scripture gives to the Godhead of Christ; and that he may see the wisdom of that God whom he hath blasphe∣med, as a token of vengeance to him, bring out one dart for the heart of him and his blasphe∣my out of his own quiver: The two first Scriptures he quotes, in this God defying Chapter, what say they and other Scriptures?
Answ. He begins with Ephes. 4.5. and 1 Cor. 8.6. One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things. Col. 2.9. In him (in Christ) dwelleth all the fulness of the God∣head bodily. Isaiah 9.6. For unto us a child is born, and unto us a Son is given, the Government is upon his shoulders, he shall call his name wonderful, Counsellour, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Jer. 23.5. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and this is the name whereby they shall call him, the Lord our righte∣ousness. Mat. 16.16. Then Peter an∣swered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was God. John 20.28. Then Thomas an∣swered
and said, Thou art my Lord and my God. Acts 15.28. Take heed there∣fore unto your selves and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with his own blood. Rom. 9.5. Of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen 1 Tim. 3.16. And without con∣troversie great is the Mysterie of godliness, God manifested in the flesh. 1 John 5.20. But we know the Son of God is come; Christ; and we are in him that is true; Christ, that is, his son Jesus Christ, this same is very God; and eternal life. Ioh. 3.13. No man ascendeth up to heaven, but he that descend∣ed from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven; before Abra∣ham was I am:
Phil. 2 6 Who being in the form of God thought it no rob∣berie to be equal with God took on him the form of a servant. Mat. 24.44. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstool. Joh. 5.17, 18 My Father work∣eth hitherto and I work therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he had bro∣ken the Sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, and made himself equal with God. Joh. 19.7. The Jews answered, we have a Law by which he ought to dye; because he made him∣self the Son of God. Rom. 8.3, 15 God sending his own son, not sparing his own Son. Isa. 7.14 Behold the Virgin shall conceive and bear a son and she shall call his name Emanuel, God with us. John 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begot∣ten Son. Ioh. 1.14. And the word was made flesh and we saw the glory thereof as the only begotten son of the father. Col. 1.13. Giving thanks unto the Father who hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son, who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of every crea∣ture; for by him were all things created, which are in heaven and which are in earth things visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Prin∣cipalities, or powers all things are created for him, and by him: and he is before all things, and in him all things consist. Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him: vers. 8. Ʋnto the Son he saith, O God, thy throne is for ever and ever: vers. 10. And thou Lord in the beginning hast established the earth, and the hea∣vens are the works of thy hands.
Heb. 3.3. Christ is worthy of more honour then Moses, inasmuch as he that built the house, hath more honour then the house; and he that built all things is God. Heb. 13.8. Jesus the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Isa. 45.21, 22, 23. Who hath declared this from the beginning, who hath told it of old? have not I the Lord? there is none other God beside me, a just God, and a Saviour; look unto me, and ye shall be sa∣ved all the ends of the earth; for I am a God, and there is none other; I have sworn by my self, every knee shall bow unto me and every tongue shall swear by me; compared to Rom. 14.10, 11, 12. We shall appear before the Judg∣ment-seat of Christ; for it is written, I live saith the Lord, and every knee shall bow to me, and all tongues shall confess unto God: so then every one shall give account of himself to God. Isa. 44.4.44.6. Rev. 1.18.
compared; who hath wrought and done it? he that calleth the gene∣ration from the beginning: I the Lord am the first, and with the last, I am the same; thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of hosts, I am the first and the last, and without me there is no God; And I saw se∣ven Candlesticks, and in the midest one like the Son of man, and he said, I am the first and the last. Pro. 8.22. The Lord hath posses∣sed me, the beginning of his wayes, I was before his works of old. Mar 3.1. Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall pre∣pare my way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall speedily come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye desire. Psal. 45.6. Ʋnto the Son he saith, O God thy Throne is for ever and ever. Esa. 40.3 A voice cryeth in the wilderness, prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make straight in the desert a path for our God. CHAP. V. QƲest. We find the Blasphe∣mer pretending to the Letter of the Scripture, without Conse∣quent or Comment; how then does Eph. 4.4. one Spirit resolve his Question, how many holy Spi∣rit's of Christians are there? Ans. No ways. Quest Whereas then he would ungod God the holy Ghost, he makes a phrase and gives the ho∣ly Ghost a new name, The ho∣ly spirit of Christians whereas we find no such thing in Scripture, but the holy Spirit of God; what shall we then say to such a Blasphemer, who would under pretence of ex∣press Scripture, put on us, that for Scripture which we never find there, & that to so damned an end? Answ. The Lord rebuke thee Satan, to the Law and to the Te∣stimony.
Quest. The Scriptures indeed are the rule of faith; and no God ought we to worship but the God in the Scriptures: What Scripture have we then that ex∣presly proves the Deity of God the holy Ghost? Answ. The first Scripture be∣ing unhappily quoted by our Ad∣versary, being 1 Chron. 10.11. I shall therefore first give you, The Spirit searcheth all things, Esay 6.9. compared to Act. 28.25. and I heard the voice of (Je∣hovah) the Lord; saying, whom shall I send? And I said, here am I, send me: Then he said, go and fay unto this people, they shall hear and not understand, &c. In Acts its quoted, well said the holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, go unto this people and say, by hear∣ing ye shall hear and not under∣stand. Heb. 9.14. The etternal Spi∣rit.
1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? 1 Cor. 6.19. Know you not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, which dwelleth in you, therefore glorifie God in your body, and in your Spirit, for they are Gods. 2 Cor. 6.16. And what Agree∣ment hath the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God. Acts 5.3, 4. Then said Peter, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thy heart that thou shouldest lye unto the holy Ghost? Thou hast not lyed unto man but unto God. Esay 40.9. Say unto the Cities of Judah, behold your God, ver. 10. behold the Lord God will come with power, ver. 13. who hath in∣structed the Spirit of the Lord, or was his Councellour? ver. 15. Behold the Nations are as a drop
of a bucket, and are counted as the dust of the ballance; Behold he takes away the sles as a little dust, vers. 17. All Nations before him are as nothing, less then nothing, and vanity, ver. 18. To whom then will ye liken God? Luke 1.3. And the Angel said, the holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall over∣shadow thee: the Spirit of God hath made me. 1 John 1.5, 7. Three bear Re∣cord in heaven, and these three are one. Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Na∣tions, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Gen. 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the waters. 1 Cor. 12.1. Now concerning gifts, vers. 4. There are di∣versities of gifts, but the same Spi∣rit, vers. 6. And there are diver∣sities of operations, but God is the
same, which worketh all in all: ver. 8, 9. To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom: to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit: to another faith by the same Spirit: to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit: vers. 11. All these things worketh the self-same Spirit, distributing to every one severally, as he will. Mat 12.28, 31.32. I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God: there∣fore I say unto you, every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men but the blasphemy of the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men; and whosoever speaketh against the holy Ghost, it shal not be forgiven him, either in this world, or the world to come. Quest. Are there not some workings of the Spirit in the hearts of men already regenerate, that are extraordinary and mira∣culous? such as in the Acts, which is called receiving the holy Ghost;
the holy Ghost falling upon them, &c. in use for confirmation of the primitive Church, some that are proper to such a state, as the Spi∣rit of Adoption: Because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son; of Consolation, so the Spirit is called the Comfort∣er, which Christ prays shall be sent; of assurance and evidence; after ye believed, ye were fealed with the holy Spirit of promise; if there be, and that this is the meaning of such Scriptures, do they then prove that Regeneration, Conversion, and the first beginnings of grace are in us, without the working of the Spirit, until after, as our Ca∣techist would insinuate? or else do they prove only the further and gradual workings of the Spirit? what say the Scriptures? Answ. 2 Cor. 3.8. The Gospel by which we are converted, is cal∣led the Ministration of the Spirit. Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born
of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Mat. 3.12. I baptize you with water, unto amendment of life: but he that cometh after me, will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Ioel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. 2 Cor. 6.11, 18. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are purified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Ioh. 3.24. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. Rom. 8.2. The Law of the Spi∣rit of life which is in Christ Jesus, hath freed me from the Law of sin and death. CHAP. VI. QƲest. That Scripture, Rom. 5.10. We shall be saved
by his life; is it so to be understood, as Saints ought not to expect sal∣vation by the death of Christ, as Biddle insinuates? What say other Scriptures to this thing? Answ. Rom. 8.3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sin∣ful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, Heb. 2.9, 14, 15. that he by the grace of God should taste death for all men, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life-time subject to bondage, 2 Cor. 5.14. If one dyed for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they that live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose again. 1 Tim. 2.6 who gave him∣self a ransom for all men. Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be ministred unto, but
to minister, and give his life a ransom for many. Mat. 26.28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins, Heb. 9.28. Christ wat once offered to bear the sins of many. Esay 53.11. By knowledge shall my righteous servant Justifie ma∣ny, for he shall bear their iniqui∣ties. Eph. 5.25 Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it; without blood there is no remission; he dyed for us, and gave himself for us. Eph. 1.7. We have redemption through his blood. Heb. 9.12. But by his own blood entred he once into the holy place, and obtained redemption for us. Heb. 13.13. Therefore even Jesus that he might sanctifie his own people by his own blood, suf∣fered without the gate. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19 Knowing ye
were not redeemed with corrup∣tible things, as silver and gold; but with the precious blood of Christ. 1 Iohn 1.7. And the blood of Iesus Christ his Son, cleanseth us from all sin. Rev. 1.5. Who hath washed us from our sins in his own blood. Rom. 4.25. Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities. 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scri∣ptures: he laid on him the iniqui∣ties of us all. Quest, But how is the other Question, of Christ his be∣ing given, raised and exalted by another to be a Saviour, accord∣ing to those Scriptures, a name gi∣ven, exalted to be a Saviour, raised unto Israel a Saviour, to be under∣stood? Answ. As are those Scriptures
in the fourth Chapter of the huma∣nity of Christ: else the Scripture tels us, 1 Tim. 2, 6. He gave him∣self a ransom: he gave himself for us. CHAP. VIII. QƲest. Whereas he would im∣pudently apply that Scri∣pture, Joh. 3.13. No man hath ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven: and what other Scriptures speak him coming down from heaven, coming forth from God, and such like; to this erroneous doctrine, that Christ as man, first ascended into heaven, was there, and came down thence, ere he shewed himself to the world; is that according to truth? or doth he this meerly to avoid the force these Scriptures have in them to prove the Deity of the Son? what Scriptures have
you, that will sufficiently prove he did not so ascend as man, ere he was discovered to the world? Answ. Mat. 1.8. The birth of Jesus was on this wise; when as his Mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came toge∣ther, she was found with child of the holy Ghost: behold a Virgin shall be with child. Luke 1 30,31. And the Angel said unto her, Mary; Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son. Mat. 2.8. Search diligently for the young child: ver. 9. stood over where the young childe was: vers. 11. They saw the young child with Mary his Mother: vers. 13. Arise, take the child and his Mo∣ther: for Herod seeketh the child to destroy him: vers. 14, 15. He arose and took the babe and his Mother, and departed into Egypt, and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son: vers. 19, 20, 21. And when Herod was dead, behold an Angel of the Lord ap∣peared in a dream to Ioseph in E∣gypt, saying, Arise, and take the babe and his Mother, and go into the Land of Israel: Then he rose up, and took the babe and his Mo∣ther, and came into the Land of Israel. Vers. 23. And went and dwelt in a City called Nazareth. Luke 2.40. And the child grew, and waxed strong in the Spirit, 42. Now when he was twelve years old. 43. The child Iesus re∣mained in Jerusalem. 51.52. And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth and was subject to them, and Iesus increased in wis∣dom and stature. Joh. 20.17. Iesus said unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended unto my Father: but I a∣scend unto my father and your father.
Quest. These Scriptures prove indeed sufficiently, that Jesus was conceived among us; for she was with child; born among us: seen among us: removing from place to place among us: growing in years and stature, and gifts among us: and after all this his own testi∣mony, after his resurrection, do sufficiently prove, he ascended not as man, before he descended; what use then shall those Scriptures turn to, which he abuses to that end? Ioh. 3.13. No man hath ascend∣ed, but he that hath descended, the Son of man which is in hea∣ven. Iohn. 8.42. I came from God. Vers. 29. I am from above. Iohn 13.1.3. Jesus knowing that he came from God. Ioh. 16.28, 30. I came forth from the Father: by this we be∣lieve that thou camest from God. Answ. Add them all to that
Testimony afforded us by the Scripture, Rom. 9.5. Who is God over all, blessed for evermore, Amen. Quest. Whereas our Cate∣chist quotes several Scriptures, importing that he that believes shall be saved; if we hold fast our confidence to the end; if a man purge himself, if through the spirit we mortifie the deeds of the flesh, we shall live; if we repent, our sins shall be blotted out; if we do these things, happy are we; if we suffer with him, we shall al∣so raign: and whereby he de∣ducts—that the promises of the Gospel are propounded con∣ditionally to faith, perseverance, obedience, doing and uttering, which indeed is true, but mean time conceals that Truth, which ought to be considered herewith, name∣ly, that we may perform these conditions, we must have recourse to an absolute promise: are there
not therefore Scriptures that make all these first to be Gods gift, ere they are our Act? repeat some among many. Answ. Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, &c. Eph. 6.23. Peace be to the Brethren, and love, with faith, from God the Father, and from our Lord Iesus Christ. Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith. Eph. 2.8. By grace are ye saved through faith in Iesus; and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Acts 26.22. I obtained help of God, and continue unto this day. 2 Tim. 2.14. And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his hea∣venly Kingdom. Heb. 13.20, 21. The God of peace
that brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepheard of the Sheep, tho∣rough the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in you what is pleasing in his sight thorough Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen. Eze. 11.19. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit in their bowels, and will take their stony heart out of their bodies, and I will give them a heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my Judgements, and execute them. Hosea 14.9. The wayes of the Lord are just, and the r ghteous shall walk in them. Phil. 2.13. For it is God that worketh in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Acts 5.31. Him hath God rais∣ed up, with his right hand, to be a Prince and Saviour to Israel, to
give repentance and forgiveness of sins. Acts. 11.17, 18. Forasmuch then as God gave them a like gift as he did unto us, who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could let God? when they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, then hath God also granted unto the Gentiles repentance unto life! Rom. 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his bounty, and patience, and long-suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of God lead∣eth thee to repentance. 2 Tim. 2.24, 25. But the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gen∣tle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently, instructing them with meekness that are contrary-minded, pro∣ving if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may ac∣knowledge the Truth, and come to amendment out of the snare of
the Devil, of whom they are ta∣ken prisoners to do his will. Phil. 1.19. Ʋnto you it is gi∣ven for Christ, that not onely you should believe in him, but also suf∣fer for his sake. CHAP. IX. QƲest. Though the many Scriptures cited do prove the Divinity of the Son, and we do in the main refer all other by strokes thereat (one whereof we have in this Chapter) to that distinct head, yet whereas here is quoted Mat. 9.2, 3, 4, importing that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins; and that the multi∣tude glorified God, which had given so much power unto men Acts 5.31. Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and Savi∣our to give repentance and remis∣sion of sins to Israel; which Scrip∣ture he accommodates by his
Question, to his Lye; namely, that Christ forgiving sins on earth and heaven, does it as a man impow∣ered and exalted by God, and not as God: That so he may re∣move the irresistible force of this argument, He that forgives sins, is God; but the man Jesus Christ forgives sins: Ergo. Have you ther∣fore no Scripture that directly proves this thing; that what the Lord Jesus did in the work of Re∣demption and forgiveness of sins, he did it as God? and so what ere act he did as Mediator, he did by vertue of his Divine nature. Acts 20.28. The Church of God which he hath purchased with his own blood. CHAP. X. QƲest. What shall we say to this Blasphemer, who yet in despight of Jesus Christ, God bles∣sed for ever, abuseth that place, Iohn 22.23. The father judgeth no man, but hath committed all
Judgement to the Son, that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father; to th s cursed end. The Son is not to be honoured as the Father, because he hath not the same esteem with the Father, but the same judiciary power; that so he may divert the dint of two unanswerable Argu∣ments in this glorious Text. 1. He that is Judge of all the world, is God: but the Son is Judge of all the world. Ergo Gen. 18.22, 25. And Abraham stood before the Lord, and said, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? And the Lord answered. If I shall find 50. persons in Sodom righteous. I will spare the place for their sakes. 2. The second is, He that is to be Honoured even as the Father, is equal to the Father; but the Son is to be Honoured even as the Father, Ergo. So that though there be enough in the naming this Scripture, to con∣fute
this child of Satan, yet have ye no Scripture over and above those Scriptures already brought to vindicate the Divinity of the Son that expresly proves the Son is honoured as he is, and because he is God? Answ. 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts, that they may be ashamed which blame your good conversation in Christ. Luke 17.15, 16, 17. Then one of them when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice praised God, and fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him thanks; and he was a Samaritan. But Jesus answered and said, Are there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There were none found to give God thanks save this stranger. Quest. Since in this Chapter he belches out yet more blasphe∣my, what shall be said in answer to his perverting of this Scripture?
Iohn 5 27. he hath authority to execute Judgement, because he is the Son of man; Christ therefore, saith he, had it not as he is God; and that Rev. 1.5, 6, 11, 12. Un∣to him which washed us from our own sins in his own blood, be glo∣ry and dominion; worthy is the Lamb that was slain; when saies he, Saints and Angels praise him, not because he is very God, of very God, but because he died for us. Answ. These are sufficiently spoken to in the Scriptures to the other Answer; yet more to follow him, in regard in this Question he blasphemes the term very God of very God, see Phil. 2.5, 6.7 8.9, Let the same mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no rob∣bery to be equal with God; but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a Servant, and was made like unto
man, and was found in shape as a man; he humbled himself, and be∣came obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross where∣fore God also highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every name. 1 Iohn 5.20. But we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us a mind to know him that is true and we are in him that is true; that is, in his Son Iesus Christ; this same is very God, and eternal life. Iohn 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and pitched his tents among us: and we saw the glory thereof as the glory of the onely begotton Son of the Father, full of grace and truth. CHAP. XI. QƲest. There being two parts of the Priesthood, of Christs satisfaction, and intercession, ac∣cording to the Scriptures; its the
design of this Chapter to make void the first of them, name∣ly the satisfaction of Christ by making the Priesthood of Christ meerly to consist with latter name∣ly his intercession; contrary to that rule, What God hath joyned, let no man put asunder: And whereas he doth this, First, by Heb 8.4. If he were on earth, he should not be a Priest. Heb. 7.15, 16. There ariseth another Priest, made not after the Law of a Car∣nal Commandement, but after the power of an endless life; hereby concluding, that Christ was not a Priest untill after his death and resurrection; and if so, no Priest upon the Cross; since then this is so weighty a business, what saith the Scripture in other places? Answ. The Scriptures to this thing are already cited in the sixth Chapter. All centring in that, 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ died for us ac∣cording
to the Scriptures. Quest. But whereas that Scrip∣ture, Heb. 7.25. he is able to save, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us, is alledged: doth he save only by his intercessi∣on, or by his intercession without his satisfaction? What other Scriptures therefore have you to prove Christ to be a Priest, and a Priest able to save, because he of∣fered up himself? Answ. Many, but some of the principal our adversary names, I cannot tell why, unless that we should not. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered up to bear the sins of many. Heb. 10.11, 12. This man af∣ter he had offered one sacrifie for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God; for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Heb. 7.26.27. For such a High-Priest it became us to have, which
is holy, harmless, undefiled, sepa∣rate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens; which needed not daily, as these High-Priests, to offer up a sacrifie, first for his own sins, and then for the peo∣ples for that he did once when he offered up himself. Quest. Doth our Catechist pre∣tend to expres place of Scripture, and yet tells us so impudent and known a lye, as that Christ entred into the holy place to offer him∣self, as in his nineth Question, in this Chapter, intimating he offer∣ed himself not here; what will you then say to so bold a Blasphemer? Answ. Acts 13.10. Oh full of all subtilty, and all mischief, the child of the Devil. and enemy of all righteousness! wilt not thou leave to pervert the straight wayes of the Lord? Quest. What means that place in Heb. 9.12. By his own blood entred he into the holy place;
meaneth it that Christ was not a Priest? &c. as this lying wretch insinuates from this place, that Christ offered not himself till he went into the holy place; or rather means it that Christ by his offer∣ing himself, and suffering upon the Cross, then being a Priest, went up to God? rehearse some passa∣ges in this Chapter. Answ. Verse 12.13, 14, 15. But Christ being come an High-Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Ta∣bernacle, not made with hands, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood en∣tred he once into the holy place, and obtained Redemption for us; for if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Hiefer, sprinkling them that are unclean, sanctifieth as to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered up him∣self
without spot unto God? ver. 24, 25, 26. for Christ is not en∣tted into holy places that are made with hands, which are simi∣litudes of the true Sanctuary, but is entred into the very heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us; not that he should offer himself often, as the High-Priest entred into the holy place every year with other blood; (for then must he have often suffered, since the foundation of the world) but now in the end of the world hath he appeared once to put away sins by the sacrifice of himself. Quest. shough indeed that ob∣lation once offered for the sins of many, which Christ offered up himself, was the great act of his Priestly office, yet was not Christ as Priest before his suffering? or came he to his Priestly office by suffering? That is to say, did he first suffer, and then was a Priest? Is that meant in that place, that
he might be a merciful and faithful High-Priest? Answ. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; so speaks the Psalmist before Christ, Psal. 110.4. Quest. Seeing we have such an High-Priest, let us come boldly un∣to the Throne of grace, Heb. 4.14.16. is the proper use indeed we ought to make of the Priest∣hood of Christ, but principally re∣specting his intercession? what other Scripture therefore doth the Scripture direct us to, to be made of his satisfaction? Answ. Luke 1.68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he visited and Redeemed his people; and hath raised up the horn of sal∣vation unto us, in the house of his Servant David, ver. 74, 75. that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, should serve him without fear, all the dayes of our life in holiness and righteous∣ness
before him. Luke 2.8. to the 14. Rom. 5.8, 9, 11. While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us: much more then being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him; and not only so, but we rejoyce in God through our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. 1 Pet. 21.24. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being deliver∣ed from sin should live in righte∣ousness; 2 Cor. 5,21. For he hath made him to be sin for us, that we should be made the righteous∣ness of God through him. CHAP. XII. QƲest. Its demanded whither it were the will and purpose of God, that Christ should, suffer
the death of the Cross? what say you in answer? Answ. We say, answer and confess that he was delivered by the determinate councel and foreknowledge of God; and that what was done, was whatever Gods hand and councel derermi∣ned before to be done; onely we would herewith take in that 9. to the Heb. 13. which saith expresly that Christ through the eternal spirit, offered himself to God. Quest. Reconciliation being properly betwixt two persons at variance; the Mediator of Re∣conciliation, hath in both these, re∣specting God and us, made an a∣tonement and reconciliation: And because God was the party offen∣ded, the Scripture therefore speaks that man was reconciled; hence are we said to be reconci∣led to God; God was in Christ re∣conciling the world to himself; Christ suffered for sins, that he might bring us to God.
But the adversary of all truth takes occasion hence to insinuate that God was not at ods with us; and if so, needed no satisfaction: Therefore saith he, Christ died not to reconcile God to us, but us to God: That so he may null that glorious work of Christs satisfacti∣on: To which in its proper place the Scriptures have already spo∣ken; yet that this false conclusion may fall, do not the Scriptures say, we lay under the displeasure of God, which was done away by that work of his satisfaction? Answ. We were the Children of wrath as well as others: Eph. 2.3. Christ hath redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, when he was made a Curse for us. Gal. 2.13. Jesus which deli∣vereth from the wrath to come. 1 Thes. 1.10. — Rom. 5.9. Saved them from wrath to come through him. Quest. If we lay under the curse
of the Law, and were children of wrath, and this curse and wrath are we by this Mediator redeemed from; then indeed hath he recon∣ciled God unto us by his satisfacti∣on, that glorious part of his Me∣diation: but have you no Scri∣pture that doth expresly hold out our reconciliation to God, by the blood of Christ, to be in order to our acceptance with God? Answ. Col. 1.19, 20, 21. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to himself: and to set at peace, through the blood of his cross, both the things in heaven, and the things on earth: and you which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your mindes were set on evil works, hath he now also re∣conciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in his sight.
Rom. 5.9.10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God through his son; and not only so, but we all rejoyce in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atone∣ment. Quest. When the Scripture says Christ dyed for our sins, our sins indeed procured his death Accidentally: for we might have sinned, and Christ not have dyed, which is causa causata but where∣to doth the Scripture assign the first principal and moving cause which is causa causans? Answ. John 3.16. Grd so loved the world, that he gave his only be∣gotten Son. Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. Quest. Christ indeed learned obedience by the things he suffer∣ed, left us an example, brought
us to God, destroyed him that had the power of death, sanctifie us with his own blood, makes us live together, with him, not live to our selves; which are glorious ends; the Scripture tels us of the death of Christ: but are these the only ends of Christs death the Scrip∣ture mentions? if not, what other principal end is here omitted? Answ. Ephes. 1.7. We have re∣demption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Col. 1.14. Same words, Ephes. 1.14. Redemption of the possessi∣on purchased. Gal. 4.5. When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of woman, and made under the Law, that he might re∣deem them which were under the Law. Titus 2.13, 14. Our Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquities.
CHAP. XIII. QƲest. Were there neither Scripture nor Argument against the doctrine of universal love and general Redemption, this were enough to a sober mind to Question it, in that its bound up in the volume of our Authors Truth; and so vigorously conten∣ded for by such a Master of here∣sie; And may cause our late as∣sertors thereof to blush to see their opinion touching so impor∣tant an head in Divinity, inserted in so black and Atheistical a Calen∣der: But to the thing; the Scrip∣tures speaking Christ dyed for all gave himself a ransom for all, tasted death for every man, giveth life to the world, will have all men be saved, all should come to repentance, for the sins of the whole world, &c. and other such of a general tendency; how must
they be understood? of a ge∣neral confused and universal love to men, so that God wil∣led, and Christ effected the Salva∣tion of all men? or else according to restraint given us in other Scriptures? to the Election of the Father: the prayer of Christ: the faith, and obedience of men: the sheep of Christ: his Church: such whom his Father hath given him: his people; his peculiar people: and this general term all, ex∣pounded by other Scriptures, to be many? which will if so, effectu∣ally prove, that though Christ is indeed in common tendered, and propounded to all men, but intended and effectually applyed only according to these restraints. Rehearse the Scriptures therefore on each of these. Answ. Rom. 9.11, 12.13. For ere the Children were born, and when they had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might re∣main
according to Election, not by works, but by him that calleth, it was said, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, I have loved Iacob, and hated Esau. Rom. 11.5. Even so then at this present is there a remnant accord∣ing to the election of grace; ver. 7. The Election have obtained it; the rest have been hardned. v. 28. As touching the election, they are be∣loved for the Fathers sake. Iohn 17.9. I pray for them; I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me, for they are thine. Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that whosoever believeth on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Iohn 12.46. I come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth in me, should not abide in the dark∣ness. Acts 10.43. To him also give the Prophets witness that through
his name, all that believe in him shall receive remission of sins. Rom. 3.22. The righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. Heb. 5.9. Being consecrate, was made the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Mat. 25.33. And he shall set his sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left. John 10.26, 27. My sheep hear my voice; and I give unto them eternal life. John 10.15. I lay down my life for my Sheep. Mat. 15.24. And he answered, and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Acts 20.28. Take heed there∣fore unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost had made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he hath
purchased with his own blood. Ephes. 5.25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Iohn 6.29. And this is the Fa∣thers will who hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. Mat. 1.21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. Titus 2.13, 14. Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people un∣to himself, zealous of good works. Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many.
Mat. 26.28. This is the blood of the new Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to take away the sins of ma∣ny. Isa. 53.11. But his knowledge shall my righteous servant justifie many; for he shall bear their ini∣quities. Quest. These Scriptures are undeniable as to this great point; but is there not a general, providential, temporal good, mer∣cy and salvation in God, common to all men? yea to irrational crea∣tures as well as men? Answ. Psal. 145.8, 9. The Lord doth good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. Psal. 36. O Lord, thou savest man and beast. Quest. In this Chapter we have another blow at the Godhead of the Son; The Scriptures abused to this end are such as tel us, Christ
was raised by God, by the power of God, by the glory of the Fa∣ther, and such like: whence it is concluded, Christ rose not by his own power, but by the power of another: Is that therefore the language of these Scriptures; which tels us, he was not raised by him∣self? Touching that, we must ad∣dress to other Scriptures; what therefore saith the Lord himself touching this thing? Answ. Iohn 2.19, 20, 21. Je∣sus answered, and said unto them, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again: then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this Temple a building, and wilt thou rear it in three days? but he spake of the Temple of his body. Iohn 10.17. Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again: no man taketh it from me: But I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.
Quest. This discourse of the re∣surrection was improvidently medled with to that end intend∣ed; for if the Lord Jesus Christ did by his own power raise him∣self from the dead, as those Scrip∣tures prove, then onely was he God; yet have you not other Scriptures do prove, that when God the Father raised up the Son from the dead, the Son then rais∣ed up himself, inasmuch as the Father and the Son work together in one and the same work? Answ. John 5.21. For likewise as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickneth them, so the Son quickeneth whom he will. John 5.19. Whatsoever things the Father doth, the same things doth the Son also; the father work∣eth hitherto, and I work.
CHAP. XV. QƲest. To usher in the doctrine of works, way is made for it by confounding the terms, Iu∣stification and Righteousness; as if they were but one and the same thing, when indeed there's nothing less; for the Scripture indeed tels us of a righteousness which is of the Law, but nowhere a Iustifica∣tion which is of the Law. That we may therefore understand them both, let us hear the Scrip∣ture speaking touching them both; and first for Iustification; doth not the Scripture expresly say, it cannot be righteousness in us? Answ. Psal. 143.3. For in thy sight shall no man that liveth be ju∣stified, Rom. 4.5. To him that worketh not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for Righteous∣ness.
Quest. Justification then cannot be righteousness in us, but accoun∣ted to us; what is Justification then but remission of sins? and doth not the Scripture make our Justi∣fication to consist herein, that ini∣quities are forgiven, and sin not imputed? Answ. Psal. 32.1. Blessed is he whose iniquitie is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: blessed is the man to whom God imputeth not sin. Quest. But how prove you this is meant to be Justification? doth not the Apostle Paul, treating on this very thing Iustification, quote this very place, summing up Iusti∣fication in two parts; Imputation of righteousness without works, non-Imputation of sin? Answ. Rom. 4.2, 5, 6, 7, 8. For if Abraham were Iustified by works, he had wherewith to boast, but not before God; But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him
that iustifieth the ungodly, his faith is accounted for Righteous∣ness; even as David declareth the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord Imputeth righteousness without works: saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgi∣ven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not sin. Quest. What then is our Righ∣teousness? doth not the Scripture tell us, its the satisfaction and obe∣dience of Christ, in life and death performed for us, and of God freely imputed to us that believe? report the language of the Scrip∣ture touching this glorious im∣port, first of his satisfaction? Answ. 1 Cor. 2.2. For I deter∣mined to know nothing among you save Iesus Christ, and him crucified. Esay 53.5, 6. By his stripes we are healed, the Lord hath laid upon him the iniquities of us all.
Luke 22.20. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Rom. 3.24. Justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption which is in Christ Iesus; whom God hath sent forth to be a recon∣ciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness to the forgiveness of sins. Rom 5.8, 9. While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us; much more then, being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Gal. 5.13. Christ hath redeem∣ed us from the Curse of the Law, when he was made a Curse for us. Eph. 1.7. By whom we have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. 1 Joh 1.7. The blood of Iesus Christ the Son of God, cleanseth us from all sin, Christ the Son of God cleanseth from all sins. Col. 2.10. Ye are compleat in him.
Rom 5.19. For as by one mans disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous. Quest. Its clear indeed, tha its the suffering of Christ, the obe∣dience and righteousness of Christ that makes us righteous, and justi∣fied; but then how doth the Scrip∣ture say, his faith was counted righteousness? Abrabam belie∣ved in God, and he counted it for righteousness: Is it (contrary to the sense of all the forementi∣oned Scriptures) the act of faith, or the blood of Christ the Object of faith, that justifies? in short, is Justification for our faith, or by it? how say the Scriptures? Answ. Eph. 2 10. By Grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Rom. 5.9. Being now justified by his blood. Quest. But the Scriptures say, we are justified freely by grace,
the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace; eternal life is the gift of God, &c. Is it so, as if the gift of God, and the me∣rit of Christ are inconsistent? nay, rather do they ever act apart? may not, nay is not that which is a free gift of God, respecting us, the price of blood respecting Christ? Answ. We need no farther then the Scriptures wrested on this very account. Rom 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace, through the Re∣demption that is in Christ Je∣sus. Eph. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. Rom. 6 23. The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Quest. Doth not the Scripture say therefore positively, that we are bought with a price? and that
price is the precious blood of Je∣sus Chrst? Answ. 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought with a price. 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price; be not the Servants of men. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corrup∣tible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, re∣ceived by the traditions of the fa∣thers, but with the precious blood of Iesus Christ, as a Lamb unde∣filed, and without spot. Quest Nay, more, doth not the Scripture expresly say, that without this price of blood there is no remission? Answ. Heb. 9.22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no remission.
CHAP. XVI. Quest. Our Saviour tels us his Commandments are not grievous, his yoak is easiy, and his burden light; this indeed is a slight proof of our Master of Arts to conclude our possibility of keeping the Commandments of God: let's hear the sense of the Apostle Paul to this very thing, affectionately expressing the desire of his rege∣nerate part to keep the Law of God, and his hearty closing there∣with making good that of our Sa∣viour: That his Commandments are not grievous, his yoak is easie, and his burden light: yet withall plainly telling us, that he was not able to keep them, by reason of his unregenerate part; and in plain terms giving our Master of Arts the lye. Answ. Rom. 7.14. — For we know the Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal, sold under sin; for that which I do I allow not; for that I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that I do: now then its no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me; for I know in me, (that is in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I know not; for the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that do I; I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me; for I delight in the Law of God after the inward man: but I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into capti∣vity to the Law of sin, which is in my members: Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Quest. In Truth this is an emi∣nent experience, in this eminent Apostle, writ for our instruction:
but what more express Scriptures have you? Answ. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon the earth, that doth good, and sinneth not. 1 John 8.10. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; If we say we have not sinned, we make him a ly∣ar, and the truth is not in us. 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient to think any thing as of our selves. Psal. 14.3.2. Enter not into Judge∣ment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justi∣fied. Esay 64.6. We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy rags. Quest. Indeed this makes little for the possibility of keeping the Law of God: but yet more, are not these laws broken by us, ere we come unto act? and if so, there is yet further impossibility. Answ. Mat. 5.28. I say unto
you, whosoever looketh after a wo∣man, to lust after her, hath commit∣ted Adultery with her already in his heart. Prov. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Quest. Here is sin proved effectu∣ally to be in all, even the best men, omitting good, committing evil; yea, and against their en∣deavours and desires, and sin in thought; but what is this sin which the best men do, and cannot but do? is it not the breaking, trans∣gressing, or not keeping the Com∣mandments of God? Answ. 1 John 3. Whosoever com∣mitteth sin, transgresseth also the Law; for sin is the transgression of the Law. Quest. But suppose a man ex∣actly observe and do all the Law: some few points, nay, ore breach in his time onely excepted; doth not that intitle him to the guilt of
all? so that he that keeps not all and every one, keeps none of the Commandments? Answ. Iames 2.10. For whoso∣ever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Quest. If this be our possibility to keep the Commandements, the Lord be merciful to me a sinner; but yet the Scriptures speak of keeping the Commandements of God, doing the will of God, hear∣ing and doing, to which blessed∣ness is annexed: is there not there∣fore a new obedience required of, and practised by the Saints, accor∣ding to the tenour of such Scrip∣ture, which though it be not perfection, yet is accounted to them as perfection, and hath bles∣sedness intailed to it; That obe∣bience centring on these two Ba∣ses Sincerity and Faith. Answ. Walk before me, and be perfect, &c. upright, seat
Psal. 1.1, 2. Blessed is the man that walketh not in the Counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful; but his de∣light is in Law of the Lord. Gal. 3.21, 22. If there had been a Law given which could have given life, surely righteous∣ness should have been by the Law; but the Scripture hath con∣cluded all under sin; that the pro∣mise, by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them which be∣lieve. Quest. But David said of himself he had keep the ways of the Lord; did he mean perfectly? How could that be, since he is recorded (a fit example alledged by Biddle) both an Adulterer and a Murde∣rer? what can be then meant by his keeping, but his sincerity? is not that his righteousness, clea∣ness of hands, and his keeping the ways of God? namely, his
not wickedly departing from God, and his being upright be∣fore him? quote the very words already by Biddle, (for which light we thank God, not Biddle) to the contrary end. Psal. 18.20. to 24. The Lord re∣warded me according to my righteousness: according to the cleanness of my hands hath he re∣compenced me; for I have kept the wayes of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God; for all his judgements were before me, and I did not put away his Sta∣tutes from me; I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity; therefore hath the Lord recompenced me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his ey∣sight. Quest. What saith Paul, whom before we find could not keep the commandments, yet in Gods sight was accounted perfect; but how?
Answ. Phil. 3.7. That I might be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is of the faith of Christ. Quest. That the Lord Jesus himself did respect, and the Saints may, the recompence of reward, is not denyed by us:—which is war∣ranted by those Scriptures that tell us, by wel-doing we should seek for Honour, Glory and Im∣mortality: we should look for the blessed hope: But how is this to be looked on as due unto us? ex debito, vel ex congruo? for our do∣ing, or for our suffering? or ra∣ther to the grace of God which pleaseth so to reward us? in short, is the reward of merit or of grace? Answ. Luke 17.7. to the 10. but which of you having a servant plowing, or feeding Cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, go and sit down to meat, and will not ra∣ther
say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten and drunken, and afterward thou shalt eat and drink doth he thank that servant, because he did those things that were commanded him? I trow not; so likewise you when you have done all those things com∣manded you, say we are unprofi∣table servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. Ephes. 2 8.9. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, its the gift of God: not of works least any man should boast. Quest. The Scripture tels us, we are chosen to be holy and un∣blameable: That Christ gave him∣self for the Church, to present to himself a glorious Church not ha∣ving spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. 2. That the gifts of Christ were for the pro∣tecting of the Saints: we are ex∣horted
to be perfect; prayed for, that we may stand perfect and compleat in all the will of God; and that our whole spirit, soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: and we have it recorded, that Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; That Zacharias and his wife Elizabeth were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments of the Lord blameless: if these and such like be intended of perfection compleat, is it not in respect to the imputation of Christs Righteous∣ness and perfection to us; not of our own righteousness or perfecti∣on in us? Answ. I desire to be found in him, not having my own Righteous∣ness. Phil. 3.9. Quest. But rather is not the scope of those Scriptures, truly to press us to aim at perfection and have it as a rule in our eye? nay
doth not the Apostle Paul press such as he cals already perfect, at the same time to press on to perfection, as not having yet attained perfection, though called perfect? let us hear himself speak of himself and others. Answ. Phil. 3.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead; not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect; But I follow after, If I may appre∣hend that for which I am appre∣hended of Christ Jesus; Brethren, I count not my self to have appre∣hended; But this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press to∣wards the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. Quest. When Paul was at his highest pitch, through the abun∣dance
of Revelations, yet was he not then far from such an estate as perfection in degree? what saith he himself? Answ. 2 Cor. 12. Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of Revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh. Quest. But though the degree of perfection were not attained or attainable, yet there is sincerity, which is perfection; there is an universal, general obedience to every part of the Law of God, which is perfection too in Gods ac∣count; so much these Scriptures compared with others declare; but can they prove the compleat pitch and degree of perfection? besides what is already named, what say other Scriptures? Answ. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. For we know in part, & we prophesie in part. Psal. 19.12, 13. Who can under∣stand his Errors? cleanse thou me
from my secret sins; keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins. Mat. 6. 12. Forgive us our Trespasses. Mark 9.24. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. Col. 3.5. Mortifie therefore your members which are upon the earth. Psal. 51.4. My sin is ever be∣fore me. Quest. Touching good works enough hath been said in the for∣mer chapter, to evince that they have nothing to do in the business of Justification, so as that God should justifie us for, or because of our works: yet inasmuch as here its again insisted on as the cause of Justification; repeat therefore the same Scriptures here urged, which prove our Justification to be not of works but of grace. Answ. Eph. 8, 9. 10. By grace are ye saved through faith: and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works: Rom. 11.5. And if by grace, its no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace. Quest. But good works are so to salvation, as is the Antece∣dent to the Consequent: to say though we may not expect to be saved for them, yet we cannot expect to be saved without them; what therefore the Scri∣pture makes the proper end of good works, are they not especi∣ally these, and such like as these? obedience to God, the honour of our profession; the glory of God, the proof, evidence and justification of our faith, a tryal to the sincerity of our profession, a sign of our state in grace, ac∣ceptance with God, and from the whole, to put to silence evil men, and be a comfortable ground of peace in our own suls. What says the Scriptures to each of these?
Answ. 1 Thes. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your Sanctifica∣tion. Titus 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, That they which have believed in God may be careful to maintain good works: These things are good and profitable unto men. Eph. 4.1. I therefore the Priso∣ner of the Lord beseech you, that you walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your father which is in heaven. James 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25. What doth it pro∣fit my brethren though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? will faith save him? if a brother be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed
and filled; notwithstanding you give them not those things that are needful to the body: what doth it profit? even so faith if it hath not works, is dead. Was not Abraham our father justified by works? Thou believest that there is one God: thou dost well; the Devils also believe and tremble; but wilt thou know O vain man that faith without works is dead? was not A∣braham our father justified by works, when he had offered his son Isaac upon the altar? seest thou how faith wrought with his works? and by works was faith made perfect. 1 John 3.7, 10. Little children, let no man deceive you; he that doth righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous, in this the chil∣dren of God are manifest, and the Children of the devil: whosoever doth not righteousness, is not of God. 1 Iohn 2.29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every
one which doth righteousness is born of him. Acts 10.35. He that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted of him. Heb. 13.18. Pray for us; for we trust we have a good consci∣ence in all things willing to live honestly. 1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as ev l doers, they may be ashamed that falsly ac∣cuse your good conversation in Christ. 1 Pet. 2.15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Acts 23.1. And Paul earnest∣ly beholding the Council, said, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good conscience towards God, un∣till this day. Quest. We are now come to that grand Question, touching
the perseverance of the Saints wherein we have many criptures brought, telling us that the righ∣teous may turn away from his righteousness, and sin unto death, and that for his iniquity which he hath committed he shall dye. Eze. 18.24.33.13. Is there any denies a temporal death ac∣cording to these Scriptures? have ye not other examples agreeing with them that sickness and death are inflicted on good men, under the Gospel for their miscarriages? Answ. 1 Cor. 13.—For this cause some of you are sick, and some are fallen asleep. Quest. But do these or other Scriptures following prove that doctrine to be false, Once in Christ and ever in Christ? as we have ta∣ken for granted in the question of Biddle: The Scriptures are such as tell some shall depart from the faith; some have made Shipwrack of faith, cast off their faith erred
from the faith; overthrown the faith of some; several exhortati∣ons in Scripture, that we take heed we depart not from the living God; left we be hardned tho∣rough the deceitfulness of sin; lest any man fall after the exam∣ple of unbelief; lest being led away by the error of the wicked, fall from their own stedfastness; least any man fail of the grace of God; lest by any means the Tempter tempts us, and the Apo∣stles labour be in vain; lest we destroy our weak brother by our knowledge; and the Apostle, lest when he preach unto others, him∣self should be cast away: severall other positive Scriptures speaking, such Saints as were enlightned, have tasted the heavenly gift, made partakers of the holy Ghost, tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they fall away; that some are cursed children, having forsaken
the right way, and have gone astray: That some after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, are again entangled there∣in, and overcome, who after they have known the way of righte∣ousness, turn from the holy Com∣mandment delivered to them; and to conclude, if a man abide not in Christ, he is cast forth and wi∣thers; every branch in him that beareth not fruit he taketh away. Do not some of them prove that hypocrites may go far in the bu∣siness of Religion, and have much light, much experience, yea faith, (though temporary) and yet fall away? do not others of them, as the last, prove, that such men may have the profession of Christ and be members of the visible Church of Christ, and so said to be in him; yet being strange from the work of regeneration, and implantati∣on, in the end be cast out? But notwithstanding all this; do any
of these Scriptures, or all of them prove, that a real member of Christs mystical body, or a true Believer, may fall from that state, lofe his faith, and finally perish? is not this contrary to the whole tenure of the Gospel? what do the Scri tures speak? do they not tell us that such as thus fall, were never true Believers? & that many did thus believe, whom our Lord himself did not account to be true Believers? 2. Hath not God in his word plentifully promised that true believers should persevere and be preservd from total and fi∣nal apostacy? and if so, doth not the Scripture tell us, God cannot lye? 3. Doth not the Scripture tell us, that God doth keep true be∣lievers, that they cannot thus final∣ly fall? (4.) Doth not the Scripture tell us, that such as are true belie∣vers are elected of God, and can∣not
thus fall, but have already attained the inheritance? (5.) Doth not the Scripture tell us, that Christ prayeth the Fa∣ther for the perseverance of the Saints? and doth not Christ him∣self say, the Father hath always heard him? 6. Do not the Saints and true Believers daily pray for their per∣severance? and doth not the Scrip∣ture tell them what ever necessary thing they ask in the name of Christ, shall be obtained? 7. Are not true believers thus kept by Jesus Christ in the faith, so as they can never totally and finally lose their faith? 8. Are not such sealed by the holy Spirit in their hearts, that they shall never fall? (9.) Are not Believers compa∣red to a Tree that withers not: a house that is builded on a Rock and fals not: seed sown in good ground, which bringeth forth its perfect crop?
10. Are not such Believers so dead to sin, that it cannot again have dominion over them? and are they not so born of God, as the seed of God abides in them: that they cannot so sin again as do other men? yea, are not such belie∣vers so endued, as that they shall overcome all their enemies, and cannot be overcome? In short, if these particulars are the Tenour of Scripture, and the truth as it is in Jesus, shall not this truth of the Saints everlasting perseverance, be worthy of all acceptation to the worlds ends? sure it will, let us therefore hear what the Scriptures speaks to each of these, and first of the first. Answ. 1. — John 8.31. Then said Iesus to those Jews that be∣lieved on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples in∣deed. 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, because they were not of
us: for if they had been of us, they would have no doubt continued with us, but they went out that they might be made manifest they were not all of us. Heb. 3.6.14. Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end. Luke 8.18. Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken what he seems to have. 2 John 23, 24. Now when he was at Jerusalem, at the Passover, in the feast day, many believed in his name, when they saw the mi∣racles that he did; But Iesus did not commiit himself unto them, be∣cause he knew all men, and needed not that any should testifie of man, for he knew what was in man. Gods pro∣mise. 2.—Jer. 32,38, 40. They shall be my people, and I will be their God; and I will make an everlast∣ing Covenant with them, that I
will never turn a may from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Esa. 54.10. For the Mountains shall remove, and the Hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away saith the Lord, that hath compassion on thee. Isa. 59.10. And I will make this my Covenant with them saith the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shal not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth even for ever. Hosea. 2.19. In that day, I will marry thee unto me for euer. al. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abi∣deth for ever.
Iohn. 4.14. Whosoever drinketh of this water that I shall give him, shall never be more athirst: but the water thar I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, that springs up to everlasting life. Iohn 6 39. And this is the Fa∣thers will, which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. Iohn 10.27, 28, 29, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give un∣to them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand? My Father that gave them me is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock I wil build my Church, and the gates hell shall not overcome it. Ioh. 14.16. I will ask the father, and he shall give you another com∣forter, that he may abide with you for ever.
Titus 1.1,2. This hope of eter∣nal life, God that cannot lye hath promised before the world be∣gan. God keeps them.3.— 1 Cor. 1.7, 8. Waiting for the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ, who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Iesus Christ; God is faithful. 1 Cor. 10 13. God is faitful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able; but will give with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it. 1 Thes. 5.23, 24. Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout; and I pray God, that your whole spirit, soul and body may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ: faithful is he that calleth you, who will also do it. 2 Thes. 3.3. The Lord is faithful
which will stablish you, and keep you from evil. Phil. 1.6. And I am perswa∣of this thing that he that haeh be∣gun this good work in you, will per∣form it until the day of Iesus Christ. The Elect can∣not fall.4.—Mat. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; so that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very Elect. Rom. 8.29,30. For those whom he knew before, those also he pre∣destinated; moreover whom he pre∣destinated, them also he called: and whom he called, them also he justifi∣ed; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Rom. 11.1. God hath not cast away his people, whom he knew be∣fore vers. 7. what then? Israel hath not obtained that he sought, but the election have obtained it, and the rest have been hardned.
Christ prays, and is always heard.5.—Luke 21.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Si∣mon, behold Satan hath desired to winnow thee as wheat: but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. John 17.15, 20. I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou keep them from evil. I pray not for these alone, but for them which shall believe in me through their word. Rom. 8.34. Who shall con∣demn? it is Christ which is dead, yea rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and maketh request for us; who shall separate us from the love of Christ? John 11.41, 42. And Iesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee because thou hast heard me, I know that thou hearest me al∣ways.
The Saints pray and shall obtaen.6.— Mat. 6. 13. Lead us not into temptation, but de∣liver us from evil. 1 John 5.14. And this is that assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us. 6 Saints are preserved in the faith.7.—John 6.37.38. All that the Father giveth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me; I cast not away. This is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose no∣thing, but should raise it up again at the last day. Chap. 10.27, 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall not perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. John 17.12. Those that thou gavest me, have I kept, and nore of
them is lost: chap. 13.1. Foras∣much as he loved his own which were in the world, unto the end he loved them. 8.—2 Cor. 1.21. And it is God which establisheth us with you in Christ, and hath annointed us: who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Ephes. 1.13, 14. In whom also ye have trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, even the Gospel of your Salvation, where∣in also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. Chap. 4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of Redem∣ption. Psal.9. Comparison of Believers in Scripture. 1.3. For he shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, that will bring forth her fruit in her due
season, whose leaf shall not fade. Mat. 7, 24.25. I will liken him to a wise man, which hath builded his house on a rock. Luke 8.15 But that which fell on good ground, are they which with an honest and good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. 10.—Rom. 6.2 8,10 Saints dead to sin.9, 11. How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein? wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live also with him; knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dyeth no more, death hath no more dominon over him: likewise think ye also that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to to God in Christ Jesus our Lord. 1 Iohn 3 9. Whosoever is born of God, sinneth not; for his seed remaineth in him, neither can he sin, because he is born of God. Chap. 5,4. For all that is born
of God, overcometh this world. Rom. 8.35.37. to the end. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? in all these things we are more then Conquerours through him that loved us; for I am per∣swaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Quest. Our Saviour tels his Disciples, hitherto they had asked nothing in his name; was it be∣cause they prayed God without a Mediator? without the name of Christ? nay sure; but they had asked nothing, that is nothing compara∣tively to what they might have asked, and God would give; was there at any time even be∣fore Christs Incarnation, any ac∣ceptance with the Father without
him? was not Christ the Centre of all those types? Surely yes, the Scripture is full. Let it suffice us here to hear one Scripture proving that Christ was to them before his coming in the flesh as to us since, though more darkly; one Scripture proving that they did then pray the Father through his name, even before his incarnation; One Scripture that there is but one Mediatour for all men, whether them before, or us since his manifestation in the flesh; let us hear them faithfully re∣corded. Answ. 1 Cor. 10.4.3. More∣over Brethren, I would not have you, ignorant how that all our Fa∣thers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ)
Dan. 9.17. Now therefore oh our God, hear the prayer of thy ser∣vant, and his supplications; and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that lieth waste, for the Lords sake. 1 Tim. 2.5. For there is one God; and one Mediatour be∣tween God and men, the man Christ Jesus. CHAP. XX, XXI. QƲest. Its of great comfor to the Church indeed, that Christ her head, hath the Keys of hell and death; But hath not the Lord Jesus committed to the Church the power of these keys, that the publike, regular, and due use thereof may according to the institution of Christ, and Apostolical direction be had to the proper ends thereof, in each par∣ticular Church and congregation of Christ under the Gospel?
Answ. Iohn 16.19. And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven; and whatso∣ever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shal be loos∣ed in heaven. Iohn 20.23. Then Iesus said un∣to them, Peace be unto you; as my Father sent me, even so send I you: and when he said this, he breathed on them, and saith to them, Receive ye the holy ghost. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose∣soever sins ye retain, they are re∣tained. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault betwixt him and thee alone; if he hear thee, thou hast won thy brother; but if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed; and if he wil not
vouchsafe to hear them, tell it to the Church; and if he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee as an Heathen-man and a Pub∣lican. verily I say unto you, what∣soever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have de∣termined already as though I were present, that he that hath done this thing, when ye are gathered toge∣ther, and my spirit in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that such one I say, by the power of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Iesus. ver. 13. With such a one, eat not; put away therefore from your selves that wicked person. Quest. Touching Baptism, this is the end of this Chapter, to de∣stroy
and overthrow the Ordi∣nance and Institution of water-Baptism, agreeing in this with such as of late have appeared to that and other such good ends; for its a body of heresie we have to do with; no wonder therefore, if he takes every brother by the hand; But how is this done? first, by bringing before us such Scriptures as tell us, That John indeed bap∣tized with water, but he that came after him with the holy Ghost; do those prove that water-baptism ceased with John? or that Christ did that which John could not do, namely, wash us with his blood and Spirit? doth not the Scripture therefore call Baptism the washing of the new birth and the forgive∣ness of sins? Answ. Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost. Acts 2.2.16 Arise and
be baptised and wash away thy sins. Quest. No wonder indeed then, that John could not baptize as did Jesus, whose shoe latchet he was not worthy to unloose: since it is not the outward baptism of water, but the blood of Christ that clean∣seth us from all sin: since it is true also we are baptized into Christs death; and it is not the putting away of the filth of the flesh but the answer of a good conscience towards God that saves us: these all proving baptism indeed to be a Sacrament and no more effectual then the Spirit makes it effectual, which it hath made instrumental: we confess it is not otherwise the thing signified, but must affirm it to be the sign: what testimony therefore have you for the use of that sign, namely, the use of wa∣ter, in Scripture? Answ. Mat. 18.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Mark 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved. Acts 2.38.4.1. Then Peter said, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Iesus Christ; then they that gladly received his word were baptized; the same day were added to the Church 3000. souls. Mat. 3.11. I baptize you with water to amendment of life. Ioh. 1.31, 33. Therefore am I come baptizing with water: he that sent me to baptize with water. Quest. This indeed is our suffi∣cient warrant from the significan∣cy of the word baptizing, and also from the express addition of wa∣ter, wherewith Iohn was sent ex∣presly to baptize: only the efficacy of that ordinance was then, and is now acknowledged to be the work of Christ by his Spirit; but if they
should thus say, This was indeed the baptism of Iohn, but the A∣postles did not baptize, or if they did not so, what testimony there∣fore have you, that the Apostles did baptize, and with the element of water, according to the first in∣stitution of baptism? and first, give the example of Paul, who though he make it a great work, to which as an Apostle he was chief∣ly called to preach the Gospel: and that he might clear himself of vain glory, he rejoyceth he bap∣tizeth not many; yet he acknow∣ledgeth that he baptized some. 1 Cor. 13. to the 17. Were ye baptized into the name of Paul? I thank God I baptised none of you but Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say, I had baptized into mine own name; I baptized also the house of Stephanus; further∣more, I know not wither I bapti∣zed any other; for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.
Mat 8.36. to the end. And as they went on the way, they came unto a certain water, and the Eu∣nuch said See here is water, what doth let me to be baptized? and they went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him; and assoon as they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip. Quest. There needs indeed no more au hority: yet to put it out of all controversie, have ye no pre∣sident of some baptized with the element of water, even after they had been baptized with the holy Ghost? Answ. Acts 10.44. to the end. While Peter yet spake these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word; so they of the Circumcision, which be∣lieved were astonished, as many as came with Peter because that on the Gentiles, also was poured out
the gift of the holy Ghost: for they heard them speak with tongues, and magnifie God; then answered Peter, Can any man for∣bid water, that these should not be baptized which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we? so he com∣manded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Quest. One word more and then we shall leave it to whomso∣ever reads to judge, whither we or our Master of Arts will more need to fly from plain Scripture to con∣sequence or comment: have ye therefore no example that the Lord Jesus Christ himself who did himself baptize with the holy Ghost yet for the honour of his own Institution, and to confirm us in the truth, that he might ful∣fill all obedience, submitted to this Ordinance of Baptism administred in the Element of water? Answ. Mark 1.9.10. And it came to pass in those days that Ie∣sus
came from Nazareth, a City of Galilee, and was baptized of Iohn in Iordan: and assoon as he was come out of the water, Iohn saw the hea∣vens cleaving in twain, and the holy Ghost descending on him like a Dove. Mrt. 3.13. to the end. Then came Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto Iohn to be baptized of him; but Iohn earnestly put him back, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me? Then answering Iesus said, Let it be now; for thus it becomes us to fulfil all righteousness: so he suf∣fered him: and Iesus when he was baptized, came straight out of the water: and lo the heavens were opened unto him, and Iohn saw the the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting on him, and lo a voice came from heaven, say∣ing, This is my welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
CHAP. XXIV. QƲest. Well were it for the Heresie of former ages, and of this, if the last thing in the Ca∣techism were true: fitly brought (if believed) to lull asleep the pre∣sent torments of a checking Con∣science, which will work in the heart of such as maliciously sin against the truth: but alas they cannot but know the greater is their present sentence, and receipt of Iudgement, and fiery indignati∣on which shall devour such adver∣saries. Heb. 10.26, 27. They have a lye in their right hand. It is most fitly added therefore as a close hereto: The thing is this then in one word dreadful enough, where∣as we read of (a lyar ought to have a good memory, see the last Question of the third Chapter) death opposed to everlasting life,
the second death, destruction, per∣dition, Hell-fire, &c. Is it (as I know Biddle could wish) such a death as immediately maketh the Creature cease to be, and dye as doth a beast: and so that the height of their misery were that they should not be happy? to say, they should dye, and thats all; or else more truly according to Scripture, doth this death, second death, de∣struction, damnation hell fire &c. consist in eternity of torments, and everlasting death, so that damnati∣on is a life though miserable, in op∣position to which, salvation is only called eternal life: — Two or three Scriptures and so end. Answ. Isa. ult. ult. And they shall go forth, and look on the car∣kasses of the men that have trans∣gressed against me; for their worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. Mark 9.42. to the 48. And
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him, that a Mil∣stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea; Wherefore if thy hand cause thee to offend, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, then having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where the worm dyeth not, and the fire never goeth out; likewise if thy foot cause thee to offend, cut it off; it is bet∣ter for thee to go halt into life, then having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where the worm dyeth not, and the fire goeth not out; and if thy eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out; it is better for thee to go into the kingdom of God with one eye, then having two eyes to be cast into hell fire, where the worm dyeth not, and the fire never goeth out.
Mat. 25.41 & 46 verses. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the Devil and his An∣gels; and these shall go into ever∣lasting pain; and the righteous into life eternal. FINIS.
