B4200 T221457 12774817 93745
The PASSION of our SAVIOUR. A PINDARICK ODE on the Suffering GOD. In Imitation of RAPINS CHRISTUS Patiens. By Francis Bragge Gent. Engra  and sold by John S in Golden Lion Court in Aldersgate engraved title page
decorative border resembling a picture frame I. WHAT Dark and Dismal shade is this? What Gloomy Sadness spreading o'er the Skies? What Black and Melancholy Vail, Which Covers Mourning Natures Face? Why has th'Affrighted Sun forsook his Place? And why the Universe so Pale? Why does the Trembling Moon turn back her Weeping Eyes? Sure there was never cause of grief like this! The Sun beheld the DEITY,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Beheld his Maker Hanging on a Tree. He saw—and started back—and hid his Face, Asham'd to shew his own Created Rays, When once he'd seen the Source of Light, Th' Eternal GOD, involv'd in Night. II. But where should I begin? where should I end? This Sad, if there was ever sad Complaint? Shall I relate his Flesh with Scourges orn, And how he bore the Pain, and how he bore ye Scorn?
decorative border resembling a picture frame Or what is stranger yet that Man could dare, To pierce the GOD of Nature with a Spear? Shall I tell how the Softer Rock, When cover'd ore With Heav'nly Gore: Unable to sustain the shock Of so Impetuous and so just a Grief, Burst—and its Stony Heart did into pieces cleave? Or JESUS shall I tell thy Bloody Sweat, When on the Flow'ry top of Olivet,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Thou saw'st approaching near The Dreadfull Hour, How exquisite thy Pangs, how earnest was thy Prayer! Then what a Flood of Gore, Ran down and Scarlet dy'd each Briny Tear? A wond'ring Angel saw the Trembling GOD, Saw all his Grief but wonder'd more, To see his Love Triumphant o're his Fear; To see him take the Cup, and kiss his Fathers Rod. III.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Whither Audacious Man! O whither dost thou go? Hold in thy Desperate hand and see. It is the humble Deity! O! Wound not him who Loves thee so, All this he Suffers for Redeeming thee. Yet while I speak, Behold! The Armed Throng Pours like a Mighty Torrent in See! how they drag the Patient GOD along Who feels not half so quick their Fury as their Sin. The Impious Crowd upon him Press,
decorative border resembling a picture frame One tears his Hair, another wounds his Face; And all with Eager Zeal contend, Who shall the most abuse their Greatest Friend. So when with stinging hunger Mad, Th'Hyreanian Lions range the Forrest ore; Terror thro' all the Flocks and Herds they spread And ev'ry trembling Shepherd Flies before; If e're a Tender Lamb is left behind, Not to one Savage does the Victim fall, But with contending fierceness all, Tear Limb from Limb, and into Atoms Grind.
decorative border resembling a picture frame IV. And can the avenging Thunder hold, And let such Monstrous Guilt unpunishd go? Sure Heav'ns it self afraid to see so Bold And so Triumphant Wickedness below! As well it may, since GOD must plead his Cause Before a Mortal Judge, and fall by Human Laws. 'Twas Night & all things hush'd in a short liv'd repose, Nature opprest with Grief had fall'n asleep, Only the Silver Moon sat up to weep,
decorative border resembling a picture frame And restless Malice Rose. The Raving Jews each other call, And Drag the wearied JESUS to the Hall. O! Let me ne'er Describe the Dismal Scene Of that sad Night! How piercing was his Pain! How many Cruel Stripes in that sad Night he Bore, Yet nought return'd but Tears and Gore. All that the Maddest Fury could Invent, All that Revenge could Wish, or Guilt could Fear; Or Keenest Hatred ever meant,
decorative border resembling a picture frame All this and more— In that one Dismal Night they made him bear; And thought it not enough, but Crown'd the rest With Scornful Jeers, and made their GOD their Jest. V. Scarce had Aurora shew'd the coming Light; And Phoebus from his Watry Bed, Rowz'd up his Fiery Steeds, and Chas'd away ye Night When all Amaz'd he Look'd, and of a Bloody Red. Trembling he saw th'enrag'd Crow'd,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Athirst for their Redeemers Blood, Trembling he heard their Horrid Cry, Rending the Air with Crucify. Crucify him, does all the Place Resound, Crucify him, th'unwilling Hills Rebound. The Judge perceiv'd his Spotless Innocence, Try'd to Asswage Their swelling Rage; And gave him to be Scourg'd for no Offence; Away with Eager hast they bear Th'Afflicted GOD.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Still now and greater Torments they prepare, Naked they tye their Maker to a Stake, Then with a twisted prickly Rod The unrelenting Soldier Tears his Back; Again renews the stroke and opens ev'ry Wound; Again the Ecchoing Walls ye Hissing Stroke rebound. VI. Now thick as Summers Hail or Winter Rain (When with a mighty Deluge Big The teeming Clouds upon a Mountain break)
decorative border resembling a picture frame The trickling Blood pours down from ev'ry Vein, And all the Slipp'ry Pavements cover'd o're, With Scarlet streams and knots of Clotted Gore. This did th'avenging Father See Beheld his suffering Son in all his Agony, And yet in ne'er a Cloud of Thunder spoke, Nor Crush'd 'em down to Hell with one Almighty Stroke. A Diadem of peircing Thorns they made, And Crown'd at once and Tore his tender Head. A Reed they for a Scepter bring,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Cry Hail! & Bow the Knee, & Mock their Bleeding King, They See with Horrid Joy, the streaming Blood Down from his wounded Temples pour, They see his Face with Scars disfigur'd o'er, And Laughing say—Behold the Son of GOD! Now does the Workman rend the sturdy Oak, And Unconcern'd redoubles ev'ry stroke; Securely He the fatal Engine makes, While at the Dreadful sight Affrighted Nature shakes.
decorative border resembling a picture frame VII. 'Tis Done—and Jesus bears away his Cross, The Scene of all his Triumphs, all his Woes, 'Gainst mighty Death he goes to take the Field Resolv'd to Conquer, yet Resolv'd to Yield. And now he sinks below th'unequal weight Of such a Load as Sin and That, Too soon they fear his Pains would cease, And out of Cruel Pity lend a little Ease. Another takes the Cross, and on they go
decorative border resembling a picture frame To Lofty Golgotha's Aspiring Brow, Thrice did the trembling Mountain sound, And thrice the hollow Caverns Groan'd, All Nature into dire Convulsions fell, To see the Drooping Heav'ns, & hear ye Shouts of Hell! The harden'd Jews alone with Fury Blind, Stretch forth their Naked GOD; His Hands & Feet upon the Cross they Bind, And fix with Nails unto the Groaning Wood. Aloft the Pond'rous Trunk they rear,
decorative border resembling a picture frame And poize their Bleeding Maker in the Air. Amazing Sight! between two Thieves to see Him hanging on one Slender Tree, Who ye Prodigious weight—of all ye Sins—of the whole World did bear. VIII. Why Nature dost thou Blush? why Tremble so? It was not Thou that wert to Blame, Not all thy Pow'rs th'amazing Deed could do; 'Twas Love that bore the Crime, 'twas Love that bore the Shame. A Daring Soldier stabs th'Expiring GOD,
decorative border resembling a picture frame And down there pours a Rapid Stream of Blood. No longer could th'Affrighted Sun Behold So Monstrous and so sad a Sight; But headlong to the Ocean rowl'd, And hid his Blushes in the Vail of Night. Each Trembling Mountain shook its Snowy Head, The all Devouring Grave gave up her Dead. The Temples sacred Vail was rent in Twain And all things felt their Makers grief, but Man. Back to their Fountains did the Rivers flow
decorative border resembling a picture frame And falling Hills their Channels fill'd below. The hardest Rocks in pieces broke, And all the Earth's Foundations shook; While o'er the City Frightful Ghosts appear, And horrid Spectres fill the Dusky, Troubled Air. IX. Thee Jesus! did the hollow Grotts Bemoan, And all were melted into Pearly Tears. For thee the Lions and Getulian Bears, For thee th'Armenian Tygers Groan.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Each purling Stream ran murm'ring thro' the Plain And told in Hollow Sighs its Makers Pain Ore all the World a Pompous Sorrow spread, All things were Sad, for GOD himself lay Dead. And while the Savage Lions grieve, Shall harden'd Man alone refuse to give His Tributary share of Flowing Tears, Upon his Meek Redeemer's Hearse? O! Let him weep a Mighty Flood, Strong as his Saviours Love, and Reeking as his Blood.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Let ev'ry Distant Shore his Griefs resound, Nor let his Sorrows ever stay, Till he has wash'd those Sins away Which Crucify'd his GOD, and gave the Fatal Wound. FINIS.
