B6400 12393767 61067
A Short DISCOURSE Of the Rise, Nature, and Management OF THE Small-POX, And all Putrid FEVERS. Occasioned by the Death of our Late Incomparable QUEEN. Together with a Philosophical Account of an Excellent REMEDY for these and many other Diseases. By T. Byfield, M. D. and Fellow of the Colledge of Physitians in Dublin. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry. MDCXCV. Price Six Pence.
A DISCOURSE Of the Small-Pox, &c. OUR late Universal Loss, as it has given op∣portunity to many Reverend, Learned and Ingenious Persons to oblige the World with the just Character of this Great and Good PRINCESS, than whom, these Nations in many Ages have not afforded a Nobler Subject: So for the sake of all those who are yet to run the Risque of this Distemper for their Lives; that the lesser Barks may happily avoid those Rocks, on which the Royal Soveraign was lost, I shall with all plainness and brevity give an account of the Rise and Nature of the Small-Pox, and all Putrid Fea∣vers, for if that be not throughly understood, per∣sons
are liable to innumerable Errours and Mis∣takes, which too oft (God knows) prove fatal to those they are concern'd about. I very well know what I have to say is unusual, but since it is most true; for I take not these No∣tions on Trust but Tryal. I confess I can't but deeply regret the World was not better acquain∣ted with what I now offer to their serious Consi∣deration before the Glory of our Age was past receiving any Advantage by it. But to proceed: The very Hypothesis of my Discourse is this; That the Venom of these Di∣stempers is of a Sulphureous and Viscous Nature, and being so, there is but one way to Expel or over∣come it; all other Experiments being not only altogether useless, but highly injurious. Those that have taken the pains to enquire into the Causes of things, have found that Sulphurs are both the Life and Venom of Bodies. The first of the Nature of Light, so rarified that 'tis not perceptible, but by its Effects, some of which are these, it Tinctures the Blood in which is its chief Residence, it Irradiates and enlivens the whole Body, every part of which is animated by it: If it be supprest, Diseases prevail; if as∣sisted it has power sufficient to work them off; if
extinguisht, Death necessarily and inevitably fol∣lows, for 'tis the Animal Soul. The other Sulphureity is of a far different nature, the Matter out of which all Fiery Diseases are shap't; 'tis Crude, Viscous, Corrosive and Malign; yet Na∣ture deals well enough with it, throwing it off continually by her proper Passages; till by some accident or other they are obstructed, being pent up it returns, and being a more materiated Fire, feeds on the gross indigested humours, assimilating to its likeness whatever it lays hold on, and thus it grows more Corporeal, Dense, and a potent Ve∣nom; insinuating its Contra-natural Heat into the whole Mass of Blood, which is thereby imme∣diately inflam'd and corrupted: And according to the quantity and Venemous quality of this un∣natural Fire, the Distemper terminates in a Fever less or more Malignant; or in Small-Pox, Measles, &c. The Spirit of Life, not able to keep House with this Guest, there arises a terrible Contenti∣on; and since on the decision of this Quarrel no less than Life depends, a Fundamental Knowlege is here most necessary, not only of the Cause, but of the Nature of the Cause; since it produces a clear Judgment, and a certainty in Practice:
Whereas when People Act in the dark they are always at a loss, and know not to what they owe the success or misfortune that befals 'em: But trying many Experiments the poor Patients of∣times, as their last Refuge, are forc't into the cold Arms of Death, the only shelter from so many Calamities. To my Purpose; this Venom being, as I said before, Sulphureous and Viscous, 'tis further requi∣site to know the Nature of this Sulphureous Vis∣cosity, since 'tis easie to deal with what we under∣stand. Now in few Words, the Nature of such Bodies is at first to ascend in the form of a light and thin Vapour, which unduly detain'd grows more pon∣derous, gross and corporal, and then most diffi∣cult to be expel'd, till by some inward Agent it be again rarified into the form of a Vapour. And this Task the Spirit of Life only is able to perform: Tho' at present, being overpower'd by these Sul∣phureous Mists and Fogs, it likes lie the Sun be∣hind a thick Cloud unable to expand its Beams: But when it receives auxilliary Force by proper Cordials of a temperate and lively Nature, with ease it drives out this Intruder, and restores the Body to its former Vigour and strength. For do
not mistake, and think that Cordials alone do this, 'tis impossible. And this is the reason why com∣passionate Ladies, Nurses and old Women, whom Experience only makes Wise, often serve the In∣tention of Nature by promoting her Design, tho' by plain and Ordinary Means, which refresh the Animal Spirits, and enable them to go through their Task. Yet there is a vast difference in Cor∣dials and things of that Nature given in this case; for that only is a true Medicine which is so quali∣fied that it chears the Spirits, expels the Distemper, and at the same time abates the Fever; nay car∣ries off a great part of the Malignity insensibly through the Pores, which would have turn'd to Small-Pox, and tho' not an Opiate, gives an En∣joyment not to be understood, but by those that feel it. And as Opiates always make dull, stupid and Stomach sick; so this makes brisk, lively and cheerful; and yet when the time of rest comes, causes the Sleep to be sound and sweet. And now I'm oblig'd to show the uselessness and danger of other Methods: And since Blee∣ding is the first thing commonly prescrib'd, I shall begin with that, and do solemnly protest, it is my Opinion, that in this Distemper there is no more occasion for a Chyrurgion than there is for
a Bone-setter; nor is it only useless, but highly dangerous; for when the Blood is in a great Fer∣ment in order to throw off what ever is obnoxious, at that time to let any of it out, is as if we should do so to Liquors in Fermentation, which every Body knows would hinder their Working over; to which there is required a fullness. To fat People 'tis more pernicious, their Na∣tures are not so fiery, but more apt to receive a check, and have the Venom congeal'd before it reaches the Superficies; To lean hotter Consti∣tutions 'tis less dangerous, tho' safe for nei∣ther. No fear People should burst or dye for want of outlets, every Pore will prove a Portal wide enough, when the Matter is sufficiently rarified from within: But when the Blood is let out the empty space is immediatly fill'd (for Nature admits no va∣cuum) with a cool thin Air, which causes this Vapour that is of a heavier Nature to flat; sink, and fall back on the Vitals, of which an undeni∣able Proof is the depression of the Spirits, and sick Qualms of dangerous consequence, if immediate relief be not given. Nor is this all, for the Blood as I said before, being the very Mansion of the Spi∣rit of Life, as the Scripture it self bears Witness, you part with your dearest Friend, under pretence of expelling an Enemy, which yet you can never
do this way, tho' you should draw it half out; no more than you can fine thick muddy Liquors by such unlikely Experiments; For what's left is as bad still. But we daily see when by a lively Principle within they have work't out and thrown off all that is of a contrary Nature, they fine and grow clear, without any more adoe, and then are at rest, as all Agents are when they have attained their end. Another common Practice is Blistering and Swea∣ting, which tho' not quite so bad, are yet without use, but not without danger. For as it is impos∣sible to draw out inward fiery Venoms (unless they were beforehand mounted near the Skin) by an outward Application, which only attracts Watry Substances: So considering this Distemper as such, a fiery Venom, 'tis hereby depriv'd of the Moisture necessary for its Latitude and Allay, in both which respects 'tis of vast concern to keep it within, that joining with the heat or unnatural fire, they may between them from an Air, and so rise with ease and safety to the Patient; And be∣ing thus temper'd and allay'd they are generally of a large sort, that don't leave deep Marks. Whereas, were the the Moisture drawn off, as the Heat wou'd grow violently intense, so neither
would it (without great force) breath out: But circulate and prey on all it finds within, to the utter extinction of the Lamp of Life. I know the general Incentive both to Blood-letting and Blistering, is that the Fever is high, and they fear it may get into the Head, and these are of great use to prevent it, as also to hin∣der such a number of Small-Pox from coming out. I grant indeed there is a likelyhood of these Sul∣phureous Fumes in their rising, to get into the Head, nay of making the Patient talk Idly too, for they are of an intoxicating Nature, but of no more Danger than the Fumes of Wine, provided no Er∣rour be committed to make them strike back. For when they come to the Superfices of the Skin, the Watry and more Aerial Part, which as a Ve∣hicle helpt it thither, easily passing through the Pores Wings away; and the other being Sulphu∣reous and gross, receiving a check from the Air, settles there in its own Fiery from, and then the Head is clear and settled, the Spirits brisk and lively, the Appetite pretty good, and the Fe∣ver abated. As for the other Advantage pretended of pre∣serving a good Face, I have more than once ob∣serv'd this: That when Physitians by Drawing-Blood,
or giving cooling things, &c. have sunk the Spi∣rits, and hinder'd the kindly coming out, which is never so well as at Natures first attempt, the Patient on the return of the Venom, growing Heart-sick and opprest almost to Death, to gain the Point they have lost, they have been forc't to double their Files, and heap Cordial upon Cordial, which being Common Preparations, and so not divested of their own unnatural heat, as they ought to be, have increased the Fever, and drove out more than can well be maintained: And these Pit most, are a very smal sort, and of great viru∣lency and danger. Because Nature now having done her utmost, if she be baffled once more, a thousand to one resigns. But that I may comprize all in few words, whatever rebates, drives back, stupifies, dejects, overcools, makes great discharges of any kind; or on the other hand, whatever over-heats, drives out too forcibly, and fires the Spirits, is directly contrary to these Distempers, which ought so to be manag'd, that the Natural, not Unnatural Heat be assisted, the former being the very Agent that must do the Work; which if allow'd: A Me∣dicine rightly qualifi'd ought to have these pro∣perties; That it be stript of all false fire, which
would assist and heighten the Distemper. That instead thereof it be plentifully furnisht with the Salubrious Principles of Life and Sanity, readi∣ly joyning in this extremity with that Vital Spark within us; That it be of Ability to clear the first passages insensibly in the Operation; yet most sensibly in the Effect: For this is no time for Violent Means: That it likewise be endow'd with a Power to compose and quiet the Spirits, by bringing to equality and unity the Principles which are at Variance: And not as Opiats (which stupifying the Senses for a while) detain and tye down, not only the Spirits, but the Distemper, hindring its going off in its proper season, and Nature from assisting; so that when its Somnife∣rous Virtue is spent, you find you have lost time, the Patient only growing sensibly weaker, but the Distemper remaining in its full Vigor and more Fatal.) And that in a word, by its innate Virtue (with God's blessing) it can bring you safe thro' this dangerous Disease to your desir'd Health, and a more than ordinary Strength; and such a Medi∣cine is the Panacea, of which the following Dis∣course Treats.
Some Account of a Universal Remedy. THE Contemplation of Man's Body (tho' Dead) in its wonderful Structure by Ana∣tomical Display is a curious View: But the con∣sideration of him alive in his vital Form and Spring of Action enlivening the whole, is a more Ele∣gant Review. 'Tis to my purpose at present to behold him inform'd with the principle of Coelestial Fire, en∣kindling vital Airs, and stretching 'em thro' the whole Circumference, promoting thereby an ani∣mal Nourishing Heat to every Organ of the Bo∣dy, and by a Magnetick Love, panting after the Universal Breath of the World, and sucking thro' the Medium of the Air, a continued Reparation of Enlivening Beams to his Central Spirit, from the Fountain of Life and Form, the Sun. Having thus United the Lesser to the greater World, by joyning breath to breath, my design is to shew how this inbred Fire is maintain'd, may be enlarg'd, and when perverted and wrought in∣to a destructive Heat and Fire against Nature, by Art, may be reclaim'd to an Oleose, Soft, Nourish∣ing Heat, from its harsh, inrag'd consuming Fire.
But before I proceed, I must take care to keep under the warm influences of the Sun, and regard him as the common Parent of us all, and the Soul of the World, a Globe of Central Sulphur Gloriously Illuminating dark and shady Bodies (I had almost aid Understandings too) whose Mas∣culine Principle, endow'd with an hidden Fecun∣dity bestows quickening Virtues on all the scat∣ter'd Natures of the Earth, whereby numberless Efficacies and vital Breathings are convey'd thro' Spiritual Channels, for the avoiding Corrupti∣on, and replenishing them with Light, Adequate to that Tincture of Light which powerfully in∣forms mixt Bodies: So that He may truly be call'd the Heart of the Universe, deriving Life to all parts, and impregnating decaying Nature with new Vitality. This Magazeen of the Empyrean Heaven, where the Light first seiz'd upon matter, fills with Light and Life, the soft and yeilding Natures of the Air, which cannot be suppos'd a nothing, or an empty space, but an Essential Body of its own, admitting of great Powers and Virtues, where the matter is swallow'd up by its Form, and Tran∣slated into a Nature almost Spiritual. For where Form and Matter meet in equal poise or just Equa∣lity,
the matter's rescu'd from all Blemishes and Accidents, and freed in a wonderful manner from Infection and Corruption. The Air thus richly stor'd with beams of Life and Universal Sperm supplies the various kinds of being on the Earth, according to the strength of their Specifick Magnets. And it does so su∣perabound in Principles, they cannot take em off her hands, and she so lusts to be Imbodied, that where there's an aptness to Congelation, she'll strike the form of her Spiritual Essence: As I have strictly observ'd the Rime in an Hoar-Frosty Morn exactly shot into Stiria, which are the Sig∣natures of abounding Volatiles. And now 'tis time to derive this flowing Bounty to the Sons of Men, who lift up their Heads to Heaven for Life and Breath, and all things, and well they may; for I know not where else they'l feed their vital Flame: Since nothing more humours the Tincture of Life in Man, or his animal Fire, than the Nutritive beams from the Sun. For that Spark of Original Sulphur which trans∣mutes into Redness, the Mass of Blood is the Spring of Natural Fire and radical Moisture, and the Sun in the little World, Man; discenter'd from
the great Luminary: But held in Life by the in∣tercourse of large Breathings, whereby he repairs his Store from that inexhausted Fountain. In vain then shall I look for a fit Remedy amidst the Domestick or Exotick Drugs for Man. By Food he may, and must supply a Faecunda Terra, but this is but dunging the Ground, by Respira∣tion he must support his Vital Air. Having thus pointed out the Noblest Principle of Life in Man, I wou'd give a little aim at a suitable Medicine adequate thereto, as the most apt to repair and set him right when decay'd or over-power'd; and of such a Nature are the un∣determin'd Sulphureous Sparks of the Universe collected at certain Seasons of the year, when the Air is richly impregnated: but the manner of at∣tracting, and further knowledg of what is taken, together with the Artful handling of the matter are too curious and troublesome Niceties. For who wou'd take the pains to reunite Atoms, and consult the Poise so strictly in the cotempering of Principles, as just to give the Dominion to a liv∣ing Sulphur: but such a temperament obtain'd becomes a Medicine Spiritually fixt, and a noble Preservative against the Spirit of Diseases, and its consequent Materiation by contact with material
Thus our internal Air maintain'd (by Art upon Na∣ture) free from disturbance or Venoms, is always salubrious and pleasant. It plain enough appears, that the truest Medi∣cine for the Life of Man is a well exalted Sulphur▪ whereby it becomes Spiritualiz'd, not Volatiliz'd. But betwixt these two words lies seven years labour, with brains too. 'Tis sufficient then to suggest the Nature of it, that it may appear at least harmless. Since I assum'd this Notion of Sulphur, as the most Essential Principle of Life, I have revolv'd again and again the most powerful Specifick Sul∣phurs, especially those of the Mineral Nature, which are difficulty enough obtain'd in Purity, and notwithstanding Art, they will retain some Portion of their Specifick Venoms, which are not to be destroy'd but by the Death of the Species: So strongly is Nature determin'd to the preservation of her Kind. I could Instance in many of 'em that retain very Churlish Qualities after all the pre∣tended Art about them, such as Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, &c. meerly as Venemous to our Bodies, tho they are banter'd off, as having a Contest only with Offending Humours. I have us'd 'em in my Practice, and know as well what they are, and can do, as another.
After abundance of Experiments and Tryals, for the attaining of Noble Pleasant Medicines: I must confess, I think my self not a little Fortu∣nate in my Art of drawing down from the Sun and Air plenty of illuminated Sulphurs, and in my Skill of ordering 'em so as to result in the most effectual and pleasant Remedy; which is Preservative, Curative and Restorative, able at once to season the whole Fountain, so as to cleanse it self and all its streams. Far unlike to other Medicines, which are reputed Good for some One Disease, and that mi∣staken, kill instead of cure. But this Medicine (di∣lated in an appropriate Vehicle,) is render'd dispens∣able to all Persons, under any Circumstances, and as salubrious as the most refin'd Air. And this I call my Panacea, which I think abundantly more difficult to make, than to make it appear to be of such General Use, as the Nature of the Thing im∣ports, and the Experience of it can attest. But I'le not much concern my self to gain Proselytes. I would have it valu'd only at the Rate of its Real worth, and my self not too much undervalu'd for be∣ing the Author of it. Universal Matter once obtain'd, may be Reasona∣bly thought productive of a Universal Remedy. Now no passive actuated matter is undetermin'd, and I have
already declar'd against Specificks, and Dead Matter is not for my turn. The Living, Permanent, A∣ctive Matter of the World is my Subject, which (af∣ter 'tis render'd fusible by Art) penetrates the ve∣ry Center of Life, bringing with it the Riches of Superiour Orbs, Generously enriching Nature's Store with Beams of Life and Balmy Fire, enlarg∣ing her Magnetick Virtue; whereby she Vigorously attracts both Air and Common Food, assimilating them to her wholsom Nature. Hereby tender Stamina Vitae become Robust, the body haile and strong, quick and bright, able to dispel diseasie Forms, and resist their first Attempts. For the due Feeding, and Maintaining the Animal fire in its Resplendent Lustre, at once forbids all Jars, Dis∣cords, False Fire, &c. and gives a Free Enjoy∣ment of the body in all its necessary and pleasant Actions. Truly to sweeten, unite and strengthen the Mass of Blood, is of huge Advantage: And 'tis not Vomiting, Purging, nor Steel, nor Alkali∣sate Powders, nor washing with Waters will do the Business: A Course of pure Air, with Tem∣perance, bids fairer, and many are relieved there∣by.
But to restore Essential Sulphur, the Origin of the Tincture of the Blood, and subdue fixt Salts, inferring Corrosive Fires, and renew and increase a sweet Vital Air, is the Work rather of a Philo∣sopher than a Phisician. For the doing of all which this Panacea is a Compleat Medicine, altogether Philosophical, and an entire Dispensatory. Having now Regal'd the Spirits with this live∣ly Mellow Remedy; from so good a stock we may derive fresh Vigour to the branches, Plumpness to the whole, and cause every part to rejoyce with 'em; for their Nourishment depends so much on a wholesome Fountain, that Health or Diseases are communicated to 'em according to the decay or strength, Purity or Impurity of it. And what a Catalogue of Distempers is assign'd to the sundry Or∣gans of the Body, and Elaborate Methods and Medicines for their Cure? When as a well in∣form'd Principle of Life, benignly darts at once kind Rays throughout the whole, assisting with proper Vigour the Faculties, duely to separate what ought to be discharg'd through the cleansing Ducts, and refine and purifie what should be re∣tain'd.
What need then is there to run out the Ordure by Violent Purgatives, and the wholesome Juices too, sharpened and envenom'd first by Physick, even to the Excoriation of Bowels, and damage of the adjacent parts? Many are mistaken in this Point, and many take the Advantage of it. The blood is not at all purified thereby, nor sweetened; but often exasperated and fretted by such Contraries. Besides, the bowels well fill'd keep out Wind, Cholicks, Gripes, Twistings, and many more Disorders: And what Hurt in the Congestion of wholesome Food? It seems to be the design of Nature, by the Length, Windings and Position of the Guts in such order, that there should be due Retentions. Di∣gestion in Dung we that experiment by Heats, know to be the Truest and most Natural. The Scitu∣ation then of the Great Gut call'd Colon, the last but one, and the Amassment of the Feces in it, ly∣ing under the Great Organs of Digestion and Separa∣tion, shew that Nature had a design from that warm bed to comfort and assist the Neighbouring Vis∣cera. For such as are always flurting and jerking their bowels with purging Physick, less than one yard of
a strait Gut (from the Pylorus to the Anus) had been better for them. Nevertheless, I don't say, but discreet Evacuations, at some times, are truely Necessary for some, and the Drinking of Clean∣sing Waters, in their Seasons, as Epsom, North-hall, &c. The Danger of Vomits, Diaphoreticks, Blisters, Sa∣livations, improper Bleedings, Opiates, internal Stiptick Medicines, &c. ought to be discover'd; but I'le pass 'em by at present; for the very thoughts of 'em Jar my Nerves. Since I can with this Remedy keep the stomach and bowels clean from Choler, Flegm and Wind, and make a quick and clean Digestion, what needs Vomiting and Purging? 'Twill cause a Generous Transpiration; No occasion then to melt and waste the Nourishing Iuices with Provokers of Sweats, sometimes to a Colliquation, Faintness and Death. 'Twill cleanse and strengthen the Glands, first separate flowing and unclean Serosi∣ties, then keep 'em Tite from an Overflowing: forbear to swell, inflame and corrupt 'em by Sali∣vation with Mercury; or to distort Nature by for∣cing a little water through the Skin with Bli∣sters.
And if this proves an Antiferment, 'twill of∣ten save the Hazard of Bleeding in many Disea∣ses. It helps to sound and undisturbed sleep; No Use then of Opium. It reconciles great disorders, and always is on Nature's side; No need then of Iron Chains to bind an Enemy in your breast. While some lay on with Vomit, Purge, Blister, Cly∣ster, Helter, Skelter, blowing up, pulling down, like the Insurancers from Fire, I can deal with Life so subti∣ly, as to touch her to the quick; yet so kindly, that instead of crying Oh! I sweetly feed her Vital Flame, and give fresh Vigour to her Languishing or Fretted Spirits: And from a Rich Store-House derive 'em strong and mellow to all the withering and enfeebled branches, Reconciling Feuds and Quarrels by giving satisfaction to every disturb'd Member of the Body. All the Juices thus en∣rich'd, are Supple, Generous and Quick: All the parts supply'd with both are Agil, Plump and Strong. I have been more than Twenty Years a Great Seeker of Medicines, and have been at Great Ex∣pence every way about 'em, and have at any Rate possess'd my self of the Reputed Best. And I sin∣cerely
profess I slight 'em all for this, knowing it to be a Truth in Nature and Art, and as great a Truth in Practice. The Height of common Chymistry is to mount a Volatile Salt, that is quick, pungent and fugi∣tive. This Medicine is no such thing: But be∣ing greatly enricht with spiritual Sulphurs, and re∣tain'd by its own Magnet, is permanent and fusible, yet innocent and efficacious. But that the design'd Benefit of this Discourse may not be lost, I must, for the sake of some persons, descend to particulars. To Declining Age, when the Fire abates, and Moisture, Clouds and Cold Diseases pre∣vail, with the Decay of Organs by the Impover∣ishment of Spirits, through their often Eclips'd and declining Sun: Nothing more aptly repairs the Central Fire and Radical Moisture; whereby not only Diseases are dispers'd, but the whole body is replenish'd with proper Nourishing Juices: So as to recover, in some measure, Quickness and Strength of Parts; at least to furnish 'em with Good Appetite, strong Digestion, liberal Expul∣sion of Wind, Large and Clean Breathings, free from Clammy, Tough Humours; Clarity of Brain and Senses, and an entire dissipation of the
Winter Diseases. So that Prolongation of Life, and pleasant Enjoyment of it need not to be doubted, since God gives means thereto. There∣fore to be perswaded at Seventy to sit quietly down with the Common Wear and Tare of Na∣ture is more than needs: For such hail Principles as could reach thither, may with timely good Re∣pair, pass on I know not whither. To such as are coming into the World, as well as those that are going out, and bring with them he∣reditary Diseases, or an unthriving Nature, 'tis of singular Advantage: For next to the benefit of being deriv'd from Parents of a sound and strong Constitution, there is nothing more beneficial than to convey by their first Food Fundamental Princi∣ples of Health, which may prove as lasting as their Lives. To be drank by the Nurses while the Children suck. 'Tis a Compleat Medicine to such as have a general disorder, or decay of body and spirits, and know not where to lay the blame. For Consumptive Persons, and those endangered by it, aptly suits all their Complaints, and needs no Second, provided there be a proper Regimen, and careful avoiding of injurious things. For in a Hectick the blood having suffered a great dissoluti∣on
and separation, the Spirits of it are turned into a kind of Wildfire, which flies about, and wanting allay, burns and consumes a person almost to No∣thing. Now this excellent Medicine here becomes a Peace-maker, sweetly attracting back again (by Vertue of its Magnetick Quality) the dispersed Spirits; and by reason of its likeness to the most constituent parts of the blood, joyns it again, and determines its Action within its own proper Sphere. And then all things go well, and Symp∣toms disappear▪ Thus this Distemper, commonly accounted incurable, is forc'd to yeild the Victory to this salutiferous Remedy. In every Scorbutick Distemper 'tis very available, and acts as variously as the Scorbutick Form is va∣rious; for being a Medicine truly Natural, Nature can use it any way to her own benefit. And it is so Fortunate, that it cannot be taken to amend the blood, but 'twill into the bargain communicate Health and Vigour to all the parts of the body. For Fevers of all sorts, especially malignant, 'tis incomparable. Whereas in the use of other Me∣dicines, these Distempers hold a considerable time, with imminent danger, and often end in Death; I have many a time, with great pleasure, beheld,
this Noble Medicine surprising us with its admira∣ble Effects; taking off common Fevers in a few Days; sometimes in 24 Hours totally. And as for malignant Fevers, it secures the Vitals from be∣ing overcome by their Venom; and keeps 'em up through the whole Course of their sickness, from running very low. Here I omit to account for the Small-Pox, be∣cause of the Preceeding Discourse. Yet I may say thus much; That I have had five Patients at one time sick of the Small-Pox, and through the bless∣ing of God on this Medicine, not one miscarried; altho I did not visit after they were out (having ne∣ver had 'em my self) but only gave directions to those who attended 'em. I might mention the several Concerns of Women and Virgins, to whom I abundantly dispense it: But here I'le only particularize that restless and un∣easie distemper of Vapours, for which 'tis valuable, by removing the Cause, in reducing the parts di∣stended, and expelling those Fumes that fly up∣wards. I might add, how it obliges Women in Labour and Lying-in, assisting in all their Circumstances, and is the most Natural Cordial.
The bare Experience of ir for Cholicks, Cholical Dispositions, and tender Bowels; how it recovers the strength of Fibers, gives a Liberal Expulsion of Wind, and makes the Belly always easie; were a sufficient, Character. For melancholy people, such as are Dropsical, short-breath'd, Asthmatical, Paralytick, Lethargical, Apople∣ctick, and many others, as tho I had nam'd them all; 'tis abundantly qualify'd. But I chuse rather to nullisie than enumerate Diseases. 'Tis as easie and pleasant to take as Canary, and may be us'd as Entertainment, all the while recei∣ving health and pleasure. No one can injure him∣self with it. And 'tis so loose and free from Phy∣sical Rules and Hours, that it ought not to be rank't with the unpleasant Crew of Medicines: But reposited with the most Delicious Wines. From my House in Great Carter-Lane.
