C2904 R18272 11743458 48522
ARTICLES OF PEACE & COMMERCE Between the most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II. By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. AND The most Illustrious LORDS, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, and Governours of the Famous City and Kingdom of ALGIERS in BARBARY: Concluded by Arthur Herbert, Esquire, Admiral of His Majesties Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas: On the Tenth day of April, Old Stile, 1682. Published by His Majesties Command. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1682.
ARTICLES OF PEACE & COMMERCE Between the most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II. By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Chri∣stian Faith, &c. AND The most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, and Governours of the Famous City and Kingdom of Algiers: Concluded by the Honourable Arthur Herbert, Admiral of His Majesties Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas. Article I. IN the First place it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day, and for ever for∣wards, there be a true, firm and inviolable Peace be∣tween the most Serene King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, &c. and the most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga and Governours of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, and be∣tween all the Dominions and Subjects of ei∣ther side, and that the Ships or other Vessels, and the Subjects and People of both sides shall not henceforth do to each other any harm, offence, or injury either in word or deed, but shall treat one another with all possible respect and friendship. II. That any of the Ships or other Vessels be∣longing to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of His Majesties Subjects, may safely come to the Port of Algiers, or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, there freely to Buy and Sell, paying the usual Customs of 10 per Cent. as in former times, for such Goods as they sell, and the Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on Board with∣out paying any Duties for the same; And that they shall freely depart from thence when∣soever they please, without any stop or hin∣drance
whatsoever. As to Contraband Mer∣chandizes, as Powder, Brimstone, Iron, Planks, and all sorts of Timber fit for Build∣ing of Ships, Ropes, Pitch, Tar, Fusils, and other Habiliments of War, His said Majesties Subjects shall pay no Duty for the same to those of Algiers. III. That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of His Majesties Subjects, as those belonging to the Kingdom or People of Algiers, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffick without any Search, hindrance or molestation from each other; and that all Persons, or Passengers of what Countrey so∣ever, and all Moneys, Goods, Merchandizes and Moveables, to whatsoever People or Nation belonging, being on Board of any of the said Ships or Vessels, shall be whol∣ly free, and shall not be stopped, taken or plundered, nor receive any harm or damage whatsoever from either party.
IV. That the Algiers Ships of War or other Vessels meeting with any Merchants Ships or other Vessels of His said Majesties Sub∣jects, not being in any of the Seas appertain∣ing to His Majesties Dominions, may send on Board One single Boat with Two Sitters onely, besides the ordinary Crew of Rowers, and that no more shall enter any such Mer∣chant Ship or Vessel without express leave from the Commander thereof, but the Two Sitters alone, and that upon producing a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland, or of the Lord High Admiral of Scotland, for the said Kingdoms respectively, or under the Hands and Seal of the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of any of the said Kingdoms, that the said Boat shall presently depart, and the Mer∣chant Ship or Vessel shall proceed freely on her Voyage, and that although for the space of Fifteen Months next ensuing after the Conclusion of this Peace, the said Comman∣der
of the Merchant Ship or Vessel produce no such Pass, yet if the major part of the Sea∣men of the said Ship or Vessel be Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, the said Boat shall immediately depart, and the said Mer∣chant Ship or Vessel shall freely proceed on her Voyage; But that after the said Fifteen Months, all Merchants Ships or Vessels of His said Majesties Subjects shall be obliged to produced such a Pass as aforesaid. And any of the Ships of War or other Vessels of His said Majesty, meeting with any Ships or other Vessels of Algiers, if the Commander of any such Algier Ship or Vessel shall pro∣duce a Pass Firmed by the Chief Governours of Algiers, and a Certificate from the English Consul living there, or if they have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if for the space of Fifteen Months next ensuing the Conclusion of this Peace, the major part of the Ships Company be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belong∣ing to Algiers, then the said Algier Ship or Vessel shall proceed freely; But that after the said Fifteen Months, all Algiers Ships or Vessels shall be obliged to produce such a Pass and Certificate as aforesaid.
V. That no Commander or other Person or any Ship or Vessel of Algiers shall take out of any Ship or Vessel of His said Majesties Sub∣jects, any person or persons whatsoever, to carry them any where to be Examined, or upon any other pretence; nor shall they use any Torture or Violence to any person of what Nation or Quality soever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel of His Majesties Subjects, upon any pretence whatsoever. VI. That no Shipwrack belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of His Ma∣jesties Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging to Algiers, shall be made or be∣come Prize, and that neither the Goods thereof shall be Seized, nor the Men made Slaves; but that all the Subjects of Algiers shall do their best endeavours to save the said Men and their Goods.
VII. That no Ship, nor any other Vessel of Al∣giers shall have permission to be delivered up, or go to Sally, or any other place in Enmity with the said King of Great Britain, to be made use of as Corsairs or Sea Rovers against His said Majesties Subjects. VIII. That none of the Ships or other smaller Vessels of Algiers shall remain Crusing near or in sight of His Majesties City and Garison of Tangier, or of any other His Majesties Roads, Havens or Ports, Towns and Places, nor any ways disturb the Peace and Com∣merce of the same. IX. That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Tripoli, or Sally, or of any other Place, bring any Ships, Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of His said Majesties Subjects, to Algiers,
or to any Port or Place in that Kingdom, the Governours there shall not permit them to be sold within the Territories of Algiers. X. That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain do come to Algiers, or to any other Port or Place of that King∣dom with any Prize, they may freely Sell it, or otherwise to dispose of it at their own pleasure, without being molested by any: And that His Majesties said Ships of War shall not be obliged to pay Customs in any sort; and that if they shall want Provi∣sions, Victuals, or any other things, they may freely Buy them at the Rates in the Market. XI. That when any of His said Majesties Ships of War shall appear before Algiers, upon no∣tice thereof given by the English Consul, or by the Commander of the said Ships to the Chief Governours of Algiers, Publick Procla∣mation
shall be immediately made to Secure the Christian Captives; and if after that, any Christians whatsoever make their escape on Board any of the said Ships of War, they shall not be required back again, nor shall the said Consul or Commander, or any other His Majesties Subjects be obliged to pay any thing for the said Christians. XII. That from and after the time that the Ra∣tification of this Treaty by the King of Great Britain, shall be delivered to the Chief Go∣vernours of Algiers, no Subjects of His said Majesty shall be Bought or Sold, or made Slaves in any part of the Kingdom of Algiers, upon any pretence whatsoever. And the said King of Great Britain shall not be obliged by vertue of this Treaty of Peace to Redeem any of His Subjects now in Slavery, or who may be made Slaves before the said Ratifica∣tion; But it shall depend absolutely upon His Majesty, or the Friends and Relations of the said Persons in Slavery, without any limi∣tation or restriction of time, to Redeem such,
and so many of them from time to time, as shall be thought fit, agreeing of as reasona∣ble a Price as may be, with their Patrons or Masters for their Redemption, without ob∣liging the said Patrons or Masters against their wills to set any at Liberty, whether they be Slaves belonging to the Beylicque or Gally, or such as belong to the Bashaw, Dey, Governour, Aga, or any other persons whatsoever. And all Slaves being His Ma∣jesties Subjects, shall, when they are Re∣deemed, enjoy the advantage and benefit of abatements of the Duty due to the Royal House, and of the other Charges, by paying such reasonable Sums as any Slaves of other Nations usually pay when they are Re∣deemed. XIII. That if any Subject of the said King of Great Britain happen to die in Algiers, or in any part of its Territories, his Goods or Moneys shall not be Seized by the Governours, Judg∣es, or other Offices of Algiers (who shall like∣wise make no enquiry after the same) but the said Goods or Moneys shall be possessed or
received by such person or persons whom the Deceased shall by his last Will have made his Heir or Heirs, in case they be upon the place where the Testator deceased. But if the Heirs be not there, then the Executors of the said Will, lawfully Constituted by the De∣ceased, shall after having made an Inventory of all the Goods and Moneys left, take them into their Custody without any hindrance, and shall take care the same be remitted by some safe way, to the true and lawful Heirs; and in case any of His said Majesties Subjects happen to die not having made any Will, the English Consul shall possess himself of his Goods and Moneys upon Inventory, for the use of the Kindred, and Heirs of the Deceased. XIV. That no Merchants being His Majesties Subjects, and residing in, or Trading to the City and Kingdom of Algiers, shall be obliged to buy any Merchandizes against their Wills; but it shall be free for them to buy such Commodities as they shall think fit, and no Captain or Commander of any Ship or Ves∣sel
belonging to His said Majesties Subjects, shall be obliged against his Will, to Lade any Goods to carry them, or make a Voyage to any Place he shall not have a mind to go to: And neither the English Consul, nor any other Subject of the said King, shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of His Maje∣sties Subjects, except that he or they become Sureties for the same by a publick act. XV. That the Subjects of His said Majesty in Algiers, or its Territories, in matter of Con∣troversie, shall be liable to no other Jurisdi∣ction but that of the Dey, or Duan, except they happen to be at difference between themselves, in which case they shall be lia∣ble to no other Determination but that of the Consul onely. XVI. That in case any Subject of His said Ma∣jesty being in any part of the Kingdom of Algiers happen to Strike, Wound, or Kill a Turk
or a Moor, if he be taken, he is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater seve∣rity then a Turk ought to be, being guilty of the same Offence; but if he escape, neither the said English Consul, nor any other of His said Majesties Subjects, shall be in any sort questioned and troubled therefore. XVII. That the English Consul now, or at any time hereafter living in Algiers, shall be there at all times with entire Freedom and Safety of his Person and Estate, and shall be permitted to choose his own Druggerman and Broker, and freely to go on Board any Ships in the Road, as often and when he pleases, and to have the liberty of the Coun∣trey; And that he shall be allowed a Place to Pray in, and that no man shall do him any Injury in word or deed. XVIII. That not onely during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but likewise if
any Breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Algiers, the said English Con∣sul, and all other His said Majesties Subjects Inhabiting in the Kingdom of Algiers, shall always, and at all times, both of Peace and War, have full and absolute Liberty to de∣part and go to their own, or any other Coun∣trey, upon any Ship or Vessel of what Na∣tion soever they shall think fit, and to carry with them all their Estates, Goods, Fami∣lies and Servants, without any interruption or hindrance. XIX. That no Subject of His said Majesty, being a Passenger, and coming or going with his Baggage, from or to any Port, shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on Board any Ship or Vessel in Enmity with Algiers; And in like manner no Alge∣rine Passenger being on Board any Ship or Vessel in Enmity with the said King of Great Britain, shall be any way molested, whether in his Person, or in his Goods which he may have Laden on Board the said Ship or Vessel.
XX. That at all times when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britains, carrying His said Majesties Flag at the Main-Top-Mast-head, shall appear before Algiers, and come to an Anchor in the Road, That immediately af∣ter notice thereof given by His said Maje∣sties Consul, or Officer, from the Ship unto the Dey and Government of Algiers, they shall in Honour to His Majesty, cause a Sa∣lute of One and twenty Cannon to be Shot off from the Castles and Forts of the City, and that the said Ship shall return an An∣swer by Shooting off the same Number of Cannon. XXI. That presently after the Signing and Seal∣ing of these Articles by the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, and Governours of Algiers, all Injuries and Damages sustained on either part, shall be quite taken away, and forgotten, and this Peace shall be in full force and vertue, and continue for ever. And for all Depredations
and Damages that shall be afterwards com∣mitted or done by either Side, before notice can be given of this Peace, full Satisfaction shall immediately be made, and whatsoever remains in kind, shall be instantly restored. XXII. That in case it shall happen hereafter that any thing is done or committed contrary to this Treaty, whether by the Subjects of the one or the other Party, the Treaty notwith∣standing shall subsist in full force, and such Contraventions shall not occasion the Breach of this Peace, Friendship, and good Corre∣spondence, but the Party Injured shall ami∣cably demand immediate Satisfaction for the said Contraventions before it be lawful to break the Peace; and if the Fault was committed by any Private Subjects of either Party, they alone shall be Punished as Break∣ers of the Peace, and Disturbers of the Pub∣lick Quiet. And Our Faith shall be Our Faith, and Our Word Our Word.
Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God, the Tenth day of April, in the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, One thousand six hundred and eighty two: And in the Year of the Hegira, One thousand ninety three, and the Eleventh day of the Moon Abril. (L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.) FINIS.
