C4528 12148849 55026
All that thou sees't and readest is Divine: Learning thus vs'd is water turn'd to wine: Well may wee then despaire to draw his minde, View heere the case: i'th Booke the Jewell finde.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF HANNIBAL THE GREAT CAPTAIN OF THE CARTHAGINIANS, Who maintained Wars against all the power of ROME for eighteen years together in ITALY. AS ALSO The LIFE and DEATH of EPAMINONDAS the GREAT CAPTAIN of the THEBANS, Who was famous both for his Virtues and Valour. By SA. CLARKE sometime Pastor in St Bennet Finck, London. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Guilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. 1665.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF HANNIBAL the Great CARTHAGINIAN CAPTAIN. Who maintained Wars in ITALY against the ROMAMS for eighteen years together. By   Pastor in St Bennet Finck, London. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Sign of the Guilded-Acorn in St. Pauls Churchyard near the little North door. 1665.
Licensed Roger L'estrange. October 20. 1664.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF HANNIBAL THE GREAT. HAnnibal, the Son of Amilcar was about tweenty six years old,Hannibal chosen General. when he was chosen Generall of the Car∣thaginian Forces in Spain. He was elected by the Army as soon as As∣drubal (their late Generall) was dead, and the election was ap∣proved, and confirmed by the Senate of Carthage, wherewith Hanno, and his faction was nothing pleased. This was now the third of the Barchine Famely (so called of Amilcar, whose surname was Barcas) that commanded in chief over the men of War. Hanno therefore and his Partizans, being nei∣ther able to tax the Virtue of their enemies, nor to per∣form the like services to the Common-wealth, had no∣thing
left whereby to value themselves, excepting the generall reprehensions of War, and cautelous advise of not provoking the Romans: but they were little re∣garded. For the Carthaginians saw apparently, that the Oath of the Romans to the Articles of Peace, was like to hold no longer, than till the Romans could find some good advantage to renew the War. It was therefore rather desired by the Carthaginians, that whilst they were in a fit condition, the War should be∣gin, rather than in some unhappy time of Famine or Pestilence, or after some great losse in their Army or Fleet, they should be driven to yeild to the impudent de∣mands of their insulting enemies. This disposition of his Citizens Hannibal well enough understood. Neither was he ignorant that in making War with the Romans it was no small advantage to get the start of them. Could he but bring his Army into Italy, he hoped to find Friends and assistance, even from those People, that helped to encrease the Armies of the Romans. But his design must be carried privately, or else it would be prevented. He resolved therefore to lay Siege to Saguntum in Spain, where he now was with his Army, which might seem not greatly to concern the Romans, and would highly please the Car∣thaginians. Having resolved hereupon, neverthelesse he went or∣derly to work, beginning with those that lay next in his way. First therefore he entered into the Territory of the Olades,He be∣sieges, and takes many Townes. and besieging Althaea, in a few dayes he be∣came Master, not only of it, but of all the other Townes in their Country; and the Winter coming on, he rested his Army in New Carthage, or Carthagena, impart∣ing liberally to his Souldiers of the Spoiles that he had gotten in his late Conquests. In the Spring he made War upon the Vacci, and with little difficulty wan, first Salamanca, and after it Arbucala, though not without a long Seige and much difficulty: But in his return he was put to the height
both of his Valour, and Prudence. For all such of the Vacaei that could bear Armes,His Va∣lour, and Policy. being made desperate by the Spoile of their Country, with diverse others that had escaped in the late overthrow, joyning with the Toletans, made up an Army of one hundred thousand able men, waiting for Hannibal on the Banks of the Ri∣ver Tagus. They knew that he was very adventurous, and had never turned his back upon any enemy, and therefore hoped, that having him at such an advantage, they should easily have foiled him. But at this time our Great man of War, knew as well how to dissemble his Courage, as at other times to make good use of it. For he withdrew himself from the River side, as seeming fearfull to passe over it, aiming thereby to draw over that great multitude from their Banks of advantage. The Spaniards, as Hannibal expected and desired, think∣ing that he retreated out of feare, thrust themselves in a disordered manner into the River, to pursue him. But when Hannibal saw them well neare over, he turned back his Elephants to antertain them at their land∣ing, and thrust his Horsemen, both above and beneath them into the River, who by the advantage of their weapons slew almost all of those in the River with∣out resistance, and then pursued the rest,His Vi∣ctory. who be∣ing amazed, fled, and so he made a very great slaughter of them. The Saguntines perceiving the storme drawing near to them, hastened their Ambassadours to Rome, who complained that they were like to be undone, onely for their Friendship to the Romans. This so moved the Senate, that some would have War presently pro∣claimed, both by Sea, and Land, and the two Con∣suls sent with Armies, one into Spain, the other into Affrick: But others went more soberly to work (ac∣cording to the Roman gravity) whereby it was con∣cluded, that Ambassadours should be sent into Spain, to view the State of their Confederates. These Ambassadours found Hannibal at Carthagena,
where they had Conference with him, who carried himself so reservedly, that they departed, as doubtfull as they came. But whilst they were passing to and fro, Hannibal prepared, not only his Forces, but some Ro∣man pretences against Saguntum. For the Tudetani, who were neighbours to the Saguntines, complained to him of sundry wrongs that they had received from them of Saguntum: Probably Hannibal himself had hatched some of them. Having therefore such an occasion, he sat down with his whole Army before Saguntum. The Romanes were glad of the Quarrel,He be∣sieges Sa∣guntum. as hoping that Car∣thage, with all belonging thereto, would in short space become their own. Yet were they not hasty to threa∣ten before they were ready to strike; but meant to tem∣porize untill they had an Army in readinesse to be sent into Spain, where they intended to make Saguntum, the seat of War. In the beginning of Hannibals Siege, his Carthaginians were much discouraged by reason of the brave Sallies which the Saguntines made upon them, in one of which Hannibal himself received a dangerous wound in the thigh that made him unable to stir for many dayes. Yet in the meantime he was not unmindfull of his businesse, but gave order to build certain movable Towers that might equall those upon the City walls, and to prepare to batter the Curtaines, and to make a breach. These being finished and applied, had soon wrought their de∣sired effect. A large breach was made by the fall of some Towers, whereat a hot assault was given: But it was so gallantly defended by the besieged, that the Carthaginians were not only beaten from the breach, and out of some ground within the City, which in the first fury they had wan, but they were pursued even to their own Trenches and Camp. Yet at length the Carthaginian Army (wherein were one hundred and fifty thousand men) did so tire out the Townsmen by their continuall Allarms▪ that at length it gat into the Town, and had been Masters of it, but that they
were hindred by some Counter-works which the Besieg∣ed had raised. In this extreamity there was one Alcon, that came out of the City to treat with Hannibal, who would give no other tearmes but these hard ones, That they should deliver up to him all the Gold, Silver, and Plate, and other Riches which they had in the City; That the Citizens should leave the City, and take up such other habitations as he should appoint them; neither should they carry any more out with them, save the cloaths on their backs. These tearmes seemed so unreasonable to Alcon, that he durst not returne into the City to propound them to the Citizens. Yet might they far better have submitted thereto, how hard soever, because thereby they might have saved their lives, and the honour of their wives and Daughters, whereas, the City being shortly after taken by storm,Saguntum taken. they saw their Wives and Daughters defloured before their faces, and all put to the Sword that were above fourteen years of age. The Trea∣sures found in Saguntum, which were very great, Han∣nibal reserved, therewith to pay his Army. The Slaves, and other booty, he divided amongst his Soul∣diers, reserving some choise things, wherewith to present his Friends at Carthage, to encourage them to the War. This news exceedingly vexed the Romanes,Roman Ambassa∣dors sent to Car∣thage. being angry at their own slownesse to send help to Saguntum, which held out eight moneths, looking still for succour, but in vain. Then did the Romanes send Ambassadors to Carthage, to demand whether this act were done by their consents, or whether it were Hannibals presumpti∣on alone? If they granted the former, they were to give them defiance. Answer was made them in the Se∣nate of Carthage by one of the Senators, to this effect. That by this Message the Commonwealth of Carthage, was urged to plead Guilty, or not Guilt: That it be∣longed to them to call their own Commanders in questi∣on, and to punish them according to their faults;The Car∣thaginians answer. but to
the Romanes to challenge them if they had done any thing contrary to their late League and Covenant. Its true (said this Speaker) that in our negotiations with Luctatius your Ambassador, the Allies of both Nations were comprehen∣ded, but the Saguntines were not then your Allies, and therefore no parties to the Peace then made: For of your Allies for the future, or of ours, there was no question: As for the last agreement between you and Asdrubal, wherein you will say that the Saguntines were comprehended, its you that have taught us how to answer that particular. For whatsoe∣ver you found in the Treaty, between us and Luctatius, to your disadvantage, you said it was his presumption, as promising those things for which he had no Commission from your Senate: If then it be lawfull for you to disavow the Actions of your Ambassadors and Commanders, concluding any thing without precise Warrant from you; the same liberty may we also as∣sume, and hold our selves no way bound in honour to performe the contract that Asdrubal made for us, without our Com∣mand, and Consent. In conclusion, the Carthaginian Senate moved the Ro∣mane Ambassadors to tell them plainly the purposses of those that sent them? whereupon Q. Fabius, gather∣ing up the skirt of his Gown, as if somthing had been in the hollow thereof, made this short reply; I have herein my Gown-skirt both Peace and War; Make you (my Masters of the Senate) election which you will have. All answered, even which of them you have a fancy to offer us. Then (quoth Fabius) take War, and share it amongst you. Which all the Assembly willingly accepted.War de∣nounced by the Romanes. War being thus proclaimed, Hannibal resolved not to put up his Sword which he had drawn against the Saguntines, till he had therewith opened his passage to the Gates of Rome. So began the second Punick War; indeed second to none that ever the People of Rome met with. Hannibal wintered at Carthagna, giving license to his Spanish Soldiers to visit their Friends, and refresh themselves against the Spring. In the mean while he gave Instructions to his Brother Asdrubal for
the Government of Spain in his absence. He also took order to send many Troops of Spaniards into Africk,Hannibal prepares for Italy. to supply the roomes of those Affricans which he had drawn into Spain, as also that the one Nation might re∣main as Pledges for the other. He selected also four thousand Foot, all young men, and Persons of qualli∣ty, out of the best Citties of Spain▪ which were to be Garisoned in Carthage it self, not so much to strengthen it, as that they might serve for Hostages▪ He also left with his Brother, to guard the Costs, and Ports, fifty seven Gallies, whereof thirty seven were ready Armed. Of Africans and other Nations, strangers, he left with him above twelve thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, besides one and twenty Ele∣phants. Having thus taken order for the defence of Spain and Africk, he sent some to discover the Passages of the Py∣renaean Mountaines that part Spain from France; and of the Alps, that part France from Italy. He sent Am∣bassadors to the inhabitants of the Pyrenes, and to the Gauls to obtain a quiet passage, that he might bring his Army intire into Italy. These being returned with good satisfaction; In the begining of the Spring he passed over the River of Iberus with an Army of ninety Thousand Foot, and twelve Thousand Horse. All those parts of Spain which had not before been entered, he now subdued;He Con∣quers much of Spain. and appointed one Hanno to Governe Spain on the East side of Iberus, with whom he left ten Thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse. When he came to the borders of Spain, some of his Spanish Soldiers returned home without asking leave; which, that others also might not attempt, he courte∣ously dismissed such as were willing to be gone: Hereby the Journey seemed the lesse tedious to such as accompa∣nied him voluntarily. With the rest of his Army, consisting now but of fifty Thousand Foot, and nine Thousand Horse, he passed the Pyrenes, and entered into
Gaul (now France:) But he found the Gauls bounding upon Spain ready in Armes,His pas∣sage through France. to forbid his entrance in∣to their Country; but with gentle Speech, and rich Pre∣sents, which he sent to their Leaders, he wan them to favour his expedition. So without any other molesta∣tion, he came to the Banks of Rhodanus, where dwelt on each side of the River a People called Volcae. These being unacquainted with the cause of his coming, sought to stop his passage over the water: But he was greatly assisted by those of Vivarets, and Lionois: for though ma∣ny of them had transported themselves, and their goods into Daulphine, thinking to defend the Banks against him; yet such as remained, being willing to free their Country from such unwelcome Guests, they helped him to make Boats: informed him of a better passage higher up the River, and sent him Guides. When his Boats were ready, he sent Hanno the Son of Bomilcar,He is op∣posed. up the River to the Foard, and himself in the mean time made a shew of entering the Foard be∣low, that Hanno charging the Gauls on their own side, and himself at the same time passing the River in their faces,His Victo∣ry in France. might win the further Bank, which was done accordingly, though with some difficulty, and thereby the enemies were dispersed. Having passed this first brunt, and overcome both the rage of the River and those that defended it, he was visited by the Princes of the Cisalpine-Gauls, that inhabi∣ted Piemont, and Milan, who had lately revolted from the Romanes.Some Gauls in∣courage him. He passeth the Alps. These informed him that the pas∣sage over the Alps was not so difficult as report made it, and gave him Guides, with many other encourage∣ments. Yet found he himself extreamly encombred by the Savoyards, and lost more of his Carriages and Car∣thaginians than he could well spare. For he was twice strongly assaulted by them before he could recover the plaines on the other side. He was fifteen dayes passing over the Alps, wherein, besides the trouble of his ene∣mies,
he was much assaulted by foule weather, and Snow, it being now the begining of Winter. But the fair and fertile plaines which they now were entring in∣to, with the assistance, and encouragment of the Cisal∣pine Gauls, gave them much comfort, having nothing else of difficulty remaining, but that which from the begining they made account to overcome by their proper valour and resolution, namely the Romane Ar∣mies and resistance. The Romane Ambassadours who had denounced War at Carthage, in their return homewards, took Spain in their way, with a purpose to draw into their Alliance as many Cities, and Princes as they could: The first that they attempted were the Volcians, from whom they re∣ceived this answer: that they would never joyn with them who had forsaken the Saguntines in their greatest need; and that themselves had found the Cathaginians such good neighbours, that they meant still to adhere to them. From Spain the Ambassadours passed through Gaul, perswading them not to suffer Hannibal to passe through their Countery, and gloried much in their own strength: But the Gauls laughed them to scorn, and had scarce patience to hear them speak: Telling them that they meant not to set their own Houses on Fire to save the Romanes from burning; That the Car∣thaginians had never offended them as the Romanes had done, who had already forced some of them out of their habitations, and made others Tributaries, who were as free as themselves. With these unpleasing answers the Ambassadours re∣turned home; carrying no good newes of friends like to help them, but rather that the Gauls intended to take part with their enemies. And accordingly when the Cisalpine-Gauls heard that the Carthaginians had passed Iberus, and were marching towards Rome, the Bij,The Gauls rise a∣ganst the Romans, and Insubrians rose up against the Romans: Their quarrel was the late planting of Roman Colonies at Cemona, and Placentia, within their Territories. Relying there∣fore
upon the Carthaginian succour, which they thought to be at hand, laying aside all regard of those Hostages, that they had lately given to the Romans, they fell upon those Colonies. The Towns they could not win, but they forced the Romane Comissioners, which were abroad, to fly into Modena,They be∣siege Mo∣dena. where they besieged them. But the Gauls, having little skill in besieging Cities, grew weary, and were desirous of Peace: This they did on purpose to draw on some meeting, that laying hands on the Ro∣mane Deputies, they might with them redeem their Ho∣stages; and it fell out in part according to their wish: For Ambassadours comming to them from Rome to treat with them, they made them Prisoners. Manlius the Praetor, hearing of this outrage, marched with his Army to relieve the besieged. But the Gauls laid an Ambush in his way, that falling upon him, ut∣terly routed him, and slew most of his Army except a few that escaped into a defensible place upon the River Po. This being heard of at Rome, C. Atilius, the other Praetor, hasted with an other Army to relieve the besieged. But as the Gauls were too hasty, so the Romans were too slow in the begining of this War.The Ro∣mans send an Army into Spain. For they could not believe that Carthage, which had almost servilely endured so many indignities from them in the late peace, durst be so bold on a suddain as to attempt the Conquest of Italy itself. Wherefore they appointed one of their Consuls to make War in Spain, and the other in Africk. Titus Sempronius went into Africk, with one hundred and sixty Gallies of five to an Oare, which preparations seemed to threaten Carthage her self. P. Cornelius Scipio, the other Consul, hasted towards Spain, and by the way, touching at Massilia, he was there informed, that Hannibal had passed the River Rhodanus, whom he had thought to have found busy in Spain. Hannibal also heard of the Consuls arrivall, with whom he meant to have nothing to do. Yet both sent forth Scouts, Hannibal sent out five hundred Nu∣midians,
and Scipio three hundred of his best Horse▪ They met, and fought, and the Romans had the better of it. But when Scipio drew neer, thinking to have me with the Carthaginians, he found that they were gone three dayes before with an intent to see the Walls of Rome. Scipio hereupon sent his Brother Cn. Cornelius Scipio into Spain, with the greatest part of the Army against Asdrubal, and himself with the choisest return∣ed bak, and landing at Pisa, he marched through Tus∣cany, and Lumbardy, where he drew together the brok∣en Bands of Manlius, and Atilius, who were lately beaten by the Gauls, intending therewith to op∣pose the enemy, thinking to find them tired with their long Journey. Five moneths Hannibal had spent in that tedious march from Carthagena. When he had passed Rhoda∣nus, he had in his Army but thirty eight thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse, the rest having perished with Diseases, Enemies, Rivers, and Mountaines,Hannibals losses in his march. Hav∣ing newly passed the Alps, and scarce refreshed his wearied Army in Piemont, he sought the friendship of the Taurini, who being at this time in War with the Insubri∣ans, (his good Friends) the Taurini refused it▪ whereupon he besieged their chiefe Town, and in three dayes wan it, the spoil whereof did much incourage his Army, and the others Calamity terrified their Neighbours. Most of those parts would willingly have joyned with Hannibal, but when the Consul Scipio came amongst them, they began to be better advised▪ This waver∣ing affection amongst the People, made the Generals to hasten to a Battel. Their meeting was a Tienun [now Pavia] where each of them wondred at the others ex∣pedition. The Senate at Rome were much amazed at Hannibals arrival in Italy: wherefore they sent presently to Sempronius, and the other Consul, now in Sicily to give him notice of it, and to require him speedily to re∣turn
with his Army for the safegard of Italy,Hannibal prepares to fight. which accordingly he did. Scipio and Hannibal were now so near, that fight they must ere they could part, and therefore each of them encouraged their Souldiers by the best arguments they had: Hannibal assuring his men that there was no mean betwixt Victory and Death. A Battel.When the Armies approached near each to o∣ther, Scipio sent forth his Horsemen of the Gauls to begin the fight, lining them with his Darters for their assistance; himself with his men at Armes followed slowly in good order. The Gauls, being in their Gene∣rals sight, behaved themselves gallantly, and were as bravely opposed; but their Darters at the very first, ran cowardly away without casting a Dart, for fear of be∣ing trodden down by the enemies Horse. Yet did the Gauls maintain it stoutly, and did more hurt than they received: neither was Scipio unmindfull to relieve them; wherefore he adventured himself so far, that he received a dangerous wound, and had there perished if his Son (afterwards called Africanus) had not brought him off. Whilst the Romans were busy in helping their Consul, an unexpected storm assailed them at their backs: Hannibal had appointed his Numidian Horsemen to charge the Romans in their Flank, and to compass them about, whilst he, with his men at Arms sustained their charge, and met them in the face. The Numidi∣ans preformed it well, cutting in pieces the scattered Foot that ran away at the first encounter, and then fal∣ling on the backs of those that charged Hannibal▪ by this impression the Romans were shued together and routed, betaking themselves to their heels,The Ro∣mans beaten. and leaving to their enemies the honour of the day. Scipio perceiving how things were like to goe, almost stole the Retreat with most of his Footmen yet un∣broken, and recovered the Bridge over Ticinus▪ but notwithstanding his hast, he lost six hundred of his men which brought up his Reare, and should have broken
down the Bridge. It was two dayes after, ere Hannibal could passe the River: Scipio in the mean time refresh∣ing his men, and easing himself of his wound in Placen∣tia: But when Hannibal presented them Battel again, and they durst not accept of it, the Gauls, which before assisted the Romans out of fear, took courage and left them, and thinking that now the time was come for the recovery of their liberty, that night they fell upon the Roman Camp, wounded and slew many, especially of those that kept the Guard, with whose Heads in their hands, they fled over to the Carthaginians,The Gauls forsake the Romans. and pre∣sented their service: Hannibal received them exceeding courteously, and sent them to their own homes that they might preswade the rest of the Nation to become his confederates. The same night the Consul stole a retreat as he had done before, but not with the like successe: For Han∣nibal had an eye upon him, and ere he was gone far,Hannibal beates the Consul. he sent his Numidians after him, and himself followed with the Body of his Army. Then had the Romans received a great blow, but the Numidians, greedy of prey, fell to ransacking their Camp, and thereby gave them li∣berty of escaping, only some in the Reare were either slain or taken Prisoners. Scipio being unable to travel by reason of his wound, and judging it meet to stay for the coming of his fellow Consul, entrenched him∣self strongly upon the Banks of the River Trebia; which so diminished his reputation, that every day more of the Gauls fell to Hannibal, amongst whom came in the Boij, that brought with them the Roman Commissi∣oners: Hitherto they had keept them as pledges where∣with to recover their own Hostages▪ but now they de∣livered them to Hannibal as tokens of their affection to him. Hannibal being in great want of victuals, he at∣tempted the taking of Clastidium,He wins Clastidi∣um. wherein the Romans had laid all their Store, and Amunition, and a Brundusian, that had the keeping of it surrendred it to him for a little money.
The newes of these disasters coming to Rome, filled the Senate, and People with a desire of revenge, their Foot wherein their greatest strength lay, being yet en∣tire: they therefore hasted away Sempronius with his Army, who by speedy marches came to Scipio upon the Banks of Trebia. The Consuls took counsel what was fittest to be done, now that their Armies were con∣joyned: Sempronius, was eager to fight before Scipio re∣covered of his wound, that he might get the whole glo∣ry of the Victory: He also feared the election of new Consuls, his time being almost expired: But Scipio per∣swaded the contrary by many arguments: yet would not Sempronius be taken off, wherewith Hannibal was exceedingly pleased, who feared nothing so much as delayes. To further the desire of Sempronius, the Gauls that inhabited near to Trebia, complained of injuries done to them by the Carthaginians. Indeed they neg∣lected to supply Hannibal with necessaries, and therefore he was bold to be his own Carver. Hereupon Sem∣pronius sent forth a thousand Horse, which coming un∣looked for upon Hannibals Forragers, who were heavy laden,Hannibals Forragers beaten. they cut many of them in pieces, and chased the rest even to their Camp. This indignity made the Cartha∣ginians to sally out, who caused them to retire faster than they came: Sempronius relieved his own men, and Hannibal did the like: So that at length the Roman Army was drawn forth, and Battel offered, if the Carthaginians had not refused it. This Victory (for so the Consul would name it) made the Romans very desirous to try it out in open Field, notwithstanding Scipios diswasion from it. This Hannibal was informed of by the Gauls that were in the Roman Camp: therefore he resolved to secure the Victo∣ry by adding a Stratagem to his fortes. He found in a hallow place overgrown with Reeds, a fit trench to co∣ver an Ambush: Therein he cast his Brother Mago with a thousand choise Horse, and as many Foot. The rest of his Army, when he had well fed, and refresh∣ed
them, he led into the Field and marched towards the Consuls. Early in the morning he had sent over the River some Numidian Horsmen to brave the enemy, and draw him forth to a bad Dinner before he had broken his Fast. Sempronius readily embraced the opor∣tunity of fighting, and forthwith sent over the River, in a miserable cold day, his Footmen, who were al∣most to the armeholes, which together with the wat of food, did much enfeeble them: The Romans were strong in Foot, having in all thirty six thousand: the Masse of those were ranged in a grosse Battalion,Another Battel. guard∣ed on the Flanks with three thousand Horse, thrusting their light-armed and Darters in loose Companies be∣fore the rest in the nature of a Vauguard. The Car∣thaginians equalled them in Foot, and exceeded them in Horse: when therefore the Roman Horse were broken by the Numidians: when their Foot were charged, both in Front and Flank, by the Spaniards, Gauls, and Ele∣phants, and when all were pressed in the Reae by Ma∣go and his men out of the Ambush,The Ro∣mans bea∣ten. then fell the Romans by heaps under their enemies Swords, and were beaten down as well fighting as flying, so that of thirty six Thousand, there escaped no more than ten thousand of all sorts. The remainder of this broken Army was collected by Scipio, who got therewith into Placentia, steal∣ing away the same night, which was very rai∣ny. Sempronius ecaped with great danger, and fled to Rome, where he did his Office in choosing new Consuls for the year following, and then return∣ed to his Province with a fresh supply against Han∣nibal. The Winter proved very sharp, and unfit for service, which well pleased the Romans, who lay warme in Placentia, and Cremona. Yet did not Hannibal suffer them to lie very quiet, but vexed them with continual Alarms, assaulting divers places, and taking some. He also wan the Lygurians to him, who, to testifie
their faithfull love, presented him with two Roman Questors, [Treasures,] two Collonels, and five young Gentlemen,Hannibals Policy. the Sons of Senators. These and all his o∣ther Prisoners, Hannibal held in streight places, loaden with Irons, and misserably fed. But their followers he intreated courteously, and sent them to their own Coun∣tries without ransome, protesting that he undertook the War in Italy to free them from the oppression of the Romans. By these meanes he drew many to his party, and assistance. But some of the Gauls, fearing that their Country should be made the seat of War, conspired against his Life: others discovered the danger to him, who yet,Treache∣ries a∣gainst him. soon after, were ready to practice the same▪ which enforced Hnibal to use Perukes and false Beards the better to conceal himself from them. At length when Summer was come, he resolved to leave these giddy Companions and so passed the Appeni Hills that he might approach nearer to Rome. So away he went having his Army much recruted with Liguri∣ans and Gauls; and to prevent the obstructions in the ordinary way, he chose to travel through the Fennes of Tuscany.His dan∣gerous march. In those Marshes and Bogs he lost all his Ele∣phants save one, with one of his own eyes, through the moistnesse of the Aire, and by lodging on the cold Ground: Yet at last with much ado, he re∣covered the firme and fertile Plaines, and Quarter∣ed about Arretium, where he somwhat refreshed his weary Army, and heard newes of the Romane Con∣suls. C. Flaminius and Cn. Servilius, were newly chosen Consuls for this year: The first a tractable man, whol¦ly governed by the Senate; the other a hotheaded man, who fearing some obstruction, gat him out of the City before the day of Election, that he might, as soon as he was chosen, take possession of his Office: fearing least he should lose his Honour, which he hoped to gain in the War. The Senators were so displeased at this, that they sent for him back; but he neglected their Com∣mand,
and hasted to meet with the Carthaginians, whom he found at Arretium. Hannibal was well pleased with the fiery disposition of this Consul: and therefore provoked him by many in∣dignities, hoping thereby to draw him to fight, ere Servi∣lius came with the rest of the Army. For which end he put to Fire and Sword all the Country round about him, even under the Consuls nose. By this Flami∣nius thought his Honour to be much empaired, and therefore advanced towards the enemy. Many ad∣vised him to stay for his Colleague, but he would not be perswaded: Then he commanded the Army to march. All the Territory of Cortona as far as to the Lake of Thrasymene was on a light fire, which, whilst Flaminius thought to quench with his enemies bloud, he pursued Hannibal so unadvisedly, that he fell, with his whole Army into an Ambush: from thence he was charged unaware from all sides, so that he knew not which way to turne, nor how to make resistance. There was he slain in that place, accompanied with the carcasses of fifteen thousand of his Countrymen: About six thousand of his Vantguard took courage out of desparation, and breaking through their enemies, they recovered the tops of the Mountains: but being discovered there, Maharbal was sent after them,The Ro∣mans bea∣ten again· who overtook them by night in a Village, and surrounded them with his Horse, and so they yielded, rendering up their Armes upon promise of life and liberty. This accord Han∣nibal refused to confirme, and so made them all Priso∣ners. At this time he had about fifteen thousand Prisoners: all that were not Romans he set free without ransome, still portesting, that for their sakes he came into Italy: But the Romans he kept in streight Prison, and held them to hard meat. Presently after the Battell of Thrasymene, C. Semproni∣us, with four thousand Horse came neere to Hanaibals
Camp. He was sent from Ariminum by Servilius, the other Consul, to encrease the strength of Flaminius, but coming too late, he only encreased the misadventure. Hannibal sent out Maharbal to intercept him,The Ro∣mans bea¦ten. who find∣ing them amazed at the ill newes of the late losse, charg∣ed, and brake them, killing almost half of them, and drew the rest simply to yeild to mercy. Servilius hearing of the overthrow and death of his Colleague, hasted to Rome for the defence of it. Greatly were the Romans amazed at these disasters, and their aproaching danger.Great fea at Rome. Wherefore they had re∣course to a remedy which had been long out of use, and that was, to choose a Dictator, whose power was a∣bove the Consuls, and scarcely subject to the Controll of the whole City:A Dictator chosen. And now they chose Q. Fabius Maxi∣mus, the best reputed man of War in the City, and Fa∣bius chose M. Minutius Rufus, Master of the Horse, who was as the Dictators Leiutenant. The first act of Fabius was the reformation of some∣what that was amisse in matter of Religion: then were the Walls and Towers of Rome repaired, and fortified, the Bridges upon Rivers were broken down, and all care taken for the defence of Rome it self. Four Legions the Dictator raised in hast, and from Ariminum he received the Army which Servilius had conducted thither. With these he marched apace after Hannibal, not to fight, but to affront him.Fabius his warinesse. He always lodged upon high grounds, and of hard accesse, knowing that the Roman Horse were far inferior to the Numidians. Hannibal in the mean while pursued his Victory, and ranged o∣ver all the Countries, using all manner of cruelty to∣wards the Inhabitants, especially those of the Roman Nation, of whom he put all to the Sword that were able to bear Armes. Passing by Spoletum, and Ancona, he encamped upon the Adriatick shores, refreshing his diseased and over-traveled Army: and arm∣ed his Africans, after the Roman manner, and made his dispatches for Carthage, presenting his Friends,
which were very many) with part of the Spoils that he had gotten. Having refreshed his Army, cured his wounded, and fed his Horses, he followed the course of the Adriatick Shore towards Apulia, a Northern Province of the Kingdom of Naples, spoiling all that lay in his way. Yet took he not one City in all those Countries. Indeed he assaied Spoletum, but finding it well defended, he presently gave it over. All his care was to weaken the Romans in force and reputation;Hannibals Policy. knowing that when he was absolute Master of the Field, it would not be long before the walled Cities would open their Gates to him. To this end he presented Fabius with Battel, and pro∣voked him with all manner o bravado's; but Fabius would not bite: His design was to attend the Cartha∣ginians so neere as to keep them from stragling,Fabius his wisdom. and to preserve the Country from utter spoil. Thus by de∣grees he inured his men to dangers, and brought them first to look on the Lion afar off, that at length they might adventure to sit on his taile. But Minutius had a contrary disposition, and was as fiery as Flaminius, taxing Fabius with cowardlinesse and fear; yet nothing moved this wary Dictator: He suf∣fered▪ Hannibal to crosse the Apennie Mountaines, and to fall upon the rich and pleasent Territories of Cam∣pania: Fabius still keeping upon the Hils, and fast grounds. When Hanibal saw that he could by no means draw him to fight, and that the Winter drew on, he resolved to rest his Army that was loaden with spoil, in some safe and plentiful Country till the Spring came again. But before he could do this, he must passe a∣long by the Dictators Camp, that hung over his head▪ For there was no other way for him to get out of this fertile Country which he had already wasted. But by the errour of his Guid he was brought (as it were) into a pinfold. Now began the wisdom of Fabius to be admi∣red, and aplauded, as if he had caught the Carthaginians in a trap. But Hannibal freed himself by a fine inventi∣on:
He had gotten about two thousand Kine, upon whose Hornes he tied dry Fagots,Hinnibals Strata∣gem. and in the dark night seting them on fire, he caused them to be driven up the Hill. The sight was strange and terrible to the Romans, and Fabius himself thinking it to be a devise to circum∣vent him, kept within his Trenches. So Hannibal and his Army escaped the danger, and gat into a safe Country. Then did he make semblance of marching to∣wards Rome, the Dictator coasting him after the wonted manner; and keeping still on the high grounds betwixt him and the City, whilst the Carthaginians wasted all the plain Countries, and taking Geryon in Apulia, he turned it into Barnes and Storehouses for the Winter, and encamped under the broken Walls. Thus little was done till the Dictator was called home to Rome about some businesse of Religion; and when he went, he left the Army in charge with Minutius, the Master of the Horse. Minutius was glad of this oportunity to shew his suf∣ficiency. He was perswaded that the Romans in plain field would beat the Carthaginians, who had got the for∣mer Victories by subtilty, and ambushes. All the Army was of his opinion, and therefore they perferred his forwardnesse before the cold warinesse of Fabius: Hereupon he resolved to fight, though he had been peremtorily forbidden by the Dictator, and the breach of whose command was Death: But Minutius thought that the honour of the Victory, and love of the Army, would secure him. Hannibal on the other side was very glad that he should play with a more ad∣venturous Gamster: therefore he drew neer, and pro∣voked the Romans, sending forth a third part of his Army to wast the Country. There was a piece of high and advantageous Ground between the two Armies: Han∣nibal sent two thousand Horse to seize upon it: but Mi∣nutius by fine force, won it from them, and encamped upon it, whereby he became a nearer neighbour to Han∣nibal.
Minutius for many dayes not stirring, Hannibal sent forth many of his men to fetch in Harvest. This ad∣vantage Minutius wisely espied, and therefore drawing forth his Army, presented Battel to Hannibal, but he was not now in case to accept of it; wherefore Minu∣tius sent out some against the Forragers, who were scattered all over the Fields, and loaden with Booty,Hannibal Forragers beaten. and so were easily overthrowne. It angred Hannibal that he was not able to help them, but it angred him worse when the Romans tooke heart to assault his Trenches. But in the heat of this businesse Asdrubal came from Geryon with four thousand Horse, which emboldned Hannibal to issue forth against the Romans, to whom he did not so much hurt as he had re∣ceived. For this piece of service Minutius was highly honour∣ed by the Army, and more cryed up by the People at Rome, all judging him more worthy of Command than Fabius. But the Dictator was not so joyfull of the newes, as angry that Minutius had disobeyed his com∣mand. He said, that he knew his own place, and that he would teach the Master of the Horse to know it also; and that he would make him give an account for what he had done in his absence. The People much disliked these his speeches, and made an Act,Minutius made e∣quall with Fabius. that Minu∣tius should be joyned in equall authority with the Dictator. Before this Businesse was effected, Fabius seeing how things were like to go, dispatched the election of a new Consul in the roome of Flaminius, and having finished his businesse, went out of the City towards his Army. But the newes of Minutius his advancement was at the Camp as soon as he, so that his Lieutenant treated with him now as his Colleague, asking him how they should devide their authority: Fabius briefly told him, that seeing the Citizens had made the Master of the Horse equal with the Dictator, he would divide the Legions with him by Lot, according to the custome:
Minutius was ill pleased with this, for with half the Army he could not work such wonders as he hoped for. Yet meant he to do his best: and so taking half the Army, he encamped about a mile and a half from Fabius. It behoved the Master of the Horse to make good the opinion which had thus advanced him; there∣fore he fought good occasion to fight, to which Han∣nibal, was as forward as he. The Country between them was open and bare, yet Hannibal found meanes to lay an ambush in it: For the sides of the valley had ma∣ny spacious Caves,A Battel. and Hannibal in the night, thrust into them five hundred Horse, and five thousand Foot: and least they should be discovered, he made offer be∣times in the morning to seize upon a piece of ground that lay on the other side from the Caves, thereby turn∣ing all their eyes that way. Minutius hoping to increase his honour as he had gotten it, sent first his light Armu∣ture, then his Horse, and at length he followed in per∣son with the Legions. He was soon caught, and so invironed on all hands, that he neither knew how to make resistance, nor a safe retreate. In this dangerous case, whilst the Romans defended themselves, they lost many of their best men.The Ro∣mans beaten. But Fabius drew neer in good order to relieve them, and doing therein the office of a good Citizen, regarding more the good of his Country, than the disgrace which he had wrongfully sustained. Upon Fabius his approach, Hannibal retired: Fearing (as he said) to be well wet with the cloud that had hung so long upon the Hil-tops. Minutius forthwith submitted himself to Fabius, by whose favour he acknowledged, that his life was preserved. Thence forward the War went on slowly whilst Fabius his Dictatorship lasted, and the year following also when he had delivered up his charge to the Consuls, that followed his in∣structions. With little pleasure did they of the poorer sort in Rome
hear the great commendations which were given to Fa∣bius by the principall Citizens, because the War was not finished, nor much done tending thereto: And this af∣fection was very helpfull to Terentius Varro in his suit for the Consulship; and farther to help him, he had a kins∣man, Bibius Herennius, Tribune of the People: He boldly affirmed that Hannibal was drawn into Italy, and suffered there to range at his pleasure by the Noblemen; that without a Plebeian Consul the War would never be ended, &c. By which perswasions the multitude were won to be wholly for Terentius, to the great vexa∣tion of the Nobles, who could not endure such an up∣start: But nothing could hinder the choise of Terentius: Wherefore the Nobles, (to ballast this hot-headed man) set up L. Aemilius Paulus, a gallant man and a brave Captain, to stand for the other Consuls place, and he easi∣ly carried it. These new Consuls, Varro, and Paulus, omitted no di∣ligence in preparing for the War, wherein, though Varro made the greater noise, boasting what wonders he would do if he could but once see Hannibal, yet the care, and Prudence of Paulus did tend much more towards the effecting of it. He wrote to the two old Consuls to forbear fighting, and yet to ply the Carthagians with daily Skirmishes, and so to weaken them by degrees, that when he and his Fellow Consul came with the new Ar∣my, they might find the four old Legions well ac∣customed to the Enemy, and the Enemy well weak∣ned. These new Consuls raised an Army of a∣bove eighty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse. Hannibal all this while lay at Geryon, where all his provision, and store was. The Romanes, to be neer him, lodged about Canusium, laying up most of their provisions in the Castle of Cannae. This place Hannibal wan, and thereby not only furnished himself, but com∣pelled his enemies to want many necessaries:Cannae Castle taken. Hereby he also enabled himself to stay in that open Country,
fit for the service of the Horse. Of this mishap when Servilius had informed the Senate, it then seemed needfull to them to adventure a Battell with the Cartha∣ginian, rather than to suffer him thus to root himself in Italy. When all things were ready in the City, and the season of the year commodius, the two Consuls, with their Ar∣my set forward against Hannibal. This was done with great solemnity: Sacrifices and solmne Vowes were made to Jupiter and the other Gods, for good successe and Victory: and the Generals were accompanied with a great number that brought them out of the City, and dismissed them with Friendly leave-taking, and good wishes. These new Generals arriving at the Camp, dismissed M. Atilius, one of the last years Consuls, because of his age, and retained Servilius with them, as their Assistant. Aemilius laboured to encourage his men, telling them, that the enemy had stole all the former Victories by his Am∣bushes; that otherwise the Romans were far beyond them in Valour &c. and therefore he exhorted them to play the men and to do their best. This set them on fire to be dealing with the Carthaginians, and herein Varro con∣curred with them, longing for an oportunity to get the honour which he promised to himself, having now such a numerous Army By this means the Romans fell into a great inconvenience by the disagreement of of their Generals; Varro would fight, and Aemilius would not for the present,Varro makes hast to fight. hoping for better advantage ere long, when the enemy should be forced to dislodge out of the plain Country. The Consuls command in in turnes every day. Aemilius lodged six miles from Hannibal where the ground was uneven. Terentius the next day descended into the plaines, his Colleague be∣seeching him to stay, but could not prevaile. He sat down neer to the Carthaginian, who yet gave him but a rude welcome, and intertainment. The Carthaginian Horse, and light Armature fell upon the Roman Vant-Courriers,
and put the whole Army into a tumult, whilst it was yet in its march; but the Carthaginians were beaten off, though not without losse. The next day Aemilius, who could not securely draw back the Army, encamped upon the River Auus, sending part of his Forces over the River where they encamped themselves, with the rest he fortified and kept within his Trenches. Varro was perswaded that it concerned him in honour to make good his word to the People of Rome. When therefore it was his turne to Command,  the break of Day he began to passe the River, without staying to bid his Colleague good morrow: But Paulus came to him, labouring by all meanes to dis∣swade him. Terentius had nothing to answer but that his honour was engaged. Hannibal had twice or thrice baved them, which must not be endured. When Aemilius perceived that he could not prevaile, he was carefull that what must be done, might be done well. Ten thousand Foot he caused to be left behind in the Camp, opposite to the Carthaginians, to the intent that Hannibal might be forced to do the like, or else when they were in fight, these might fall upon his Camp,They pre∣pare to fight. and take it, with all the wealth therein, which would much distract the Carthaginians This done the Consuls drew forth their Army over the Water, and ranged them in order of Battell. This Hannibal was very glad of, and therefore with∣out any delay, passed over the River also, leaving in his own Camp enow to defend it, and no more. To en∣courage his men, he told them how fit the ground was wherein they were to fight; and that therefore they were to thank the Gods who had so infatuated the enemies as to choose such a place where the stronger in Horse was sure to pervail: Besides (said he) These are the men whom you have beaten as often as you have seen them: and now you are to fight for their Cities, and all the Riches that are in them, and ere many houres passe ye shall be Lords of all that the Romans enjoy. This set his men on fire to be at
it; and at the same time came his Brother Mago, whom he had sent to view the countenance of the ene∣my, to whom he said, What newes? What worke are we like to have? Work enough, answered Mago, for they are a horrible company; As horrible a many as they be, said Hannibal, I tell thee that amongst them all, there is not one man whose name is Mago, and therewith he fell a laughing, which all the Souldiers al∣so took for a good Omen. In this great day the Carthaginian excelled himself, expressing abundance of Military skill,The great Battel at Cannae. and of gret∣nesse of spirit, and courage. He so marshalled his Army, that all hands were brought to fight, where every one might do the best service. His Darters, and Slingers he sent before to encounter the Roman Velites: His Africans Armed after the Roman manner, made the two Wings, very deep in File. Between these he rang∣ed the Gauls and Spaniards armed, the first with broad Swords, and the other with short and well-pointed Blades. The Gauls were strong of Body, and furious in giving the Charge, but soon wearied, spending their violence at the first brunt. The Spaniards were lesse eager but more wary. These Hannibal caused to ad∣vance, leaving void the place wherein they had stood, and into which they might fall back, if they were over∣hardly pressed. Between the left Batallion by the Ri∣ver side, were the Gauls and Spanish Horse under Asdru∣bal: On the right Wing was Maharbal with the Nu∣midian Horse. Hannibal himself with his Brother Ma∣go, led the Rear. His Army this day was ten Thou∣sand Horse, and fourty Thousand Foot: His enemies had two to one against him in Foot, and he five to three against them in Horse. The Roman Army was marshalled after their usuall manner. On the right hand were the Roman Horsemen under the Consul Paulus: On the left Wing was Varo with the rest of the Horse which were of the Latines and other associates, and Servilius had the leading of the
Battel. The Sun was newly risen, and offended neither part, the Carthaginians having their faces Northward, and the Romans Southward. After some light Skirmishes between the two For∣lorns, Asdrubal brake in upon the Consul Paulus, and after a rough charge, and much execution done, the Roman Horse were overborn, and driven by plain force to a staggering recoil. When the Battels came to joyning, the Roman Legionaries found work enough, and more than enough to break that Body upon which at first they fell; yet at last Hannibals men were forced to a hasty retreat. But whilst the Legions, following their supposed Victory, rushed on upon those that stood before them; and thereby engaged themselves deeply within the principal strength of the enemy, the two African Battalions on either side, advanced so far, that getting beyond the Rear of them, they almost wholly inclosed them. Asdrubal having broken the Troops of the Roman Horse, followed them along upon the River side, beating downe, and killing most of them without regard of taking Prisoners. The Consul Paulus left his Horse, and cast himself amongst the Legions, as hoping by them to make good the day. But he failed of his expectation: Yet did he cheer up his men as well as he could both by Words, and Example, slaying ma∣ny with his own hands. The like did Hannibal a∣mongst his Carthaginians in the same part of the Battel, but with better successe. For the Consul received a blow from a Sling that wounded him much, and though a Troop of Roman Gentlemen did their best to save him from further harm, yet was he so hardly laid at, that by wounds and weaknesse he was compelled to forsake his Horse: whereupon all his company also al∣lighted. Hannibal being near▪ and seeing this, said, pleasantly, I had rather he would have delivered them to me bound hand, and foot, meaning, that he had them almost as safe as if they had been so bound. All this while Varro, with his associ∣ates
in the left Wing, was marvelously troubled with Maharbal, and his Numidians; who beating up and down upon the great Sandy plain, raised a foul dust, which by a strong South wind, was driven into the eyes and mouths of the Romans. These using the advantage both of their number and lightnesse, wearied the Consul and his followers exceedingly, neither giving nor sustain∣ing any charge, but continually making offers and then wheeling about. Yet at the first, they seemed to pro∣mise him a happy day of it. For when the Battels were even ready to joyn, five hundred of these Numidians came pricking away from their fellows, with their Shieldes on their backs, as was the manner of those which yeilded, and throwing down their Armes, yielded themselves, Varro had no leasure then to ex∣amine them, but bad them to rest quietly behind his Army till all was done. These crafty march∣chants did as he bad them for a while, till they had oportunity to put their designe in execution. Under their Jackets they had short Swords, and Poniards, with which and other weapons that they gathered up of those that were slaine, they flew upon the hindmost of the Romans, whilst all eyes were bent another way, where they did much mischief,Hannibals Policy. The Ro∣mans bea∣ten. and raised great ter∣rour. Thus Hannibal in a plain ground found meanes to lay an Ambush at the back of his ene∣mies. The last blow that put an end to all, was given by the same hand that gave the first. Asdrubal having routed and slain all the Roman Horse, save the company of Aemilius that joyned themselves to the Foot, did not stay to charge upon the face of the Legions▪ but, fetching a compasse, he came up to the Numidians with whom he joyned, and gave upon Terentius. This fear∣full cloud prognosticated a dismal storme; wherefore Terentius his followers, having wearied themselves much in doing little, and seeing more work towards than they were like to sustain▪ thought it their safest
not how to use a Victory▪ and God had otherwise de∣termined. When Hannibal had sacked the Roman Camps, and trused up the spoils, he dislodged and marched away to Samnium, finding a disposition in many People there∣abouts to forsake the Romans, and to make aliance with him. The first Town that opened their Gates to him, was Cossag,Many Towns inertain Hannibal where he laid up his Baggage; and leaving his Brother Mago to take in other paces, he hastened into Campania. He dismissed all his Prisoners that were not Romans, without ransome; whereby he won the affections of most of the Common People in Italy, to incline to him. He also gave leave to his Roman Prisoners to send to Rome to procure their ransome, with whom he sent Carthal▪ the General of his Horse, to see how Rome stood affected to peace. The Senate commanded Carthal to depart out of their Territories, and refused to redeem their Prison∣ers; probably, because they wanted Mony wherewithall to do it. Campania is a most pleasant and fruitfull Country, and Capua, the chief City in it, rich and wealthy, the Citizens despised now the unfortunate virtue of the Ro∣mans, and sent Ambassadours to Hannibal with whom these Articles were agreed upon: That the Campans should be absolutly free, and Governed by their own Lawes: That no Citizens of theirs should be subject to any Carthaginian Magistrate in War or Peace; and that Hannibal should deliver to the Campans three hun∣dred Roman Prisoners, such as themselves should choose, whom they might exchange for their Gentlemen that were Hostages with the Romans. Then did Hannibal hasten towards Capua, leaving Naples that he had thought to take in by Scalado, but found the Walls too high, and himself not fully furnished for a Siege. At Capua he was intertained with great solemni∣ty and Pomp;Capua intertains him. all the Town being so earnest∣ly in love with their new Guests that they mur∣thered
all the Romans that at present they could come by. The same course with these of Capua, ran the other Ci∣ties thereabout, except Nola, Nueria, Naples, Cassilie, and Acenae, which yet stood out for the Romans. Rome it self was in great fear of Hannibals coming at the first re∣port of the overthrow at Cannae▪ and the grief of that losse was so generall▪ and immoderate,The Ro∣mans mourn. that it much hindred their provision against apparent danger. All the Senators found work enough to quiet the Peoples lamentations. Courriers were sent forth to bring them certain tidings how things went, whereof when letters from the Consul Varro had fully informed them, they were so amazed, that they ran into Barbarous Supersti∣tion, and by the advise of their Southsayers▪ they buri∣ed two men, and two women alive in the Ox-market. Ambassadours also were sent to the Oracle at Delphi,Their Su∣perstition to enquire with what Prayers and Supplications they might pacifie the Gods, and obtain an end of their ca∣lamities. In the midst of these extremities they called home their Consul Terentius that he might name a Dictator, and all sorts of people went forth to meet him, and welcome him home, which was done to hold up their reputation. M. Junius was chosen for the Dictator,A Dictator chosen. and T. Sempronius Master of the Horse. These fell present∣ly to the ustring of Forces, and raised four Legions and a thousand Horse, yet were they faign to take some that were very , and they encreased their number by adding to them eight thousand sturdy Slaves, to whom liberty  promised if they would deserve it by their manly service: The Dictator also Proclaimed, that▪ whosoever were in debt and could not pay it, or that had committed  capitall offence, should be pardoned if they would  in the War▪  to Arme these they were faign to take down out off their Tem∣ples the spoiles of their enemies▪  had been there .
The Dictator having dispatched all needfull businesses in the City, took the Field with twenty five Thousand men, with whom he marched into Campania, and did little more then to keep Hannibal from spoiling the Country. Marcellus, one of the Roman Praetors, lying at Otia with a Legion and fifteen hundred Souldiers newly taken up, with whom he should have gone into Sicily, hearing of the overthrow at Cannae, sent his new livied men to Rome for the defence of it, and with his Le∣gion marched to Nola to help the Citizens there: Han∣nibal had many Friends in Nola amongst the common People, and therefore brought his Army thither▪ and on a day seeing the Walls unmanned, he bad his Soul∣diers bring their Ldders and scale them: But whilst they did it,Hinnibal beaten. and were in confusion, Marcellus with his men, issued out at three severall Gates, and set up∣on the Carthaginians, expecting no such thing, and did such execution amongst them, that this was accounted a Victory, and reputed the bravest act in all those Wars, from whence they concluded that Hannibal might be overcome. From thence Hannibal went to Acerrae, where being refused entrance,Acerrae taken by Hannibal. he laid Seige to it on every side, where∣with the Citizens being terrified, before his works were finished, they stole out by night, and left the Town empty; which Hannibal sackt and burnt, then hearing that the Dictator was about Cassiline, thith went he, but found him not; only many companies of the Roman Confederats were gotten into the Town, and kept it: The Citizens were affected to Hannibal, and would faign have been free from there Guests, who finding their intent,Cassiline besieged· in a night slew all the Citizens, and fortified a part of the City against the enemy. Hannibal gave diverse assaults to it, but was still repel∣led with losse, and many sallies they made with vari∣able successe: Hannibal mined, and they countermined, so that he was thriven to enclose them, that he might win it by Famine. T. Sempronius Gracchus, Master of
the Horse lay up the River with the Roman Army, and would faign have relieved the Besieged, but durst not venture. Barrels of Corn he sent floating down the River to relieve them, which, being discovered, came into Hannibals hands. Gracchus cast abundance of Nuts into the stream, which faintly sustained the Besieged. At length when all their food was spent, and whatsoever green thing grew under the Walls, the Carthaginians plowed up the ground, and the besieged presently sowed it with Rape-seed. Hannibal admired their patience, and said, That he meant not to stay there till the Rapes were grown, and therefore, whereas he had intended to have made them an example for their obstinacy, he was now content to grant them their lives upon an easie ransome, and so quietly dismissed them. The time of the year now being come, Hannibal retired into Capua, where he wintered, and where (as some say) his Army was cor∣rupted with the pleasures and plently there, and made more effeminate than before. About this time Hannibal sent his Brother Mago to Carthage with the joyfull newes of this great Victory.Mago sent to Car∣thage. He told the Carthaginian Senate, with how many Roman Generals his Brother had fought, how many Consuls he had chased, wounded, or slain. How the Romans, who never used to shun a Battel, were now grown so cold that they thought their Dictator Fabius the only good Captain. That not without reason their spirits were thus abated, since Hannibal had slain above two hundred and six Thousand of them, and taken above fifty Thousand Prisoners. He told them how many States in Italy followed the Fortune of those great Victories. He told them that the War was even at an end, if they would follow it close and give the Romans no time of breathing. He wished them to consider that the War was carried into an enemies Country, that so many Battels had diminished his Brothers Ar∣my, that the Souldiers that had deserved so well, ought to be well rewarded, and that it was not good
to burden their new Italian Friends with exactions of mony, Corn, &c. But that these must be sent from Carthage. Lastly he caused the Gold Rings, taken from the fingers of the Roman Knights that were slain, to be powred out before them, which being measured, filled three Bushels. This errand of Mago for the present found extraor∣dinary good welcome; And large supplies were voted to be sent to him:Large sup∣plies pro∣mised to Hannibal. But his old enemy Hanno, obstruct∣ed them, and the too much Parsimony, of the Citizens was the cause that there was very little done, and that which was done came too late. However, Mago brings the news of the great supply which was decreed to be sent; which much rejoyced Hannibal and his new con∣federats. The Spring drew on when the supply was ex∣pected, but there came no more than a few Elephants, and Hannibal was forced to rest contented with them. Then did he take the Field, and sought to make him∣self master of some good Haven Town that might serve to intertain the Carthaginian Fleet when it should arrive with the supplies. For this end he sent Himilco, who by the help of his good Friends the Brusians, won Petilia; he won also Concentia and Crotan, and the City of Locri, and many other places; only the Town of Rhegium,Diverse Cities taken. over against Sicily, held out against him. The Romans at this time were in such a case, that Hannibal with a little help from Carthage, might have reduced them to great extremity. But his own Citi∣zens suffered him to languish with expectation of their promised supplies, which being still deferred from year to year,The pro∣mised Supplies come not. caused as great opportunities to be lost as a Conquerer could have desired. But whatsoever Han∣nibal thought, he was faign to apply himself to his Italian Friends, and to feed them with Hopes▪ and to trifle away his time about Nola, Naples, Cumae, &c. be∣ing loath to weaken his Army by a hard Siege; that was to be reserved for a work of more impor∣tance.
Many offers he made upon Nola, but al∣wayes with bad successe. Once Mercellus fought a Bat∣tel with him there, under the Walls of the City, having the Citizens to assist him, wherein Hannibal lost a thou∣sand men; which was no great marvil, his forces be∣ing then divided, and imployed in sundry parts of Italy at once. At this time T. Sempronius Gracchus, and Q. Fabius Maximus, the late famous Dictator, were chosen Con∣suls. But Fabius was detained at Rome about matters of Religion, or Superstition rather, wherewith the Ci∣ty was commonly, especially in the times of danger, very much troubled, so Gracchus alone, with a Consular Army, waited upon Hannibal amongst the Campanes, not able to meet him in the Field, yet attentive to all occasions that should be presented. The Slaves, that lately had been Armed, were a great part of his followers. These and the rest of his men Grac∣chus continually trained,Gracchus his Pru∣dence. and had not a greater care to make his Army skilfull in the exercises of War, than in keeping it from quarrels that might arise by their upbrading one another with their base condition. Gracchus at this time had a bickering with the Capu∣ans, upon whom he came at unawars,The Ca∣puans beaten. and slew a∣bove two thousand of them, and took their Camp, but staid not long to rifle it for fear of Hannibal, that lay not far off. By this his Providence he escaped a greater losse, than he brought upon the Capuans: For when Hannibal heard how things went, he presently march∣ed thither, hoping to find these young Souldiers and Slaves busied in loading themselves with the Booty: But they were all gotten safe into Cumae, which so angred Hannibal, that at the earnest request of the Capuans, he assailed it the next day: Much labour, and with ill success he spent about this Town. He raised a woodden Tower, and brought it close to the Walls thereby to assault it,Cuma be∣sieged. but they within built a higher Tower, whence they
made resistance, and found meanes to set Hannibals Tower on fire, and whilst the Carthaginians were busy in quenching the fire, they issued out, charged them valiantly and drove them to their Trenches. The Consul wisely sounded a retreat in time, or Hannibal had requi∣ted them. The day following, Hannibal presented Bat∣tel to them, but Gracchus refused it: Seeing therefore no liklyhood to prevail,The Siege raised. he raised his Siege and de∣parted. About this time Fabius, the other Consul, took the Field, and recovered some small Towns that Hannibal had taken, and punished the Inhabitants severely for their revolt, the Carthaginians Army was too small to Garrison all the Towns that had yeilded to them, and with all, to abide (as it must do) strong in the Field. Wherefore Hannibal, attending the supply from Car∣thage that would enable him to strik at Rome it∣self, was driven in the mean time to alter his course of War; and instead of making (as he had for∣merly done) a general invasion upon the whole Country, he was faign to wait upon occasions, that grew daily more commodious to the enemy, than to him.Hannibal delaies. When Hannibal was gone to Winter in Apulia, Marcellus wasted the Country of the Hirpines, and Samnites▪ the like did Fabius in Cam∣pania. The People of Rome were very intentive upon the work they had in hand, they continued Fabius in his Consulship, and joyned with him Cladius Marcellus. Of these two, Fabius was called the Shield, and Marcellus the Roman Sword. The great Name of these Consuls, and the great preparations which they made, put the Campans in fear that Capua it self should be besieged, wherefore at their earnest request Hannibal came from Arpi, and having comforted his Friends, on a sudden he fell upon Puteoli, a Sea-town of Campania, about▪ which he spent three dayes in vain, there be∣ing six thousand in Garrison, wherefore he left it,
and marched to Terentum, werein he had great intelli∣gence. In the mean time Hanno made a journy against Be∣neventum, where T. Gracchus met him.A Battel Hanno had with him about seventeen thousand Foot, Brutians, and Lucans, besides twelve hundred Horse, most of them Numidians and Moors. Four hours he held the Romans work ere it could be perceived to which side victory would incline. But Gracchus his Souldiers, which were most of them Slaves, had received from him a peremp∣tory denunciation, that this day or never they must pur∣chase their Liberty, by bringing every man an enemies head. The sweet reward of Liberty was so desireable, that they feared no danger in earning it, though the cut∣ing off their enemies Heads troubled them exceedingly, which Gracchus perceiving, proclaimed that they should cast away the Heads, assuring them that they should have their liberty presently after the Battel, if they wan they day. This made them run headlong upon the ene∣my, whom their disparate fury had soon overthrown, if the Roman Horse could have made their party good against the Numidians. But though Hanno did what he could, and pressed so hard upon the Roman Battel, that four thousand of the Slaves retired to a ground of Strength, yet was he glad at length to save himself by flight with two thousand Horse, all the rest being either slain or taken.The Car∣thaginians baten. Gracchus preformed his promise to the Slaves, making them free: only on those four thousand, that went aside in the Battel▪ he inflicted this slight punishment, that as long as they served in the Wars, they should eat standing, unlesse sicknesse forced them to break this order. So Gracchus with his Army returned into Beneventum, where they newly enfran∣chised Souldiers, were Feasted in publike by the Towns∣men, some sitting, some standing and all with their Heads covered, as the manner of such was, with white Caps. This was the first Battel worthy of note, that the Cartha∣ginians lost since the comming of Hannibal into Italy.
Thus the Romans by degrees began to get heart, and repair their breaches, only their Treasury was very empty,The Ro∣mans po∣verty, how sup∣plyed. whereupon the People were called together, and were plainly told, that in this exigent, there must be no taking of mony for victuals, weapons, apparel, or other necessaries for the Souldies, but that they must trust the Commonwealth with the loan of these things till the Wars were ended. This was willingly assented to, and the Armies were well supplied both at home, and abroad. In the mean time the Roman Generals omitted no part of industry in seeking to recover what had been lost.Cassilne taken by the R∣mans. Cassiline was besiged by Fabius, unto whose as∣sistance Marcellus came▪ The Town was well defended by a Carthaginian Garrison for a longtime, but at length, the Inhabitants grew fearfull, craved a Parlee, and agreed to deliver it up, so as all might have liberty to depart whither they pleased. This was consented to, yet as they were issuing out, Marcellus seizing upon a Gate, entred with his Army and put all to the Sword: only about fifty that had gotten out, ran to Fabius, who saved them, and sent them to Ca∣pua. Hannibal was this while about Tarentum, but after long expectation of having it delivered to him, he was faign to depart without it. So he went to Salapia, which he intended to make his wintring place, and began to Victual it. The new Counsuls chosen at Rome, were, Q. Fabius, the Son of the present Consul, and T. Sempronius Grac∣chus the second time. The old Fabius became Lieute∣nant to his Son; and on a time when the old man came to the Camp, his Son rode out to meet him. Eleven of the twelve Lictiors, let him passe by on Hotsback, which was against the custome: but the Son perceiving this, bad the last of the Lictors to take notice of it, who thereupon bad old Fabius alight, and come to the Con∣sul on Foot: the Father cheerfully did so, saying, It
was my mind, Son, to make tryall, whether thou didst understand thy self to be Consul. Altinius a wealthy Citi∣zen of Arpi, came to Fabius and offered to deliver the Town into his hands. Hannibal hearing of it, was glad, and sent for the Wise and Children of Altinius into his Camp, he examined them by torment, and being as∣sured of the Treason, he commanded them to be burnt, and seized upon all Altinius his wealth. Fabius short∣ly after came to Arpi, which he took by Scalado in a stormy night.Arpi taken by the Romans. Five thousand of Hannibals Soul∣diers day in the Town, and of the Arpines there were about three thousand. These were thrust formost by the Carthaginian Garrison, who suspected them, and therefore thought it no wisdom to trust them at their backs. But after some little resistance, the Arpines gave over the fight, and Parlied with the Romans, and the Arpi∣ne Praetor, going to the Roman Consul, received his Faith for the security of the Town, wherefore they pre∣sently made head against the Garrison, yet did the Car∣thaginians make stout resistance, till it was agreed that they should passe safely, and returne to Han∣nibal. About this time Cliternum was taken by Sempronius Tudianus, one of the Roman Praetors. Also one hun∣dred and twelve Gentlemen of Capua offered their service to C. Fulvius, the other Praetor, only upon condition to have their goods restored to them: which shewed that their affections were turned from Hannibal to the Romans. The Consentines also and the Thurines, which had yeilded to Hannibal, when there was no appearance of those great succours which were promised from Carthage, returned to their old allegiance again.The Ro∣mans bea∣ten. Others would have done the like, but that at this time Hanno met with, and slew L. Pmponius, and a great multitude that followed him. Hannibal in the mean time had all his care about Ta∣rentum, which if he could take, it would be very com∣modius for the Landing of the supplies▪ which he yet
expected. Long he waited for an opportunity, and at last by the help of his Friends within it,Tarentum ake by Hannibal. he one night entered at the two Gates that were opened for him, and presently made to the market place; which the Gover∣nour perceiving, fled to the Port, and taking Boat, got into the Citadel that stood at the mouth of the Ha∣ven. Hannibal having gotten the spoil of the Roman Souldiers goods, he addressed himself against the Cita∣del, which stood upon a Peninsula, and was joyned to the Town by a causway, which was fortified with a Wall and a ditch. Against this Hannibal raised some works, hoping in a short time to take it, but whilst he was thus busied, there came in a strong supply by Sea to them, which made his attempt hoplesse. The Ta∣rentins Fleet lay in the Haven and could not go forth by reason of the Citadel, whereby the Citizens were likely in a short time to suffer want: To help this, Hannibal caused their ships to be drawn up, and car∣ried through the streets, which were long and plain, and lanched them into the Sea without; which done, they so cut off all supplies, that the Citadel began to suf∣fer want. Now this while the Roman Forces grew strong, and Q. Fulvius Flaccus, with Appius Claudius, the new Consuls, prepared to besiege the great City of Capua, having now armed twenty three Legions, though to fill them up, they had listed many Boyes, and they made a Law for their encouragement, that their years should go on from that time, as if they had been of lawfull age. Before the Roman Army drew near, the Capuans, through their own wretchlesnesse, began to feel want of Victuals, they sent therefore to Hannibal, desiring him to succour them before they were closed up, and he sent Hanno with an Army to supply their wants. Hanno appointed them a day to bring store of Carriages to convey in the provisions which he should make, but when the day came, they brought only
fourty Waggons, with a few pack horses. Hanno was much vexed at it, and appointed them another day when they should come better provided: But in the mean while Q. Fulvius the Consul, came privatly to Bene∣ventum,The Car∣thaginians beaten. and having learned that Hanno was gone abroad a Forraging, he marched all night, and by the break a day, assaulted his Camp, which for a long time was gallantly defended, but at last, though with great losse, he won it, in which six thousand were slain, se∣ven thousand taken Prisoners, besides a great Booty that Hanno had lately gotten from the Roman Confede∣rats. This misadventure, and the neer approach of the Roman Consuls, made them of Capua to send a piti∣full message to Hannibal, intreating him to hasten to their relief, considering how faithfull they had been to him. Hannibal answered them with fair pro∣mises, and sent away two thousand Horse to keep their lands from spoile, whilst himself was intent about taking the Citadel, and some other Towns in thse parts. The Consuls, fortifying Beneventum, to secure their backs, addressed themselves to the siege of Capua.Capua be∣sieged by the Con∣suls. Ma∣ny disasters befell the Romans in the beginning of this great enterprise. Gracchus, a brave Souldiers, and lately twice Consul, was slain. He was honourably interred by Hannibal, some of whose straglers had slaine him, the Manumissed Slaves that served under him, took this opportunity to go every man whither he pleased, so that it was long ere they could be got together again. Yet the Consuls proceeded in their work. Mago and the Citizens gave them but bad wel∣come, sallying out, and slaying fifteen hundred of their men.The Seige raised by Hannibal. Neither was it long ere Hannibal himself came, fought with them, and caused them to dislodge. They removed by night and went severall wayes▪ Ful∣vius, towards Cnn, and Claudius into Lucana. Hannibal followed Claudius bin could not reach him▪ Yet by the way he met with one Penula, a stout man
that had the charge of neer sixteen thousand men,The Ro∣mans bea¦ten. with him he fought, and slew him, and almost all his men, scarce a thousand of them escaping. Then was Hanni∣bal informed that Cneus Fulvius, a Roman Praetor, was in Apulia with about eighteen Thousand men. Com∣ing to Fulvius, so forward he was, that needs he would have fought with him that night. Hannibal set Mago with three thousand men in an Ambush,Another victoy. then offering Battel to Fulvius, he soon had him in the Trap, whence he was glad to escape himself, leaving all, save two thousand of his men, dead behind him▪ These two great blowes much astonied the Romans. Yet when they had gathered they remainders of those Armies, the Consuls fell hard again to the Seige of Ca∣pua.Capua be∣sieged again. At the first sitting down of the Consuls they pro∣claimed, that whosoever would come out of Capua by such a day, should be pardoned, and enjoy his estate, if not, no grace was to be expected: the Capuans rely∣ing on their own strength, and the assistance of Han∣nibal rejected this offer with scorn: And before they were wholly closed up, they sent to Hannibal request∣ing his help: He gave them good words, and dismis∣sed them. But he, thinking that they were well able to hold out for a long time, staid to di∣spatch his businesse, before he went, by which means the Consuls had time enough to entrench and secure themselves. When the Consulship of Claudius and Fulvius was expired,Hannibal comes to relieve them. they were continued in their charge of the Ar∣my as Proconsuls, and their designe was to take Capua by Famine. But Hannibal came before he was expected by the Romans, and took one of their Forts, and fell up∣on their Camp; the Capuans also at the same time sally∣ed out but were beaten in again; Yet did Cli in pur∣suing them, receive a wound, that ere long brought him to his Grave. Hannibal followed his businesse bet∣ter and had almost taken the Camp, yet at length was repelled.
This extreamly angred Hannibal and made him inter∣taine a haughty resolution, even to set upon Rome, which accordingly he pursued, and because that work must be done with celerity, he caused his men to provide victu∣als for ten dayes▪ and so marched forward. This newes coming to Rome, they sent to acquaint their Generals with it, wishing them to do what they judged best for the safety of the City. And thereupon Q. Fulvius took fifteen thousand choise Foot; and a thousand Horse, and with them hasted towards Rome. As Hannibal drew neer, making wofull havock as he went, all the streets and Temples in Rome were filled with women, crying, and praying,Hannibal intends for Rome and leaves it. rubbing the Altars with their haire, the Senators were all in the Great market place, ready to give advice upon all e∣mergencies. But Fulvius and Hannibal arrived at Rome neer together. The Consuls and Fulvius encamped without the Gate of Rome, attending Hannibal, who coming within three miles of the City, advanced with two thousand Horse, and rode along a great way un∣der the Wals, viewing, and considering how he might best approach them. Yet went he back without doing or receiving any hurt. Many tumults were at this time raised in the City, and the multitude were so affrighted, that they would have run out of the Gates if they could have done it with safety. The day following Hannibal brought up his Army and presented Battel to the Romans, who would have accepted it, had not a terrible shower of rain caused both the Armies to return into their Camps and this happened two dayes together, and the weather cleered up presently after. But Hannibal, who had brought but ten dayes provision with him, could not stay any longer, he therefore made all the spoil he could in the Roman Ter∣ritories, passing like a Tempest over the Country, and run towards the eastern Sea so fast, that he had almost taken Regiu before his arrival was suspected. As for Capua he gave it for lost, and  facti∣on
of Hanno, which thus disabled him to relive that fair City Fulvius returned back to the Siege of Capua, which now began to suffer want. And faign they would have sent again to Hannibal but that all wayes were intercepted. The truth is, Hannibal had already done his best, and now began to faint under the burden of that War, wherein (as he afterwards protested) he was vanquish∣ed by Hanno and his Partizans in the Senate of Carthage, rather than by any force of the Romans. Capua being now brought to extremity, the multitude forced the Senators to consult about the delivering of it up to the Ro∣mans: The bravest of the Senators foresaw what the issue would be, and therefore one of them invited the rest home to supper, telling them that when they had Feasted themselves he would begin to them such a Health as should for ever free them from the malice of their ene∣mies, the Romans: Twenty seven of the Senators im∣braced the motion, and when they had supped, drank Poison,Capua taken. whereof they died: The rest, hoping for mercy, yeilded to discretion. So a Gate was opened whereat a Roman Legion entred, disarmed the Citizens, and made the Carthaginians Prisoners; The Senators were laid in Irons; and presently after, Fulvius caused all the Campane Prisoners to be bound to stakes, and scourged a good while with Rods,The Con∣suls cruel∣ty. after which he struck off their heads. The like rigor Fulvius used to all the Towns of the Campanians: most of the Inhabitants, with their Wives and Children he sold for Slaves, the rest were banished; after which the Glory of Hannibal began to shine more dimme, and most of Italy by the ter∣rible example of the Capuans, had a generall inclina∣tion, upon good conditions, to return to the Roman side. Marcellus and Levinus being chosen Consuls, Levi∣nus went into Sicily, and Marcellus was to make War with Hannibal: They were busy in raising Souldiers, but wanted mony extreamly; many wayes were proposed
how to supply that want. At last the Consuls said,The pub∣lick wants supplied. that no preswasions would be so effectual with the People, as good examples; wherefore they propounded and it was presently resolved, that every one should bring and put into the Treasury all the mony, Jewels, and Plate that they had, and none reserve more than one Salt, and a Bowle wherewith to make their offerings to the Gods: as also a Ring for himself: and some o∣ther small Ornaments for his Wife and Children; and this was accordingly done by all, with much cheerfull∣nesse. Then went forth Marcellus against Hannibal, whose Army was now greatly diminished by long and hard service. His credit also amongst his Italian Friends was much weakened by the losse of Capua: This put him upon pillaging those Towns which he could not keep, thinking that the best way both to enrich himself, and to pres it from his enemies: but this farther aliena∣ted them from him,Salapia yeilded to Marcellus whereupon Salapia yeilded to Marcellus, and betrayed to him a gallant Regiment of Numidians, the very best that Hannibal had. After this the Consul took two Cities of the Samnites, wherein he slew above three thousand of Hannibals men; which Hannibal could not prevent, the Romans being grown stronger in the Field than he. But now came newes that Massanissa was at Carthage, with five thousand Horse, ready to set sail for Spain, whither, when he came, he was to accompany Asdrubal, the Brother of Hannibal into Italy. This did not more comfort Han∣nibal and his followers, than it terified the Romans. At this time Hannibal was informed that Cn. Fulvius, a Roman Prator, lay neer to Herdonea, to get the Town by practice: Hannibal made great marches thitherward, and when he came, offered Battel to Fulvius,The Ro∣mans beaten. who rea∣dily embraced it. The Roman Legions made good re∣sistance a while, till they were compassed round with the Carthaginian Horse: then fell they to rout, and a great slaughter was made of them; Fulvius, with
twelve Collonels, and about thirteen thousand were slain, and Hannibal set Herdonea on fire because it was appointed to be delivered up to the Romans. Marcellus hearing this, hasted thither: At Venusia they met,A Battel and fought a Battel from morning till the night parted them, and ended with uncertain Victory. Many more skirmishes they had, but none of impor∣tance. Then Q. Fabius Maximus, and Q. Fulvius were a∣gain chosen Consuls: and Fabius resolved to besiege Tarentum, which if he could win, like it was that scarce any one good City would remain true to Hannibal, and in the mean time he desired Fulvius, and Marcellus, with their Army, to presse Hannibal so hard that he might have no leasure to help Tarentum. Marcellus was glad of this opportunity, judging that no Roman was so fit to deal with Hannibal as himself: He followed him therefore from place to place, desiring ever  come to Battel, but upon unequall tearmes. Hannibal only inter∣tained him with skirmishes, meaning to keep his Army intire, till Asdrubal came to him. But Marcellus was so importunate, that he could not be rid of him, wherefore Hannibal bad his men to beat soundly this hotspur Roman Captain of whom he could not be rid till he had let him bloud. Then followed a Battel wherein Hannibal had the victory,A Battel. took six Ensigns and slew about three thousand of the Romans.The Ro∣mans beaten. Marcellus rated his men exceedingly, and called them cowards, which did so shame them, that they asked pardon, and desired him to lead them forth again against the enemy. Hannibal was angry to see that nothing would make them quiet, and so they fought again, and though the Romans had the better of it, fighting very desparately, yet they lost so many men that they had little cause to boast of the Victory: Only this advantage they had, that hereby Fabius got time to prosecute his Siege at Taren∣tum without disturbance. Fulvius the other Consul this while took in diverse Towns of the Hirpines, Lu∣uls,
and Volscentes, that willingly rendred themselves and betrayed Hannibals Garrisons to him. Fabius, by the Treason of a Brusian Captain in Taren∣tum had the Town delivered into his hands, and yet when he was entered he put all to the Sword, Brutians as well as others,Tarentum taken. whereby his credit was much empair∣ed. All the Riches of the Town he sought out, which was very great, and sent it to the Treasury at Rome where there was much need of it. Hannibal having gotten cleer of Marcellus, fell upon those that besieged Caulonia, all whom he slew or took Prisoners,The Ro∣mans bea∣ten and then he hasted to relieve Tarentum; But when he came within five miles, he heard that it was lost. This grieved him, yet he said no more than this, The Ro∣mans have also their Hannibal: We have lost Terentum in like sort as we got it. But lest he should seem to retreat out of fear, he encamped there four or five dayes, and thence departing to Metapont, he bethought himself how to take Fabius in a trap. He caused the chief of Metapont to write to Fabius; offering to betray it into his hand. These Letters were sent by two young men of the City, who did their errand so well, that the Consul wrote back, and appointed the day when they should expect him. Hannibal being glad of this, at leasure made ready his Ambushes for the wary Fabius; but some∣thing hindred him from coming, and so al was fru∣strated. M. Claudius Marcellus, and T. Quintus Crispinus were chosen Consuls, who had a strong desire to make War upon Hannibal, assuring themselves of Victory. Crispinus had also a desire to make his Consulship Fa∣mous by taking some good Town, as Fulvius and Fa∣bius had done by taking of Capua, and Tarentum: where∣fore he went and besieged Locri,Locry besieged▪ the best City in Italy that held for the Carthaginian, bringing all sorts of En∣gins to promote the work. But Hannibal was not slow to relieve the City, at whose approach, Crispinus rose and retreated to his fellow Consul. Thither followed
Hannibal, to whom the Consuls offred Battell: He ∣fused it, yet dayly intertained them with kirmishes, waiting for some advantage, and reserved his Army to a time of greater imployment when his Brother Asdru∣bal should come into Italy. Marcellus was not well pleased with this, and therefore sought to force him to fight; for which end, he comanded a Navy by Sea, and the Garrison of Tarentum again to besiege Locri: But Hannibal had an eye behind him,The Ro∣mans bea∣ten. and by the way, laid an Ambush for those of Tarentum, slew three Thousand of them, and made the rest to fly back into Tarentum. As for the Consuls, Hannibals desire was to wast them by little, and little. Betwixt him and them was a little Hill, overgrown with bushes, amongst them he hid some Numidians, willing them to attend every advan∣tage. To this Hill the Consuls thought fit ro remove their Camp; thither therefore they rode to view the place, taking with them the son of Marcellus, a few Collonels, and other principal men, and about two hundred Horse. The Numidian Centinel gave warn∣ing of their approach, and the other discovered not themselves till they had surrounded the Consuls and their Company. The Consuls defended themselves hoping to be quickly releived from their Camp that was neer at hand: But all their Horse save four,The Con∣suls slaine. forsook them and fled. Marcellus was slain with a Lance; Crispinus had his Deaths wound, and young Marcellus was wounded, yet got to the Camp, the rest were all slain. Hannibal gave an honourable Funeral to Marcellus, bestowing his ashes in a Silver pot, covered with a Crown of Gold, and sent it to his Son to be interred where he pleased. Then icinius the Roman Admiral laid hard Siege to Lo∣cri,The Ro∣mans bea∣ten. wherefore Hannibal went thither again, but as soon as his Vant-couriers appeared, the Romans ran in confused heapes to their Ships, leaving all their Engins, and whatsoever was in their Camp to Hannibal. C. Claudius Nero, and M. Livius were chosen Con∣suls,
at which time Asdrubal was already come into France, and was approaching towards Italy▪ Livius wold not stir against him but with a considerable Army, and those of the choisest men: and Claudius with an other Army, was sent against Hannibal. By this time newes came that Asdrubal was passing the Alps, and that the Ligurians, and those about Genoa were ready to joyn with him. When all was ordered according to the Consuls minde, they went forth of the City; each his severall way. The Citizens were full of fears,Great fear at Rome. there being an other Son of Amilcar come into Italy, and one that in this expedition seemed to be of more sufficien¦cy than Hannibal. For whereas in that long and dangerous march through so many Barbarous Nations, over great Rivers, and Mountains, Hannibal had lost a great part of his Army, Asdrubal in the same journy had increased his▪ descended from the Alps like a row∣ling Snowball, far greater than when he came over the Pyrenes. This made the People wait upon their Consuls out a Town, like a pensive train of Mour∣ners. Asdrubal at his first coming into Italy set upon Pla∣centia; but there he lost a great deal of time,Asdrubal comes in∣to Italy. and yet was faigne at last to leave it, whereby he gave the Ro∣man Consuls leasure to make ready for him, and caused his Brother Hannibal to make no hast to meet him, knowing that Placentia would not be taken in hast. Nero made what speed he could to meet with Han∣nibal, and stop him from joyning with his Brother. He had with him fourty thousand Foot, besides Horse, with which he oft offered Hannibal Battel, and in diverse Skirmishes had the better of him. At Crumentum Han∣nibal fought with him, but was worsted▪ yet at he off and marched away to , with Nero still at his heels. Thence he went to Canum, and sat down there neer the place where he had obtained his most memorable Victory. There also Nero sat down by
him, thinking it enough to hinder him from joyning with his succours. There was he advertised of Asdru∣bals approach by letters that were going to Hannibal which he intercepted: wherefore he resolved that it was better to run some desparate adventure than to suf∣fer them to joyn together. He therefore took six thou∣sand Foot and a thousand Horse, all of his choisest men, and away he posted as fast as he could to assist his Fellow Consul. Livy at that time lay encamped neer to Serea Gallica, and Asdrubal within half a mile of him. In six dayes Nero finished his journy thither, and by the way his company was encreased by some voluntaries. The next day after his coming, they consulted together, and resolved to fight the enemy, Asdrubal perceiving that both the Consuls were now together, and thereup∣on feared that Hannibal was slaine, and though before he was forward to fight, yet now he thought it no shame to retreat farther from them. So he dislodged secretly by night, intending to get over the River Metaurus: but being misled by his Guids, he had not gone far before: Nero was at his heels with all the Horse, which hindred him from going any farther, and the other Consul fol∣lowed with the Legions in order of Battel. Asdrubal, seeing a necessity to fight, omitted no care, or circum∣spection. His Gauls he placed in the left wing upon a Hill,A Battel. which the Enemy could not ascend without much difficulty. In the right wing he stood himself, with his Africans and Spaniards: His Lygurians he placed in the midst, and his Elephants in the Front of the Battel. On the Romans side Nero had the right Wing, Livius the left, and Portius led the Battel, Livy and Portius found strong opposition, and with great slaughter on both sides, prevailed little or nothing. Nero laboured much in vain against the steep Hill, where the Gauls stood out of his reach: wherefore taking part of his Forces, he led them round behind Livy and Portius, and charged Asdrubal in the Flank, which made the Victory incline to the Ro∣mans: For Nero ran all along the depth of Asdrubals Bat∣tel,
and put it to rout. Of the Spaniards and Africans the greatest part were slaine: the Ligurians and Gauls saved themselves by flight: Of the Elephants only four were taken alive: the rest were slaine, most by their riders: the Guid having in readinesse a mallet and a chissel wherewith he gave a stroke between the ars in the joynt next the Head, wherewith he killed the Beast upon a sudden. Asdrubal strove with great Patience against many dif∣ficulties, and performed all the duties of a worthy Ge∣nerall, and stout Souldier,Asdrubal slaine. and when he saw the losse irraparable, he rode manfully into the thickest of the Enemies, where fighting bravely, he was slain. The number of the slain on both sides is variously reported, the Camp and all the Riches in it fell into the hands of the Romans. When it was known at Rome how Nero had left his Army, they were much amazed and full of fears: The People filled the Market place, the Women ran to the Temples with Vows and Prayers, and all were filled with melancholly: therefore the newes of this Victory was intetained with exceeding joy, as if Hannibal were already driven out of Italy. Nero returning to his Camp, threw the Head of Asdrubal before the Carthaginians and brought forth his African Prisoners bound, send∣ing two of them to give Hannibal notice what had hap∣pened. Hannibal having in this unhappy fight, lost, besides his worthy Brother, all hope that had so long sustained him in Italy,Hannibal retires in∣to Brusia. withdrew himself into the Country of the Brutians, and thither he caused all the Lucans, his Friends, to remove, as likwise all that dwelt in Metapontum. For he wanted men to defend so many places as he held, lying so far asunder. Wherefore he drew them all into ester com∣passe in the utmost corner of Italy; it being a Country of much fastnesse, and the People exceedingly devoted un∣to his service. This was in the thirteenth year after his coming into Italy: and from thence to the eighteenth
year wherein he departed, there was no memorable thing done. For Hannibal wanted strength where∣with to make any great attempt, the Romans had little minde to provoke him, but thought: it well that he was quiet. This commendation is given him by the Roman Historians themselves. That making War upon a People, of all others the most Warlike, he obtained so many Victories by his own good conduct: And that leading an Army compounded of so many sundry Na∣tions Africans,His Pru∣dence. Spaniards, Gauls, Carthaginians, Italians, and Greeks, which were neither in Language, Lawes, Conditions, or any other thing, one like to an other, yet he held them all in such good order, that they never fell to sedition amongst themselves, or against their Gene∣ral. And here we must leave him till he be drawn in∣to Africk by Scipio. P. Cornelius Scipio having Conquered Spain, returned home to Rome,Scipio coms from Spain· Is chosen Consul. where he made suit for the Honour of a Triumph, which was denied him, because he only had the place of a Proconsul: Yet to make him amends, they chose him Consul, together with P. Licinius Crassus, who being High Priest also, might not go far som the City, as being to attend the matters of their Superstiti∣on: which made well for Scipio, who was desirous to be sent into Africk, to transfer the War thither. Some there were of the Senators, especially Q. Fabius Maxi∣mus, that opposed him therein: yet at length he obtain∣ed to have the Isle of Sicily for his Province, with leave to passe into Africk if he found it expe∣dient. The Treasury at Rome being extreamly exhausted, no mony was given to Scipio, neither was he allowed to presse Souldiers for his African Voyage: But the People made up the backwardnesse of the Senate with their for∣wardnesse▪ For besides his Roman Souldiers, he had a∣bout seven thousand Voluntaries that came to him from sundry parts of Italy. Severall Towns also furnished him, with Corn, Iron, Handmils, and all other necessaries, so
that having his Navy in readinesse, he transported his Army into Sicily, where he found, besides other Forces,He go into Syci∣ly. two gallant Legions of old Souldiers that had served at Cannae. For encreasing his number of Horse, he pressed three hundred young and rich Gentlemen of Sicily, and then discharged them again, upon condition that they should deliver their Horse and Armes to as many Roman Gentlemen whom he had brought along with him for the same purpose. Then did Scipio imploy Laelius into Africk, rather to make discovery than to do any thing,Sends in∣ti Africk. who yet took a great Booty, and struck no little terrour into the Car∣thaginians, who saw their affaires now to be upon the tearmes of change. He also procured King Massanissa to revolt from the Carthaginians and to joyn with the Ro∣mans. Then did Scipio embark his Army for Africk,And goes himself. where he landed neer the Faire Promontory, and present∣ly after encamped before Vtica. The Carthaginians at this time had no Captain of note in their City, nor a better Army than of raw Soul∣diers that were levied in hast. Asdrubal the Son of Gesco, that was lately chased out of Spain by Scipio, was their best man of War. But before he was ready to take the Field, Scipio had beaten the Troop of Cathaginian Horse that were sent to impead his landing, and slaine Hanno their Captain; he had also sacked one of their Towns, and taken eight thousand Prisoners, and sent them into Sicily. He took also Salva which he fortified. Then passed he to Vtica and besieged it fourty dayes with all sorts of Engines, but prevailed not.Vtica be∣sieged. By this time Asdrubal had gotten thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse, but all raw Souldiers, and King Syphax brought to their help fifty Thousand Foot and ten Thousand Horse, with which they marched bravely towards Scipio, who thereupon left the Siege, and en∣camped upon the Shore in a place of advantage which he strongly fortified, and Winter drawing on, Mussanissa brought in great store of Corn, Cattel, and other Pro∣visions
to him. Asdrubal and Syphax encamped neer un∣to him: their Souldiers covered their Huts with Mats and Reeds, and dry Boughs▪ and being held in hand about a treaty of peace, they grew remisse, and carlesse in keeping their Guard,The Car∣thaginians beaten. which Scipio being informed of, took his oportunity in the night to set their Camps on fire, and in the confusion slew, and took Prisoners most of them. Yet did the Carthaginians make shift to raise another Army of neer thirty thousand, reckoning in Syphax, and his men, and four thousand Spaniards, Mercena∣ries,And a se∣cond time. that were lately come to them: Scipio went to meet them, and another Battel was fought, and the Victory easily obtained by Scipio against those raw and untrained men. Thus Scipio became Master of the Field, and took in diverse Cities, and sent Massanissa and Laelius after Syphax into his Kingdom, whom they beat again, took him Prisoner, and partly by fair meanes, and partly by foule, became Masters of most of his Kingdom, which Scipio bestowed upon Massanissa. And this was the first time that the Romans took upon them to make Kings. The Carthaginians were extreamly dismayed, when they heard this newes, and for the calamity which had befaln their good Friend Syphax, and when they under∣stood that Massanissa, their immortall enemy, had gotten possession of his Kingdom. This made them send forth Ambassadours to Scipio to make suit for Peace. When these came into Scipios presence,They sue for Peace. they basely prostrated themselves on the ground, and kissed his Feet, and made as unworthy a Speech, beseeching him to passe by their offences,, and to grant them Peace. Scipio knew well in what a poor case Rome then was, and how unable to defray the charge of the War if it should be continued, and therefore he was willing to grant them Peace upon these conditions. That they should render up all the Prisoners, and all their Renigadoes, and slaves; That they should withdraw their Armies out of
Italy and Gaul: That they should not meddle with Spain, nor with any Islands betwixt Italy and Africk: That they should deliver up all their Ships of War, save twenty: That they should pay him a great summe of Money, with some hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat and Barley: All these they assented to, whereupon he granted them a Truce that they might send their Am∣bassadors to the Sanate of Rome. But the truth was,They dealt de∣ceitfully. they desired only to get time till Hannibal might come back, in whom they reposed all their confidence: And therefore they took occasion to pick new quarrels with the Romans, which they were the rather encoura∣ged to, hearing newes that Hannibal was already landed in Africk, by whose meanes they hoped either to drive the Romans out of Africk, or to procure better tearms of Peace. Hannibal departed out of Italy no lesse passionate then men are wont to be,Hannibal▪ leaves Italy. when they leave their own Coun∣tries to go into Exile: He looked back to the shore, accusing both Gods and men, and cursing his own dul∣nesse in that he had not led his Army from Cannae, hot and bloudied as it was, to the Walls of Rome. Arriving in Africk he disembarked his Army at Leptis, almost one hundred miles from Carthage.Comes into Afrck. He was ill provided of Horse, which he could not easily transport out of Italy. From thence he passed through the inland Country, gathering Friends by the way. Tychaeus, a Numidian Prince that had the best Horses, he allured to joyn with him: and one Mezetallus, an other Prince brought him a thousand Horse. The Carthagians in the mean time neglected to make those preparations that would have secured the Victory and yet they sent to Hannibal, requiring him with out delay to do what he could. Hannibal answered, that they were his Lords, and therefore might dispose of him and his Army, but since he was Generall of their Forces, he desired that he might have leave to make choise of his own time. Yet to please them, he made long marches to Zama, and there encamped.
From Zama he sent forth his Scouts to learn where the Romans lay, and what they were doing. Some of these were taken and brought to Scipio, who shewed them all his Camp and so dismissed them. Hannibal admired at his Generosity, and had a very great desire of an interview that he might talk with him: and this he signified by a Messenger. Scipio imbraced the motion and sent him word when and where he might meet with him. Ac∣cordingly the two Generals rode forth,An inter∣view of the Gene∣rals. with each of them a Troop of Horse till they met, and then their men were bid to stand off: Each of them had his Inter∣preter, and when they met they stood silent for a while, viewing one the other with mutuall admiration. Then be∣gan Hannibal to salute the Roman to this effect.Hannibals Speech to Scipio. That it had been better both for Carthage and Rome, if they could have contained their ambition within the shoars of Africk and Italy: for that the Countries of Sicily and Spain, were no sufficient recompence for so many Fleets as had been lost, and so much bloud as had been shed, in making those costly purchasses: But since what was past could not be recalled, he said, That it was time for them at the length to put an end to these contentions, and to Pray the Gods to endue them with more wisdom for hereafter. To which peaceable disposition his own years, and long tryall of Fortune, both good and bad, made him inclineable: But he feared that Scipio, for want of such experiences, would ra∣ther fx his mind upon uncertain hopes, than upon the con∣templation of that mutability, whereunto all humane affairs are subject: Yet (said he) my own example may peradventure teach thee moderation. For I am that same Hannibal that af∣ter my Victory at Cannae, wan the greatest part of Italy, and devised what I should do with your City of Rome which I hoped verily to have taken. Once I brought my Army to your Walls, as thou hast since brought thine to ours of Car∣thage: But see the change, I now stand hear intreating thee for Peace. This may teach thee Fortunes instability. I fought with thy Father Scipio. He was the first Roman Generall that I met with in the Field: I did then little think that the
time would come when I should hove such business with his Son: and thou maist have experience of the like in thy self, who knowes how soon? What saist thou? Canst thou be content that we leave to you Spain, and all the Islands between Italy and Africk? By effecting this thou shalt have Glory enough, and the Romans may well be glad of such a bargain: and we will be faithfull in observing the Peace with you. If thou refusest this, consider what an hazzard thou must run to get a little more: If thou staiest but till to morrow night, thou must take such Fortune as the Gods shall allot. The issue of Battels is uncertain, and oft beguiles expectation. Let us therefore without more ado make Peace. Say not that some false-hearted Citizens of ours, dealt fraudulently of late in the like Treaty. Its I Hannibal that now desire Peace, which I would never do but that I think it expedient for our Country: and judging i expedient I will alwayes main∣taine it. To this Scipio answered,Scipios re∣ply. That he was not ignorant of the mutability of Fortune: That without any note of insolence he might well refuse the conditions offered: But (said he) if thy Citizens can be contented, besides what I proposed and they formerly assented to, to make such re∣paration for these late injuries as I shall require, then I will further advise what answer to give you, otherwise prepare for War, and expect the issue. Hereupon they brake off, and each returned to his own Camp,They prepar to fight. bidding their Souldiers to prepare for Bat∣tel, wherein should be decided the quarrel between Rome and Carthage. The next morning at break of day they issued into the Field, each of them ordering their men as they judged most convenient. After which Scipio rode up and down his Army, biding them remember what they had atchieved since they came into Africk. He told them, that if they wan the day, the War was a an end, and this Victory would make them Lords of all the World, for after this, none should be able to resist them: But if they were beaten, there was no possibily of escaping; they
must either Conquer or die, or be miserable slaves un∣der must mercilesse enemies. Hannibal was far the weaker in Horse and a great part of his Army were raw Souldiers, yet his Lords of Carthage would brook no delay. He encouraged there∣fore his men as was most suitable to their qualities. To the Mercenaries he promised bountifull rewards. The Car∣thaginians he threatned with inevitable servitude if they lost they day: but especially he animated his old fellow Souldiers by the many Victories which they had gotten over those that far exceeded them in number. He bad them looke on their Enemies and see whether they were not by far fewer than that huge Army they had slaugh∣tered at Canna. He bad them remember that it was the Father of this Scipio whom they had made to run away, &c. Wherefore he intreated them, upon whose virtue he meant wholy to repose himself, that they would strive that day to make good their honour, and to purchase the fame of Men Invincible. When the Armies drew neer, the Numidian Horse∣men on both sides began to Skirmish: the Trumpets, and other instruments sounded to Battel.A Battel. Hannibals Ele∣phants (which were alwayes an uncertain kind of help) were to break upon the Romans: But some of them ran back upon their own Horse, which they so disordered, that Massanissa, taking the advantage, before they could re-ally, charged them, and drave them quite out of the Field. The rest of these Beasts, made a great spoile a∣mongst the Roman Velites, but being wounded, they ran back upon the right point of their own Battel, and dis∣ordered the Carthaginian Horse that were in that wing; which gave such advantage to the Roman Horse, that charging them when they were in disorder, they drave them away likewise. Then did the Battels of Foot ad∣vance, and ran one at the other, and the Mercenaries at the first seemed to have the better of the Romans: But at length the Roman Discipline prevailed against boiste∣rous strength. And whereas the Romans, were second∣ed
by their Friends, these Mercenaries received no help from those that should have seconded them. For the new raised Africans, when they saw the Mercenaries give back, they retired also, which made the hired Soul∣diers think themselves betrayed, whereupon they declined the fight. The Carthaginian Battel was herewith more terrified then before, so that refusing to give way to the Mercenaries they sell out amongst them∣selves, and forbore to make head against their Ene∣mies. Thus were many of them beaten down and slain through their own indiscretion: And this gave the Romans such advantage that the made a great slaugh∣ter both of the Carthaginians and Mercenaries, who could neither fight nor easily fly. Such as could, ran to∣wards Hannibal, who kept his ground and would not stir to help these run-wayes. Then did Scipio advance against Hannibal who inter∣tained him after an other manner than ever he had been received in his life before. All the former dayes work, seemed but a Pastime in comparison of this. The Ro∣mans were incouraged because they had prevailed all the day before they were also far more in number: But Hanni∣bals old Blades were fresh and the better men. They fought with such obstinate resolution that no man gave back one Foot, but rather chose to die than to lose their ground, so that for a long time the Victory was uncertain: But the return of Massanissa and Laelius with the Horse from the pursute of the Enemies, was to the Romans most hap∣py and in a needfull time. These upon a suddain,Hannibal beaten. charg∣ing Hannibal upon the Reer, overbore them with meer violence and put them to ou. Hannibal with a few Horse saved himselfe by flight, and staid not till he came to Carthage; where,He flies to Carthage, and per∣swades them to seek Peace. coming into the Senate, he told them plainly, that there was no other way left but to make such a Peace as could be procured. Amongst other things it was agreed, that the Carthaginians should pay to the Romans two hundred Ta∣lents a year for fifty years together. Which mony,
when it came to be collected, there was pitious lamenta∣tion amongst the People, the Roman yoak begining to pinch them already, that some of the Senators could not forbear weeping; but Hannibal could not re∣frain from laughter: For which Asdrubal Haedus (one of Hanno's faction) checked him, saying, that it ill be∣commed him to laugh, since he had been the cause why all others did weep. He answered, that laugh∣ter did not alwayes proceed from joy, but some∣times from indignation. Yet (said he) My laugh∣ter is more seasonable, and lesse obsurd, than your teares. For you should have wept when you gave up your Ships and Elephants, and when you bound up your hands from use of Armes without the good leave of the Romans. This miserable condition keeps us under, and holds us in assured sevitude. But of these things you had no feel∣ing: Now when a little mony is wrung from you, you are very sensible of that, God grant that the time come not, wherein you shall acknowledge, that it was the least part of your misery for which you have shed these teares. His Civil imploy¦ment.Afterwards Hannibal in the Civill administration of the City, gave an overthrow or two, to the Judges which at that time bore all the sway in Carthage, hav∣ing all the lives, goods, and fame of the rest in their power. Shortly after Hannibal was chosen Praetor, by virtue of which Office, he was superiour to them for that year. He sent upon an occasion for one of the Treasurers to come to him, but he proudly refused, wherupon Hannibal sent a Pursevant for him, and brought him in Judgment before the People, accusing, not only him, but the rest of the Judges for their inso∣lency, and unbridled power, withall, propounding a Law that the Judges should be chosen from year to year. He found also that they had robbed the Trea∣sury, which caused the Taxes to be laid upon the common People, whereof he made such plain demon∣stration, that they were compelled to restore with shame
what they had gotten by knavery. This so irrita∣ted his Enemies, who were of the Romans Faction, that they complained to the Roman Senate that the Barchine Faction grew strong again,He is com∣plained of to the Romans. and that Hannibal would shortly be in Armes: For he was like a wild Beast that could never be tamed: that he held secret in∣telligence with King Antiochus, who was an enemy to the Romans, &c. Hereupon the Senate sent three Ambassadors to Carthage to demand Hannibal, but he kept such good espiall upon the Romans that he was informed of their intentions, against which he was never un∣prepared: And therefore when night was come, he stole out of the City, accompanied with two Friends whom he could trust, and having Horses in a readinesse, he rode all night, and came to a Tower of his own by the Sea se, and having pro∣vided a Ship in readinesse, he bad Africk farewel,He flies from Car∣thage to Tyre· lamenting the misfortune of his Country more than his own, and shaped his course to Tyre▪ which was the Mother City of Carthage: There he was inter∣tained Royally, in whose worth and honour the Tyrians thought themselves to have interest be∣cause of the affinity between the Cities. Thence went he to Antiochus,He goes to Antioccus. who was exceeding glad of his coming, intending War against the Ro∣mans. To him Hannibal gave excellent advice how he might carry on his War against the Romans,His coun∣sel neg∣lected. with best advantage; but Antiochus hearkned more to his Courtiers than to him, and so was shamfully bea∣ten by the Romans: at which time he admired Hannibal as a wise man, yea as a Prophet, who long before had foreseen, and foretold him what now was come to passe, and when it was too late, wish∣ed that he had followed his Counsel. To be brief, Antiochus was forced by the Romans to sue for Peace, which at last the Romans yeilded to: Provided a∣mongst
other things, that Hannibal might be deli∣vered into their hands. Hannibal getting an incling of this,He flies to Prusias. fled to Gortina in Creet, where he lived a long time very quietly, but at length he fell in∣to the envy of many by reason of his great wealth, whereupon he filled certain great chests with Lead, and deposited them in the Temple of Diana there, as if he kept the Treasure for a dead lift▪ and there∣upon the People, having such a Pledge as that of him, looked lesse after him: But he in the mean time stole away to Prusias, King of Bythinia, hav∣ing first molten his Gold, and powered it into some hollow Statues of Brasse, which he carried away with him. Shortly after there fell a War between Prusias, and Eumenes, King of Pergamus, Prusias being encourag∣ed to break his League and to make War upon him, by his confidence in Hannibal, whom he had there to mannage his War for him. The War therefore grew hot betwixt them, both by Land and Sea. But Eu∣menes, by the assistance of the Romans, overpowred Prusias in both: And whereas Prusias was but weak of himself, Hannibal procured him the assistance of some other Kings and States, and those of very Warlike Na∣tions: and amongst them the aide of Philip, King of Macedonia, who sent him Philocles his General, with a very considerable Army to help him. When Prusias had received an overthrow from Eu∣menes by land, he sought to try his Fortune by Sea, wherein yet he was too weak for him: wherefore Hannibal advised him to try whether he could not do that by Policy, which by plain force he was not able to effect. He put therefore a multitude of all sorts of Serpents into Earthen Pitchers, to be hurled a∣board the Enemies Ships when they were in fight: giving order to the Souldiers and Sea-men to set all upon the Ship wherein Eumenes himself was, and to defend themselves from the rest as well as they
could: and that he might the more certainly know in which Ship Eumenes was, he sent an Herauld be∣forehand with a Letter, containing nothing but a meer flout to Eumenes, and full of abuses to his Person. Whenas therefore Prusias his men came to it, they fought neither against great nor small, but on-against the Ship wherein Eumenes was, whereupon he he was fain to seek his safety by flight; yet had he perished had he not thrust in upon the next shore, where he had placed, for a relief upon all occasions, a company of his men. As for Eumenes his other Ships, when they pressed hard upon the Enemy, they let fly amongst them their Earthen Pitchers full of Snakes, which at first seem∣ed to them a ridiculous thing: but when the Pitchers, falling upon the Decks, brake in pieces, out flew the Snakes, so that they could stir no where in the Ships by reason of the Serpents, whereby they found them∣selves no lesse annoied by their stings, than with the Arrowes of their Enemies, which caused them to give over fighting, and to fly to their Camp which was upon the Shoar. Thus Hannibal by this trick, got the better of Eu∣menes in that fight. Nor then only, but also in sun∣dry other encounters; and by one Stratagem or o∣ther, he ever put Eumenes to the worst. And once when he advised Prusias to fight, and he durst not, because the entrailes of the Beast (said he) forbid me. What (said Hannibal) will you rly more upon a litle piece of flesh in a Calfe, than upon the Judgment of an old experienced Captain in the Field? Now as soon as newes of these things came to the Senate at Rome, they sent T▪ Quintis Flaminius Am∣bassador to Prusias, not so much to withdraw him from prosecuting the War against Eumenes, as to intreat him to deliver to them Hannibal, the most spitefull enemy they had in all the world. Prusias, to gratifie the Romans resolved either to
kill Hannibal,Who be∣trays him. or to deliver him alive into the hands of Flaminius, for which end he sent a Troop of Souldiers to inviron the lodging where Hannbal lay. But Hannibal having before found cause to suspect the faith of Prusias, had made some secret sallies under ground to save himself from any Trea∣sonable, or sudden assault. But finding now that all passages were shut up against him, he had recourse to his last remedy, which he was con∣strained to put in practice, as well to frustrate his enemies from their Triumphing over him, as to save himself from their torture and merci∣lesse hands, who, as he well knew, would nei∣ther respect his famous enterprises, his Honour, nor his Age. When therefore he saw no other way of escaping, he took the poison, which he alwayes had in readynesse for such an exigent, and being ready to swallow it down, he uttered these Words,His last Speech. I will now (said he) deliver the Ro∣mans from the fear which hath so long possessed them: that fear which makes them impatient af attending the Death of an old man. This Victory of Flami∣nius over me, which am disarmed, and betrayed into his hands, shall never be numbred in the rest of his Heroicall deeds, No: it shall make it manifest to all the Nations of the World, how far the Antient Roman virtue is degenerated, and corrupted. For such was the No∣blenesse of their fore-fathers, as when King Pyrrhus invaided them in Italy, and was ready to give them Battel at their own doors, they gave him intelligence of the Trea∣son intended against him by Poyson: whenas these of a lat∣ter race, have imployed Flaminius, a man who hereto∣fore hath been one of their Consuls, to practice with Prusias, contrary to the honour of a King, contrary to his Faith given for my safety, and contrary to the Lawes of Hospitality, to slay, or deliver up his own Guest.He poi∣sons him∣self. Then drank he off that Poison, and died.
P. Scipio Africanus in a discourse which he had with Hannibal, asked him, which of all the famous Captaines that ever lived, he judged most wor∣thy? Hannibal gave to Alexander the great, the first place: to Pyrrhus the second: and the third he chal∣ledged to himsef. But Scipio, who thought his own Title better, then that it ought to be forgot∣ten, asked yet further, What then wouldest thou have said, Hannibal, if thou hadst vanquished me? The Carthaginian replyed, Then would I not have given the first place to Alexander, but have claimed it as due unto my self. When the Conditions of Peace granted by the Ro∣mans to the Carthaginians were reported to the Ci∣tizens, they were very unpleasing, whereupon one Gesco, stood up to speake against them, perswad∣ing the People not to yeild to such intollerable demands: But Hannibal observing what favourable audience was given to this vain Orator, by the unquiet, yet unwarlike multitude, he was bold to pull him down from his standing by plain force: Hereat all the People murmured, as if their com∣mon liberty were too much wronged by such in∣solence of this presumptuous Captain: Which Han∣nibal perceiving, rose up and spake unto them, say∣ing; That they ought to pardon him if he had done otherwise than the Customs of the City would allow, for as much as he had been thence absent e∣ver since he was a boy of nine years old, until he was now a man of five and fourty. Having thus excused himself, he exhorted them to embrace the Peace, as wanting ability to defend themselves, had the demands of the Enemy been yet more rigo∣rous. His Father Amilcar, at what time he did Sacri∣fize, being ready to take his journey into Spain, called his Son Hannibal, being than but nine years
old, caused him to lay his hand upon the Alter, and to swear, that being come to mans estate, he should pursue the Romans with immortall hatred, and that he should work them all the mischief that possibly he could.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF EPAMINONDAS, THE GREAT CAPTAINE OF THE THEBANS. THe Father of Epaminondas was Po∣lymnis,His Paren∣tage and Educati∣on. who was descended of one of the most ancient, and renowned Famelies amongst the Thebans, the most part of which Noble linage had upon their Bo∣dies for a naturall Birthmark, the resemblance of a Snake. This Poli∣mnis had two only Sons, Caphisias, and Epaminondas, whom he educated very carefully, and had them very well instructed in all the liberall Arts, and honest Sciences: especially Epaminondas, who had the more stayed witt, and Was most inclined to Virtue,His parts. desirous to learne, humble, obedient, and wonerfull docible: and of one Dyonisius he learned to be very skil∣full in Singing, and Musick. And for Philosophy it hap∣pened well for him that he fell into an excellent Masters hands by this means.
The Colleges of the Pythagorian Phylosophers that were dispersed through the Cities of Italy, were banish∣ed by the faction of the Cylonians, yet such as still kept together, met in a Councel at Metapont to consider of their affairs: But some seditious Persons rose up against them, and set the House wherein they were on fire, and burnt them all; onely Phylolaus and Lysis, being lusty young men, escaped through the fire. Phylolaus fled into the Country of the Lucanians, and resided there with his Friends: But Lysis got to Thebes, where Polymnis intertained him, intreating him to undertake the Tu∣ition of his Son Epaminondas, who, though he was but a young Boy, yet was he of good capacity, and of very good Hopes. This Phylosopher accordingly applyed himself to manure this noble and quick wit of Epaminon∣das, and in a short time made him perfect in all Sciences and Virtue, so that it was hard to find a more wise, grave, and virtuous Person than he was, He exer∣cises and studies.When he was but fifteen years of age, he gave him∣self to all manner of exercises of the Body, as to run, wrestle, use his Weapons, and all feats of Arms: and having quickly attained to skill in these, he applied himself to his Book. He was naturally silent, fearfull to speak, but never a weary to hear and learn; where∣upon Spintharus, the Tarentine, being familiarly acquaint∣ed with him in Thebes, used to say, that he never knew any man that knew so much, and spake so little as Epaminondas. If he fell into any company that discoursed of Philosophy, or of State matters, he would never leave them, till the matter propounded was at an end. He was of a plea∣sant disposition, and so witty that he could break a jeast as well as any man. Lysis after he had lived long in Thebes, died, and was honourably buried by his Scholar Epaminondas.His Dis∣course with a Phyloso∣pher. Not long after, Theanor, one of the Pythagorians in Sicily, was sent to bring Lysis thither, but when he came to Thebes, he found him dead and buried, therefore going to Epaminondas, after salutations, he told him that his
companions, who were rich, willed him to give Po∣lymnis, and his children, a good summe of mony in re∣compence of that curteous entertainment which they had given to Lysis: Epaminondas, after pleasant excuses made, told him that none could be received, saying fur∣ther, Jason, a Captaine of the Thessalians thought that I gave him a rude and uncivil answer, when he, hav∣ing earnestly entreated me to receive a good summe of Gold, I sent him word that he did me wrong, and be∣gan to make War with me: for that he, aspiring to make himself a Lord, would corrupt me with mony, who am a plain Citizen of a free Town, and living under the Law. But for thee Theanor, I commend thy good will, because its honest and virtuous, but I tell thee thou bringest Physick to them that are not sick. Admit that thou, hearing we had been in Wars, hadst brought us Armes to defend us, and when on the contrary thou hadst found us quiet, and at peace with all our neighbours, thou wouldst not have thought fit to bestow these Armes, and leave them with those that had no need of them. Even so, thou art come to relive our poverty as though it were a burden to us, whereas on the contrary, its an easy and pleasant thing to us to carry, and we are glad we have it in our Houses amongst us, and there∣fore we have no need of Armes▪ or mony against that which doth us no hurt at all. But tell thy brethren that they use their goods very honestly: and also that they have Friends here which use their Poverty as well: and as for the intertainment▪ and burial of Lysis, he hath himself fully recompenced us, having taught us, amongst many other good lessons, not to be afraid of Poverty, nor to be grieved to see it amongst us. Theanor having made some reply about the good and evill of Riches, and told him that as Poverty was not evil in it self, so neither was Riches to be had in contempt and dispised: No truly (said Epaminondas) yet considering with my self that we have a World of covetous desires, some natu∣rall that are born with us, and bred in our flesh by the
lusts pertaining to it: Others strange to us, grounded up∣on vain opinions, which taking setling, and becoming an habit in us by trct of time, and long use through e∣vil education, oftentimes do draw us down, and weigh our Souls with more force and violence, than those that be connaturall to us. For reason, through daily exer∣cise of virtue, and practice thereof, is a meanes to free us from many of those things that are borne, and bred with us. Yet we must use continuall force and oppositi∣on against our concupisences which are strangers to us, to quench them, and by all possible meanes to re∣presse, and subdue them in us. And when this is done, there is also (said he) an ex∣ercise of justice against greedy Covetousnesse, and a desire of getting, which is not, not to go rob our neigh∣bours Houses, nor, not to rob men by the high way, nor not to betray our Friends, or Country for mony: for such an one opposeth, not covetousnesse, but pos∣sibly, its Law, or feare that bridleth his covetous de∣sire to offend: But that man that ofttimes willingly ab∣staines from just gaines, he it is that by exercise keeps himself far from unjust, and unlawfull taking of mony. For it is impossible in great pleasures that are wicked and dangerous, the Soul should contain it self from lusting after them, unlesse formerly, being oft at his choise to use them, he had contemned them. Its not easy to o∣vercome them, nor to refuse great Riches when they are offered, unlesse a man long before hath killed in him this covetous desire of getting, the which, besides ma∣ny other habits and actions, is still greedily bent shame∣fully to gaine, pleasiing himself in the pursuit of In∣justice, hardly forbearing to wrong an other so he may benefit himself. But that man that disdaines to receive gifts from his Friends, and refuseth Presents offered him by Kings, and that hath rejected the bounty of Fortune, puting by all covetous desires of glistering Treasures laid before him, he shall never be tempted to do that which is unjust, nor shall his mind be troubled, but he will con∣tent
himself quietly to do any thing that is honest, hav∣ing an upright heart, finding nothing in it but that which is good and commendable. Yet was the Life of Epaminondas far mor excellent than his discourse, as will appear by that which follows. Diomedon, the Cizicenian, at the request of Artaxerxes, King of Persia, promised to winne Epaminondas to take the Persians part. To effect this, he came to Thebes, and brought a great masse of Gold with him, and with three Thousand Crowns of it, he bribed a young man cal∣led Mycethus, who was greatly beloved by Epaminondas. This young man went to him and told him the occasion of the other mans coming to Thebes: But Domedon be∣ing present, Epaminondas said to him, I have no need of mony: If the King of Persia wish well to the Thebans, I am at his service without taking one penny:His con∣tempt of Riches. If he hath any other meaning, he hath not Gold nor Silver e∣nough wherewith to corrupt me: For I will not sell the love which I bear to my Country for all the Gold in the World: and as for thee that dost now tempt me, not knowing me, but judging me like unto thy self, I pardon thee for this time, but get thee quickly out of the City lest thou corrupt others, having failed to prevail over me: and for thee Mycethus, deliver him his mony again, which if thou dost not presently, I will send thee before a Justice. Hereupon Diomedon besought him that he would let him go away in safety, and carry that with him which he brought thither: Yea (said Epaminondas) but it shall not be for thy sake, but for my honour-sake, lest thy Gold and Silver being taken from thee, some man should accuse me that I had a share in that privately which I had refused openly. Saying further, whither wouldst thou that I should cause thee to be conveyed? To Athens, said Diomedon: This was done accordingly, and he had a strong convoy sent with him, and that he might not be troubled by the way, betwixt the Gates of Thebes and the Haven wherein he was to imbark himself, Epaminondas gave Chabrias the Athenian charge of him,
that he should see him safe at his jorneys end. His Po∣verty.Though Epaminondas was very Poor, yet would he never take any thing of his Citizens or Friends: and being so inured to poverty, he was enabled to bear it the more patiently by his study of Philosophy. For on a time, having the leading of an Army of the Thebans into the Country of Peloponnesus, he borrowed five Crownes of a Citizen for the defraying of his necessary chatges in that Journey. Pelopidas being a man of great wealth and his very good Friend, could never possibly force upon him any part of his Goods, but he rather learned of him to love Poverty. For Epaminondas taught him to think it an honour to go plainly in his Apparrel, to eat mode∣rately, to take paines willingly, and in War to fight lusti∣ly. Yet when he had occasion to relieve others, he would make bold with his Friends goods, which in such cases were common to him. If any of his Citizens were taken Prisoners by the Enemy, or if any Friend of his had a Daughter to be married,His Cha∣rity. and was not able to be∣stow her, he used to call his Friends together, and to as∣sesse every one of them at a certain summe, after which he brought him before them who was to receive the mo∣ny, and told him how much every one had bestowed upon him, that he might returne thanks to them all. But once he went far beyond this: For he sent a poor Friend of his to a Rich Citizen of Thebes to ask of him six hundred Crownes, and to tell him that Epaminondas desired him to let him have them. The Citizen being amazed at his demand, went to Epaminondas to know what he meant to charge him so deeply, as to make him to give six hundred Crowns to the other? It is (said Epa∣minondas) because this man, being an honest man, is poor, and thou who hast robbed the Commonwealth of much, art rich. His Sobri∣ety.He lived so soberly, and was such an enemy to all superfluity and excesse, that being on a time invited to Supper to one of his Neighbours, when he saw great pre∣paration of dainty meats, made dishes, and perfumes, he
said unto him, I thought thou hadst made a Sacrifice by this excesse and superfluity, and so immediatly went his way. The like also he spake of his own Table, saying, that such an Ordinary, was never guilty of Traytors, and Treason. On a time being at a Feast with some of his Companions, he drank Vinegar, and when they asked him what he meant by it, and whether he drank it for his health? I know not (said he) but this I am sure of, it puts me in remembrance how I live at home. Now it was not that his stomach was an enemy to dainty meats, or that he lived so penuriously at home, for he was marvelous noble minded: But he did it, that by his strict and unreprovable life, he might bridle and restraine many insolencies and disorders which then raigned a∣mongst the Thebans, and to reduce them to the former temperance of their Ancestors. Upon a time, a Cook giving up an account to him and his Fellows of their ordinary expences for certain dayes, he could find fault with nothing but the quantity of Oyle that was spent: which his Companions marvelling at; Tush (said he) it is not the expence which offends me, but because we have powred in so much Oyle into our Bodies. The City of Thebes upon an occasion made a publick Feast, where they were very merry, and jolly: But on the Contrary, Epaminondas went up and down without Oyle and perfumes, or decked with brave ap∣parrell, seeming very sad: Some of his Familiar Friends meeting him in this posture, and wondering at him, ask∣ed him why he walked so alone,His Vigi∣lance. and ill apparrelled through the City? Because (said he) you may in the meane time freely and safely drink your selves drunk, and make merry, taking thought for nothing. His modesty also was such, that it would in no wise suffer him to seek advancement, but on the contrary he withdrew himself from Government, that he might with the more quiet apply himself to the study of Philo∣sophy. It happened upon a time that the Lacedemonians intreated aide of the Thebans, who at that time were in
League with them, and acordingly they sent them cer∣tain Foot Companies: at which time Epaminondas being about thirty five years old, Armed himself and went a∣long with them. At this time it was, that that intimate Friendship began betwixt Pelopidas and him, which con∣tinued even to the end of their lives. These two being in a Battel the one by the other against the Arcatians, whom they had in front against them in the plaines of Mantinea, it fell out that one of the points of the Battel of the Lacedemonians in which they were, retired, and many fled: But these two resolved rather to dy than fly, and accordingly they stood to it gallantly,His Valor. till Pelopidas being wounded in seven places, fell down upon a heap of dead Bodies. Then did Epaminondas (though he took him for dead) step resolutly before him to defend his Body and Armes, he alone fighting against many, resolving rather to die in the place than to leave Pelopi∣das amongst the dead men, until that himself being thrust into the breast with a Pike, and wounded in the Arme with a Sword, was ready to faint: at which time Pro∣vidence so ordered it, that King Agesipolis came on with the other point of the Battel, and saved them both. Not long after the Lacedemonians by a stratagem, won the strong Castle of Thebes called Cadmaea, and put a strong Garrison into it, and gave the Government of the City of Thebes unto Archias, Philippus, and Leontidas, authors of all the mischief:Tyran's in Thebes. whereupon, to avoid their Tyranny, Pelopidas, and many others were fain to save themselves by flight, upon which they were banished by sound of Trumpet. But as for Epaminondas they as yet said nothing to him, but let him alone in the City: for he was contemned as a man of no account, because he was so much given to his Book: and if he should have any mind to stir against them, yet they judged he could could do nothing because of his Poverty. Whilest Pelopidas and his Companions were at Athens, they laid a plot to free Thebes from those Tyrants: But Epaminondas not making a shew of any thing, had devi∣sed
an other way to effect it, by raising the hearts and cou∣rages of the young men of the City. For when they went out to play, and exercise themselves, he alwayes found out a way to make them wrestle with the Lacedo∣monians; and when he saw the Lacedomonians throw them, and give them shrewd falls, they being the stronger, he would prvately rebuke the Thebans and tell them, that it was a shame for them to suffer the Lacedomo∣nians to set their feet upon their throats for want of cou∣rage, who yet were not half so strong, and boisteous as themselves were. All▪ this while Pelopidas and his fol∣lowers went on in their Plot,His pru¦dence. and had such good suc∣cess, that one night they got privily into the City of The∣bes and met at Charons House about forty eight in num∣ber. Epaminondas knew all this well enough, and at night some took him aside and endeavoured to perswade him to joyn with them in delivering their City from these Tyrants, to whom he answered, that he had ta∣ken order with his Friends, and Gorgidas, to put them∣selves into a readiness upon any such occasion, but for his own part he would not have a hand in putting any of his Citizens to death, unless they were legally con∣demned: yet (said he) if you will make an attempt for the delivery of the City so as that it be without mur∣ther or blood shed, I will joyn with you with all my heart: But if you will persevere in your former deter∣mination, pray you let me alone, pure, and not defiled with the blood of my Citizens, that being blameless I may take hold of another occasion which may tend more to the good of the common wealth. For the murthers that will be committed in this way, cannot be contained within any reasonable bounds. I know in∣deed that Pherecids, and Pelopidas will especially set upon the Authors of the Tyranny: but , and Smidas, being fierce and Cholerick men taking the liberty of the night, will never sheath their swords, till they have filled the whole City with murther, and slain many of the chief Citizens. Besides, its very convenient
for the People of Thebes, that some be left free, and blamelesse of these murthers, and guiltlesse of all that should be done in the fury of this action. Notwithstanding all that was said, the enterprise was executed,The Ty∣rants slain. and the Tyrants put to death, the City was restored to her ancient liberty, the Castle of Cadmaea was rendred up by composition, and Lysandrads, the Lacedemonian, and other Commanders that were in it, were suffered safely to depart, with their goods and Soul∣diers. This was the occasion of the long Wars which followed between the Lacedomonians and Thebans, with whom the Athenians joyned in League. Epaminondas still applyed himself to his Book: yet at last he was put forwards by Pammenes,His Mo∣desty. a chief man a∣mongst the Thebans, and he began to follow the Wars ve∣ry eagerly, and in divers encounters gave good proof of his prudence, hardinesse, and valour, insomuch as by degrees he attained to the highest charges of Government in the Commonwealth: and his Citizens, who before made small account of him till he was fourty years old,He is ad∣vanced to Honour. after, when they knew him better, they trusted him with their Armies, and he saved the City of Thebes, that was like to be undone, yea, and freed all Greece from the servitude of the Lacedemonians, making his virtue, as in a cleer light, to shine with Glory, shewing the ef∣fects when time served. Upon a time Agesilaus, King of Lacaedemon entered into Boeotia with an Army of twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, wherewith he harrased and spoiled all the plain Country, and presented Battel to the The∣bans in the open Fields, which yet they would not accept of, finding themselves the weaker: Howbeit, they defend∣ed themselves so well by the assistance of the Athenians, and the wise conduct of Epaminondas and Pelopidas, that they caused Agesilaus to return home with his Army. But when he was gone, the Thebans went with their Companies before the City of Thespies,The Spar∣tans bea∣ten. which they sur∣prized, and put to the Sword two hundred of the Gar∣rison,
and afterwards returned back with their Army to Thebes; and Paebidas, the Lacedemonian, who was then Governour of that City, sallye out of the Town, and charged upon the Thebans in their retreat, who inter∣tained him so hotly, that he lost five hundred of his men, and himself was slain in the fight. Not long after, the Lacedemonians returned with their former Army to make War with the Thebans, who hav∣ing seized upon certain straights, and places of advantage, so blocked up the way, that they could not over run the Country, and spoile it as they had done before; yet did Agesilaus so molest, and trouble them, that at last it came to a main Battel that held long, and was very cruel:A Battel. and though at the first Agesilaus had the better, yet the Thebans charged him so furiously, that at the length he himself was wounded and forced to retire, being well paid for teaching the Thebans Millitary Discipline. And this was the first time that the Thebans knew themselves to be as strong and lusty as the Lacedemonians, whereup∣on they Triumphed in signe of Victory, and from that time forward, they grew more couragious to make head against the Enemy, and to present them battel. But that which most encouraged them, was, the presence of Epaminondas, who counselled, commanded, and exe∣cuted very wisely, valiantly, and with great successe. At another time they went with a great number of chosen men before the City of Orobomene, where yet they prevailed not, because there was a strong Garrison of the Lacedemonians that sallied out upon them, and the fight was very sharp betwen them: yet, though the La∣cedemonians were far more in number,The Spar∣tans bea∣ten. the Thebans gave them the overthrow, which never happened to them before. For all other Nations thought that they had done excellent well, if with a far greater number they had overcome a small number of the Lacedemonians. But this Victory, and an other, which fell out shortly after under the conduct of Pelopidas, did so lift up and encou∣rage the Thebans, that they became more famous than  were before▪
The year following, Artaxerxes King of Persia, intend∣ing to make War against Aegypt, and therein to inter∣tain diverse strangers, laboured to make Peace amongst the Grecians, in hope that they, being at Peace amongst themselves would be the more willing to have Souldiers leavied amongst them. For which end he sent Ambas∣sadours to all the Townes of Greece, to preswade and in∣treat them to be at Peace amongst themselves. The Greeks were very willing to harken hereto, being weari∣ed on all sides with such long Wars, and so were easily drawn to make Peace;Peace a∣mong the Greeks. wherein it was especially agreed, and concluded, that all the Cities of Greece should be free, and use their own Lawes: and Commissioners were sent abroad to withdraw all the Garrisons where any were kept. Unto this the Thebans only refused to agree, that every Town should severally capitulate for it, re∣questing that the Towns in the Country of Boeotia should be comprehended under the City of Thebes: but the A∣thenians mightily opposed themselves against this, and Calistratus, one of their Orators, made a notable Oration about it before all the States of Greece. Epaminondas on the contrary, made an excellent and vehement speech in defence of the right of the Thebans, insomuch as this con∣troversy was left undecided, and the Treaty of Peace was universally agreed to amongst all the other Greci∣ans,The The∣bans are excepted. the Thebans only excepted, who were not com∣prised in it. At this time the Athenians, and Lacedemonians, who had long contended amongst themselves about the Prin∣cipality of Greece, now agreed, that the one should com∣mand by Sea, and the other by Land: And therefore they could not endure that the Thebans should aspire to be chief, which made them seek to dismember the other Towns of Boeotia from them, the rather, for that the The∣bans, being strong and lusty of Body, and much encou∣raged by their late Victories over the Lacedemonians, would now contend with them for their superiority, having a wonderfull confidence in the Wisdom and Pro∣wesse
of their Captaines, especially of Epaminondas. Matters resting thus doubtfull, the Citizens of Plataees, a Town of Boeotia, were desirous to enter into League with the Athenians, promising that if they would send them Souldiers, they would put the Town into their hands: But the Governours of Boeotia having intelli∣gence of it, and being desirous to prevent the Athenians, brought a party of Souldiers against it, who came before Plataees before the Citizens heard any newes of them, so that part of them were surprised in the Field by the Horsmen, and the rest fled into the Town: where having no aid, they were faign to accept of such tearmes as it pleased the Thebans to grant them, which were, pre∣sently to depart the Town with bag and baggage,Plataees destroy∣ed. and never to returne again into the Country of Boeotia. Then did they raze the City to the ground, and saked the Town of Thespies which also was at enmity with them. The Ambassadours of Persia again solicited the Greeks to a Generall Peace, and Commissioners from every Town were to meet at Sparta about it. Epaminondas was yet scarce known, having laboured to conceal himself. and in all his exploits of War, had ever preferred the ad∣vancement of his great Friend, and Companion in Armes, Pelopidas, before himself. He was now chosen by ye Thebans to go to Sparta, where, finding that the other Commissi∣oners did much comply with Agesilaus, he spake boldly, and plainly, not only in behalf of the Thebans, but for all Greece also: making it evident to all,Hi wis∣dom. that War still en∣creased the greatnesse of Sparta only, which kept all the other Towns of Greece under. He therefore advised them to establish a firme Peace, which would last the longer, when all comprized in it should be equals. Agesilaus perceiving all the Commissioners to be very attentive to and well pleased with this speech, he asked him aloud, if he thought it just, and equal, that all Boeotia should be set at liberty. Epaminondas resently,And cou∣rage. and bold∣ly asked him, if he thought it not also iust and reasonable that all Laconia should be set at liberty? Thereupon Age∣silaus,
in great anger, stood up, and commanded him to answer plainly, if they should not restore all the Towns in Boeotia to their Liberty? and Epaminondas answered him as before. This so displeased Agesilaus (who had an old grudge to the Thebans) that immediatly he put their Name out of the List of those that should be comprized within the Treaty of Peace, and proclaimed open War against them, and now there was no remedy but the Thebans must bear the whole brunt alone, for there was no one Town that durst send them any aid, because they were all sworn to the Peace, insomuch as all judged them to be utterly undone. Friends pittied there estate, and their enemies rejoyced, verily believing that they could never stand before the Lacedemonians. Then did the Lacedemonians send King Cleombrotus with an Army towards Thebes, who being come neer to Chaeronea with ten thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, he pitched, his Camp there staying for his Allies. The Thebans being informed of the approach of the enemy, chose Epaminondas to be their Captain Generall, giving him the charge of this War, with six other Counsellers to be assisting to him. Now there came Oracles to Thebes from all parts; some promising Victory, and others threa∣tening their overthrow; and Epaminondas commanded them to set those on the right hand of the chaire for Orations, that promised Victory, and the other on the left hand, which being so disposed of, he gat up into the chaire, and said to his Citizens, If you will be obedient to your Captains, and valiant against your enemies, these O∣raoles on the right hand belong to you:His Pru∣dence. But if through faint∣ness of heart, ye refuse dangers, those on the left hand shall be your Portion. Then did he list the Names of all the Thebans which were able to bear Armes, and chose out of some parts of Boeotia, such as he thought fittest for the Wars. His Pre∣sence exceedingly cheered up his Army, and all the time that he was Captain, the Thebans never saw in their Campany of those which they call sudden feares. He used
to say, that there was no Death more honest and desirable than to die in the Wars, and that the body of a Souldier should be hardened to endure any labour or paines. He could not abide fat men,Fat men cashired. and therefore cashired a whole Company of them as unprofitable burdens in his Ar∣my. He had in all, but six thousand fighting men: and as they marched forwards, they met with some un∣lucky signes, as many esteemed them; but he valued them not, thinking that a resolution to fight in a good cause, ought to be much stronger, and of more force to raise up in him good Hope, than these evill signes that appeared, to make him fear the worst. As he was marching towards the Lacedemonians, they heard it Thunder, and they that were neer him, asked him what that meant. He answered, that it be∣tokened that the Enemies braines were troubled, and beclouded, who, having places of advantage hard by them, yet encamped in the plaines. Indeed the Lacedemo∣nians waited there for their Allies, who yet failed them. For all of them, having at leasure considered of the speech of Epaminondas at Sparta, began to distast the ambition of the Lacedemonians. Epaminondas seeing his advantage, caused his Army to march with speed,His Pru∣dence. and wan the straights by the City of Coronea, and encamped there: Cleombrotus understanding that the Thebans had possessed themselves of that passe, despairing to recover it, he made his Army to march a great compasse about the Country of Phocide, going along the Sea Coast through a dangerous, and troublesome way, and so at the last he entered into the Country of Boeotia: and as he went, he took in some little Towns, and certain Gallies that lay upon the Coast, and at the last arrived at Leuctres, and there sate down to refresh his men, who were o∣verwearied with their tedious march. Then did Epami∣nindas presently advance that way to meet them, and having passed over some little Mountaines, he dis∣covered them in the plain of Luctres, where his men were much amazed to see so great an Army of their Enemies.
The six Counsellors came together to consider whe∣ther they should go forward and fight, few against many, or else retreat, waiting for some beter advantage. In this Councel, their opinions fell out to be equall. Three judged it best to retreat, the other, whereof Epaminon∣das was one, thought it best to fight, and with these three, Pelopidas, who was Captain of the Sacred Band, joyned, whereupon they all agreed to give them Battel.And Poli∣cy. Epami∣nondas seeing his Souldiers somewhat affirighted at the former ill signes, to put courage into them, he suborned some that were newly come from Thebes, to scatter a re∣port, that no man could tell at Thebes what was become of the Armes that hung up in the Temple of Hercules; but it was commonly said, that the Demigods, their An∣cestors, had taken them away, to aid their posterity, at this present time. He caused another also, who was new∣ly come from Trophonius hole, to report, that the God which gives his Oracles therein, commanded him to tell the Boeotians that when they had overcome their enemies in the plain of Leuctres, they should celebrate yearly Playes to the honour of Jupiter: and to gain the more credit to these devices, Leandridas, a Spartan, that was banished out of his own Country, and now was assisting the Boeotians, being brought before the Souldiers, he encouraged them to fight valiantly that Day: For he swore unto them, that the Lacedemonians had many Oracles, biding them to beware of Leuctres. Epaminondas also, assembling his Army, encouraged them with strong, and lively reasons, to shew their valour, so that at lasty Souldiers being freed from their superstitious feares, longed for nothing more than to come to blowes. Epaminondas ever concluded his Orations to them with these Words: O worthy men, embrace sacred Death: Advance your selves to a most honorable, and famous Fight for your Coun∣try, for the Tombes of your Ancestors, and for your Holy things. Just at this very time there came to the Thebans an aid of five hundred Horse, and fifteen hundred Foot, all Thessalians, conducted by Jason. This Jason endeavored
to have made peace with both parties, but could not prevail. Also as Cleombrotus retired with his Army out of Boeo∣tia, he met a great supply of Lacedemonians, and their Allies, brought to him by Archidamus, the Son of Agesilaus. These he sent before, thinking to daunt the courage of the Thebans with the sight of them, and him∣self with the rest of his Army suddenly returned into the plain of Leuctres, being fully resolved to fight: and the Boeotians for their part shrunk not an inch back, and so on both sides they set their men in Battel array. Epa∣minondas ordered his Battel after a new fashion never be∣fore practised by any Captain: For having chosen out of his Army the best, and most valiant Souldiers, he pla∣ced them together in one of the Points of his Battel, where himself meant to fight in Person, seconded by Pe∣lopidas, and his three hundred chosen men; called the Holy Band: In the other Point he placed his weaker men, commanding them expresly not to abide the charge of their enemies that should assaile them in Front, but fair, and softly retire when they saw them come near them: and it fell out as he wished: and he hoped to determine the Battel by the virtue,A Battel and prowess of those where he had placed all the flower, and choice of his Army. Now the sign of Battel being given, the Lacedemoni∣ans advanced with the two Horns of their Battel, ordered in the form of a Crescent. On the contrary, one of the wings of the Battel of the Boeotians began to give back, and the other with great fury ran to charge the enemy in the Flank, and soon they were come to the Swords point. At the first, because either side fought despe∣rately, the Victory for a time stood doubtfull, But at last Epaminondas his Troop brake in amongst the Lacede∣monians, and slew most of those that were about Cleom∣brotus. Yet while the King was alive, he kept back the Thebans from the victory, being accompanied with all the flower of his Army, who fought very valiantly a∣bout him: But after he fell dead to the ground, having
received and given an infinite number of wounds, then thronged they together on all sides, and there was a bloody and cruell fight about his Body, where were heaps of men slain one upon another, and though Epa∣minondas did all that possibly he could, yet the Lacedemo∣nians made such resistance, that at last they forced the Thebans somewhat to give back, whereby they convey∣ed the Body of the King out of the presse: But this conti∣nued not long: For Epaminondas both by his words and example, did so raise up and encourage the hearts of his men,The Spar∣tans beat∣en. that they fought like Lyons, and gave so fierce a se∣cond charge upon their enemies, that they wholly routed them and made them fly for life, and Epaminondas fierce∣ly pursuing the flying enemy, made a great slaughter of them, and obtained the most glorious victory that ever Captain won, having in a pitched Field overcome the most Noble, and warlike Nation of all Greece, and that with a far smaller number of men than his enemies had. He also rejoyced more in this, than in all his other victo∣ries, because it happened to him in his Fathers life-time: and he often used to say, that of all the honest and hap∣py Fortunes that befell him, nothing joyed his heart more, than that he had vanquished the Lacedemonians at Leuctres, his Father and Mother living to see it: and indeed, he that day, did not onely preserve their lives, but of all his Citizens besides,His Humi∣lity. the Lacedemonians having fully resolved utterly to destroy the Thebans. Epaminondas used at all other times to come abroad fine and neat, and with a pleasant countenance: but the next day after this Battel, he came out very sad, heavy, and pensive, and when his Friends asked him whether he had heard any ill news which occasioned this posture, he said, No: but (said he) I perceive by my self yesterday, that being overjoyed with the victory I obtained, my heart was more elevated than it ought, and therefore to day I correct that joy, which yesterday exceeded its due bounds. He knowing that it was the manner of the Spartans, as much as possible, to conceal their losses, he suffered them not to
carry away all their dead Bodies together, but every Ci∣ty one after another, by which it appeared that there were four Thousand of them slain: But of the Booetians there were not found above three hundred dead. This Battel was fought in the beginning of the second year of the hundred and second Olympiade. The Lacedemonians having by this overthrow lost the greatest part of their honour, which they had maintain∣ed so long, yet lost not their courage; but to keep their youth still in heart, and to take away all fear from such as had escaped, they sent Agesilaus, with an Army into Arcadia, who was contented to take a few small Towns of the Mantineans, and so to return home again. Some say that Lycomedes, Captain of the Arcadians, making an inrode neer to Orchomene, slew in an encounter, Poli∣tropus, Captain of the Lacedemonians, and two hundred Spartans with him, which provoked the Lacedemonians against them: and thereupon the Arcadians, finding themselves too weak for them, they sought alliance and aid from the Thebans. Sure it is that these two States were now at enmity, which occasioned the Arcadians and Thebans to joyn together, who, with their Allies being led by Epaminondas entered into Laconia, with an Army of fourty thousand men, besides thirty thou∣sand others that followed the Camp. At this time the Athenians sent Captain Iphecrates, with twelve thou∣sand men, to aide the Lacedemonians:He plun∣ders Laco∣nia. But before their coming, Epaminondas was entered into Laconia, and had sacked all the Country which had not been wasted by any enemy for six hundred years be∣fore. The Spartans seeing their Country thus plundred, and destroyed, were desirous to have gone out with such Forces as they had, but Agesilaus would not suffer them, telling them how dangerous it was for them to leave their City, and to set upon such a potent, and numerous enemy. This made them quiet: and Epaminondas in the mean time marched with his Ar∣my
towards the River Eurotas, which at that time was risen very high, because of the Winter raines. He en∣deavoured all he could, to draw forth Agesilaus to a Battel, who beholding Epaminondas a great while, marching with his Army in Battel aray along the Ri∣ver side at the Head of his Troops,He braves the Spar∣tans. he wondred at his boldnesse, and Valour, but would by no meanes adventure out of his Fort: So that when this Army had plundred all Laconia, Epaminondas led them back a∣gain laden with a very rich Booty. And though Age∣silaus was commended for pteserving his City in safety; yet Epaminondas had by this inrode, and especially by his Victory at Leuctres, so impoverished the Country, that Sparta could never after recover that losse, nor grow into that reputation and power which it had before. Yea, notwithstanding the aide sent by the Athenians, and the skill and experience of Iphicrates, Epaminondas returned with his Army intire as he came. Epaminondas that he might keep the Lacedemonians still underfoot, and heape new troubles upon them, gave Counsell to the Arcadians, and their Allies, to re-edify, and replenish with People the City of Messina, which the Lacedemonians had long before destroyed, and when all the whole Councel had given their consents to it,Messina re-edified. he forthwith, by diligent enquiry sought out all that had been ancient Inhabitants in that City, and in the space of eighty five Dayes, having repaired the ruined Houses, he raised again one of the most Noble, and an∣cient Cities of Grece, and left there a strong Garrison for their security. This gat him as much, if not more love and honour than any other service which he had ever done, The Lacedemonians being freed from a great fear by his departure, made an agreement with the Athenians, leaving to them the chief command by Sea, and re∣serving to themselves that by Land. And afterwards, by the assistance of the Athenians and that aide which
came to them out of Sicily, by little and little they reco∣vered their Towns again. The Arcadians, to stop their proceedings, assaulted ye Ci∣ty of Pallene in Laconia, and taking it by storme, put all the Garrison therein to the Sword, & then razed the Town,Pallene destroy∣ed. and plundred all the Country there abouts. And ex∣pecting that the Lacedemonians would seek revenge, they sent for aid to the Thebans, who sent Epaminondas and the other Counsellers to assist them with six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse. The Athenians having intelligence hereof, sent their Army under the Conduct of Chabrias, who marched directly to Corinth, where he met with a good supply of Souldiers from the Mega∣rians, Pallenians, and Corinthians, so that now he had a Brigade of ten thousand men. These intended to forti∣fie and stop all the passages and entrances into the Coun∣try of Poloponesus. The Lacedemonians and their Allies joyning also with them, made up an Army of twenty thousand men: And accordingly,Pelopone∣sus fortifi∣ed. beginning at the Ci∣ty of Cencrees, unto the Haven of Lecheum, they block∣ed all the wayes from one Sea to an other with migh∣ty great peices of Timber laid acrosse, and with a marvelous deep ditch: and this great work was fol∣lowed with such speed, both by reason of the great mul∣titude of labourers, as also through the forwardnesse of them that prosecuted it with such earnestnesse, that they had quite finished it before the Boeotians could ar∣rive there. Epaminondas when he came thither, viewing this fortification, perceiving that the easiest place to storme it, was that which the Lacedemonians themselves guard∣ed, he sent to give them defiance though they were thrice as many in number as he was, yet for all this they durst not come out, but kept close under their fortification: Notwitstanding he assaulted them in it, and at last drave them out. In the heat of the fight every one doing his best, some assailing, others de∣fending, Epaminondas chose out the valiantest men in
all his Army, and bravely charging the Lacedemoni∣ans, he forced them to give back, and in dispite of them, he entred into Peloponnesus, which of all other his Noble exlpoites, was the most wonderfull and memorable action. From thence he marched to the Cities of Epidaure, and Troezen, and so pillaged all the Country:He beates the Spar∣tans. But he staied not to take any of the Towns, because they had strong Garrisons in them: Yet he put Sicyone, Phuente, and some other Towns into such fear, that they yeilded themselves to him. This being done, he went to Corinth, and overcame the Corinthians in a set Battel, and beat them home, even to the Gates of their City: Yea some of his men were so unadvised, trusting to their own valour, that they entered the Gates of their City pel mel with those that fled, which put the Corinthians into such a terrible fear, that they ran with all speed possible to shelter themselves in their Houses: But Chabrias making head, beat them out again, and slew some, whereupon he caused a token of Triumph to be set up, as if he had given the Thebans an overthrow, for which Epaminon∣das laughed him to scorn. The Boeotians brought their Army as neer unto Corinth as they could, and Chabrias with his Army encamped without the Walls in a very strong Place of advantage, and there were many Skir∣mishes betwixt them, in which Chabrias behaved him∣self with such Valour that he gained great reputation even of Epaminondas himself, who upon a time being asked, whom he thought to be the Greatest Captain, himself, Chabrias, or Iphicrates? Its hard (said he) to judge whilst we are all alive. Newes was brought to him that the Athenians had again sent an Army into Poloponnesus, furnished with new Armor: Indeed this Army consisted of ten thou∣sand Spaniards and Gauls, whom Dyonisius the Tyrant, sent out of Sicily to aide the Lacedemnians, having paid them for five moneths: they did some reasonable ser∣vice
in this War, and at the end of Summer returned home again. It fell out in these last encounters that Epaminondas having forced the Lacedemonians that guarded the for∣tification before mentioned, had many of them in his power to have slain them:His Cle∣mency. but he contented him∣self only with this Glory, that in dispite of them, he had entered into Peloponnesus, seeking to do them no more hurt; which gave occasion to those that envied his Glory, to blame him, and to accuse him of Trea∣son, as having willingly spared the enemies, be∣cause they should in particular thank him only: But here it will not be improper to take no∣tice how he behaved himself amongst his Citi∣zens, and how wisely he defended his own Inte∣grity. Amongst all those that envied his Glory and virtue,He is en∣vied. there was one Meneclides, an Orator, and an eloquent man, but with all, most wicked, and very ma∣licious. He finding that Epaminondas won so much honour by the Wars, never left perswading the Thebans to embrace Peace, and prefer it before War, and that because hereby they should not alwayes live under the obedience, and command of one man. But Epaminondas one day told him in the open Counsel: Thou wilt (said he) deceive the Thebans whilst thou advisest them to leave the Wars: and highly com∣mending ease and Peace, thou goest about to put iron bolts upon their feet. For War begets Peace, which yet cannot hold long but amongst them that know how to maintain it with the Sword. Then turning himself to the Citizens, he said, If you will have the Princi∣pallity and command of all Greece, you must shroud your selves in your Tents, and lie in your Pavillions in the open Fields, and not follow sports and Pastimes here at home. For he knew well enough that the Boeotians undid themselves by ease and Idlenesse, which made him endeavour continually to keep them in exercise and War▪
Upon a time when the Thebans were to choose Cap∣tains, they went about to choose Epaminondas, one of the six counsellers, whereupon he said to them: My Masters, pray you consider of it now you are at leasure be∣fore you choose me: For I tell you plainly, if I be chosen your Captain you must to the Wars. He used to call the Country of Boeotia, which was a plain, and Cham∣pion Country, the Stage of War, saying, that it was impossible to keep it, unlesse the Inhabitants had their Targets on their Armes, and their Swords in their hands: and this was not, because he did not love Peace, and privacy to study Philosophy, or that he was not more carefull of them that were under his charge than he was of himself, using alwayes to watch and forbear his meat, when the Thebans were at their Ban∣quets, and Feasts, giving themselves over to their plea∣sures: but because he knew them well enough, and was never more carefull of any thing than to keep his Army from idlenesse. Upon a time the Arcadians desired him that some of his Companies might come into one of their Towns to lie dry and warm there, all the winter, but he would by no means yeild to it. For (said he to his Souldiers) now they see you exercising your selves in Arms, they won∣der at you as brave and valiant men; but if they should see you at the fire side parching of Beans, they would esteem no better of you than of themselves. Neither could he endure Covetousness: for if at sometimes he gave his men leave to go a freebooting, his meaning was, that whatsoever they got, should be bestowed in furnishing them with good Arms; and if any went a∣bout to fill his Purse with money he judged him unwor∣thy to be a Souldier. Upon a time he understood that his Target-bearer had received a great summe of money for the ransome of a Prisoner, whereupon he said to him: Give me my Target, and go thy wayes home, and buy thee a Tavern wherein to spend the rest of thy life: for I per∣ceive thou wilt no more, like an honest man, put thy self in dan∣ger
in the Wars, as formerly thou hast done, because now thou art grown rich and wealthy. Though Epaminondas was thus virtuous, and unblame∣able in his life, yet the aforementioned Menectides would never cease contending, and reproaching of him: and one day he went so far as to upbraid him because he had no children, and was not married,His pru∣dence. and that he mag∣nified himself more than ever King Agamemnon had done▪ To this Epaminondas answered, Thou hast nothing to do to counsel me to marry, and in this respect, there is never a man here whose advise I would less make use of than thine (and this he spake because the other was taken notice of to be an Adulterer) And whereas thou thinkest that I envy the fame and renown of Agamem∣non, thou art fowly deceived. Yet let me tell thee, that whereas he was ten years in winding one City, I on the contrary, by putting the Lacedemonians to flight in one day, have delivered not onely our own City, but all Greece from their slavery. But thanks be to you? My Lords Thebans (speaking to all the Assem∣bly) by your assistance I did it, and thereby overthrew the power and government of our insulting enemies. Yet after all his brave deeds,He is ac∣cused and abused. both he and Pelopidas were ill rewarded for all their good service, by their in∣gratefull Citizens: For at their return from Laconia, they, with some other of the six Counsellers, were ac∣cused, that after the time that their Government was expired, they retained their power four months after the time appointed by the Law. With much ado Pelopidas was quitted: But Epaminondas willed all his other Com∣panions to lay the fault upon him, who by his Authori∣ty forced them to it; and instead of excusing himself, he told them all the brave exploits which he had done at that time: Adding withall, that he was willing and ready to die, if they so pleased, Provided that they wrote upon his Tomb, that Epaminondas was put to death, because he had compelled the Thebans against their wills to burn the Country of Laconia, which in five hun∣dred
years before had never been plundered. That he had repeopled the City of Messina with Inhabitants, two hundred and thirty years after it had been laid wast by the Lacedemonians. That he had brought all the peo∣ple and Towns of Arcadia to be as one Body, in League together, and had set all the Greeks at liberty: and all these things (said he) we did in that Journey. The Judges when they heard this worthy and true defence, they all arose from their seats, and laughed heartily, and would not take up their Balls to Ballot against him. But for the second accusation, to wit, that he had shewed favour to the Lacedemonians for his own particu∣lar honour, he would make no particular answer to it before the People, but rising out of the Theater, he passed through the Assembly and went into the Park of Exercises. Upon this the people being incensed against him, refused to chuse him into Office as they had wont to do, though there was great need of him, and Created other Counsellers to go into Thessaly: and the more (as they thought) to despite him, they commanded him to go that expedition as a private Souldier, which he re∣fused not, but went very willingly. Pelopidas being sent a second time into Thessaly to make peace between the people and Alexander the Tyrant of Pheres, was by this Tyrant (not regarding that he was an Ambassadour, and a Theban) committed to prison, together with Ismenias.Pelopidas imprison? ed by a Tyrant. Upon this, the Thebans being justly offended, sent an Army of eight thousand Foot and five hundred Horse against him, howbeit under the conduct of unskillfull Captains, who, wanting judge∣ment to use their advantages, thought good to return home without doing any thing: But as they went back Alexander, being stronger in Horse than they, pressed hard upon their Reer, killing some, and wounding o∣thers; so that the Thebans knowing neither how to go forward nor backward, were in great distresse; and that which aggravated their misery was, that their victuals
were almost spent. Being thus almost out of hope e∣ver to get home in safety, Epaminondas being at that time a common Souldier amongst the Foot, both the Captaines and Souldiers earnestly intreated him to help to redresse this disorder. He thereupon chose cer∣taine Footmen that were light armed, and all the Horsmen, and with these putting himself into the Rere of the Army, he so lustily repulsed the Eenemy, that the rest of the Army afterwards marched in great safety,His Po∣licy. and still making Head, as occasion served, and keep∣ing his Troops in good order, he at last brought them all well home. This brave Act Crowned him with new Glory, con∣founded his enemies, and made him well spoken of every where, and by it he obtained the love and good will of the Citizens, who set great Fines upon the heads of those Captaines who had behaved themselves so un∣worthily in that expedition. And now the People see∣ing that by so many worthy deeds he had stoped the slanderous mouths, and confuted the accusations of his ill willers, they chose him again their Captain Ge∣nerall to conduct a new Army into Thessaly: At his coming all the Country wonderfully rejoyced, only the Tyrant with his Captaines, and Friends were exceeding∣ly dejected, and possessed with feare, being Thunder∣struck with the fame of so Noble a Captaine, and his subjects had a good mind to rise up against him, hoping that they should shortly see the Tyrant fully re∣compenced for all the wicked and cursed deeds that he had done amongst them. Epaminondas when he came into Thessaly, preferred the safety and deliverance of his Friend Pelopidas before his own honour and Glory,His Pru∣dence. and fearing lest Alexander when he should see himself and his State in danger to be overthrown, should in his rage revenge himself up∣on Pelopidas, he therefore purposly drew this War out in length, marching often about him, but never setting upon him in good earnest, often seeming to make preparations,
and yet still delaying: and this he did, to mollify the heart of this Tyrant, and not to provoke (to the dan∣ger of his Friend) the inhumane and unbridled pas∣sion of this cruel Bloudsucker. Yet he being a Monster compounded of cruelty, and cowardlinesse, was so afraid of the very name and reputation of Epa∣minondas, that he presently sent some to him to ex∣cuse his fact, and to crave Peace. But Epaminon∣das was not willing that his Thebans should make Peace and Alliance with so wicked a man, only he was content to grant him a Truce for thirty Dayes,Pelopidas released. upon the delivering to him Pelopidas and Isme∣nias. So with them he returned back to Thebes, and al∣wayes continued a faithfull Friend to Pelopidas so long as they lieved together: Yet would he never share with him in his Riches, but did still perseveare in his former strict poverty and Discipline. He was very bold, and yet it was mingled with a winning sweetnesse and a livly grace, as may appear in sundy Examples. Be∣sides his bold speech to Agesilaus, mentioned before: At another time the Argians having made a League with the Thebans, the Athenians sent their Ambassa∣dors into Arcadia, to see if they could gain the Arcadi∣ans to be their Friends. And these Ambassadors be∣gan roundly and hotly to charge and accuse both the one and the other, and Callistratus speaking for them, reproached them with Orestes, and Oedipus: Epaminon∣das being present at that Assembly, stood up, and said, My Lords,His witty speeches. we confesse that in times past we had a man that killed his Father, and in Argos, one that killed his Mother, but as for us now, we have banished all such wicked murtherers out of our Country, and the Athenians have in∣tertaned them. At another time when the Spartans had laid many great and grievous imputations to the charge of the Thebans, he said, If they have done nothing else, my Lords of Sparta, yet at least they have made you forget
to speak little. But that which was most excellent, and observable in Epaminondas, and which indeed did stop the mouth of envy it self was his moderation, and temperance, knowing how to use any state or condition, and never to rage either against himself or others, alwayes bearing this mind, that howsoever they took him, and in what place soever they set him, he was well contented, so that he might but advance the good of his Country: As may appear by this Example: on a time his evil-willers, thinking to bring him into disgrace, and meerly out of spite, made him superintendant or overseer of all the customs, whilst others of his inferiors,His Hu∣mility- unworthy to be compared with him, were placed in the most honour∣able Offices: Yet despised he not this meane Office, but discharged it very Faithfully: For (said he) the Office or Authority shewes not only what the man is, but also the man what the Office is. Shortly after Epaminondas was returned out of Thessa∣ly, the Arcadians were overcome by Archidamus and the Lacedemonians, who in the fight lost not a man, and therefore they called this journey the tearlesse Battel: and Epaminondas forseeing that the Arcadians would yet have another storme, he gave them counsel to fortifie their Towns, which they did accordingly, and built that City which afterwads was called Megalopolis,Megalope∣lis built. situa∣ted in a very convenient place. Whilst the Thebans made War with the Elians, their neighbours, the minde of Epaminondas was alwayes lifted up to high en∣terprizes for the good of his Country, wherefore in an Oration which he made to his Citizens, he preswaded them to make themselves strong by Sea, and to endea∣vour to get the principality, and to make themselves the Lords thereof. This Oration was full of lively reasons whereby he shewed and proved unto them, that the enterpize was both honourable, and profitable, which he made out by sundry Arguments, telling them that it was an easy thing for them, who were now the stronger by Land, to make themselves also the
stronger by Sea: and the rather, for that the Athenians in the War against Xerxes, though they had armed and set forth two hundred Gallyes, armed and well appoin∣ted with men, yet they willingly submitted themselves to the Lacedemonians. He alleadged many other rea∣sons, whereby he prevailed so far, that the Thebans were willing to undertake the enterprize, and thereup∣on gave present order to build an hundred Gallies, and an Arsenall with so many rooms that they might lay them under covert in the Dock:The The∣bans build a Navy. They ordered also to send to them of Rhodes, and of Chio, and of Byzanti∣um, to desire their furthrance in this enterprize: for which end Epaminondas was sent with an Army unto these Cities: In his Passage he met with Leches▪ a Cap∣tain of the Athenians, with a number of Ships in his Fleet, who was sent on purpose to hinder this designe of the Thebans: Yet Epaminondas so affrighted him, that he made him retire back again, and holding on his course he brought the aforenamed Cities to enter into League with the Thebans. Shortly after the Thebans fell out with the City of Orchomene, which had done them great hurt, and mischiefe, and having won it by assault, slew all the men that were able to bear Armes, and made all the women and children Slaves. Some time after the death of Pelopidas, certain private Persons of Mantinea, fearing to be called to an account for their bad behaviours, and robberies which they had committed, if the Arcadians and Elians should agree, they so brought it about, that they raised a new quarrel in the Country,New Wars. which was divided into two Factions, whereof the Mantineans were the chief on the one side, and the Tageates on the other. This quarrel went so far, that the Parties would needs try it by Armes. The Tageates sent to request aid of the Thebans, who accordingly chose Epami∣nondas their Captain Generall, and sent him with a good number of men of War to aid the Tageates. The Mantineans being terrified with this aid that came out
of Boeotia to their eneemies, and at the reputation of their Captain, they immediatly sent to the Athenians, and Lacedemonians, the greatest enemies of the Boeotians, for their assistance, which both the Cities granted. Upon this there fell out many and great skirmishes in diverse parts of Peloponnesus: and Epaminondas being not far off from Mantinea, understood by some of the Country men, that Agesilaus, and his Lacedemonians, were come into the Field, and that they wasted all the Territories of the Tageates; whereupon, judging that there were but few men left in the City of Sparta to defend it, he undertook a great exploit, and dangerous, and had certainly effected it, if the marvelous good Fortune of Sparta had not hindred it. His designe was this:A notable atempt▪ He departed from Tegea by night, the Mantineans know∣ing nothing of it, and taking a by way, he had certain∣ly surprised Sparta without striking a stroak, had not a Post of Candia speedily carried word of it to Agesilaus, who immediatly dispatched away an Horsman to give intelligence to them of Sparta to stand upon their guard, and he himself speedily hasted after, and arrived there a little before the coming of the Thebans, who being ve∣ry near the City a little before day, they gave an assault to them that defended it. This made Agesilus to bestir himself wonderfully, even beyond the strength of so old a man: But his Son Archidamus, and Isadas, the Son of Phaebidas fought valiantly on all parts▪ Epami∣nondas seeing how prepared the Spartanes were to oppose him, began then to suspect that his design was dis∣covered; yet notwithstanding he left not off to force them all he could, though he fought with great dis∣advantage, considering the places wherein he was: yea, he continued fighting courageously, till the Army of the Lacedemonians came on, and till the night approach∣ed, whereupon he sounded a retreat. Then being informed that the Mantineans came on also with their forces, he withdrew his Army somewhat farther off from the Town, and there Camped. After
which he caused his men to refresh themselves with vi∣ctuals, and leaving certain Horsemen in the Camp, he commanded them to make fires in the morning, and in the mean time himself with the rest of his men, went to surprize Mantinea before any should discover that he was departed.An other but fru∣strated. Yet herein also he failed of his purpose, the prosperity of the Thebans being come to its height, and the course of Epaminondas his Life drawing neer to an end, whereby Greece was deprived of this Noble and famous Captain, from whom was taken a most notable Victory, and that twice, by strange accidents. For at the second time, when he was come neer to Mantinea that was left without guard and defence, just then, on the other side of the Town there arrived six thousand Athenians, conducted by their Captain Hegele∣cus, who having put sufficient force into the Town, ordered the rest of his Army in Battel array without the Walls, and immediatly also came the Mantineans, and Lacedemonians together, who prepared to put all to the hazard of a Battel, and therefore sent for their Allies from all parts: and when they were come together they were in all twenty five thousand Foot, and two thou∣sand Horse. The Arcadians, Boeotians, and their par∣takers were thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse. When they came to the Battel, first the Horse charged with great fury,A Battel. and the Horsmen of the Athe∣nians encountering with the Thehans, proved too weak for them, not because they were lesse valiant, or hardy than the other, but because they had not so good Chieftains, and had few Archers amongst their Troops. The Thebans on the other side were all excellently well appointed, and had Thessalians amongst them, men very skilfull in their Bowes, who so plyed the Atheni∣ans that they wholly brake them, and put them to the rout, yet in their flight they did not run amongst their Footmen, which made them somewhat recover their Honour which they had lost by running away. On the
contrary part, as they fled, they met with some Com∣panies of Negropont, whom the Arcadians had sent to take in certain Hills hard by the plain where the Battel was fought, whom they put all to the Sword. The men at Arms of the Thebans seeing them turn their backs, did not pursue them at all, but presently gave charge upon a great Battalion of Footmen, forcing them all they could to break, and run through them. So the fight was very cruel and sharp, yet in the end the Athenians were forced to quit the place: whereupon a Col∣lonel of Horsemen of the Elians, who stood as a re∣serve to guard the Rere, defended them, and encoun∣tering with the Bootians, he resisted them, and made them give back, which reinforced the fault of the left point of their Army. But in the right point, after the Horsemen had charged one another, the fight was soon determined: For by reason of the great number of men at Armes of the Thebans, and Thessalians, the Mantine∣ans and their partakers were soon put to rout, and have∣ing lost a great number of their men, they sheltered themselves under the Battalion of their Footmen, and this was the issue of the fight between the Horse∣men. As for the infantry, after they came once to the Sword, it was a marvellous bloody, and cruel fight. For never before that time was there so many Greeks in the Field one against another, nor so great and expert Captains, nor such valiant Souldiers as were now. The two Nations that at that time bare the name to be the bravest Footmen in all the world, to wit, the Thebans, and Lacedemonians, were now set in Front one against the other, and they began to charge, neither sparing Life nor limb. The first charge they gave was with their Pikes, which being soon broken with the huge blows they gave each other, then they came to it with their Swords, and lustily laying about them, Body to Body, Death raged in every place, and there was a mighty carnage made: for neither part shrunk back, or
gave over with wearinesse, but stood to it like undaunt∣ed men. And so continued this dangerous Fight for a long time, by reason of the valiantness of either party, the victory stood doubtfull for a great while, and it could not be judged which side was like to have the up∣per hand. For every one that fought, had this resoluti∣on in his heart, not to fear Death whatsoever befell them: But rather desiring to make proof of their utmost Va∣lour, they willingly parted with their lives to lye in the Bed of Honour. By reason whereof, though the fight was sharp and cruel, yet the event remained for a long space so uncertain, that it could not be discerned to which side the Victory should fall But at last, Epaminondas seeing no other remedy, but that the issue of this doubtfull fight depended upon his own virtue and valour, he resolved with himself to ad∣venture his life upon it: and presently▪ gathering about him all the best, and choisest men of his Army, and of them having compounded a Company of stout and re∣solute Blades, he ran with great fury into the thickest, and greatest press of all his enemies, marching himself the foremost man in all his Troop, with a Spear in his hand, with the which at the first blow he gave, he slew the Captain of the Lacedemonians, and straightway the rest of his company began to assail their enemies. But Epaminondas laying about him like a Lion, slew so many in the place where he stood with his own hands, that at last he opned the Battel of the Lacedemonian, whom he pursued & laid on them so lustily, that they being unable any lon¦ger to defend themselves against ye irristable fury of him∣self and his followers, were enforced to give back and leave the place to the Boeotians, who yet followed them at their heels, beating them down so eagerly, that in a short space the whole Field was covered with dead Bodies, lying on heapes one upon another. But in the end, the Lacedemonians seeing that they could no way save themselves, gathered courage out of despair, and a Company of them joyning together, all
set upon Epaminondas throwing an infinite number of Darts at him, of which some he avoided, others he re∣ceived upon his Target, but yet there were many that stuck in his Body which he pulled out, and fought with the same weapons against those that had thrown them at him. At last, when he had done more than a man, and beyond all humane strength, thereby to win Ho∣nour to his Country by gaining them the victory, a cer∣tain Lcoian called Anticrates, thrust him into the breast with a Dart with such force, as breaking the wood,He is deadly woundd. he left the iron Head sticking in his Body. Having recei∣ved this deadly wound, he fell immediately to the ground: But then was there a more cruel fight about him than ever there was before, which occasioned great slaughter on both sides, till the Thebans by fine force made their enemies to flie for their lives, and when they had pursued them a while, they returned back to their Camp that they might keep the dead Bodies in their power, which was a certain signe that the victory was theirs, and then they sounded a retreat, and so the Bat∣tel ended. Both sides challenged the victory and made Triumphs for it. The Lacedemonians did it,The Spar∣tans beat∣en. because the Atheni∣ans had slain those of Negropont that were sent to seize upon the Hils before mentioned, and kept their Bodies in their power. The Thebans on the other side having overcome the Spartans, had the Bodies of them that were slain in the Battel, in their power, which was by far the greater number, wherefore they said, that they were the Victors. Thus both standing upon their tearms, it was a good while before either would send a Trumpet or Herauld to the other for leave to bury their dead. Yet at last the Lacedemonians sent first, and then they all betook themselves to give the dead an Honourable Burial. And as for him that had killed Epaminondas, he was highly esteemed and honoured for his valiant act, and the Lacedemonians gave him many rich Pre∣sents, and made him and his Posterity free from
all publick Taxes and contributions in the Common∣wealth. As for Epaminondas he was brought yet alive into his Tent; how beit his Physitians, and Surgeons being cal∣led together to dresse his wounds, they all concluded that so soone as they plucked the head of the Dart out of his Body, he must needs die. And truly he made a most noble and worthy end. For first he called for his Target-bearer, who was alwayes at his hand in the Bat∣tel, and asked him: Is my Target safe? He brought it strait. Then he asked, who had the Victory? The Boeo∣tians answered, the Target-bearer. Then he com∣manded them to bring to him Diophantus and Jolidas: they told him they were both dead: Upon this he ad∣vised his Citizens to make Peace with their enemies,His ad∣vice to the The∣bans. for that they had not any Captain of skill to lead them to the Wars. And now (said he) it is time for me to die, and therefore pluck the Dart Head out of my Body. At this word all his Friends that were about him fetched grievous sighs, and even cryed out for sorrow: and one of them weeping, said unto him: Alas Epaminon∣das! Thou diest now and leavest no Children behind thee: Yea (said he) that I do: Eor I leave two faire Daughters behind me, whereof the one is the Victory at Leu∣ctres and the other, this of Mantinea. So they pulled out the Dart,His death. and immediatly he gave up the Ghost, without shewing any signe that he was at all troubled at it. He used often to say, That War is the Bed of Honour, amd that it is a sweet Death to dye for ones Country. He was one of the bravest Captaines that ever we read of:His cha∣racter. For whereas others excelled in some one or two Virtues by which they made their Fame great and glorious, he excelled in all the Vertues and good Parts that could be desired in a Grave, Politick and Great Captain, to make him compleat in all things that could be expected in an Heathen. In his time he advanced his Country to the Principality of all
Greece. But after his Death they soon lost it: and not long after Alexander the Great, utterly▪ rake them in peices, made slaves of those that survived, and razed their City to the very ground. A in hi life time he had alwayes detested covetounsse▪ so after his Death the Thebans were faigne to bury him at the common charge of the City,Hs po∣verty. because they found no mony in his house to defray the least patt of the Fune∣rall expences. FINIS.
Courteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that these Books follow∣ing, are Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the  in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door▪ HIckes Revelation, Revealed, Folio. Clarkes Martyrology Compleat, with the Persecutions of England to the end of Queen Maries Reign, Folio. — Lives of ten Eminent Divines, some being as follow; Bishop Vsher, Dr Gouge, Dr Harris, Mr Gataker, Mr Whittaker, &c. and some other famous Christians. — Life of Christ, 4o — Life of Herod the Great, 4o —Life of Nebuchadnezzar, and Cyrus the Great; the one, the first founder of the Baylonian Empir, the other, the first founder of the Em∣pire of the Medes and Persians, 4o — Life of Alexander the Great the first founder of the Grecian Empire, As also of Charles the Great, commonly called Charlemagne, the first founder of the French Empire, 4o —A Prospect of Hungary, and Transylvania, together with an account of the qualities of the Inhabitants, the Commodities of the Countries, the Chiefest Cities, Towns, and Strong-holds, Rivers, and Mountains, with an Historycal Narration of the Wars amongst themselves, and with the Turks, continued to this year 1664. As also a Brief Description of Bohe∣mia, Austria, Bavaria, Steirmark, Cratia, Dalmatia, Moravia, and other Adjacent Countries, contained in a Map joyned therewith, by which Map you may know which Places are in the Power of the Turk, and which Christians have, 4o Cradock's KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE; Or, a Plain Discourse of the Chief Things necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and PRA∣CTISED in Order to SALVATION, 4o Ford, of Baptism, 8o Cotton, on the Covenant of Grace, 8o Culverwell, of Assurance, 8o Records Urinal of Physick, 8o Ravins Oriental Grammer, 12o Peacocks Visitation, 12o Dr Tuckney's Good Day well Improved, 12o — Death Disarmed, 12o — Balm of Gilead, 12o Clamor Sanguinis, 12o Aristipp or Blsac's Master piece, 12o Charles's Works, 24o
