C6744 R31308 11886711 50384
THE Apostolical History: CONTAINING The Acts, Labours, Travels, Sermons, Discourses, Miracles, Successes, and Sufferings, OF THE HOLY APOSTLES FROM CHRIST's ASCENTION TO THE Destruction of JERƲSALEM by Titus; A brief DESCRIPTION whereof is here Inserted. ALSO, A Narration of the particular Times and Occasions upon which the Apostolical Epistles were written; Together with a Brief ANALYTICAL PARAPHRASE of them. To which is added (for the better understanding of this History) a MAP of the Apostle PAƲL's Travels. Published for the benefit of such as desire clearly to understand, and rightly to improve the Holy Scriptures. By SAMƲEL CRADOCK, B. D. late Rector of North-Cadbury in Somersetshire. Esse Christianum, grande est; non, videri. Hieron. ad Paullinum. Difficile est, omnes partes implere hominis verè & solidè Christiani. Gr. Prudentem semper admoneo lectorem, ut non superstitiosis acquiescat interpretationibus, & quae Commatice pro fingentium dicuntur arbitrio; sed consideret priora, media, & sequentia, & nectat sibi universa quae scripta sunt. Hieron. in 25 Mat. Fruantur alii suo ingenio, mihi illi videntur optimi concionatores, qui sunt optimi Scrip∣turae interpretes. Streso. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, and are to be sold by Edward Brewster, at the Crane in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXII.
To his highly honoured Friends, Richard Hambden Rowland Hunt Henry Ashhurst Philip Foley Esquires. (Sons-in-law to the Right Honourable William Lord Paget); And to their Pious and Vertuous Ladies. Right Worthy and much honoured, IF the Dedication of this poor Work unto you, may carry with it any intimation of the great Respect and Honour I have for you, I desire the world should understand the ground of it; which is not so much the emi∣nency of your Quality and outward Condi∣tion (though that also deserves its due value and regard) as your eminent Piety and Vertue, which renders you truly honourable, and at∣tracts the esteem of all good men. And truly I cannot but look upon it as a great testimony of the Divine favour to that Noble Family to which you are all so nearly related, and a great honour to it, That in an Age so corrupt and depraved as this is, there should be found in it
so many Persons more ennobled by their Virtue than their High Birth; and more great in Good∣ness and real Worth, than in Estate. May the Blessing of God Almighty ever rest on You and your Families, and make you still great Examples of all that is good and praise-worthy, in the places where you live; that when you shall have finished your course, and served your Ge∣neration here according to the will of God, and are entred into your everlasting Rest, your Names may be to the succeeding Age as a Per∣fume poured forth. As for what concerns this Work, you may please to understand, That it is the fruit of some of my hours of leisure and retirement, of which I have had more of late years than ever I desired or expected. And surely tam otii quam negotii reddenda est ratio, as he said: We must give account to God of our times of leisure, as well as of those of publick and visible em∣ployment. For those several years last past, wherein I have been confined to privacy, I have addicted my self to the serious study of the Holy Scriptures, not finding any way wherein I could better employ my time. For where can we find that profit, that delight, that comfort in afflictions, which may be reaped from a diligent perusal and serious meditation on those Sacred and Divinely-inspir'd Writings? I have often thought with my self, that a short and plain Analytical Paraphrase and Exposi∣tion of them, might be of great use to those
who have not leisure to read larger Comments. And accordingly I have bent my pains to serve them therein, as I was able. If my poor endea∣vours may be any ways serviceable to the Church of God, I shall rejoyce. However, as our blessed Saviour said in excuse of Mary when she was blamed for pouring her Box of precious Ointment on his Head (Mar. 14.4, &c.), Let her alone, she hath done what she could; intimating, that if she had known how to ex∣press her high veneration and affection to Him in a better manner, she would have willingly done it: So I hope I may in some measure of sincerity and uprightness say, that I have done what I could. If I had known how to do any thing better for the service of God and His Church, in the Circumstances wherein I have of late years been cast, I hope I should have readily done it. But seeing I did not, I have (humbly imploring the Divine Assistance) ad∣ventured on this. 'Tis well known, that there is nothing in this world more pleasing and cheering to the eyes, than Light; insomuch that one elegantly calls it The smile of Nature. And in like manner, to the Mind and Understanding of man, there is nothing more pleasing and delightful than a clear discovery of Truth. But of all Truths, there are none can be so acceptable, so delight∣ful and ravishing, as those glorious Truths revealed by God in his holy Word, which tend so much to the bettering of man here, and to the bring∣ing
of him to eternal happiness hereafter. And truly I am very confident, would Persons of Quality and Education more diligently read and study the Holy Scriptures, they would find such incomparable delight, sweetness, and comfort in them, that Play-books and Romances, and such corrupting and effeminating Trash (which consume the precious hours of too many of our Gentry) would seem vile and contemptible in their eyes. But I need not say these things to you, who know how better to employ your time, and have learned to prefer Manna before Onions and Garlick. All that I shall further trouble you with, is only to acquaint you, That se  ventu∣ring this poor thing of mine into a World so full of Censure and Prejudice, I find my self inclin'd to put up some such Petition unto God for it, as that excellent person, Mr. Herbert put up for his Divine Poems: Turn their eyes hither who will make again: Theirs, who will hurt themselves or me, refrain. And thus (honoured Friends) wishing very heartily unto You, and all yours, all manner of prosperity, I remain, Your very humble and affectionate Servant, SA. CRADOCK. Gesings in Wickam-brook Suffolk, Octob. 1. 1672.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, HAving lately published the intire History of our Bles∣sed Lord and Saviour, from his Birth to his glorious Ascension to Heaven; it will not be, I hope, unaccep∣table to thee, if I here present thee with the History of the Church immediately succeeding; and give thee a Narrative of the Acts, Labours, Travels, Sermons, Discourses, Miracles, Suc∣cesses, and Sufferings of the Holy Apostles, as they are record∣ed by the Evangelist Luke in that Divine Book of his, call'd the Acts of the Apostles. And that my Design in this undertaking may the more clearly be discerned, be pleased to understand, that I have digested the whole Work into Seven Chapters. The FIRST CHAPTER contains the Acts of all the Apo∣stles joyntly, from our Saviour's Ascension to Saul's Conversion; and shews what was done by them before the Feast of Pente∣cost, at the Feast, and after it. (1.) Before the Feast; it shews how they continued in joynt-devotion for ten days together at Jerusalem, in expectation of the great promised effusion of the Spirit; and during that time, called Matthias by lot to the Apostleship in the room of Judas [Acts chap. I.] 2. At the Feast; it shews how they received a plentiful effusion of the Spirit, and spake divers Tongues; at which some of the Jews mocking, Peter preached an excellent Sermon to them, which had such wonderful success, that by his own and the other A∣postles endeavours, about Three thousand were that day con∣verted to Christ [Acts Chap. II.]. (3.) After the Feast; it relates how PETER going up to the Temple with John, he there
miraculously cured a Cripple. The people being filled with amazement and astonishment at this miracle, Peter informs them, That it was not wrought by any power of his own, but by the power of Jesus Christ. And from hence he takes occasion to preach Christ to them (Chap. III.). The Rulers of the Jews being offended at his Sermon (though a great number of the people were converted thereby), apprehend him and John, and bring them before the Council, who after examination dis∣miss them, yet with a charge not to preach any more in the Name of Jesus. The Church hereupon betake themselves to prayer, and receive a present and gracious answer from the Lord. Next it shews, how holy and gracious the conversation of this Infant Church was, who convers'd together with great concord and charity, the rich selling their goods for the su∣stentation of the poorer so [Acts Chap. IV.]  es the fraud and hypocrisie of Ananias and Sapph  dreadful punishment; as also the many wonds  wrought by the Apostles, to the terror of some, and e con∣version of others; and their couragious persisting to preach Christ, notwithstanding they were persecuted, imprisoned, and beaten for it [Acts Chap. V.]. In the next place it sets forth how the Apostles appointed Seven Deacons to take care of the poor, whereof Stephen and Philip were the most eminent, whose particular acts are ia∣ted; as namely, Stephen's disputing with some of the Snagogue of the Libertines, who (not being able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spake) drew him before the Council, and and there falsly accused him [Acts Chap. VI.]. Stephen in a long and grave Oration defends himself, and pleads his Cause; but they interrupt him, and fall upon him, and stone him [Acts Chap. VII.]. Immediately after Stephen's Martyrdom, a violent Persecution arose, which scattered the Disciples at Jerusalem. Philip here∣upon went and preached Christ at Samaria, and did many Miracles there, and baptized many; and among the rest, Simon Magus. The Apostles that were left at Jerusalem, hearing of Philip's good success at Samaria, send Peter and John thither to confirm those new Disciples, and to enlarge the Church. These two Apostles coming thither, they by prayer and imposition of hands conferr the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost on the true believers there; which Simon Magus seeing he offered the Apostles money to enable him to confer the like gifts on whomsoever he pleased: for which impiety Peter sharply reproves him. Lastly, It sets forth how Philip was sent to instruct and baptize the Eunuch [Acts Chap. VIII]. The SECOND CHAPTER contains more particularly the History of those two great Apostles Paul and Peter, though there is inserted also something concerning Barnabas's journey to An∣tioch, and the Martyrdom of James. Now concerning PAƲL, these things are here related: (1.) His
miraculous Conversion. (2.) His Vocation to the Apostleship. (3.) His Preaching Christ first in the Synagogues of Damascus, and then in Arabia for the space of three years. (4.) His re∣turn to Damascus and escaping the hands of the Jews that there conspired to kill him. Concerning Peter, these things are recorded: (1.) The Mira∣cles he wrought, namely, his healing Aeneas of the Palsie at Lydda, and raising Tabitha from the dead at Joppa [Acts Chap. IX.] (2.) The Doctrine he preached to Cornelius (a Gentile) and his company, upon a particular vision and command from God; whereupon the Holy Ghost falleth on them, and they are baptized [Acts Chap. X.]. This converse and communi∣on of his with the Gentiles, he vindicates to the Jews, who were scandaliz'd at it, by a narrative of the whole matter. Here also is inserted a narration, how the Gospel being spread into Phoenice, Cyprus, and Antioch, by those Disciples who were dispersed upon the fore-mentioned persecution, Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem to confirm them. Barnabas being at Antioch, sds for Paul to come to him thither; where they both stre∣nuosly preach Christ, and there the Disciples were first called Ch stians [Acts Chap. XI.]. About this time Herod persecu∣ted the Chtians at Jerusalem, and killed James the brother of John. (3.) Here are related the sufferings which Peter un∣der-went under Herod, who imprisoned him with an intent to put him to death; but he was delivered by an Angel upon the prayers of the Church. Whereupon the anger of the King falls heavy upon his Keepers. Herod shortly after goes down to Csarea; and in his pride taking to himself the Ho∣nour due to God, he is striken by an Angel, and dyeth mise∣rably. After which, the Gospel prospereth [Acts Chap. XII.]. This is the last we hear of this great Apostle (excepting his be∣ing present at the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.) till we come to his Epistles. As for Paul, the remainder of his story falls within the time and compass of his travels, and those Five re∣markable Journeys of his which are described in the Five en∣suing Chapters. The THIRD CHAPTER contains a Narration of Paul's First Journey from Antioch with Barnabas, to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, John-Mark being their Minister: At which time they travelled to Cyprus, Pamphylia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, and other Provinces of Asia the Less. And therefore this Journey we may call for distinction-sake, Iter Asiaticum; It is described Acts Chap. XIII, XIV. The FOURTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Second Journey with Barnabas, and Titus, and others, from Antioch to that fa∣mous Council at Jerusalem, which we may therefore call Iter Hierosolomitanum. It is described Acts Chap. XV. from ver. 1. to 36. The FIFTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Third Journey, be∣ing accompanied with Silas and Titus, to visit and confirm the
Disciples in those Cities where He and Barnabas had before preached the Gospel; which done, they were called by a Vi∣sion over into Macedonia, and so passed into Europe, and travel∣led to Philippi, Beroea, Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth, and so by Ephesus returned into Syria and Judea, and then came back a∣gain to Antioch. This Journey we may call Iter Graecum sive Macedonicum. It is described from ver. 36 of Chap. XV, to ver. 23 of Chap. XVIII. The SIXTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Fourth Journey, which he began from Antioch in Syria, from whence he went to Ephesus, according to his promise, and staying the greatest part o his time in that City, we may from thence call it Iter Ephesinum. From thence he went to visit the Europaean Chur∣ches; and at last from Macedonia, through Asia the Less, and Syria, he returned into Judea, where by the Jews he was ac∣cused, and by the Roman Officers taken into custody. Which Journey is described from ver. 23 of Chap. XVIII, to Chap. XXVII The SEVENTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Fifth and Last Journey from Csarea to Rome, which we may therefore call Iter Romanum, It is described Acts Chap. XXVII, and XXVIII. In these Seven Chapters I have comprised the Divine History of the Acts of the Apostles. Possibly some may now ask How it can be properly so called, seeing it chiefly relates the story of Peter and Paul; and of the former but sparingly, and insists principally upon the Acts of the later, mentioning but little what the other Apostles did, or what Churches they planted, or what death they died. For answer to which, this is all that can be said, That it seemed good to the Spirit of God to have only so much written as he saw conducing to our edification; and in that we are to acquiesce. Besides, Luke who wrote the Acts of the Apostles, was a disciple and follower of Paul, and his Companion in most of his Travels; and therefore no won∣der if he designed principally to write his Story. To all which we may add, That as Paul's Conversion was more miraculous than the conversion of any other of the Apostles, so the course of his Ministry was more illustrious. He laboured more abun∣dantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. HieromCatal. script. Ecclesiastic. Tom. 1. thinks, Luke wrote this History at Rome in the second year of Paul's imprisonment there, and at the request of the Brethren in that City, and by the direction of Paul himself; but principally, by the peculiar guidance of the Holy Ghost. He is thought to have written it in the 62 year of Christ, and the 6th of Nero. We have there∣fore in this Divine Book set before us, an History of the rise, growth, state, and practice of the primitive Church, in the purest Apostolical times; and a declaration of the pure doctrine then de∣livered, and of the pure Worship and Church-Government and Dis∣cipline then practised. All which may be a pattern to succeeding Churches in all ages. And agreeably hereunto I find a learned
man expressing himself; I have often thought with my selfSaepe me ce∣perit ista cogi∣tatio quod iud in monte Sinai Mosi exhibitum divinum sche∣ma, non magi fuerit veteris tabernaculi ae∣dificandi exem∣plar, quàm A∣ctorum Aposto∣licorum volu∣men, Ecclesiae Novi Testa∣menti aedificandae & regendae, omnibus ad hoc vocatis, forma est & Typi; in quo certè nec vola nec vestigi∣um est illius Hierarchicae tyrannidis, quam Aula Romana nobis ferro & flammis satagit obtrudere, nec ulla mntio sessionis Petri in Episcopatu Romano, quae Papisticae fidei unica basis est, &c. Streso in Prae∣fat. ad Act. Apost. (says he) that the Divine Scheme given to Moses in Mount Sinai, was not more a pattern to erect the ancient Tabernacle by, than the History of the Acts of the Apostles is a form and type according to which all that are thereunto called, must build and govern the Church under the New Testament, in which certainly there is not the least appearance of that Hierarchical Tyranny which the Court of Rome endeavours to force upon us by fire and sword, nor any men∣tion of Peter's being Bishop of Rome, which is the only Foundation the Popish-Creed is built upon. In this Divine Book also we may see how Christ subdued the World to the obedience of the Gospel, by a few illiterate men again all the malice of Satan labouring to suppress it,  raising slanders and persecutions against it; and when  d not prevail with violence, raising Hereticks to corrupt  ere we have examples of the prudence, faithfulness, and di∣lnce of the Holy Apostles: Here we may see how they lived, wat they taught, how they dealt with the obstinate, how with the irm, and how they acted in the doubtful and controversal Cases of the Church. A we go long in this History, we come to the particular times wherein the Apostolical Epistles were written; and then we shew e particular occasions of writing of them, and by whom, and from what places they were sent; giving a short Analysis and Paaphrase of them, which I hope will give much light to them, and serve also to illustrate many passages in this Aposto∣lical History. For the Chronotaxis, or disposition of the things contained in this History, into the proper times wherein they were acted, there being so great diversity of opinions among ChronologersChronolo∣gi non magis congruunt quam Horo∣logia. Strigel. and Learned men, I have followed what I thought best, leaving others the liberty of their own judgments. As for the Apostolical Epistles (which are in number 21), ac∣cording to the best conjectures we are able to make, they were written in this order of Time, according to this ensuing Table.
In the time of Paul's Third Journey The 1 Epistle to the Thessalonians, from Corinth. See Chap. 5. Sect. 12. 2 Epistle to Thess. See Chap 5. Sect. 12. In the time of Paul's Fourth Journey Epistle to Galatians from Ephesus. See Chap. 6. Sect. 5. 1 Epistle to Corinthians. See Ch 6. Sect. 7. Epistle to Titus. See Chap. 6. Sect. 8. 2 Epistle to Corinthians. See Ch. 6. Sect. 14. 1 Epist. to Timothy. See Chap. 6. Sect. 15. 1 Epist. to the Romans from Corinth. See Ch. 6. Sect. 18. In the time of Paul's Imprisonment at Rome, Epist. of James. See Chap. 7. Sect. 5. To Philemon. See Chap. 7. Sect. 7. To Philippians. See Chap. 7. Sect. 8. To the Colossians. See Chap. 7. Sect. 9. To the Ephesians. See Chap. 7. Sect. 10. To the Hebrews. See Chap. 7. Sect. 11. 1 Epist. of Peter. See Chap. 7. Sect. 12. 2 Epist. of Peter. See Chap. 7. Sect. 13. Epist. of Jude. See Chap 7. Sect 14. 2 Epist. to Timothy. See Chap. 7. Sect. 15. After all these, 1 Epist. of John. See Chap. 7. Sect. 17. 2 Epist of John. See Chap. 7. Sect. 18. 3 Epist. of John. See Chap 7. Sect. 19. Thus (Courteous Reader) I have given thee a brief view or pro∣spect of this whole History; for a better understanding of which, I have added a Map of the Apostle Paul's Trayels. And lastly▪ for a close I have added a short description of the De∣struction of Jerusalem, which may be as a Comment not only to  passages in this History, and in the Apostolical Epistles, but in th Gospels also. About 23 years after this dismal Destruction, in the 14 year of Domiian, John the Evangelist had the Revelation in the Isle of Patmos. And this is all I thought fit to advertise thee of by way of Preface. Only I shall add, If thou desirest to reap any benefit by my Paraphrase on the Epistles, I entreat thee to take thy Bible, and to read the Text along with the Paraphrase. It is not un∣known to any who have ever attentively read over the Apostoli∣cal Epistles, that there are abundance of dark and obscure passages in them; abundance of , things hard to be understood, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3.16. I may truly say, I have not wil∣lingly or knowingly passed over any of them untouch'd, but said something (according to my poor Talent) either in the Paraphrase, or in the Notes, tending to the clearing of them. And so heartily praying and desiring that from the whole, God may receive glory, and the ingenuous Reader benefit, I bid thee farewell. Thine in Christ Jesus, SA: CRADOCK.
I Have seriously perused and read over the Apostolical History, written by Mr. Samuel Cradock; and I do thankfully acknowledg, that I have received much comfort and benefit by it, and am fully perswaded, That those persons, whether Ministers or People to whom God shall give hearts to peruse it as I have done, will be convin∣ced that it will be very beneficial to the Church of God, especilly to private Families, in helping them to understand the Holy Scriptures. Sic testor, Sa: Fairclough, sometimes Rector of Ketton in Suffolk. Kennet, Octob. 8. 1672. Mr. Brewster, WE have perused, as our occasions wuld permit, the Book you brought us, call'd The Apostolical History, containing an Analytical Paraphrase on the whole Book of the Acts of the Apostles, and all the Apostolical Epi∣stles, which are in number Twenty one. And seeing you desire our opinion upon it, we declare, That we judg it a Work which (with the blessing of God) will be exceeding useful and beneficial to seve∣ral sorts of persons: Particularly, 1. To such Ministers as are not furnished with good Libraries. 2. To young Scholars who should be directed in Chronologie, and how to reduce the passages and transactions of the Apostolick Times, to their due and proper places, and should be guided in a right way and method of studying the holy Scriptures. 3. To Masters of Families, that they may thereby be enabled to instruct their Families. 4. To private Christians in the daily reading of the Scriptures, who have not time or leisure to read larger Comments. 5 'Tis a Book sit for Parents to give to their Children that are grown up, to bring them to a love and delight in the Scriptures, they being made plain, and facile, and intelligible in this Para∣phrase. 6. The Notes in the Margin are very useful for Scholars to give them an account of the particular interpretations that the Au∣thor giveth of sundry difficult places; and yet they are so ordered, that they will not disturb the unlearned in reading either the Apo∣stolical History, or the Paraphrase on the Epistles. 7. The Map of Paul's Travels is useful and delightful, not only for the clearer understanding how that blessed Apostle planted the Gospel up and down in the world; but it may be useful also for the understanding of several passages in the History both of the Old and New Testament.
Lastly, The History of the Destruction of Jerusalem, may give much light to many passages not only in the Apostolical Epistles, but in the Gospels also. And therefore we commend this Reverend Author's design of helping us to know the Scriptures, to the blessing of Him who inspired those that wrote them. And this we do the more hopefully, because it hath been the observation of the most pi∣ously considerate, That God hath in all Ages made those La∣bours of his Servants most eminently acceptable, which have been employed in the profitable explication of any part of the Scripture; as if He, who hath imprinted such a Majesty upon the Text, delighted also to reflect an honour upon the Inter∣preters thereof; and to make mens Works illustrious, by their illustrating the Word of God, and directing others in the paths that lead to blessedness. Your loving Friends, WILLIAM JENKIN, sometimes Pastor of Christ's Church London. RICHARD FAIRCLOƲGH, sometimes Rector of Mells in Somerset-shire.
The several Apostolical Epistles, as they are pla∣ced and paraphrased in this History, may be found according to this ensuing Direction. THE First Epistle to the Thessalonians, pag. 114 The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, pag. 122 The Epistle to the Galatians, pag. 133 The First Epistle to the Corinthians, pag. 152 The Epistle to Titus, pag. 186 The Second Epistle to the Corinthians, pag. 195 The First Epistle to Timothy, pag. 214 The Epistle to the Romans, pag. 223 The Epistle of James, pag. 310 The Epistle to Philemon, pag. 322 The Epistle to the Philippians, pag. 324 The Epistle to the Colossians, pag. 333 The Epistle to the Ephesians, pag. 343 The Epistle to the Hebrews, pag. 361 The First Epistle of Peter, pag. 402 The Second Epistle of Peter, pag. 413 The Epistle of Jude pag. 421 The Second Epistle to Timothy, pag. 426 The First Epistle of John, pag. 435 The Second Epistle of John, pag. 448 The Third Epistle of John, pag. 450
ERRATA. Page 4. l. 35 read two thousand, p. 24 l. 15 dele est, p. 29 l. 22 r. twenty, p. 41 l. 39 r. them, p. 47 l. 23 r. he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, p. 48 for fourteen r many, p. 55 l. 25 r His, p. 59 l. 1 r Exteriùs, p. 73 l. 15 r thereof, p. 74 l. 23 dele and, p. 156 l. 4 r have made further, p. 187 l. 47 r that they may be sound in the faith, and submit themselves to the doctrine of the Gospel, p. 197 l. 26 r inflicting, p. 234 l. 51 r wages of sin, p. 235 l. 4 r head, p. 244 l. 17 r are not the children God, p 249 l. 46 r as well as to the Jews, p. 268 l. 21 r a young man, p. 288 l. 3 r those rites, p. 299 in the margin r Anno Chri∣sto 61, Neronis 5: p. 309 r Anno Christi 62, p. 325 in note * r. non aliud, p. 335 l. 53 r ex∣tended to them, p. 351 l. 16 r sinless, p. 355 l. 22 r awake thou, p. 373 n. f r peccatum in Spiri∣tum Sanctum, p. 394 n. b r toga, p. 396 n. h l. 18 r videri, p.  r multa, p. 433 l. 41 r his, p. 449 l. 17 for competent r compleat, l. 25 for  th.
THE Apostolical History. CHAP. I. Containing a Narration of the Acts of the Apostles (jointly considered) from Christ's Ascension to Saul's Conversion.Anno Christi 33 Tiberii 18. SECT. I. THE Holy Evangelist Luke having in his former Trea∣tise written the History of Our Lord and Saviour, (wherein he had spoken of all thingsNon dicit se scripsisse omnia sed de omnibus: de singulis nimirum tan∣tum, quantum ad spiritualem aedificati∣onem sufficit: Et haec est sufficientia Scripturae, quam credimus contra Pon∣tificios. Non credimus omnia in Scrip∣turis esse, sed de omnibus id, quod ad salutem sufficit., that Jesus both did, nd taught, so far forth as the Holy Ghost hought fit to dictate to him, and to injoyn im to publish) he now proceeds to write the History of his ApostlesDicit se de actis Apostolorum nunc scripturum, licet de aliquibus tantum Apostolis scribit, nec omnia eo∣rum acta. Nihil scribit de Thomâ, Bartho∣lomaeo, Andreâ &c. nec de eorum pro∣fectionibus in Indiam, Galliam, Germa∣niam, neque de eorum morte; nimi∣rum, quia Spiritui sancto visum non est, plura scribi, quam nobis ad aedificatio∣nem opus erat. In iis quae scripta sunt nos diligentèr exerceamus, de caeteris ne simus curiosi. Stres.. And in the first place, to connect this History with his former, he shews, That after our Saviour was risen from the dead, he continued Forty days on the earth, and in that space of time appeared often to his chosen ApostlesMinistri sivè officiarii Christi sunt hi, ut videre est, 1 Cor. 12.28. Eph. 4.11. Rom. 12.5. Primi sunt Apo∣stoli qui à Christo ipso vocati non pote∣rant errare in Doctrinâ, missi in uni∣versum orbem ad ecclesias plantandas. Juxta hos, erant 2. Propherae, qui h∣bebant dona praedicendi futura, et in∣terpretandi Scripturas; et alii extraor∣, qui habebant dona linguarum, & miraculorum. 3. Evangelistae, Apo∣stolorum comites, & administri. 4. Docto∣es & Pastores, qui ordinariè vocati erant ad explicandam Scripturam & pascen∣dam disciplinâ unam aliquam particula∣rem ecclesiam, cui erant praefecti cum his erant. 5. Rectores 1 Cor. 12.28. item∣que Diaconi, Act. 6. Christus tanquam Doctor supremus, & Academicus in pa∣storibus formandis fuit occupatus, qui deinde ecclesias docerent. Quo plus re∣verentiae habeat quod illis praecipit Christus, addit, hoc spiritûs directione factum. Non quod aliundè regi opu ha∣buerit Filius Dei, qui aeterna est sapien∣tia, sed quia homo quoque erat, ne quis putaret humano ingenio tradidisse po∣stolis, quod tradidit, nominatim ad di∣vinam authoritatem nos revocat; sicuti toties Dominus ipse nihil se tradere affir∣mat nisi quod à Patre accepit. Calv. in loc., giving them many sure Evidences, that it was truly He, their Lord and Master; and by the direction of the Holy Ghost (where∣with his Human Nature was full) he gave them many Precepts and Commandments, touching the discharge of their Function and Office; acquainting them with the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, viz the Kingdom of his Grace, which is erected, and set up in the Hearts of men by the prea∣ching of the Gospel. And having now ga∣thered
them together] supple  ip∣sos in unum recolligens qui dispersi fue∣rant. vid. Joh. 21.2. est, Attico more, passivum sono, sensu activum, Grot., that they might behold his Ascension, he commanded them▪ that they should not disperse themselves, not depart from Jerusalem, but stay thee, and expect the performance of the Promise made by the Father of a great and plentiful Effusion of his Spirit upon them [Joel 2.28.] of which he had often before told them, as we may see, Luk. 24.29. & Joh. 14. and ch. 15. and 16. And though they had been before baptized by John, who baptizedSolent Theologi quatuor species baptismi recensere 1. Eluminis, seu aquae. 2. Flaminis, seu spiritus, Mat. 3.11. igne baptizabit. 3. Sanguinis seu Martyrij Mat. 20.22. Mar. 10.38. 4. Luminis seu verbi, Act. 18.25. Quatuor igitur sunt res, quas sacrum baptismatis nomen solet insignire. 1 Sacramentura regeneratio∣nis. 2. Ipsam regenerationem. 3. Mar∣tyrium. 4. Doctrinam Evangelii. with water, but could not confer the SpiritHoc non ideo dicitur, quod Jo∣hanni baptisma fuerit ceremonia vana, vacua, in efficax, quae Spiritum sanctum non habuerit conjunctum, vid Mar. 1.4. Act. 19.4. Sed dicitur Johannes so∣la aquâ baptizasse, quia ipse non potuit dare Spiritum sanctum, sed tantum de∣dit externum spiritûs sacramentum, & sigillum; Christus autem dedit Spiritum. with the outward Ordinance, yet now they shouldst be baptized with the Holy Ghost ten days hence; not but that they had received the Spirit before in some measure, but now this Spirit should be poured forth in a more large, and plentiful manner upon them, to confirm them more assuredly in the Doctrine of the Gospel, to sanctifie them more abun∣dantly, to seal to them, and bear witness with their Spirits, that they were the adop∣ted children of God, Eph. 1.13. Rom. 8.16. And lastly, to confer those gifts upon them, which were requisite for the execution of their Office, namely the gifts of Tongues, Prophecies, and Miracles, that they might divulge and proclaim his Doctrine and Gos∣pel not only in Judea, and Samaria, but e∣ven to the uttermost parts of the earth. The Apostles hearing him discourse of this ex∣traordinary effusion of the Spirit, and ima∣gining (as it seems) it would be an intro∣duction to the glorious temporal kingdom of the Messiah, (which still ran in their minds,) they asked him, whether he would at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel or no? having an eye, (as 'tis probable) to that place, Dan. 7 27. And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. To whom he replies. That they ought to be contented with the knowledg of such things as the Father hath thought fit to reveal to them: but for other things which he is pleased to keep secret, they should not pry into them, the knowledg of them being neither necessary, nor profitable for them. And this might abundantly satisfie them, that they should shortly be endued with such power, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, where∣by they should be rendred fit to preach the Gospel, and to testifieMinistri de Christo testantur tri∣bus modis. 1. Christum praedicando. 2. Secundum Christum vivendo. 3, Propter Christum patiendo. to the uttermost
parts of the earth (even both to the Jews and Gentiles) that he was the true Messias, and Saviour of the world. Having thus spoken unto them, he led them forth to that part of Mount Oli∣vet which is neer BethanySome think our Saviour led his Dis∣ciples as far as Bethany, and there having taken leave of some that were dear to him came back with them to the Mount of Olive▪ which lyeth between Bethany and Jerusa∣lem, and from thence ascended to heaven. Lucas dicit cap. 24.50. eduxit eos foras ad Bethaniam usque. h. e. ad eam Bethaniae partem, quae in monte erat Oliveti in quo monte Christus saepè preces, & la∣chrymas ad Patrm fuderat, ut qui locus submissionis ipsius testi fuerat, idem es∣set & gloriae., and there lifting up his hands, he blessed them, and as he blessed them he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven, a cloud recei∣ving him out of their sight. They standing amazed at this wonderful sight, and earnest∣ly looking after him towards heaven, two AngelsAn tanta sit Angelorum vis, ut suâ virtute possint efficere corpus vero simile, an verò divinâ virtute ipsis cor∣pus aptetur, non disputbimus. Id certum quod non verum corpu ex semine hu∣mano hypostaticè sibi unia sed tantum figuram corporis sormatam ex materiâ remotâ gestet, quale & Christus in praeludium incarnationis saepè assumpsit. Aliud antem est illud corpus, quod deinde pr incarnationem induit. Stres. in white robes appeared to them, and assured them, that he would so come to judgment, as they had seen him go to heaven, to wit, visibly, and in the same bo∣dy with which he ascended; at which time he would appear in the clouds again with great Majesty and Glory. Acts 1. v. 1. The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus,Chap 1: ver. 1.  ponitur pro  con∣structione Graecis familiarissimâ, quâ sequens casus à praecedenti regitur. Deinde verba inchoativa, completivè sunt intelligenda; Quae coepit facere, & docere, h. e. quae fecit, & docuit. of al that Jesus began both to do and teach. v. 2. Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen. v. 3. To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion, by many in∣fallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God: v. 4. And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. v. 5. For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost, not many days hence. v. 6. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? v. 7. And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the sea∣sons, which the Father hath put in his own power. v. 8. But ye shall receive power after that the holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. v. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was ta∣ken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. v. 10. And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven, as he went up, be∣hold, two men stood by them in white apparel, v. 11. Which also said, Ye men of Gallilee, Why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
SECT. II. THe Apostles having seen our Saviour thus gloriously ascend into Heaven (worshipping, and adoring him in Spirit, as their Lord, and Saviour, Luk 24.52.) returned to Jerusalem, and according to his commandTuit hae non simplex obedientia, fed obedientia contra consilium carnis & sanguinis [Gal. 1.16.] Sciebant Hie rosolymis perpetuas infestationes Judae∣orum esse metuendas, Joh. 20.9. sed, congregatio habenda erat in una domo centum & viginti hominum, & carnis consiliis abnegatis, strictè Christi man∣dato adhaerent. vid. Mat. 16.24. conti∣tinued there in joint devotion in an upper∣room for ten days, together with many o∣ther men, (whereof some were of the kin∣redIntelliguntur cognati Christi, non tantum ex parte Josephi, quem aiunt ex priori uxore plure habuisse silios, sed etiam ex parte Mariae. Uxor e im Cleo∣phae, quae Mariae soror erat tre filios, ha∣bebat, Jacobum, Josen, Simonem Judam. Mat. 13.55.56. comp. cum Joh. 19.25. & Mat. 27.56. Enere plures eo tempore, qui in Christum credebant. Nam 1 Cor. 15. mentio est, de pluribus quam quingentis fratribu quibus Christu, apparuit, sed videntur caeteri in Galilaea mansisse, & illi praeci∣puè Christum secuti, qui erant de Christi sanguine, quibus tamen aliqui potuerunt accedere, qui Hierosolymis habitabnt. of Jesus) and some pious women, who had followed him; among whom was MaryThis is the last mention of Mary the mother of Christ, that we meet with in the Scripture. Voluit Spiritus sanctus reliquam ejus vitam silentio involvere, ut futura circa ejus personam fabulosa super∣stitio nihil praetextûs in Scripturâ inveniret. his mother; their whole number being about Sixscore; and there they ex∣pected the great, and large effusion of the Spirit, which was promised unto them. Acts. 1. v. 12.v. 12. Iter Sabbati duo millia passu∣um habuit, eaque supptatio congruit cum lco Johannis ubi dicit Hierosolymam distare a Bethani 15 ferè stadiis, quae mille, & nonginto circitèr passus continet. Iter Sabbati a lege praescriptum non erat: simplicitèr enim quietem Dominus in lege praecipit: sed quia non facilè continebantur Ju∣daei, quin Sabbato ad sua negotia excurrerent, ideo credibile est ad cohibedam ejusmodi lasciviam communi sacerdotum concilio edi um fuisse ne ultra duo millia Sabbato conficere liceet. Tametsi Hieronymus in responsis ad Algasiam hanc traditionem a duobus Rabbinis fluxisse commemorat, Atribà Scil. & Simone Heli. Calv. in loc A Sabbath days journey]  is probable that this was the common walk of the people of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day in pleasant weather for their meditations when they had done the publick duties of the day. Now not only on the Sabbaths, but also on other holy days it was not lawful to walk above two hundred cubits, as we have observed out of the haldee Paraphrase, and therefore the Evan∣gelist may be conceived to use this expression for the measure betwixt it and the City [A Sabbath days journey] because it was remarkably so, not only upon obligation but for delight, and the peoples common Sabbath days walk. Lightf. in loc. Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath days Journey. v. 13. And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomw, and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James. v. 14. 14. ] est vox deducta a nomine  sen robur, & notat talem perseverantiam, qu quis multo labore, & magnà vi seipsum tenet, & constantem reddit in aliquâ occupatione difficili. ] vi. 2 Cor. 1.11. Precati sunt animis in amore conjunctis & nullo odio divifis, 1 Tim. 2.8. These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.
SECT. III. DUring this time of their abode together, Peter rose up, and made a motion to the rest of the disciples there present, that one should be chosen into Judas's place; who having formerly had the honour to be one of Christs Apostles had by his late treachery against his Lord, and MasterMat. 26.47, 48: (being guideNon est gravius peccatum quam aliis esse  peccati: vae Ministri, vae Parentibus, vae Magistratibus, qui hoc faciunt. to them that took him, as the Holy GhostErgo Spiritus Sanctus est vera persona, et non qualitas, & ex propriâ scientiâ praedicit. Nam futurorum prae∣dictio Deitatis signum est infallibile, Isa. 44.6, 7. & 41.22, 23. & quamvis di∣citur, Joh. 16.13. ab aio audire ista fu∣tura, quae nobis praenunciat, tamen hoc non ita intelligendum, quasi opus habeat a Patre aliquid discere, quid ipse nesci∣at, sed quod revelationem suam quam dat hominibus, instituat secandum vo∣luntatem Patris, & Filii, revelans ea, quae Pater, & Filius volunt revelari. Haec enim est voluntaria oeconomia tri∣um Personarum inter se. had long ago predicted by the mouth of the Prophet David, Psal. 41.9.) fallen from that digni∣ty; He tells them that this Judas received from the chief Priests and the Rulers of the Jews a reward for his Treason, yet it did not at all profit him, but only gave occasion to them, with that money, to purchase the Porters fieldSee Zech. 11.13. called from thence Aceldama, to his everlasting infamy. He farther shews, that this wretched man having through re∣morse, and anguish of Spirit for that his hainous fact, hanged himself,See my Harmony of the four Evan∣gelists, chap. 6. Sect. 15 the rope, or that to which it was fastned breaking, he fell down headlong, and burst asunder, and his bowels gushed outSimile exemplum habemus in hi∣storiâ ecclesiasticâ de Arrio haeretico, qui fecedens ad onus ventris deponendum, dicitur crepuisse, & omnia viscera effu∣disse., and so he went to his own placeIn locum suum, & factis suis dig∣num, quémque malitiâ suá meritus est. Sicut in unaquâque Repub. est Carcer, & locus supplicii erectus in terrorem improborum, ita Deus etiam impiis prae∣paravit Infernum, Mat, 25.41.. These things having thus happened to Judas, he exhorts them to chuse another into his room, shewing the necessity of such a choice for the fulfilling those Scriptures, viz. Psal. 65.25. and 109.8.In utroque psalmo agit David de Aulicis Saulis. Sicut enim David in pas∣sionibus, & persecutione suâ fuit Typus passionis Christi, ut patet passim ex hi∣storiâ Evangelistarum; ita isti ulici Sau∣lis qui Davidem persequebantur fuere typistorum Sacerdotum & aliorum ho∣stium, qui Christum persecuti sunt: Et specialièr iste Doeg, pastor pecudum Saulis, qui Davidem prodidit, fuit typus Judae, quem Christus Apostolum, & Pa∣storem ovium suarum elegerat, sed qui Christum prodidit. Et haec est rati quod isti textus, qui alioquin de hosti∣bus Davidis propriè loquuntur, hic ad Judam accommodantur. Duo autem sunt quae David Dgi, & hostibus suis impre∣catur, atque duo sunt, quae in hâc suâ imprecatione de Judâ vat matur, nem∣pe quod spoltatus omnibus bonis quae per avaritiam, fraudem, & furta corraserat, depositus erit ab officio.; which foretold he should be spoiled of what he had so wretchedly got, and that his office should be void and conferred on another. And he further declares unto them what manner of Person was to be chosen namely one of those, who had followed Jesus from the time that he was baptized by John, and began to gather disciples (at which time the Baptist gave such a publick testimo∣ny of him, that some of his own disciples, and several others began to follow him) unto the day of his Ascension, that so he might be a more competent and authentick witness, not only of his Doctrine and Miracles, and the other actions of his life, but of his Re∣surrection alsoArticulus de resurrectione Christi includit omnes alios articulos fidei de Christo. 1 Cor. 15.13. Si enim resurrexit, mortuus est, si mortuus est, natus est, &c. Est etiam signum, quod pro peccatis noris exactè satisfecit. Deus enim sponsorem nostrum non exolvisset vincul mortis, nisi lytum sufficiens ab eo accepisset..
The Apostles agreeing to this motion, put two men in election viz. Barsabas and Mathias, and praying unto God to direct the Lot, and to shew which of them he was pleased to chuse, and appoint to this office, the Lot fell on Mathias, and he was accor∣dingly numbred among the ApostlesApostoli non habent suc∣cessore. Apostolats enim fuit officium extraordinarim ad primam Ecclesiae. onstitutionem re∣ctum. trs.. Acts 1. v. 15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of th Disi∣ples, and said, (The number of names together were about an hundred and twenty.) v. 16.v. 16. ] Pa erat, Judae simile quid e∣venire, quale Achitopheli evenerat, cujus perfidiam Judas erat imitatus. Sic  aepi sumi diximus ad Mat. 1.22. Grot. Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus. v. 17. For he was numbred with us, and had obtained prt of this mini∣stery. v. 18.v. 18. ] i. e. monu∣mentum e∣leris sui reli∣quit. Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity, and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gush∣ed out. v. 19. And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem, insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood. v. 20. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolat and let no man dwell therein: And his bishoprick let another take. v. 21. Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, v. 22. Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection. v. 23. And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was called Justus, and Matthias. v. 24. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, which knowest the heart of all men, shew whther of these two thou hast chosen. v. 25.v. 25. Ad lo∣cum propri∣um] i. e. qui ipsi melius conveniebat, quàm Apostolica functio. That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fll, that he might go to his own place. v. 26. And they gave forth their lts, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbred with the eleven apstles.
SECT. IV. THe Apostles, and the forementioned number o Disciples having been thus employed for the first ten days after our Saviours Ascension, and PentecostVocatur Pentost, quia celebr∣tur de Quinquagesim post pasha, Lv. 23.16. Vatur etiam fsum Septima∣narum, Exod. 34.22. quia inter pasch▪ & hoc festum septem septimanae inter∣cedebant: hoc festo praeter ordinaria sa∣crificia fiebat sacrificium primitiarum tritici, Exod. 34.22. unde vocatur fe∣stum primitiarum. Num. 28.26. Tria festa magna habebant Hebraei. (1) Pas∣chatis, cujus secundo die etiam primitiae frugum offerebantur Deo, Lev. 23.10. Sed & primitiae hordei, quod citius ma∣turescebat quam triticum, Exod 9.31. Ruth. 2.23. (2) Festum Pentecostes, quo offerebantur primitiae tritici, Deut. 16.9. &c. (3) Festum Tabernaculorum post messem, & vindemam quoque per∣actam, Deut. 16.13. Quae tr festa e∣gregiè repraesentant tres gradus nostrae salutis, quae sunt. 1. Redemptio nostra, quam repraesentat fe∣stum paschatis, quo agnus Dei eaesus. 2. Regeneratio nostra, & sanctificatio per primitias Spiritus quam repraesentat festum primitiarum. 3. Glorificatio nostra, quam repraesentat laetissimum festum tabernaculorum, quo in sine anni post peractum laborem in plenitudine horreorum, & cellaum sub umbrâ frondium laetitiam exercebant Israelitae. Pentecoste igitur erat festum inter haec tria medium. Finis hujus festi erat rememoatio duorum beneficiorum magnorum, viz. 1 Promulgatae legis in monte Sinai. 2. Ingressûs in terram Canaan, ejusque possessionis, Deut. 26.1, 2. &c. Offerebantur quidem primitiae in festo paschatis, sed quae non a singulis Israelitis adferebantur, sed unus manipulus hordei viridis nomine totius Israelis offerebatur. Pentecostes autem festo singuli Israelitae, saltem ex singulis civitatibus aliqui deputati, primitias omnium frugum, & fructuum cum cantu, & tibii Hero∣solymam mittebant, ac Domino offerebant, quo alludit Isa. 33.29. Die ultimus septem septimana∣rum erat dies latae legis, ut colligitur, Exod. 19.1.11. vocaturque ob id festum legis. Eodem die caepit praedicari ab Apostolis lex nova, complementum veteris. being now come, as they were with one ac∣cord assembled together, suddenly there came a sound from heaven of a rushing migh∣ty wind (representing the efficacy of the Spirit of God now descending) and an ap∣pearance of cloven fiery tonguesHae figurae nos docent modum operandi, quo Spiritus sanctus in nobis utitur. Operatur per modum igni, & venti. Per modum ignis, quia emollit, illuminat, accendit, purgat cor. Per modum venti, quia refrigerat, ac reficit tempore angustiarum per solatium, & initia vitae aeternae, & quia mo∣vet per efficacem suam operationem sicut ventus impellit naves. lighted upon each of them, and they were now all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with strange tongues, such as they ne∣ver had before learnt (see Mark 16.17.) and other miraculous powers were confer∣red upon them. The fame of this being instantly spread abroad, and there being present at that time great multitudes of Jews, who had come up from all parts of Judea to the feast; and also many other JewsThe text speaketh ver. 9. of Jew of all nations under heaven now dwelling at Jerusalem, and yet it reckoneth but fif∣teen here, which were not all the nations in the world, no not all that were in the Ro∣man Empire. To say nothing of the Hyper∣bole's the Scripture frequently useth, as Ci∣ties walled up to heaven, &c. the Lan∣guages here spoken of took up all the nation where it is imaginable any Jews were scat∣tered at this time through the world. Lightf. in loc. and Profelytes born in divers o∣ther nations, some whereof probably were Students there, and others had come up at this time to worship the true God at Jerusa∣lem; they were all much amazed to hear such unlearned men, as the Apostles were, speak the languages of their several nations. But some among them derided the miracle, and imputed it to drunkenness. Hereupon Pe∣ter standing up with the rest of the Apostles in a grave Oration confuted this calumny, shewing the unresonableness of it, seeing it was now but the third hour of the day, or nine a clock in the morningVid. 1 Thes. 5.7. Hora tertia erat tem∣pu precum matutinariè, ad qua hoines vel medieritèr i iba t nsi jeju∣ni. Imò sieb stis d sextam usqu horam jejunatum, ocet nos Josephus de vi suá. Grt.; and then declares unto them, that that which was now
done was the completion of a famous Prophecy uttered by the Prophet, Joel cap. 2. from 28. to the end; the meaning of which was this, that in the last days, viz. the days of the Messias there should be a large, and remarkable effusion of the Spirit of God upon all flesh; (that is, upon Gentiles as well as Jews) yea, upon all sorts of persons among them, without distinction, namely, upon old and young, sons and daughters, bond and free; whereby they should be endued with such an excellent measure of knowledg touching the mysteries of salvation, and with such an ability to instruct others, in them, as might well be compared with the Prophe∣cies *,Per istas prophetationes, visiones, & somnia, intelliguntur omnis generis dona spiritualia. Ergo effusio Spiritûs paritura est abundantiam notitiae, fidei, sanctitatis, sapientiae, inter omnis gene¦ris homines. Sic impletur abundantèr illud Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.33, 34. Joh. 6.45. Heb. 8.11. Dicuntur haec omnia comparativè ad V. T. Non docebunt. i. e. non tantoperè opus habebunt docere, ac sb V. T. non tantâ inculcatione indige∣bunt, sed leviore negotio addiscent. Stres. See knowledg and practice. p. 151. Shall see Visions, &c. that is, shall be enabled through the operation, and revela∣tion of the Spirit, both to understand and explain the mysteries of the gospel. These ex∣pressions are borrowed from the state and condition of the Old Testament wherein God used to reveal himself to the Prophets by Dreams, and Visions. See Numb. 12 6. Dreams and Visions imparted by God to some of the ancient Prophets; and after this great effusion of the Spirit there should be many fearful stupendous sights and prodi∣giesThe Sun shall be changed into darkness, and the Moon into blood. These expressions signifie the strange, fearful, and general troubles, miseries, and desolations which shall befall the Jewes before the destruction of Jerusalem, See Mat. 24 Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus aether., and many great slaughters in Ju∣dea, as fore-runners and presignifications of the great and dismal destruction that should come upon Jerusalem, and the people of the Jews for their crucifying the Lord of Life; and that the only way to escape in the time of those fears, dangers, and destructions was to repent, and to own Christ and believe in him, and to call upon the name of the LordPer invocationem hic intelligitur totus cultus internus, & externu, qui à precatione denomi∣nationem habet propterea quod precatio est compendiosum exercitium omnium motuum Spirituali∣um quibus Deus colitur. Preces sunt motus humiliationis contritionis, fidei amoris, & omnium vir∣tutum. Qui nomen Domini invocaverit, &c. sensus est Quicunque Dominum Jesum agnoverit, rece∣perit, & coluerit secundum id, quod Scripturae de ipso revelant, & testantur, is servabitur, Stre. in faithful and fervent prayer.From ver. 1. to 22. Having thus washed off this unjust aspersion of drunkenness by interpreting and applying this Prophecy, he proceeds on to shew them, That Jesus of Nazareth was the true Messias promised by all the Prophets. And first he speaks of his person and life shewing that by those many miracles wrought by him in the midst of them, he was plainly demonstrated h. e testimo∣nio irrefragbili & incontradicibili ho∣noratum; ornatum ejusmodi testimonio de quo nullus dubitandi locus relictus; tàm certò ut nulla certior sit . Pricaeus. Est Sermo imcompletus, & hoc modo complendus Vir  Deo de∣monstrtus esse aliquid aliud quam vir nudus. Demonstratus enim à Deo est, esse vir justu, & sine peccato [vid. Joh. 8.46.] demonstratus est esse filius Dei, Rom. 1.4. & missus à Patre. Streso. to be a person sent from God and approved of him; Secondly, he speaks of his Death, how God having determined and decreed he should be put to death for the sins of men; and by his fore-knowledg discerning this the fittest expedient to bring about that great design of saving sinners, he had per∣mitted him to fall into their power: who having maliciously accused, and condemned himOmnibus adscribitur, quia omnes (paucis exceptis sidelibus) in mortem Chri i consenserant, Luc. 23.18. Joh. 18.40., at last by their vehement importu∣nity prevailed with the Romans to put him
to death, and so had by their wicked hands crucified him, v. 22, 23. Thirdly, he speaks of his Resurrection how God raised him again, loosing the bands of death, it being impossible as David had praedicted, that he should be holden of it. For though those words, Psal 16.8. &c. in a lower sense had reference to Davids person, yet they were more fully, and ultimately to be fulfilled in the Son of David, The eternal word of God, The Messias of the world; and that not only because David was a Type of him, and did represent his Person, but also because he was now in his loins, according to the flesh. As these words therefore refer to David they may be thus Paraphrased; I have set the Lord always before me, i. e. I have set my thoughts continually on God, as being ever present with me; and because he is at my right hand ever ready to assist and support me, I shall not be moved, that is, not swallowed up of my sorrows nor removed from my constant obedience to his will. And upon this account, my heart is glad and my tongue rejoyceth, my flesh also shall rest in hopeHope is here ascribed to the dead body figuratively., that is, When my body shall be laid to rest in the earth, it shall not be with∣out hope of a joyful Resurrection. For thou wilt not leave my SoulThou wilt not leave my soul in Hell] Soul sometimes is taken properly, some∣times improperly for the whole person, Act. 27.37 Sometime for the dead car∣kass, Lev. 19.28. and 21.1. Num. 6.6. and 5.2. in all which place the Hebrew word rendred dead carkass is , and so  is taken here. Animamque Sepulchro Condimus, Virgil: The word Sheol here rendred Hell does also signifie the Grave Psa. 55.15. and 141.7. Gen. 42.37. and not for a place of Souls under the earth. See Dr. Rey∣nolds Praelect. 81. and 82. upon the Apo∣cryphal Books, and Robert Parker upon Christs Descent into Hell.  is ta∣ken for Death, or the state of the dead, or the invisible place in reference to the Soul, or the Grave in reference to the body. The Papists would from this place conclude, that the Soul of Christ imme∣diately upon his Death did locally des∣cend into Hell the place of the damned. But without any ground. For the words speak evidently of a deliverance from a paenal condition, whereas the Papists themselves hold that Christs Soul was triumphant in Hell. And the Apostle in this place plainly proves, that David was left in that Hell from whence Christ was raised so that it is clear he understood the words of Christs rising from the Grave: as the second clause doth more plainly express, Thou wilt not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. The Scope of the Apostle therefore in citing thi place is not to deal about the deliverance of Christs Soul out of Hell, but punctually of Christs resurrection; and the resurrection is properly of the body, not of the soul. The true meaning and sense therefore of the Article of Christs descent into Hell (as the Latines im∣properly translate ) seems to be this, He went into the place of invisible Souls. For his body remained in the Grave, and his Soul passed to Paradise. And thus the Articles go on methodically without any Tautology. That after Christs death his body was buried in the Grave, his Soul went to the place o blessed Souls, and the third day both Soul and bo∣dy were re united in his Resurrection, See Dr. Richardsons notes on Psalm. 16. in Hell, that is, my dead body in the grave; nor suffer me utterly to perish in the Pit of corruption so as never to rise again. Thou wilt shew me the path of life, that is, how I shall after my resurrection live for ever in thy glory, Thou wilt make me full of joy with thy countenance, that is, In thy presence I shall have fulness of joy forevermore. But these words in their proper and literal sense could not be spoken of David, because David's body was left in the grave and was there corrupted [See Act. 13.36.37. compar'd with 1 King. 2.10.] and therefore they must needs have refe∣rence to Christ, who (as David saw by the Spirit of Prophecy) was to spring from his Loins. (See 2 Sam. 7. and Psal. 132.) and so by the same Spirit he saw also that he was soon to rise again from the dead, as the head of his mystical Body, and by virtue of his resurrection, his members were to rise also.
And that God had assuredly according to David's Prophecy raised this Jesus from the dead, Peter declares that he and his fellows could, and did bear their Testimonyfrom v. 24. to 33.. Fourthly, he then speaks to them of his Ascension, and how after his resurrection he was exalted to the right hand of God: the consequent of which was, that having received authority and commission from the Father to prour forth his holy Spirit in a plentiful manner, [which he had often before spoken to them of, as in Joh. 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.13, 14.] he had now accordingly done it, and this strange thing of their speaking divers tongues, (which was so much wondred at by them) was an effect thereof. He further shews that David never ascended, or went bodily to Heaven, and so cannot be said to be exalted to Gods right hand while his enemies were made his Footstool. And therefore the person of whom that was praedicted, Psal 110.1. (and whom David there calls Lord) could be no other than Christ. For Conclusion, he bids all the house of Israel know assuredly that God the Father had ordained, and appointed this Jesus, whom they had crucified, to be the Head, and Saviour of his Church, and had instated him in the true kingly office of the Messiahfrom v. 33. to 37.. A great multitude of the Auditors were so affected with this Discourse, that being touched with an in∣ward remorseRegeneratio hominis incipit à tali tertore, per quem cor seu anima hominis it compungitur, conteritur, vulneratur, ut imbuat r vivo & aeri sensu miseriae suae. Probandum est; an habe is, effecta hujus contritionis, sci∣licet Cor flexile, quod vebo Dei facilè movetur, & ducitur ad bonum. Triplex Spiritus, seu tres gradus donorum Spiri∣tua ium lectis dantur. 1. Spiritus Ser∣vitutis, q o anima conteritur, vulne∣ratur, & sensu miseriae oueratur, ut gra∣tiam anhelet, & dside et, Rom. 8.15. 2. Spiritus Regenrationis, quo ex Deo gignimur, & Christo unigento Dei per fidem iferimur, ut filii Dei fimus, Joh. 3 5 Spiritus Adoptionis, quo de pater∣no Dei in nos amore certiores reddimur, quod simus filii Dei, accendimurque fili∣ali amore in Deum, quo clam mus Ab∣ba, Pater, Eph. 1.14. Gal. 4.6. Rom. 8.15. for their sins, they ask'd Peter and the rest of the Apostles what they should do? Peter exhorts them to repent and to own Christ for the true Messias, and to be∣lieve in him, and to be baptized in his name, and then they should be made partakers of the holy Ghost; and some of them possibly, of those miraculous gifts and powers, which they now saw and admired in the Apostles. For upon their believing in Christ, the pro∣mise made by God in the New Covenant of remission of sins [Jer. 31.34. Zech. 13.1.] appertained to them, and to their childrenPromissiones, quae ad Parentes fi∣deles pertinent etiam eorum liberis de∣bemus applicare, quamdiu facto contra∣rio & propriâ infidelitate seipsos non ex∣cludunt. Streso., and to as many of the Gentiles and their Chil∣dren, as the Lord should effectually call to faith in his Son, and therefore they ought to receive Baptism the Seal thereof. And with many other words he exhorted them to with-draw, and separate themselves from that untoward generation of the Scribes and Pharisees [See Mat. 3 and ch. 12. and ch. 16.] who so desperately opposed Christ, and his Gospel, and by their autho∣rity and example strove to keep people off from embracing the only way of Salvation opened by him. 'Tis probable, whilst Peter preached thus to the Jews of Judea and Jerusalem in the Syriack tongue others of the Apostles spake at the same time, and to the same purpose * to several there present of other nations,See Lightfoot in loc. p. 47. 48 and the success of their preaching was that Three thousand were that day
converted to Christianity, and by their hands immediately bap∣tizedfrom 37. to 42.. These new converts being now added to the Church, continued and faithfully persevered in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellow∣ship (performing all Christian offices of love one to another) and in the religious exercise of the duties of Gods Worship, such as receiving the Holy Supper, Prayer and Praising God. And a great asto∣nishment seized the people to see the wonderful things that were done by the Apostles. This also is further recorded of these new Converts, that they had their goods (as to the use of them) in commonThis community was not of all their goods, but of that part which every one would voluntarily consecrate for the publick or particular necessities of the Saints (See Act. 5.4.) and was used only in Jerusalem in those first be∣ginnings of Christianity, and we do not read it was made a praecedent for other times, and places. Videtur ipsis jam tum revelata fuisse futura destructio terrae, & urbis Judai∣cae, & necessitas exulandi. Usi igitur sunt prudentiâ; maluerunt bonis suis ecclesiae consulere, quam omnia perde∣re. Quod fecerunt, non fecerunt ex praecepto, sed liberè: si inter Christia∣nos nullae privatae possessiones licitae, sed omnia deberent esse communia, non foret locus praeceptis contra surtum, non locus praeceptis de eleemosynis. Nam quo fine jubemur de nostris dare pauperibus, si nihil nostrum est, sed om∣nia communia. Streso. in that time of the Churches necessities, and the richer sort sold and par∣ted with some of their possessions and goods to help and relieve the poorer. And fur∣ther their practice was daily to frequent the Temple at the usual hours of prayer, and privately in particular houses to celebrate the Lords Supper. And thus conversing to∣gether with great simplicity and sincerity, they went on cheerfully in their Christian course praising and blessing the Lord for all that he had done for them: and their inno∣cent and harmless conversation procur'd them favour with the generality of the peo∣ple, who had not their hearts prepossess'd with prejudices against Christ, and his Gos∣pel. And thus we have seen what were the first fruits of the Apostles ministry, whose endeavours it pleased God so to bless, that there were daily more and more Converts added to the Churchfrom v. 42. to the end.. Act. 2. v. 1. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. v. 2. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were fitting. v. 3. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. v. 4. And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. v. 5. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of e∣very nation under heaven. v. 6. Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came toge∣ther, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language. v. 7. And they were all amazed, and marvelled, saying one to another, Be∣hold, are not all these which speak, Galileans? v. 8. And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born? v. 9. Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, v. 10. Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and in the parts of Libya, about Cy∣rene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes,
v. 11. Cretes, and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the won∣derful works of God. v. 12 And they were all amazed and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this? v. 13. Others mocking, said, These men are full of new wine. v. 14 But Peter standing up with the eleven, lift up his voice and said unto them, Yemen of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words: v. 15. For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day. v. 16. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel, v. 17. And it shall come to pass in the last days, (saith God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesie, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: v. 18. And on my servants, and on my hand-maidens, I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall prophesie: v. 19. And I will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth be∣neath: blood and fire, and vapour of smoak. v. 20. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, be∣fore that great and notable day of the Lord come. v. 21. And it shll come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. v. 22. Ye men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man ap∣proved of God among you, by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know: v. 23 Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel, and foreknow∣ledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: v. 24. Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death, be∣cause it was not possible that he should be holden of it. v. 25 For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be mo∣ved. v. 26. Therefore did my heart rejoyce, and my tongue was glad: more∣over also my flesh shall rest in hope; v. 27. Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. v. 28. Thou hast made known to me the ways of life, thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance. v. 29. Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch Da∣vid, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day. v. 30. Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne: v. 31. He seeing this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flsh did se corruption. v. 32. This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses. v. 33. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having re∣ceived of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. v. 34. For David is not ascended into the heavens, but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, v. 35. Until I make thy foes thy footstool. v. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.
v. 37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? v. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. v. 39. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. v. 40. And with many other words did he testifie and exhort, saying, Save your selves from this untoward generation. v. 41. Then they that gladly received his words, were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. v. 42. And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. v. 43. And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs  done by the Apostles. v. 44. And all that believed were together, and had all things common: v. 45. And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. v. 46. And they continued daily with one accord in the temple, and break∣ing bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and single∣ness of heart. v. 47. Praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. Chap. 2. v. 1. Cum complerentur dies Pentecostes] verbum completivum sumitur in∣choativè ut etiam Luc. 2.21. Numerus quinquaginta dierum propriè loquendo non e∣rat completus ineunte primo Pentecostes. Sed currente eo complebatur; erat enim ip∣se quinquagesimus. Sensus est, quum tempus quinquaginta dierum, quod incidebat in diem Pentecostes compleretur, currente adhuc eo, quo completur, venit Spiritus Sanctus. De Dieu. v. 3. Seditque supra singulos eorum] scilicet, iste ignis. Poena linguarum disper∣sit homines, Gen. 11. Donum Linguarum dispersos in unum populum recollegit. v. 5. ] Judaei peregrini illie commorantes religionis & studiorum causâ. Judaei verò dicuntur non tam natione quam religione.  viri religiosi] In∣telliguntur quidem viri religionem Judaicam sectantes, verum qui non essent circumcisi. Quicunque enim circumcisionem assumpserant, illi non jam  sed  dicebantur. v. 11. ] Dei potentiam, quae Jesu resuscitato apparuit. Id enim praecipuum argumentum fuit, quo conversus est mundus, vid. cap. 1. 22. 2. 24. 3. 15. v. 17. Sequitur Lucas in hujus loci, ut & aliorum productione, LXX interpretes non tamen ad amussim, verbis interdum mutatis, & transpositis, quod & Moses fecit, De∣calogum in Deuteronomium recitans. v. 19. Sanguinem, & ignem, & vaporem fumi] per Sanguinem intelligo bella, & caedes; per ignem, & vapores fumosos multa incendia oppidorum, virorum, & vil∣larum; per obscurationem Solis obscurationem gloriae, & faelicitatis populi Judaici; per mutationem Lunae in sanguinem grassationem haeresium, & turbulentorum, ac saepè sanguinolentorum scismatum in Ecclesiâ. See our Harmony of the Four Evangelists. pag. 172. v. 20. ] dies terribilis. Sic truculentus ille Antiochus dictus est  terribilis potius quàm Illustris. De Dieu. Omnes dies beneficiis aut poenis illustres, Dies Domini vocantur, ut benè notavit Maimonides Ductore dubitantium, 2.29. Grot. v. 21. Pii eripientur communi exilio. v. 22. Jesum Nazarenum] appellant eum eo nomine, quo vulgò vocatus fuit. v. 24. Solutis doloribus mortis] Petrus hic respicit ad locum, Psal. 18.6. ubi Christus in personâ Davidis queritur quod Cheble Sheol i. e. funes sepulchri & Mokeshe maruth ipsum eumdederint. In Graeco est . Lucas igitur in citando se∣quitur versionem Graecam tum receptam. At nomen funium his magis quadrare vide∣tur. Non erat possibile] Scilicet, ut Christus superaretur, seu vinceretur, à morte; Id enim verbum  propriè significat. v. 25. ] de eo sic apud Hebraeos saepe  pro  usurpatur, ut Psal. 91.11. vide Eph. 5.32.
v. 27. ] i e me Frequens Hebraismus. videre corruptionem] meta∣phora ab animato ad exanime ] silicet,  h. e.  in Inferni do∣mo. Fnallage praepositionis  pro . v. 39. ] & omnibus qui procul adhuc absunt Idem vult quod  Constat enim praepositionem  ejusmodi adverbiis adjunctum saepè vacare, Talia sunt  statim;  eras, &c, De Dieu. v. 40. Deserite hujus improbae gentis mores. Schisma est separatio à bonis seu à verâ ecclesiâ popter rem nullius momenti; sed Separatio est à malis ob corruptam doctrinam salvificam, & cum non licet manere sine communione mali. v. 44. ] Unum communem scopum habebant, nimirum abnegatio∣nem sui ipsorum, & promotionem regni Christi. They continued in the same confessi∣on and practice of the duties of religion, though possibly they were divided into several companies and congregations according to their several nations and languages. v 46. ] Privatim, & sic poonitur . Non enim in templo, sed per domos privatorum coenam Domini participabant. Salmasius. v. 47. Erant gratiosi apud  ob bonitatem, modestiam, patientiam, qua∣rum virtutum ea vis est, ut amorem etiam à disparis vitae hominibus extorqueat. Par∣ticula itaque universlis hic reringenda est ad eos tantum qui licet à Doctrinâ Apo∣stolorum atque Ecclesiae essent alieni; animum tamen gerebant sincerum, non odio, & malevolentiâ in Apostolos, eorumque doctrinam, vitiatum. Apud Sacerdotes enim, & Scribas tantum abest, ut gratiosi extiterint, ut potius in summo fuerint odio. SECT. III. ABout the same time Peter and John went up to the Temple about three a Clock in the afternoon (being one of the hours of prayer) and there in the name of Christ they healProphetae, V. T. qui Legem ma∣gis, quam Evangelium praedicaverunt plura terribilia, & vindicativa fecerant miracula, quam beneficia Ignem ex coelo fecerunt descendere, impiorum manus fecerunt exrescere, leprâ afflix∣erunt, tenebris, grandine, ranis, occi∣sione pimogenitorm, inundatione a∣quarum, &c. puniverunt. Sed in N. T. pauca habemus miracula vindicativa, sed pleraque omnia benefica. Praeser∣tim de Christo noandum, quod quan∣tum vis plurima fecerit miracula, tamen nullum fecerit terribile, ac vindicativum in vitâ suâ, sed omnia benefica, ut ve∣rè de illo dicatur quod est Act. 10.38. Unum autem miraculum vindicativum. de Christo legimus verum non in homi∣nibus, sed in ficu exercitum, Mat. 21.18.19. Cum mancos, caecos, mendicos vi∣demus, ne dicamus sicut discipuli, Joh. 9 2. sed agnoscamus esse hoc meritum totius natura humanae; & quod nos prae∣servati sumus, speciali & impromeritae gratiae esse tribuendum, qu obligamur ad specialem gratitudinem. a cripple lying at the gate of the Tem∣ple (called Beautiful)Erat haec in primo Templi am∣bitu sivè Atrio gentium, quod Herodes caeteris adjecerat: alta erat cubitorum 30 tota aere Corinthico, (quod auro pretiosius fuit) inducta, vid. Joseph. de bello Jud. lib. 6. c. 6. Quistorpius. to ask alms,Exemplum hic habemus libertatis divinae in dispensandâ gratiâ. Hic homo accepit, quod non non quaerebat. Ipse non nisi eleemosynam captabat, & accepit Spiritualem, & Corporalem sani∣tatem; sicut Saul quaerens asinas inuenit regnum. Conmat hoc illud Paulimum, Rom. 9. Non est currentie neque volentis. Hic homo petit eleemosynam, quam non accipit; accipit autem quod melius est. who had been lame from his birth, and was now about Forty years old (See ch. 4. 22.) The people being amazed at this mi∣racle flock'd in great multitudes about the Apostles in Solomons-Porch, earnestly gazing on them, and wondring at this strange cure wrought by them; and the man that was cur'd kept close to them, having received so great a benefit by them. Peter seeing this, address'd himself to the people shew∣ing them that they were much mistaken, if they thought that this Miracle was wrought by any power, or virtue, that was in such mean men, as they were. No, they durst not arrogate so much to themselves. He assures them it was wrought by no o∣ther power, than that of Jesus Christ▪ whom they had wickedly crucified (preferring Barabbas a murderer before him): but God had raised him from the dead, and of his resurrection they his Apostles were sure, and faithfull witnesses. He shews them it was
by faith, and relyance on his powerPer virturem, & Potentiam Je∣su Christi, quâ eum credo mihi assiste∣re, do tibi, ut surgas, & ambules. Per nomen Jesu intelligitur virtus, vis, ac potestas Jesu, secundum promissionem, Mar. 16.18. (which faith was also his gift, and wrought in them by his Spirit) that they had wrought this cure on this Cripple. He tells them that though they had done very hainously in thus putting to death the Prince of life, yet he was perswadedPetius dicit se scire, quod fecerint ignorantes. eri scilicet per judi∣cium chritatis, vid. Luc. 23.34. 1 Cor. 2.8. Non erant convicti, quod Chistus esset ille ipse Messias à Deo promissus. Pe∣tri Scopus ergo est non Judaeorum pec∣catum excusare, sed tantum is ostendere, quod non commiserint illud peccatum, quod non habet spem veniae. Peccare in Spiritum Sanctum non est facere quod scimus malum esse, sed est ideo aliquod facere, quia scimus malum esse, vel ideo aliquod persequi, quia scimus bonum esse.. that most of them did it ignorantly, not being thorowly convinc'd (though they had evidence enough to have convinced them, had they duly attended to it) that Jesus of Nazareth was the very Messias; yet however hereby they had ac∣complished what was praedicted in the Scrip∣tures concerning the sufferings of Christ. He exhorts them therefore to repentContritio non justificat, sed fides; sed tamen nulla fides justificat, nisi qua ex contritione prosiciscitur. and turn to God, laying hold on his Grace and Mercy offered in Christ, that their sins might be blotted out, seeing those blessedPeccata delentur ex libro justi∣tiae divinae per oliterationem, & in∣ductionem sanguinis Christi. Ex libro nostrae conscientiae, per Spiritum san∣ctum, Heb. 10.22. cordibus purgatis a mal conscientià Series argumenti haec est. Moses, & omnes Prophetae, quotquot locuti, hos die annunciarunt, & Christo testimonium dederunt, volueruntque, ut eum audiretis, & vos ad eum converte∣retis. Voautem estis filii prophetarum, ideoque obligati ad eos audiendos, & filii istius foederis, quod Deus cum Abra∣hamo pepigit, & quo totius mundi salu∣tem in hoc hristo promisit. refreshing Gospel-times, which he had long ago promised, were now come, and he had sent his SonErasmus, & Beza, ad primum Christi adventum haec referunt: hunc versum ergo hoc modo reddit Beza, Resi∣piscite, & converte vos, ut deleantur pec∣cata vestra post quam venerint temporare frigerationis a conspectu Domini & miserii prius praedicatum vobis Jesum Christum. Glassius etiam dici  poni pro  quum sen postquam:  usur∣patur etiam pro  apud Thucid. & Xen. into the world, whom the Pro∣phets long ago foretold, and preached of. This Saviour being now ascended he tells them the Heavens must contain (having re∣ceived hi Humanity) until the accomplish∣mentv. 2. Ʋntil the restitution of all things] or the accomplishment of all thing. The Arabick renders it untill the time in which all things shall he per∣fected, or finished.  doth not only signifie a restitution to a for∣mer estate, but a fulfilling, or accom∣plishing, and the praeposition  doth not so much stand in the force o Re again as in opposition to α privative in , so Matth. 17.11. Elias indeed shall first come , and shall restore al: what to their former estate? Nay, that the Bap∣tist did not, for he brought them into a quite different estate to their former: The words therefore may be more fully rendred thus. Elias truly shall firt come, and accomplish all things that are writ∣ten. And so must the Son of man do all things that are written of him, as Mark follows the sense, Mar. 9.12. Lightfoot in loc. Apud Hesychium, & Phavorinum, . Ergo in hoc sen∣su non ineptum erit vertere, Act. 3.21. Quem oportet coelum recipere usque ad tem∣pora consummationis omnium, i. e. ad fi∣nem mundi, quando venturus est Judex vivorum, & mortuorum, Ds. N. Knatch∣bull. of all things, which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy Pro∣phets since the world began; such as are, Christs victory over Satan in the Salvation of all his people, the Calling of the Jews, and his conquest of the last enemy Death, &c. He further sheweth them that Moses had prophesied of this Christ, under the title of the great Prophet, commanding he should be heard and obeyed in all things, Deut. 18.15.18, 19. and that all the Prophets from Sa∣muel as many as have spoken have also fore∣told of these days; They therefore should consider that they were the children of the Prophets, that is, the people to whom God primarily and chiefly sent the Prophets, and the People to whom the promise and cove∣nant which God made with Abraham, That in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed (namely, by giving the Messias to spring from his loins) did primarily apper∣tain. And this Jesus, being that promised Messias God had now sent into the world, whom, being put to death, he had raised again, and now in the power and ministry
of his Gospel had first sent again to them, to bless them by turning them from their sins by the powerful operation of his Spirit, and to offer himself unto them as the only Sa∣viour, and Redeemer; and therefore they ought in point of gratitude with all rea∣diness to receive, and embrace him. Act. 3. v. 1. Now Peter and John wnt up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour. v. 2. And a certain man, lame from his mothers womb, was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entred into the temple. v. 3. Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked an alms. v. 4. And Peter fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said, Look on us. v. 5. And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them. v. 6. Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have, give I thee: In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk. v. 7. And he took him by the right hand, and lift him up: and immedi∣ately his feet and ancle-bones received strength. v. 8. And he leaping up, stood and walked, and entred with them into the the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God. v. 9. And all the people saw him walking, and praising God. v. 10. And they knew that it was he, which sate for alms at the beautifull gate of the temple; and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had hapned unto him. v. 11. And as the lame man which was healed, held Peter and John, all the people ran together unto them, in the porch that is called Solomons, greatly wondering. v. 12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk? v. 13. The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers hath glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go. v. 14. But ye denied the holy One, and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you: v. 15. And killed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses. v. 16. And his Name, through faith in his Name, hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know: yea, the faith which is by him, hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all. v. 17. And now brethren, I wote that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers. v. 18. But those things which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled. v. 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blot∣ted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. v. 20. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you.
v. 21. Whom the heaven must recive, until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. v. 22. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. v. 23. And it shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. v. 24. Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days. v. 25. Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kinreds of the earth be blessed. v. 26 Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. v. 1. . Circa idem tempus. v 6.  i. e. Imperio, & virtute Christi. v. 7. Non sine raione textus addit, quod surgere jubens, simul dextram ejus appre∣hendens, eum erexit. Sic cum ministri hortantr & jubent peccatores ut surgant & ambulent in bonis operibus, jussio illorum conjuncta est cum potentiâ Christi, quae efficit quod jubetur. Homo igitur semel regenitus potest seipsum movere ad bonum, potest obedire Deo & facere quod Deo gratum est. Quoniam enim vitam habet Spiritualem, vita dat & fert secum vires operandi & se movendi. Tres tamen cautiones hic probè observan∣dae sunt. 1. Non potest sine continuatione gratiae & assistentia ejusdem Spiritus. 2. Non potest perfectè. 3. Non potest sine maculâ. Potest regenitus facere bona opera, sed non quae sunt in seipsis tam bona, ut Deo ex seipsis placeant. v. 11. The Porch called Solomons] Not that the Porch built by Solomon was now standing, for that was burnt and destroy'd by the Babylonians as well as the rest of the Temple; but because this was built in the same place that Solomons was. v. 12. ] aut quasi Deus nobis hoc ob nostram pietatem largiretur. v. 13. Glorificare Jesum, est gloriam ejus ad quam exaltatus erat, mundo, & homini∣bus patefacere, ut eum agnoscant. Persona glorificanda tribus titulis proponitur. 1. Vocatur puer Dei. sicut Act. 3.26. & 4.27. ad exprimendum tenerum amorem quo Deus illum complectitur (Est filius in sinu suo, Joh. 1.18.) & ad exprimendum offiium Christi:  saepè sumitur pro servo, Luc. 12.45. Isa. 42.1. & 52.13. Sed appellatur servus non ratione inaequalitatis, quae est in naturâ, sed ratione liberae sub∣missionis, & obedientiae, quâ se passus est à Patre mitti ad opus ejus expediendum, ad voluntatem ejus faciendam.  cum de Jesu dicitur filium vertunt Ambrosius & Hilarius, ut notat Erasmus infra, ca. 4.27. 2.  quia ipse est sancti∣tas, & justitia essentialis; & auctor Sanctitatis, & justitiae quae est in aliis. 3. Prin∣ceps vitae scilicet, qui vitae imperat. Nam per mortem victor mortis factus est, Heb. 2.14. 1 Cor. 15.54. v. 16. De Apostolorum side hic agitur. q. d. per fidem quâ nos nitebamur poten∣tiâ & verbo Christi cum diceremus In nomine Jesu surge, & ambula, impetravimus hoc miraculum. Ad miracula facienda non opus est aliâ fie, quam quae est communis omnium fidelium, sed tantum aliâ promissione. v. 17. Petrus Judaeos appellat fratres. Erant fratres secundum carnem, & propter externam communionem foederis. v. 21. Quem oportet, coeli capiant. h. e. receptum contineant. Ex idiotismo Hebraeorum, quo fit ut ex antecdente intelligatur consequens, Bez. v. 24. Samuel is reckoned the first of the prophets after Moses, 1. Because pro∣phesie from the Death of Moses to the rising of Samuel was very rare, 1 Sam. 3.1.2. 2. Because he was the first prophet after Moses, that wrote his prophesie, and 3. Be∣cause the Schools of the prophets were first erected by him, (See 1 Sam. 19.20.) and not that there was no prophet before him. See Dr. Hammond in loc. v. 25. Filii dicuntur, qui alicujus doctrina instituti sunt; sic discipuli prophetarum filieorum vocantur 2 Reg. 2. Seu potius quia ad eos primum spectant prophetarum oracula, & promissiones. Sic dicuntur filii Testamenti. Quâ ratione Mat. 8. vo∣cantur silii regni quibus regnum promissum est.
SECT. IV. AS the Apostles were thus going on in instructing the People, the Priests, and Sadduces, and Captain of the Roman Band (that was placed in the Tower AntoniaThe Tower Antonia was first built by Hircanus the Armonean but ater repaired by Herod, and in honour of Anthony, named Antonia. for the guard of the Temple) came upon them, and being greatly enraged, i. e. Ira, & dolore erant accensi. The distaste and dislike of these men proceeded from several prin∣ciples and causes. The Captains distaste was for fear the business should tend to a tumult The Sadduces because they preached the Resurrection of the dead. The Priests, because the Apostles be∣ing private men went about to teach the people, and because they preached the Resurrection through Jesus, . i. e. either as verified in Jesus, or by the power and efficacy of Jesus. Sadducaei rigidi admodum in poenis exi∣gendis ut Josephus docet, qui Pharisaeos ait fuisse in iis rebus leniores. Nimirum qui omnem spem in hâc vitâ collocatam habebant, severè occurrendum putabant omnibus iis quae turbare poterant quie∣tem populi, in quâ & ipsorum quies con∣tinebatur, Grot. at the Doctrine they preached, they took them and put them in custodyDeus sensim adsuefacit suos ad ferendam crucem, ut crescant cum cru∣ce vires. that night; yet Peter's Sermon had had so good an ope∣ration upon the people, that with the Three thousand which were before converted ch. 2.41. the number of believers in Christ was now come to be about Five thousandPrior concio convertebat 3000. nunc accedunt 5000. aut saltèm tot, ut utriusque concionis effectus conjun∣ctim producat 5000. Quòd numerus credentium circitèr ad 5 millia crevisse dicitur non de novâ accessione intelligo, sed de totâ ecclesiâ, Calv. in loc. The next day the Council being met toge∣ther (in which were Annas and Caiaphas, and some others, that were descended of High Priests) the Apostles are now called in question about the Miracle, they had wrought, and required to give an account by what power or authority they had done it. Then Peter being filled with the Holy Ghost, and an extraordinary measure of Courage, told them plainly, that by the power and authority of Jesus of Nazareth (whom they had crucified and God had raised from the dead) and by Faith in him, they had wrought this miraculous cure. This he tells them was the StoneSee my Harmony of the Four Evan∣gelists, ch. 5. p. 144. spoken of, Psal. 118.22. and Isa. 28.16. (which could be meant of no o∣ther than the Messias) who was now re∣jected and dis-esteemed of them who would be accounted the builders of the Church of God with sound Doctrine; yet notwithstanding their rejecting of him he tells them he is certainly the head of the cornerDeus eum constituit in lapidem angularem, i. e. in fundamentum cui in posterum tota ecclesiâ superstrueretur. Duplex est cujuslibet aedificii funda∣mentum 1. Externum, & naturale, viz. fundus, vel terra apta. 2. Inter∣num, & artificiale, quod ab architectis ponitur, & est pars aedificii. Sic ecclesia christiana duplex habet fundamentum. 1. Externum, viz revelationem Dei per prophetas, & Apostolos in Scripturis sa∣cris; Haec est principium, & fundamen∣tum cui innititur fides ecclesiae, & prop∣ter quod Ecclesia credit quae credit. Non enim testimonium aliquod humanum, non authoritas Papae & Ecclesiae, neque rationis humanae scientifica demonratio est illud funda∣mentum, & principium, propter quod credimus quae credimus, sed sacra Scriptura, Joh. 5. Illae sunt, quae testificantur de me. 2. Habet etiam Ecclesia Christiana fundamentum internum quod est pars aedi∣ficii. Sicut enim architecti in ipsâ terrâ ponere solent lapidem quadratum, vel Petram aliquam in an∣gulis aedificii, quae muros ustineat, Ita in aedificio Ecclesiae primò omnium ponitur lapis ille angula∣lis, & Petra, quae cum sit ipsa pars aedificii, caeteris aedificii partes sustinet, atque portat. Hic lapis est Jesus Christus. Ille est cum suis meritis cui innititur sides nostra, & sicut s des habet duas quasi par¦tes, 1. Assensum mentis. 2. Fiduciam cordi. Ita duo habet fundamenta. Scripturae authoritas est fundamentum assensûs: Christi merita, fundamentum fiduciae. Fides in Christum non est mera imaginatio salutis, sed est fiducialis amplexus Christi, repositio Cordis in Christum, quâ ei adhaere∣mus cum sensu miseriae nostrae premimur. Stres. in loc., and the principal Stone, or chief part of the whole spiritual building, his true Church being the Person in whom the strength of the building lyes, and by whom the two walls of the building, viz. Jews and Gen∣tiles are joined together, and made up into one House and Church; neither is Salvati∣on to be attain'd by or through the mediati∣on of any other person whatsoever. From v. 1. to 13.
The Council much marvelled at this boldness, and freedom of speech, wherewith the Apostles expressed themselves, seeing their education had been such as could not raise them above mean and ordinary men. But then they were told, or else some of them remembred, that they were such as had attended upon Je∣sus in his life time. However though they were convinced of the truth of the Miracle wrought by them, yet after they had debated upon the matter among themselves, they judged it fit strictly to prohibit them to preach any more in the name of Je∣sus; which injunction the Apostles would by no means yeild obedience unto, alledging that it was much more right and fit to obey God, than them; and declared, that they could not choose but proclaim for the benefit of others those truths concerning Christ of so high importance, which themselves had certain know∣ledg of, being eye and ear-witnesses of them. However not∣withstanding this rational Plea, the Council added some further threatnings to terrifie them, and so dismissed them, having no∣thing to lay to their charge, but only that for which the people looked on them with admiration and glorified God for working by them. From 13. to 23. The Apostles being thus dismiss'd, went immediately to their own company (that is the Society of those Hundred and twenty mentioned ch. 1.15.) and acquainted them with what had happened unto them. The Brethren being much affected herewith betake themselves, by fervent prayer unto the Lord, ac∣knowledging that what he had long ago praedicted by his Pro∣phet DavidThe second Psalm which owne not its author in the Title, the Holy Ghost ascribeth here to David, and seemeth thereby to intimate, that eve∣ry Psalm that declareth not its Author in the Title is to be ascribed to David, Lightf. in loc. Psal. 2.1. concerning the Messias, was now come to pass. For the Jews had highly opposed him, the anoint∣edA Patre unctus, ut esset servus, & legatus Dei▪ haec unctio consistit 1. In datione potestatis, & authoritatis. 2. In datione Spiriti Sancti, qui humanam na∣turam ad hoc faceret aptam. Hac uncti∣one roboratus est ad perficiendam om∣nem justitiam, quae à nobis requirebatur. Unctus est Spiritu Sancto, ut ex ejus ple∣nitudine Ecclesia sumeret, & hauriret sua dona. Unctio ergo notat commissionem officii & adaptationem ad illud. Hoc au∣tem officium Christi triplex est. 1. Prophe∣ticum consistens in Doctrinâ sive mediatâ, sive immediatâ, miraculis etiam ad con∣firmationem Doctrinae facietibus. 2 Sa∣cerdotale, consistens in oblatione Sacrifi∣cii, & Intercessione Huc pertinet bene∣dictio, quâ impetratur benedictio po∣puli. 3. Regium, consistens in rectione ecclesiae per Spiritum suum, & defen∣sione contra hostes. Particula Ʋt latens in constructione Graec hic non est nota intentionis, sed eventus Voluntas Dei, & interdictum Dei non pugnant. Deus enm saepe prohibet quod vult fieri, sed distinctione hic opus est: alia est voluntas eligens, alia voluntatas approbans. Deus non vult quod prohibet, i. e. non approbat, sed odit, ac detestatur. Deus tamen vult quod prohibet, i. e. eligit sibi in medium, quoad bonum aliquem finem perveniat. Quânam autem in re consistit ille concur∣sus divinae manûs cum pecatis hominum? solet vulgò in sequentibu constitui. 1. Deus permittit non Ethicè quasi non prohibeat, sed hysicè, quia non impedit, sed sinit homines ire viis suis. Relinquit eos sui libidinibus, nec coercet Satanam. 2. Sustentat creaturam peccantem. 3. Dirigit malitiam creturae in talia objecta, & in tales fines, in quos vult, & eam limitat ne agat pro mensurâ malitiae, sed ad mensuram divinae sapientiae. Deus non praedefinit, & ordinat malas impiorum actiones in quantum malae sunt, verum ordinat bonum illud quod inde elicit, & quod illi malo adversum est. of the Lord, and invented false things against him, and the Roman Gover∣nours in Palestine, Herod, and Pontius Pilat had combined against him, and the Jewish Sanhedrin had joined their malicious Coun∣sels to destroy him, and in opposing him, had also opposed God the Father who sent him. All this they had done, and thereby had been instruments to act that which God before determined (h), viz. that his Son should be put to death for the sins of men. And now God having raised him again from the dead, and commanded his Apostles to preach him to the world, these Jews had with great threatnings forbidden them: Whereupon they humbly beseech the Lord
to enable them his Servants, and Ministers to preach his word with all boldness and courage▪ and to give them power to work miraculous cures in the name of Jesus for the confirmation of the Gospel. Upon this prayer of theirs there came a wind from heaven like to that mentioned Chap. 2.2. and shook the place where they were assembled, and special eminent giftsRepleti sunt Spiritu Sancto, i. e. augmentum donorum acceperant sicut de Pentecostes receperant bonum ini∣tium. Repleti sunt Spiritu Sancto, ut scilicet in persecutione loquantur ver∣bum Dei cum fiduci. Unde Chrysost. Reaccensi sunt Spiritu Sancto, & reac∣censum in ipsis Charisma. De. Lightfoot thinks, that upon the Twelve now sell that wonderful gift of conferring the Holy Spirit. of the Spirit fell upon them, and especially they were indued with a greater measure of boldness to preach the Gospel even in the midst of persecution, and this was such a confirmation to them, that despising the ter∣rors of the Jews, they with greater confi∣dence publish'd the Gospel of Christ than before. This also is further to be observed concerning this infant Church, and these primitive disciples, that they maintain'd a great union and concordDuplici medio sibi contra hostes consulunt. 1. Precibus. 2. Strictâ in∣ter se unione, dilectione, & concordiâ. Et specialitèr in hoc consenserunt, ut ar∣ticulum de Resurrectione Christi effica∣citèr urgerent. 1. Ex vaticiniis crip∣turae demonstrabant verum Messiam de∣buisse resurgere. 2. Potentiâ suae do∣ctrinae suorumque operum miraculoso∣rum, quae in nomine Jesu faciebant, con∣vincebant homines, Jesum eos roborare, & proindè non mortuum esse, sed vi∣vere. among them∣selves both in Doctrine and Opinion, in Heart and Affection, and had such enlarged bowels toward one another, that no man esteemed what he had his own when the Churches necessity required it for the help of such among them as were in want. The Apostles also with great authority and assurance gave testimony to the Resurrection of Christ, and their Doctrine found great favour and acceptation with the People. And those of the disciples, that had possessions sold themSuch was the state of the Church at this time, as was never like to be a∣gain. It was but newly born, it was all in one city, the most of the peo∣ple far from their own houses, all in a possibility to be soon scattered by per∣secution. Therefore this example can∣not be a copy for after times to follow as a command or to imitate as a per∣fection, Lightfoot in loc. Requae erat temporariae alicujus ne∣cessitatis, & liberi arbitrii, Act. 5.4. non debet hodiè in exemplum trahi, mul∣tò minu ut necessaria obtrudi. Freid. lib. and laid down the mony received for them, at the Apostles feet to be distributed by their advice, and counsel, to every one as they had need. In which business Bar∣nabasarnabas dictus est a  filius, &  pro quo contractè  consolans riaco  consolatus est. De Dieu. a Levite gave an eminent example, who having a piece of Land of his own (not part of the Levites portion, which he might not alienate, but probably somewhat, which belonged to him in Cyprus where he was born) made sale of it, and brought the full price of it, and put it wholly in the Apostles power to dispose of, and to
distribute as they saw occasion among those of the Church that were in want and necessity. Act. 4. v. 1. And as they spke unto the people, the priests and the captain of the temple, and the Sadduces came upon them. v. 2. Being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead. v. 3. And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next day: for it was now even-ide. v. 4. Howbeit, many of them which heard the word, believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand. v. 5. And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and scribes, v. 6. And Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kinred of the high priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem. v. 7. And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power or by what Name have ye done this? v. 8. Then Peter filled with the holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel. v. 9. If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole. v. 10. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole. v. 11. This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. v. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. v. 13. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned, and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledg of them, that they had been with Jesus. v. 14. And beholding the man that was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it. v. 15. But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves. v. 16. Saying, What shall we do to these men? For that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. v. 17. But that it spread no furthr among the people, let us straitly threa∣ten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this Name. v. 18. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Nme of Jesus. v. 19. But Peter and John answered, and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judg ye. v. 20. For we cannot but speak the things which we have sn and rd. v. 21. So whn they had further threatned them, they lt tm go, fiding nothing how they might punish them, bcuse o th pople, for all men glorifid God for that which was done. v. 22. For the man was above fourty years old, on whom this micle of healing ws shwd. v. 23. And bing let go, thy went to thir own compny, and reprted all that the chif priests and elders had said unto thm. v. 24. And when thy heard that, they lit up their voice to God with
one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God which hast made heaven and earth and the sea, and all that in them is, v. 25. Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? v. 26. The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered to∣gether against the Lord, and against his Christ. v. 27. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered together. v. 28. For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. v. 29. And now Lord, behold their threatnings, and grant unto thy ser∣vants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word, v. 30. By stretching forth thine hand to heal: and that signs and wonders may be done by the Nme of thy holy child Jesus. v. 31. And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldness. v. 32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul: neither said any of them, that ought of the things which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things common. v. 33. And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the resurrecti∣on of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all. v. 34. Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, v. 35. And laid them down at the Apostles feet: and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. v. 36. And Joses, who by the Apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being interpreted, The son of consolation) a Levite, and of the countrey of Cyprus, v. 37. Having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the Apostles feet. v. 5. Seniores] idem quod Senatores, & consules urbium. Scribae, qui apud Jere∣miam Juris-consulti, & interpretes legis, qui in medio consessûs responsa dabant de ju∣re. Quidam Scribae erant interpretes legis forensis, & potius politicae vocationis quam ecclesiasticae. v. 6. Quotquot erant ex genere Pontificio] h. e. Quorum majores summo sacer∣dotio non ita pridem functi fuerant; Quae magna nobiitas fecerat ut Synedrio mag∣no ascriberentur, Grot. v. 9. De beneficientiâ hominis infirmi] h. e. in eum collatâ. Genitivus modo causam efficientem, modo rem, aut personam recipientem notat, ut hic. v. 11. ] in Psal. 118.22. 'tis , the stone, whom they refused. So 'tis also Mat. 21.42. and that according to the Hebrew text. But here the Apostle heightens the expression, that he may set home their reusing Christ the nearer to their hearts. v. 12. Non est aliud nomen] nomen pro ipsâ personâ, aut re ponitur: sic nomn Christi est Christus ipse, quod etiam Ethnicis in usu. Tibullus, nec fidum foemina no∣men. Sic Virgil. 6. Aeneid. Silvius Albanum nomen h. e. Albanus homo. Nomen aliquando ponitur pro dignitate, & eminentiâ. ut Phil. 2.9, 10. v. 13.  hic opponitur , h. e. peritis, & intelligentibus. Agnoscebant eos cum Jesu fuisse] Non mirum, cum Senatorum quidam interdum Jesum suis discipulis comitatum adiissent, & allocuti essent, Mat. 21.23. Luc. 18.18. Joh. 12.42. v. 20. Non possumus, quae vidimus, non loqui] h. e. Non debemus silere verbum potesttis non raro pro verbo dbiti, & juris accipitur; non possum, i e. non jure, ligetime, honestè, & bonâ conscientiâ. Id possum, quod jure p ssum.
SECT. VII. ANanias and SapphiraThey had the for∣mality to sell their lands as others did, but had not the sincerity to part with the money, as others had: their double deal∣ing both in word and deed is fear∣fully punish∣ed with sudden death at the beginning of the Christian Church, as Nadab, and Abihu, and the Sabbath-breaker were at the beginning of the Jewish, that in future times others might beware of dissembling with God, Lightfoot. in loc. Nota in quibus peccaverit Ananias praecipuè. 1. Non propter Dei gloriam, & proximi utili∣tatem vendidit agrum, sed ut venaretur sibi sanctitatis, & pietatis laudem. 2. Asseverat quod to∣tum pretium deposuerit, cum tamen partem ejus maximam sibi retiuisset. Concurrunt igitur hic Dei contemptus, ambitio, dissidentia, mendacium, hypocrisis, Freidl. Quod Ananias voto jam ante totum agrum Deo consecraverit, votoque illo violato sacrilegus evascrit, ex textu colligi non videtur; sed tantum quod cum per ambitionem totius pretium donsse videri voluerit partem ejus suppresserit, quod hypocriseos erat, & mendacii, De Dieu. Petrus antehac majestatem, & exaltationem Christi testatus est per miraculum beneficentiae in ho∣mine clando. Nunc eam testatam reddidit per miraculum severitatis in homine hypocritâ. Inter∣pretes vulgo hunc actum comparant cum facto Pauli, Act. 13 9, 10, 11. & cum facto Eliae, 2 Reg. 1.9, 10. Peccatum Annaniae erat peccatum nullius necessitatis, quod facillimè potuisset omittere. Non o∣pus habebat quicquam dare, & potuisset totum retinere. Hinc videmus quod bona vendere, & da∣re omnia pauperibus, non fut res necessitatis in primitivâ Ecclesiâ, sed libertatis. Carebat tum tempo∣ris Ecclesia protectione Magistratûs, & propriis armis Spiritualibus se defendebat, quae cum ordinariè funt invisibilia, tunc visibilia fuerunt ad majorem terrorem impiorum, tum intra, tum extra Eccle∣sim. his wife pretending to follow this example fraudently kept back by joynt consent part of the price for which they had sold a possession, and yet pre∣tended to lay down all the price it was sold for at the Apostles feet. For which Hypocrisie, and lying to, or in the presence of the Holy Ghost, and thinking to go undiscovered of that Spirit, which wrought so powerfully in the Apostles, and to impose upon God himself, as if he saw not what men secretly did, and presumptuously tempting him, and trying (as it were) whether he would be so severe to punish it, or no, they are stricken dead, and great fear fell on all that heard of these things. Act. 5.1. But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession, v. 2. And kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the Apostles feet. v. 3. But Peter said, Ananias, Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lye to the holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? v. 4. Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. v. 5. And Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up the ghost: and great fear came on all them that heard these things. v. 6. And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried him out, and buried him. v. 7. And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife not knowing what was done came in. v. 8. And Peter answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for o much. And she said, Yea for so much.
v. 9. Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of them that have bu∣ried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out. v. 10. Then fell she down straitway at his feet, and yeilded up the ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and carrying her forth, buried her by her husband. v. 11. And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard these things. v. 2. ] Verbum factum ex  seorsim, notat clam, & callidè quip∣piam surripere, & suffurari. v. 3. Quare implevit Satanas cor tuum] h. e. Cur occasionem praebuisti Satanae, ut veneno suo cor tuum impleret, & ad hoc mendacium impelleret? Quare te ita re∣gi, & impelli passus es à Satana? Implere cor alterius est audacem eum reddere, implere cor suum audacem fieri. Confer Esth. 7.5. Quis est hic, qui implevit cor suum (vel quem implevit cor ejus) ad faciendum est? i. e. qui tam audacis animi sit, ut hoc facere sustineat. Vide etiam, Eccles. 8.11. Nihil enim metuit cor Spiritibus ple∣num, De Dieu. ] i. e. in Spiritum Sanctum. Elipsis praepositionis . Hinc elicitur Testimonium ad demonstrandam Spiri∣tus Sancti Deitatem. v. 4. Non es mentitus hominibus tantum, sed cum primis Deo. Idem est mentiri Deo, & Spiritui Sancto. Mentiri Deo aut Spiritui Sancto is dicitur, qui sperat se Apostolos fallere posse Spiritu Sancto instructo, Grot. v. 4. , scilicet in tuâ possessione,  ad tuos usus manebat, & venundatum in tuâ erat potestate. scilicet ] Quid est quod potuisti, &c.
SECT. VIII. THE Apostles having thus manifested the power of Christ, and his Justice in this example of Ananias and Sapphira, they also manifested his graciousness and mercy in working ma∣ny miraculous cures in his Name, in healing the diseased, and delivering the possessed; insomuch, that the people brought forth their sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the ShadowPontificii super hanc umbram Petri aedificant superstitionem suam circa reliquias Sanctorum. Si sola, in∣qu unt, umbra Petri tot morbos potuit sanare, quid non possint reliquiae ve∣stimentorum, vel corporis? Si Pauli su∣doriola, Act. 19. Si Christi fimbria, Mat. 9, fanarunt morbos; Si ossa Elisae mor∣tuos excitarunt, 2 Reg. 13. Quid non poterunt lignum crucis, sepulchrum Christi, tunica Christi, lac & crines Mariae, caligae Josephi, &c.? vid. Stres. in loc. Christus simbriae tactu sanavit morbos; Petrus etiam umbrae contactu: sic impletum est quod dixerat Christus, Joh. 14.12. Grot. of Peter pas∣sing by, might overshadow some of them. And these acts of mercy were as necessary for the propagating of the Gospel, and to invite people to believe in Christ, as those other of severity were for the restraining those corruptions wherewith Satan would otherwise have infected the Church in its minority; and to prevent the intrusion of HypocritesPoena Ananiae, & Sapphirae non parum valebat terrendis impiis, nè te∣merè prorumperent in eorum coetum, ubi Deus tam severum vindicem se o∣stenderat. Calv. in loc.. The Apostles and Believers had at this present their place of meeting and assembling to preach the Gospel in So∣lomon's PorchSee chap. 2. ver. 46., which was the East-Cloy∣ster of the Mount of the Temple [See 1 King. 6.3.], in part of which the Sanhe∣drim used to sit, and yet they are not afraid to come so nigh unto them. But such of their hearers as were not sincere, durst not join themselves to them, having seen the severity on Ananias and Sapphira for their Hypocrisie; yet multitudes of others were added to the Church daily; and the common people seeing the wonders that were done by them, and their eminent gifts and endowments, could not but extol and magnifie themErant, (inquit Chry∣sost.) Apostoli sicut Angeli, admirabiles, interriti ad minas, & pericula, & deliciis superiores, spirantes ignem divinum, gravitate & vultu venerabiles, affabilitate amabiles, charitate fervidi, oratione coelestes, moribus divini. Corn. a Lap. in loc.. From ver. 12, to 17. Hereupon the High-Priest, and those that were with him (most of them of the Sect of the Sadduces) set themselves ve∣ry zealously against them; and apprehending them, put them into the common Gaol; from whence being freed the night follow∣ing by an Angel, they are commanded by Him to go again, and preach boldly in the Temple the Doctrine of Christ, which de∣clares unto men the right way unto eternal lifeVocat Evangelium verbum vitae hujus: non hujus terrenae, sed q. d. hu∣jus vitae propter cujus spem captivi erant Apostoli.. The Council meeting next morn∣ing, sent to the Prison for them, but find them not there; for they were preaching in the Temple; from thence they are brought before them by the Captain and Officers, yet without violence: for they feared the people would stone them, if they used such per∣sons harshly who had done so many cures among them. Being
now again brought before the Council, they are here accu∣sed of two things. 1. Of Contumacy, in persisting to preach the Gospel, notwithstanding they were strictly forbidden. 2. Of Sedition, as if they endeavoured to stir up the people to avenge the blood of Jesus upon the Rulers, perswading them it was by them most unjustly shed. Peter, in the name of the rest, answers to the first of these, acknowledging they had not obeyed them in that their Injunction, because they had commanded that which was contrary to God's Com∣mand; and in such a case it was just and reasonable, that God should be obeyed, and not they. He tells them, That though they had dealt most injuriously and maliciously with Jesus of Nazareth, and had crucified him; yet God had raised him again from the dead, and exalted himAnte exaltationem Christus erat Salvator, quia salutem pro nobis me∣rebatur: post exaltationem est Salvator, quia salutem in nobis operatur. Chri∣stus erat Rex noster in medâ sua exi¦nanitione, ut de se fatetur, Joh 18.37. Erat enim unctus in Regem sed tamen, durante exinanitione, non ita eviden∣tèr functus est fficio Regio, ac post ex∣altationem. Sicut David erat Rex ab ipso unctionis momento, 1 Sam. 16.13. Sed tamen dium exilio passus est, an∣tequam Regium solium ascendit; ita Christus, &c. to his ight hand in Heaven, and instated him in his Regal Power, that he might, as a Spiri∣tual Prince, rule and protect his Church; and, as a Saviour, send his Spirit into the Hearts of Sinners, to draw them to Re∣pentance, and belief in himselfReligio piorum in V. T. nullâ alia in re fuit posita quàm, 1. In humili confessione propriae indignitatis, & cor∣ruptionis, & impotentiae. 2. In con∣fugio fiduciali ad misericordiam Dei, in sacrificio & satisfactione promissi Me∣diatoris sundatam. 3. In sincero studio emendationis, & gratitudinis, ac pati∣entiâ, ac spe resurrectionis & vitae ae∣ternae: Conversio ergo generalitèr sumpta dividitur in tres partes, viz. contritionem fidem, & emendationem. that so they might receive remission of sins, and all the blessed consequents thereof. He de∣clares, that they his Apostles did bear their testimony to the truth of these things; and so did the Holy GhostSee Joh. 15.26. and 16.13, 14., who descending up∣on them, and others also (who believed in Christ, and yielded obedience to him), en∣dowed them with extraordinary giftsSpiritus Sanctus duplici modo de Christo testatur. 1. Inartificialiter per modum testis; cum ita operatur in animos fidelium, ut eis persuadeat de veritate verbi divini, & verbum illud, quod ipse re∣velavit, esse veritatem. Spiritus Sanctus non tantum est Auctor verbi, sed Testis verbi. Verum hoc testi∣monium est internum, quo non pssunt uti fideles ad convincendos alios, & quod non potuissent allegare Apostoli ad convincendos hos judices. 2. Artificialiter, per modum argumenti, cum scilicet iis qui Christo obediunt, largitur tam mirabilia dona, ex quibus tanquam certissimo argumento possunt omnes homines concludere, Christum non esse nunc mortuum, sed vivum, & exaltatum. Hoc testimonium hoc loco alle∣gant Apostoli ad convincendos hos judices., and enabled them to do miraculous cures: And if their testimony were false, certainly it would never have been so confirmed. From Ver. 12, to 30. These words so enragedHaec concio Petri eadem est quan∣tum ad substantiam eum istâ, Act. 2. tamen longè alius effectus illius ac hu∣jus. Illam adiente,  com∣pung: bantur, hanc audients  dissecabantur. the Coun∣cil, and cut them to the heart, that they presently entred into consultation of put∣ting the Apostles to death; but were divert∣ed from that wicked intendment, by the advice of Gamaliel, a learn'd and grave Se∣nator, and of much repute among them; who told them, that if this work were of men, it would come to nought; as he proves by two instances, one of TheudasFuerunt duae Theuda; alter prior, de quo hic Lucas; alter posterior, de quo Josephus scribit, lib. 20. c. 2. Is de quo hic agitur exstitit paulò ante fi∣nem Herodis, ut notat Casaub. Exerc. 17 Ostendens ita sensisse & Oigenem, Non est mirum, diversis temporibus plures extitisse factiosos homines ejusdem no∣minis. Grot., who gave him∣self out to be some excellent person sent of
God for the delivering of the Jews; and the other, of Judas of GalileeDictus fuit Gaulonites cujus memi¦nit Josephus, lib. 18. c. 1. lib. 20. c. 5 Hic cum Cyrenius Praeses Syriae mittere∣tur ad censendum populum, seditionem concitavit, docens non alium esse Do∣minum quam Deum agnoscendum; cen∣sum nihil aliud esse quam manifestam servitutis professionem; & libero Judae∣orum populo indignum. Faciebat autem ista Judas ministerio Sadociae Pharisaei, quem sibi adjunxerat., who in the time of the Tax laid by Augustus rai∣sed a Sedition, disswading the people from paying it; Both which persons he tells them gathered many followers after them, but miserably miscarried in their enterprize. But he further shews them that if this work were of God, they could not possibly overthrow it, neither ought they to attempt it, least therein they should shew themselves to be fighters against God. This advice being so rational, it prevailed with them to desist from their former intention. Yet notwithstanding sending for the Apostles again into the Court they appointed them to be scourgedNon autem Apostolos intactos dimit∣tunt: quod tamen aequum fuerat, & con∣gruens iis quae dixerat Gamaliel., and strictly charging them not to preach any more in the name of ChristPotest mundus impius ferre con∣cionatores, qui praedicent legem, repre∣hendant vitia, hortentur ad virtutem. Illos tamen doctoret non possunt ferre, qui concionantur in nomine Jesu, & docent, in solo Jesu esse omne id, quod ad salutem requiritur, in tantum ut ne∣mo possit salvari misi per justitiam Chri∣sti, & per tractionem, & conversionem, Spiritûs Sancti., dismissed them. But they were so far from being discouragedPersecutio piorum est comoedia, quae triste habet initium, tristesque processus, sed semper laetam catastrophen. Martyrium, & amissio vitae corporalis non est exitus & finis, & catastrophe hu∣jus fabulae, sed coronatio, martyrium sequens. Tum demum finitur, cum caesus coronatur, & cae∣dens in ignem conjicitur. by these things, that they went away rejoycing, that they were counted worthyMagna virtus ipsam contumeliam honori ducere ob bonam causam, Ita in Apostolis, per elegans , combinantur summa dignitas, & indignè propter Christum tractari. to suffer shame for his sake. And daily both in the Temple, and in private houses they ceased not to preach Jesus Christ. Act. 5. v. 12. And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs, and wonders wrought among the people (And they were all with one ac∣cord in Solomons porch. v. 13. And of the rest durst no man joyn himself to them: but the people magnified them. v. 14. And believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women) v. 15. Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by, might overshadow some of them. v. 16. There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto Je∣rusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed every one, v. 17. Then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him. (which is the sect of the Sadduces) and were filled with indignation. v. 18. And laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them in the com∣mon prison. v. 19. But the Angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and said, v. 20. Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life. v. 21. And when they heard that, they entred into the temple early in the morning, and taught: but the high priest came, and they that were
with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought. v. 22. But when the officers came, and found them not in the prison, they returned, and told, v. 23. Saying, The prison truly found we shut with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but when we had opened, we found no man within. v. 24. Now when the high priest, and the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these things, they doubted of them whereunto this would grow. v. 25. Then came one and told them, saying. Behold, the men whom ye put in prison, are standing in the temple, and teaching the people. v. 26. Then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without violence (For they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned) v. 27. And when thy had brought them, they set them before the coun∣cil, and the high priest asked them, v. 28. Saying, Did not we straitly command you that you should not teach in this Name? And behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this mans blood upon us. v. 29. Then Peter, and the other Apostles answered, and said, We ought to obey God rather than men. v. 30. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. v. 31. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Sa∣viour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. v. 32. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him. v. 33. When they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took coun∣sel to slay them. v. 34. Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel a doctor of law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the Apostles forth for a little space. v. 35. And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what ye intend to do as touching these men. v. 36. For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be some∣body, to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joyned them∣selves: who was slain, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to nought. v. 37. After this man rose up Judas of Galilee, in the days of the taxing, and drew away much people after him: he also perished, and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed. v. 38. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought. v. 39. But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. v. 40. And to him they agreed: and when they had called the Apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the Name of Jesus and let them go. v. 41. And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoycing that that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. v. 42. And daily in the temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. v. 13. ] Nemo eorum, qui extra ecclesiam erant, & fidem Christi nondum amplexi essent auderet se adjungere consortio Apostolorum, ob recentem ad∣huc ex prodigioso Ananiae interitu metum; id tamen progressui Evangelii non ob∣fuit. v. 20. Omnia verba vitae hujus] Vitae nomine intelligit doctrinam, quae ad vitam aeter∣nam ducit, Joh. 12.50. & 17.3.
v. 34. This Gamaliel was Pauls Tutor, Ast. 22.3. the Son of Simeon, that took Christ in his Arms, Luc. 2. and the Grandchild of the famous Hillel, Lightf. v. 19. Ne cum Deo pugnare comperiamini] ante : subintelligitur Cavendum est. SECT. IX. THe number of Believers now increasing at Jerusalem, there arose (as it commonly happens among a multitude) a murmuring of the HellenistsHorum plerique Hebraica non intelligebant. Quorum fuit & Philo, quanquam Judaeus ex Judaeis ortus. (that is such Jews as were dispersed among the Grae∣cians, and were born, or lived in Heathen Countries, and used the Greek Translation of the Old Testament, and the Greek Tongue, yet savouring something of the Hebrew Phrases and manner of speaking) against the Hebrews (who were such Jews as inhabited Judea, and spake the Syriack Language) because their WiddowsQuod vi∣duae Helleni∣starum aut ae∣grotae, aut in∣fantibus one∣ratae, minus acciperent quam viduae in Judaeâ na∣tae. Id autem accidebat quod (ut vi∣detur) Apo∣stoli ad hanc distributio∣nem uteban∣tur Judaeis in Judaeâ natis. were neglected, and received less, than the Widdows of the Hebrews, in the daily distribution of the Churches moneys. The Apostles desiring to have the poor well provided for, yet being them∣selves taken up with dispensing the word, (the food of the soul,) and so not at leisure to attend that other service; by their ad∣vice, and the suffrages of the Church, there were Seven men of good report for wisdom and the endowments of the Spirit, cho∣sen out of the Hundred and Eight, mentioned before, ch. 1. to be Stewards of the Churches stockExem∣plo scilicet eorum qui in synagogâ di∣cebantur  Epiphanio . Totum primae Ecclesiae regimen conformatum fuit ad formam Synagogae. Quae bene se habebant nihil opus erat mutari, Grot., unto which they were ordained by the imposition of handsSignum mandati ministerii.. Among those Stephen, and Philip were the most eminent, whose story is particularly related. Thus the Gospel went on successfully, and the num∣ber of the Disciples increased daily, yea some of the PriestsCasaubonus existimat vocem  hic deesse. Legendum igitur , ut sen∣tentia sit, Multam populi turmam credidisse, & aliquos etiam è sacerdotibus. Nam insolens (in∣quit) videtur, ut dicatur sacerdotum multa turba doctrinam Christi veram propter hoc factum esse amplexa. nihil nonnunquam praeter eos qui, in numero aut turbâ, designat. Quomodo , Luc. 19 39. . Sic  omnes praeter elassium principes dicebantur. Vide Joh. 12.42. Heinsius. themselves (formerly bitter enemies to Christ) now embraced the faith, and were joined to the Church. Act. 6. v. 1. And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplyed, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the He∣brews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration. v. 2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables. v. 3. Wherefore brethren, look you out among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.
v. 4. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministery of the word. v. 5. And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen a man full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch. v. 6. Whom they set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. v. 7. And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples mul∣tiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the priests were obe∣dient to the faith. v. 5. Cum Nicolaus dicitur fuisse ab Antiochiâ proselytus, intellige  i. e. cir∣cumcisum, & legi, suâ voluntate, subditum. Hic est Nicolaus à quo nomen traxêre Nicolaitae, Apoc. 2.6.15. à Patribus memorati, Iren. lib. 1. c. 27. Euseb. hist, l. 3. c. 29. vid. Grot. This Sect mis-construed the Doctrine of Christian community, to all licentiousness: but whether it began to be so mis-construed by Nicolas himself, or some of his followers, as the Sadduces abused the good Doctrine of Sadoc to a damnable Here∣sie, it is difficult to determine, Lightf. SECT. X. STephen being thus chosen to be one of the first Deacons, and being a man full of Faith, and powerPer  intelliguntur Incitati∣ones, & impulsus Spiritûs Sancti ex qui∣bus poterant observare praesentiam, & promptitudinem Spiritûs ad perpetra∣tionem miraculorum. Vide phrasim Scripturae, Jud. 14.6, 19. & 15.14. 1 Sam. 10.10. Cum Spiritus per hos vo∣lebat facere miraculum non solebat ex∣terno verbo promssionem edere, sed ir∣ruoba in eos, i. e. Aliquo motu, & inci∣tatione aliquâ praesentiam, & prompti∣tudinem suam ad miraculum ipsis insi∣nuabat & sic promissionem miraculi ip∣sis dabat. Cum homines huic promissi∣oni credebant, & illius fiduciâ miracu∣lum edebant, fiebat miraculum. Cum autem ejusmodi incitationes Spiritus non fiunt, etiamsi adsit fides, miracula tamen non fiunt. Tales igitur virtutes, i. e. tales impulsus, & incitationes Spi∣ritus crebras fuisse super Stephanum di∣cit Evangelsta, quibus Stephanus cre∣dens & confidens, multa in populo fecit miracula, quibus doctrinam suam confirmavit, vid. 1 Cor. 12.28. Stres. to work Miracles, he accordingly does many wonders among the people, and stoutly defends the cause of Christ against several persons of the Sy∣nagogue of the LibertinsIlli qui Stephanum adorti sunt fuerunt homines de Synagogis seu Scholis, studiosi, scilicet qui in Academiâ Hierosolymitanâ, vel instituebant, vel instituebantur. Erat Hierosolymae Acade∣mia constans diversis collegiis & variarum nationum Judaei hic erexerant collegium aliquod pro suâ quaque juventute. Libertini vocantur filii eorum Judaeorum qui à Pompeio abducti, & in ser∣vitutem venditi, à Tiberio manumissi erant, iisque concessum partem urbis inhabitare. Judaeus er∣go manumissus vocabantur libertus, filius autem liberti Libertinus, vid. Stres. in loc. Libertini Romae multi Judaicae religionis. Eorum fuit Cicilius ille in quem est divinatio Ciceronis. Tocitus Annal. 2. ait, Quatuor millia libertini generis, superstitione Judaicâ infecta, missa in Sardiniam. Horum sumptu structa Hierosolymis haec synagoga, & positi in eâ magistri eruditi., and of some other Synagogues, that disputed with him, who when they were not able to resist the wisdom, and spirit, by which he spake, they falsly accus'd him, and bringing him before the Council, set up false witnessesMixing true and false things together, as those, who bare witness against Christ. Stephen might speak of the desolation of the City, and destruction of the Temple, from Dan. 9.26.27. and Christs own praediction, Luk. 19.43.44. Mat. 23.37. He might speak that the Ceremonies and Shaddows must vanish, now the Substance is come, and of the disanulling of the Mosaical rites to give way to a more excellent spiritual Worship, and yet not speak these things with any abomination of the Temple or the Service thereof, as they possibly suggested. a∣gainst him, who declared they heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, and that he should say that Jesus would destroy the Temple, and CityVide similem accusationem, Jeremiae, c. 26.9.11., and change the Customs, and Rites which Moses had instituted,Unde observamus quam facilè corda hominum externis ceremoniis ad haereant in cultu. Nulla acrior contentio ecclesiam exercuit, quam quae est de Sacramentis, & externis ceremoniis. Ratio est, quia homines, ad verum, internum, & spiritualem cultum minimè proclives sunt, tamen ad colendum Deum obligati, in externo ceremoniarum cultu, qui corporalis est, & animalis, adeo∣que naturali homini possibilis ac facilis, acquiescunt, & in eo fiduciam ponunt, Streso in loc. and commanded from God.
v. 8. And Steven full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people. v. 9. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the syna∣gogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and of Asia, disputing with Steven. v. 10. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake. v. 11. Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blas∣phemous words against Moses, and against God. v. 12. And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the Coun∣cil: v. 13. And set up false witnesses, which said, This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and the law. v. 14. For we have heard him say, That this Jesus of Nazareth shall de∣stroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.
SECT. II. STephen being thus brought before the Council, his faceHoc de nativâ facie non dlcitur, sed potius de praesenti vultu, Calv. De∣us coelesti fulgore, & splendore faciem ejus induit, ut ita testimonium daret esse suum ministrum. utque hosles terreren∣tur. Sicut Mosis faciem fecit splendere, Exod. 34.29, 30. & Christi faciem in transfiguratione, Mat. 17. Probabilior tamen est sensus, quod animus Stephani incredibili solatio Spiritûs fuerit adeo r∣pletus, ut nullos terrores aliquo saciei pallore proderet, sed potius laetitia ip∣sius in ipso vultu resulgeret, non secus ac si omni tristitiâ exemptus inter Angelos Caeli in plenâ gloriâ fuislet constitutus. Sic potest Deus tristitiam ex hominibus tollere, cum nondum vult homines ex tristitiâ, vel miseriâ tollere, Streso. appeared full of Majesty, and Splendor, not unlike possi∣bly to that which Moses's face had, Exod. 34.30. or such as the Angels appeared with, Mat. 28.3. An argument of a clear consci∣ence, and of the divine assistance, and pre∣sence. Being permitted to speak for him∣self, he in a long and grave oration ap∣plyes himself to answer the charge that was brought against him. And because these his accusers, and others of the Jews (as it seems) imagined that God was so delighted and pleased with the Temple, and the Temple-Service, and the Mosaical, Rites that he in∣tended always to continue and perpetuate them, and that no other way of Worship could be acceptable to him; therefore by an historical deduction he shews them that God was worshipped aright before either Tabernacle or Temple was made, or any of the Mosaical Rites instituted or ordained, and therefore the true Worship of God was not necessarily, and inseparably annexed to any of these things. For the proof of this he begins at Abra∣ham, and shews them how that he living of old at Ʋr of the Chaldeans in the midst of Idolaters [Josh. 24.2, 3.] God was pleased of his free mercy to manifest himself to himGen. 12. about the seventieth year of his age, and effectually to enlighten him by his grace, and savingly to draw him to own, and worship him the true God: and commanding him to leave his native Country, and go into a land which he would shew him, he promised to make of him a great nation, and that in him, all the families of the earth should be blessed. Abraham obeying this command, drew on his father Terah also with him; and so they came from Ʋr to Charran, where he served God till the death of his father, which was about five years after. His father being dead he was again called by God to leave that Country, and to go into Canaan, which accordingly he did, and there God promised that to his seed he would give that land, but they must first endure a long servitude in Egypt. Af∣ter he had a good while sojourned in Canaan, when he was Nine∣ty nine years oldGen. 17. God made a Covenant with him, and in∣stituted Circumcision as the Seal thereof, so that from his first Call from Ʋr, when he was seventy years of age to this time when he was Ninety nine, he had served God faithfully, yet without cir∣cumcision to this present time. After this, Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob the Twelve Patriarchs: and the Patriarchs moved with envy sold Joseph into Egypt, where the Lord was with him, and by his wonderful providence rai∣sed him up to be chief Governour of the country under Pha∣raoh,
so that in the time of the Famine he sent for his father, and his family, being Seventy five souls, to come down into E∣gypt, and nourished them there. Jacob, after some time spent there, died in Egypt, and so all the rest of his sons after him, and in testimony of their Faith, and belief of the Promise, that God had made unto Abraham of giving the land of Canaan to his Seed, they commanded that their bonesEx omni∣bus Patribus in Egypto mortuis, solus Josephus Sichemam transltus videtur, & Sichemae sepultus, vid. Heb. 11.12. Ergo hic est Synecdoche pluralis pro singulari scilicet translati & positi, pro translatus & positus fuit in Sichem, prout doce∣mur, Josh. 24.32. Hnc opinionem amplectitur Calvinus, & multis exemplisillustrat Lorinus, nimirum, Mat. 26.8. murmurabant discipuli, plurale hoc intelligitur de uno singulari Judâ Iscariote, qui fo∣lus indignabatur ob profusum unguentum prout exponit Johannes, cap. 11. & 12. Sic etiam Mat 27.44. Latrones dicuntur obloqunti Christo in cruce; quod verum non suit nisi de uno Latrone. Josephus Antiq. lib. 2. ca. 4. post historiam de morte Josephi patriarchae haec subjungit de fratribus. Sed & obie∣runt fratres ipsius cum in Egypto faeliciter vixissent: atque eorum quidem corpora cum post aliquod tempu posteri exportassent, Chrebone sepeliverunt. Quod ex vetustiorum Judaeorum traditione hausit Josephus, quamvis in eo fallatur quod Chebronem scripsit pro agro Sichemitarum. Hieronymus testatur Jacobi duodecim filios Sepulchra habuisse prope Sichemam cum Epistolâ 27 ad Eustachium, scribit de Paulâ matre. Transivit Sichem, &c. atque inde divertens vidit duodecim Patriar∣charum sepulchra. Merito igitur Stephanus de Patriarchis  translati sunt Sichemam, id est, p opè Sichemam ut Heb. 9.4. In arcà erat urna aurea, & virga Aaronis, i. e. prope arcam. Nam praecisè loquendo, nihil fuit in arcâ praeter duas legis tabulas, 1 Reg. 8.9. Bocharts. should be carried into the land of Canaan, and buried there. The Children of Israel now growing, and encreasing to a vast multitude in Egypt, in tract of time, there arose a Pha∣raoh, that knew not Joseph, who fearing the number, and strength of the Israelites, exceedingly oppressed them; and to prevent their encreasing, made a barbarous Edict, that their male chil∣dren should be killed as soon as they were born, or else drowned in the river*. In the time of this Edict, Moses was born to Am∣ram and Jochebed his wife, who being a very lovely child, his Parents hid him three months in their house; but at last not da∣ring to conceal him any longer, they put him in a basket of Bul∣rushes, daubed over with flime and pitch, and laid it in the flags by the side of the River. Here the Kings Daughter finds him; and moved with compassion towards the Infant, nourisheth him up for her own son, putting him out to his own Mother to nurse: and caused him to be educated in all the learning of the Egypti∣ans, so that he proved a person of great abilities above other men, being very able both to give counsel, and to act any great affair. When he grew to the age of Forty, it came into his mind to visit his brethren the Israelites; and among other things that evidenced to him their sad condition, he saw an Egyptian smiting an Israelite, which so stirred up his spirit, that he slew the Egyptian who did the wrong, thereby giving the Israelites the first intimation, that God would deliver them by his hand, (which it seems God had by instinct, or revelation made known unto himself,) but they understood it not. The next day seeing two Israelites at variance, he would have made them friends, and set them at one again. But he, who did the wrong upbrai∣ded him for it, and said, Who made thee a ruler, and a judg over us? wilt thou kill me as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday? Moses
perceiving hereby, that what he had done to the Egyptian was known, and that the King hereupon would seek his life, he fled from thence into the land Midian, where he spent other Forty years of his life, and married Zippora, Jethro's daughter, and by her had two Sons. The children of Israel continuing still under sore bondage in Egypt; it pleased the Lord now at length to com∣passionate them, and to resolve to deliver them. Wherefore, when Moses had been Forty years in Midian, as he was keeping his father-in-laws sheep about Horeb, or Sinai, the Angel of the Lord appeared to him out of a burning Bush, and called him to go to Pharaoh, requiring him to deliver his people Israel. Moses after he had shewed many signs and wonders in Egypt at last brought them out. And leading them through the red Sea, he brought them into the wilderness to Mount Sinai, where God gave them his law, and appointed Moses to make a Tabernacle for his worship according to the pattern he had shewed him in the Mount. So that to this day for above Four hundred years, he shews them, the Fathers had worshipped God without any Tabernacle at all. He further shews them, that though Moses was a person high∣ly to be regarded, whose memory ought always to be precious to them, having had intimate converse with God, and having received the law from his mouth, yet they might remember to their humiliation how their impious Ancestors would not obey him; but contrary to his mind, during his absence in the Mount, made a golden Calfv. 39. Certum est Judaeos dum Egyptiis serviebant, eorum quoque Diis serviisse. In quam rem diserte, Josh. c. 24.14. & Ezek. 20.7, 8. & 23.3, 8. Ex quibus videtur sequi, Judaeos ad Egypti∣orum exempla se composuisse cum vitu∣lum aureum in deserto fusum adorârunt. Recte igitur de iisdem Lactantius, lib. 4. c. 10. Ad prophanos Egyptiorum ritus ani∣mos tranitulerunt, & aureum caput Bovis, qum vocant Apim, quod eos signo praecede∣rent, figurrunt. Et Heron. in Oseae 4. Videtur mihi populus Israel in solitudine sibi fecisse caput vituli, quod coleret, & Jero∣boam vitulos aureos frabricatus, ut quod in Egypto didicerant, , qui sub figurâ boum coluntur, esse Deos, hoc in suâ superstitione servarent. Hi sunt Dii tui, O Israel. Ibi plurale pro singulari usurpatur, quod saepè fit cum de Deo re est, vid. Gen. 35.7. Psal. 149.2. Eccles. 12.1. vide etiam, Neh. 9.18. Hic est Deus tuus qui eduxit te ex Egypto, i. e. imago seu symbolum illius unici Dei, Boch p. 347. and ador'd it. They might also call to mind how Moses told them before hand, of a great Prophet the Lord would raise up in due time, whom they were to hear, and obey in all things. And this great Prophet, who was no other person than the Messias, was now come. Moreover they might consider how that when the Tabernacle was made by Moses, and all the worship of God appertaining to it appointed, their rebellious Ancestors not∣withstanding, did not long continue faith∣full to it, but God for their sins leaving them to themselves, and to their own hearts lusts, they fell to worship the Host of HeavenSee Deut. 17.3. 2 King. 23 5. 2 King. 17.16. Jer. 19.13. the Sun, Moon, and Stars, upon which it was that the Lord so highly expostulates with the people of Israel, Amos 5.25. de∣nying that their Ancestors offer'd such sa∣crifice to him in the wilderness as was plea∣sing in his sight.Hoc contigisse videtur, cum po∣pulus appulit ad terram Moab. Psal. 106.28. Numb. 25.2. ornicatus est populus cum fliabus Moab quae vocaverunt eos ad sacrifieia sua. At illi comederunt, & a∣doraverunt Deos earum. In his erat Mo∣loch, qui Deus erat Moabitarum uti & Ammonitarum, à quibus illi acceperant, & loci & sanguinis propinquitate con∣juncti, Glass Sicut Baal in genere de omnibus Diis dicitur, ita Melech vel Moloch est nomen Diis omnibus commune. In Amoso ex∣tat vox Chiun, quae Saturnum designat. Cum autem nomen hoc minus fortè no∣tum, & sacrorum tantum esset, LXX sub∣stituerunt appellationem ejusdem Dei Saturni magis notam & familiarem, quae in promiscuo usu esset apud plebem, sci∣licet Rephae. Salmasius  in linguâ Egyptiacâ Saturnum significare testatur. Capellus putat intelligi Regem Egypti Remphin quem existimat eundem esse cum Pharaone cujus tempore vixit Jo∣seph, qui quòd Egyptum servasset. ab E∣gyptiis intra astra fuerit collocatus, & pro Deo cultus, & fortè etiam à quibusdam Israelitarum Idolatris. Ut id hoc loco dicatur, Sacrificia illa quae in deserto ob∣tulistis, non mihi, sed idolis vestris, & Diis fictitiis, quos occultè animo fovebatis, & colebatis, obtulistis. Tabernaculum quod ibi∣dem humeris bajulastis non meum fuit, sed Molochi vestri, i. e. Non me in eo Taberna∣culo colustis, sed Idolum, quod vos tacitè agitabatis, vid. Freidl. in loc. And though they made shew of serving him by carrying his Taber∣nacle, and all things belonging to it, yet they hankred after their Idols, which they not only bare in their hearts, but also car∣ried
about with them representations of them. For it seems they had gotten the Shrines, or Chaplets, wherein the mages of Moloch and Saturn were kept and inshrined, and carried them about with them, and wor∣shipped them. Which Idolatry of their An∣cestors not sufficiently bewailed, and repent∣ed of, together with the consequent sins of their children in succeeding ages, at last pro∣voked God to bring the captivity of Babylon upon themAmos 5.27. Migrare vos faciam trans Damascum, hic v. 43. id ita effer∣tur, Transferam vos ultra Babylonem, u∣trumque est impletum. Neque enim in Syriam tantum, cujus Metropolis Da∣mascus est, sed etiam trans Babylonem in Persiam, & Caspiam Israelitae fuere ab∣ducti ut ex Ezra 8.17. constat. Minùs ergo dixit Amosus, plus significavit. Assyria, & Media quae ultra Babylonem sunt, multò magis sunt ultra Damas∣cum.. But to return to the Ta∣bernacle, (where God used to witness, and evidence his glorious presence, and where the Ark of the Covenant was, and the Law, and the Testimonies, evidences of Gods will how he would be served) he shews, their Fa∣thers indeed carried it with them all along through the wilderness, and at last brought it into Canaan, where it continued all the days of David, and to the beginning of Solomons reign; and then it ended, and gave way to the Temple: which though David desired to build for the Service of God, yet that honour was reserved for Solomon his Son, who accordingly built it in a very sump∣tuous and magnificent manner. Now when the Temple was built, God himself declared by the mouth of his Prophet Isaiah, ch. 66.1, 2. That he delighted not to dwell in Temples made with hands, as if he were in∣cluded therein, and bound thereto. And therefore they were not fondly to conceive that after the Temple was built the worship of God was so tyed to that place as he could not be worshipt ac∣ceptably any where else —. As Stephen was thus going on, and (as 'tis probable) would have spoken much more fully to the point in hand, the Council it seems interrupted him, apprehen∣ding him to speak in a way of diminution of the Temple. There∣fore breaking off his former discourse, and turning his speech to them, he sharply reprehends them for several thingsCum animae pericliantur, non lenitate, sed sale, & a∣core opus est, quod non ma∣gis repugnat charitati, quam cum medicus in extremitate morbi adhi∣bet rodentia. Qui metuit acritudinem reprehensio∣nis, caveat putredinem malitiae.. 1. For their rebellion, and resisting the Spirit of God, which spake to them by the Apostles and by him. 2. For their imita∣ting their cruel Ancestors, who killed the old Prophets in killing the Lord of life. 3. For their horrible violating the holy law of God given them by the glorious ministry and proclamation of AngelsInter quos erat ca∣put Angelo∣rum, ipse Fili∣us Dei, Stres.. At these words they were extreamly inraged at him, and gnashed on him with their teeth. But he being full of courage and faith looked up to Heaven, and had an extraordi∣nary Vision of the glory of God, and of Jesus Christ standing on his right hand, and accordingly declared unto them what he saw. They hearing this, without any more ado, in a violent furious manner ran upon him as a Blasphemer: and though the
Romans permitted them not to put any man to death, yet in a popular rage, they hurried him away out of the City, and there stoned him. And they that witnessed against himSee ch. 6.13., (and were therefore by the Law to cast the first stone at him, Deut. 17.7.) put off their upper garments to sit themselves for the work, and a young man called Saul undertook to look to them, who consequently had an hand in stoning of him. Stephen devoutly commending his Soul into the hands of Christ, and praying for his murderers, that this sin might not be laid to their charge so as to obstruct their repentanceThat this prayer was heard ap∣peare by Gods special mercy to Saul., gave up the Ghost. Act. 6. v. 15. And all that sit in the council, looking stedfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an Angel. Act. 7 v. 1. Then said the high priest, Are these things so? v. 2. And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken: The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, v. 3. And said unto him, * Gt thee out of thy country, and from thy kin∣red, and come into the land which I shall shew thee. v. 4. Then came he out of the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Char∣ran: and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land wherein ye now dwell. v. 5. And he gave him none inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child. v. 6. And God spake on this wise, that his seed should sojourn in a strange land, and that they should bring them into bondage, and intreat them evil four hundred years. v. 7. And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage, will I judg, said God: And after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place. v. 8. And he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day: and Isaac begat Ja∣cob, and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs. v. 9. And the patriarchs moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt: but God was with him, v. 10. And delivered him out of all his affliction, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt: and he made him gover∣nour over Egypt, and all his house. v. 11. Now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction, and our fathers found no sustenance. v. 12. But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first. v. 13. And at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren, and Josephs kinred was made known to Phraoh. v. 14. Then sent Joseph, and called his father Jacob to him, and all his kinred, threescore and fifteen souls. v. 15. So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers. v. 16. And were carried over into Sichem, and laid in the spulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emor the father of Sichem. v. 17. But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, v. 18. Till another King arose, which knew not Joseph.
v. 19. The same dealt subtilly with our kinred, and evil-intreated our fa∣thers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they might not live. v. 20. In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding fair: and nou∣rished up in his fathers house three months: v. 21. And when he was cast out, Pharaohs daughter took him up, and nou∣rished him for her own son. v. 22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds. v. 23. And when he was full fourty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel. v. 24. And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian: v. 25. For he supposed his brethren would have understood, how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not. v. 26. And the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren, Why do ye wrong one to another? v. 27. But he that did his neighbour wrong, thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judg over us? v. 28. Wilt thou kill me as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday? v. 29. Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Ma∣dian, where he begat two sons. v. 30. And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sinai, an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush. v. 31. When Moses saw it, he wondred at the sight: and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came unto him, v. 32. Saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold. v. 33. Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet: for the place where thou standest is holy ground. v. 34. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them: And now come, I will send thee into Egypt. v. 35. This Moses whom they refused, saying. Who made thee a ruler and a judg? the same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer, by the hands of the angel which appeared to him in the bush. v. 36. He brought them out, after that he had shewed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderness fourty years. v. 37. This is that Moses which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me: him shall ye hear. v. 38. This is he that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel, which spake to him in the mount Sinai, and with our fathers: who re∣ceived the lively Oracles to give unto us. v. 39. To whom our fathers would not obey but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt, v. 40. Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: For as for this Moses which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. v. 41. And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the idol; and rejoyced in the works of their own hands. v. 42. Then God turned and gave them up to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have
ye offer'd to me slain beasts, and sacrifices, by the space of forty years in the wilderness? v. 43. Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which ye made, to worship them: and I will carry you away beyond Babylon. v. 44. Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion that he had seen: v. 45. Which also our fathers that came after, brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drave out before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David. v. 46. Who found savour before God, and desired to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. v. 27. But Solomon built him an house. 2.48. Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands, as saith the prophet, v. 49. Haven is my throne, and earth is my foot-stool: what house will ye build me, saith the Lord? or, what is the place of my rest? v 50. Hath not my hands made all these things? v. 51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. v. 52. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And they have slin them which shewed before of the coming of the just One, of whom ye have ben now the betrayers and murderers: v. 53. Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it. v. 54. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth. v. 55. But he being full of the holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into hea∣ven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand o God, v. 56. And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God. v. 57. Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord. v. 58. And cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young mans feet, whose name was Saul. v. 59. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. v. 60. And he kneeled down, and cryed with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep. Chap. 7. v. 2. Videtur Ʋr fuisse in Mesopotamiâ. Mesopotamiam Stephanus vocat non modo eam regionem, quae Euphrate, & Tigride includitur, sed etiam Babylo∣niam cujus pars est Chaldaea, Beza. So that Chaldaea was also reckoned to Mesopota∣mia. v. 5. Abraham was forc'd to buy a place of Burial, though all the land was given him by promise. Duo mihi Stephanus contribulibus suis in Patriarchâ Abrahamo consi∣deranda proponere videtur, quibus fidem ejus Deus vehementèr exercuit. Primum, quod in terram Canaan & in Judaeam eum transtulerit, neo tamen ullam possessionem, ne vestigii quidem pedis ei dederit. Alterum, quod hanc terram ipsi, & semini ejus obti∣nendam promiserit, quum semen non haberet, De Dieu. v. 6. There is a double summ of years mentioned concerning the seed of Abraham's sojourning, namely Four hundred years, Gen. 15.13. and Four hundred and thirty Exod. 12.40. Gal 3.17. The Four hundred are to be reckoned from the birth of Isaac, who was born in the hundreth year of Abraham, and had Jacob when he was sixty years old. Jacob when he was an hundred and thirty went into Egypt, from thence to the delivery out of Egypt reckon two hundred and ten years, and the summ will be four hundred. To which add twenty five years of Abraham since he came from Haran (for he came from thence in the seventy fifth year of his age) and five more since he came from Ʋr of the Chaldees to Haran, and the sum will be four hundred
and thirty. The Septuagint on Exod. 1.40. thought fit to express their sense in this Paraphrase. The sojourning of the children of Israel, which they and their fathers sojourned in the land of Egypt and Canaan was four hundred and thirty years. So that Stephen must be understood to say, that the children of Israel were to suffer, and be oppressed till the end of four hundred years from the birth of Isaac. v. 14. Joseph accersivit Patrem suum Jacob & omnem cognationem ejus in animaus Sep∣tuaginta quinque. Scilicet, constantem, conscriptam ex animabus 75. Multum torsit interprete conciliatio hujus loci eum illo, Gen. 46.27. & Deut. 10.22. ubi 70 solum animas domûs Jacobi, quae intrarunt in Egyptum commemorat Moses. At difficultatis parum est, si dicamus non esse loca Parallela. Moses enim catalogum texit in quo unà cum Jacobo soli ejus posteri, & quidem ex samere ejus egressi, exceptis diserte filiorum uxoribus, v. 26. comprehenduntur: Ob quam causam non ii solum qui cum ipso Egyp∣tum actu sunt ingressi, sed & Joseph eum duobus filiis Ephraim, & Manasse in septua∣genario numero continentur, etsi jam ante in Egypto essent, quia ex faemore Jacobi nti, & è terr Canaan orti, peregrini in Egypto degerent, adeoque merito haberen∣tur quasi cum Jacobo Egyptum intro iissent: Specialisque in eo catalogo rationis est, quod Judae duo nepote x Phares, Hezrem scilicet & Hamul, etsi post in Egypt nati in numerum istum, v. 11. referantur, ut nempe duorum filiorum Judae Er, & Ouan jam desunctorum locum supplernt. At in oratione Stephani non genealogia Jcobi in∣stituitur, sed quosnam Josephus è terrâ Canaam in Egyptum advocaverit, docetur. Plureenim quam è faemore Jacobi ortos accersivit, neque omnes è faemore Jacobi ortos accersivit. Excludendi ibi sunt primo duo nepotes Judae, deinde ipse Joseph cum duo∣bus siliis: Illos enim, quippe nondum natos, & se suosque filios, quippe jam in Egypo degentes, accersere non potuit. Separatis itaque istis quinque, deinde, & ptre Ja∣cobo, qui seorsim à Stephano commemoratur, restant ex septuagenario Mos numero 64, nempe undecim fratres, una soror Dina, & 52 fratrum filii; quibus si ad∣jungas undecim fratrum, undecim uxores, quas necessariò Josephus nà cum maritis accersivit, quaeque ad  pertinebant, habes omnem cognationem ejus in 75 animis. Unde consequitur corruptum esse textum LXX interpretum, qui Gen. 46.27. pro 70. habent 75. De Dieu. Non tantum  fuit, quod scriptores sacri, N. T. versionem Graecam LXX sequuti sunt, sed ex purâ necessitate. Nam alitèr impossibile erat, ut allegationes eorum ex Lege, & Prophetis à gentilibus (ut pote Hebraica non callentibus) examinarentur. Et, si Judaeus in manu habens N. T. queratur, & cavilletur quod receditur in allegationibus à textu Hebraeo, in promp∣tu adest, quod respondeatur; Haec ipsa versio, quae citatur, ipsissima vestra est, quam vos exarastis, edidistis, & mundo proposuistis, ut symbolum, & tesseram Legis, & religionis vestrae, ut ipsissima Biblia vestra. Dr. Lightf. in Heb. ad Epist. prima ad Corinth. v. 16. Quomodo Abraham Emeril à filiis Emor monumentum? Cum hoede Jacobo dicatur, Gen. 33.19. & Josh. 24.32. Masius multique alii textum putant à librariis corruptum, & nomen Abrahami irrepsisse, additum à quodam sciolo descriptore, cum nomen Jacobi à prioribus repetitum rectè conveniat cum verbo emerit. Ludovicus Capellus vult loco Abraham legendum , nepos scilicet Abrahami Jacobus. Rivetus facit nomen Patronymicum Abraham pro Abrahamides & hujusmodi phraseos varia Salmeron & A Lapide exempla afferunt, tùm ex sacris tùm ex profanis literis. Vide plura in Rob. Bailii opere Hist. & Chronolog. Sunt qui Abrahamum putant ideo pro Jacobo nominari, quia Parentes, & filii idem esse moralitèr censentur, atque ide esse quod 1 Reg. 12.16. Populus Roboamo insensus, dicit, quae pars nobis in Davide? i. e. in Roboamo Davidis nepote, & quod 1 Reg. 15.6. Perpetuum bellum in∣tercessisse legitur inter Roboamum, & Jeroboamum quamdiu hic suit in vivis. Ubi Roboami nomine, qui pridem obierat, Abias filius intelligitur, qui gravitèr afflixit Israelitas usque ad obitum Jeroboami. 2 Paral. 13.17, 18, 19, 20. Sic Christo tribuitur Davidis nomen, Jer. 30.9. & Ezek. 34.23. Bochartus pag. 435.  verti solet quod emerat Abrahamus cum ex sacrâ historiâ constat non Abrahamum, sed Jaco∣bum eum agrum emisse. At cum articulus non exprimatur tam dativus subintelligi potest, quam nominativus, ut sensus sit , quod emerat (scili∣cet Jacob de quo commate praecedente) Abrahamo. Etsi enim Abrahamus diem suum jam obiisset, ipsi tamen dici potest emptus iste ager, ad designandum scopum, quem in agri emptione habuit Jacob, qui non suit duntaxat, ut eo pro sepulchreto uteretur (neminem enim istie Jacobus in humavit, nec ipse ibi inhumatus est, sed in se∣luneá Maepelae, Gen. 49.30. & 23.16.) sed vel maximè, ut primitiae quaedam essent terrae Canaan cujus totius Haereditatem Abrahamo Deus, & semini ejus promiserat, quippe cui primò acta est promissio, ut haeres mundi esset, Rom. 4.13. Atque ibi simul causa latet cur non tantum Josephus sed (quod hic à St. Stephano discimus) reliqui etiam Patriarchae à Posteris haereditatem terrae promissae jam capientibus, Sichemum sint translati, atque in ejus agro sepulti, nempe quia ager iste emptus erat Abrahamo tanquam pignus haereditatis totius terrae, Abrahamo promissae. De Dicu. Gen. 33.19. Jacob emisse legitur partem agri siliorum Hemor  centum agnis. Fortasse pro agis, nummi intelligendi sunt agni effigie signati, quales cudisse legitur Servius Rex Romanorum: Fortassè argenti vel pecuniae nomine eo loco censeri possit quicquid illâ ae∣tate praestabat pecuniae vices. Bochart. lib. 1. cap. 2. de ammalib.
v. 26. ] Conatui datur nomen effectûs. 3 25. ] ductu Angeli. Sensus est Deum, quum Mosen mitteret prin∣cipem, & redemptorem & Mosis, & redemptionis per eum praestandae regimen universum commisisse manibus hujus Angeli. Unde liquido constat Angelum istum, qui Exod. 3. apparuit Mosi in rubo, quique ibi aliquoties Jehova, ac Deus patrum nuncupatur, ac qui istie Mosen mittit, ac instruit, non fuisse creatum Angelum, sed ipsum filium Dei, per cujus manum Stephanus ait Deum, nempe Patrem, misisse Mosen; qui Angelus vo∣catur quia in hâc actione, ut & in totâ populi liberatione subserviit Patri. Est ille An∣gelus faciei ejus de quo Isa 63.9. Angelus faderis quem Mosi in deserto comitem fuisse eumque in Monte Sinai esse allocutum, Stephanus infra testatur, v 38. Vere ergo prin∣ceps faederis qui populo Israelis tanquam suo, legem tulit in monte Sinai, qui se principem exercitus Domini meritò vocavit, Josh. 5.14. Ideoque non Angelus modo faedetis, sed & ipse Dominus jure vocatur, Mal. 3.1. Hic Angelus eduxit populum ex Aegypto, Numb. 20.16. & duxit per desertum, Exod. 23.20, & 33.2. quem Christum fuisse testatur Apostolus, 1 Cor. 10.9. De Dieu. v. 38. ] Respicitur locus, Deut. 32.47. ubi lex dicitur esse vitae, i. e. causa vitae faelicis, quae eximiè vita Hebraeis. Hic  pro . v 41. Fecere juvencum, ad imitationem Aegyptiorum, apud quos Apidis cultus valdè est vetus, vid. Tacit. Hist. 5 & Herodotum lib. 2. v. 43.  est  2 Reg 5.18. Sic Saturnum vocabant Syri, colebantque non in formâ Regis, sed in formâ Stellae, in Hebraeo est  Ciiun quod eandem Saturni stellam significat, sed Arabibus. Gro Vos portatis Saturnum, stellam Dei vestri, idem est ac si dixisset Vos portastis stellam Dei vestri Saturni; figuras quas fecistis, nempe Taber∣naculum Molochi, scilicet imaginem Caeli, in qu Sol, sive Moloch magnus ille astro∣rum Rex, tanquam in Tabernaculo continetur, & Saturni stellam, De Dieu. Praeci∣pua Egyptiorum inter quos versati erant Israelitae idolatria erat in veneratione astro∣rum, & praecipuè planetarum, quorum praecipui erant Sol, & Saturnus, vel Mars, qui Aegyptiacè appellabantur Melech & Remphan, vel Rephan, ut observant docti; Simulacra quaedam horum astrorum solebant Sacerdotes includere certis tentoriolis, vel Tabernaculis, & cistis, eaque circumgestare humeris, populo acclamante, cantante, tripudiante. Hoc imitati sunt Israelitae in deserto, Exod. 32.4.5, 6. Etsi enim ibi non legimus nisi vitulum factum, altare aedificatum, lusum, & potum esse, tamen ex inter∣pretatione Amosi, & Stephani clarum est, fuisse ibi quoque quandam circumgestatio∣nem idoli tabernaculo inclusi qualis olim fuit inter Ethnicos, Streso. v. 48. Sensit Origenes, Deum, cum Templum sibi fieri permisit à Solomone, pari id fecisse proposito, quo & altare, & victimas indulsit, nempè ut se populi genio aptaret, ac eos ritus sibi vindicaret, quos alioqui populus falsis Diis erat impensurus. Templum Christianis est corpus purum, altare animus Sanctus, Simulachra verò omnis generis, vir∣tutes. Vocabant ergo Christiani suorum conventuum loca modò Ecclesias , modò Basilicas, & eodem sensu Domos Dei: Templi autem appellatione, destina∣tò abstinebant. Grot. v 51. Incircumcisi corde, & auribus] i. e. Cor habentes plenum vitiosis affectibus, Lev. 26.41. Jer. 9.26. & quibus pruriunt aures ad ea audienda, quae vitiis favent, Jer. 6.10. Intellectûs stupiditas, voluntatis pertinacia, & indomiti affectus, praepu∣tium sunt, & membrum quod deponendum est, Col. 3.5. & 2.11. Non hic Judaeis ex∣probratur naturalis corruptio, sed corruptio attracta, qua se ipsos magis, magisque in∣duraverant, excecaverant, & praeputium roboraverant per contemptum Evangelii. v. 5  pro inter. Inter medios exercitus Angelorum. Ostendit quam magnificè data sit Lex inter multas Angelorum turmas. Respicitur locus Deut. 33.2. Grot. Accepistis legem ad ordinationes Angelorum, i e. ordinantibus Ange∣lis vel secundum, & juxta ordinationes Angelorum: huic loco parallela sunt, Gal. 3.19. Heb. 11.2.  respondet  Hebr. Filius Dei, qui quamvis in se Deus, hic tamen  tanquam Angelus Dei, Caeterorumque Angelorum praefectus consideratus, è medio Angelorum, qui eum undique stipabant, legem in monte Mosi dedit, De Dieu. Deus Pater legem per filium dedit. Filius usus est ministerio Angelorum. Angeli, nomine filii Dei Mosi legem tradiderunt, eique quid docere Israelitas debeat, praecepe∣runt Moses  ad ordinationes seu secundum, vel juxta mandata Angelorum Israelitis legem dedit, seu secundum distributiones Angelorum, quibus legem disposue∣runt, vel distribuerunt in decem praecepta, & decem praecepta in duas tabulas, totámque adeo legem in Moralem, Ceremonialem, Forensem. Distinguenda quoque circa legis promulgationem sunt haec tria. 1. Promulgatio legis per vocem, quae facta est, Exod. 19. in monte Sinai. 2. Scriptio legis in tabulis, quae facta est post hanc pomulgatio∣nem, Exod. 31, & 34. 3. Scriptio legis in libro quae Mosi injungitur, Exod. 34.27. ut lex ex isto libro populo quotidiè praelegeretur, dum tabulae lapideae autographae ma∣nebant in arcâ faederis. In solâ promulgatione usus est Angelorum ministerio, non in scriptione. v. 57. Irruerunt concorditèr in eum] quasi ex judicio zeli quod stante repub. usurpare solebant, sed tantum in eos, qui Judaeis auctores essent ad falsos cultus. Ad quod conni∣vere solebant Sacerdotes, vid. Josephus lib. 15 c. 8. etiam cum sub Romanis essent. Peccabant autem isti homines hic duplicitèr. 1. In legem, quae etiam liberâ repub.
judicium illud populare exerceri noluit nisi in auctores idolatriae, qualis non erat Ste∣phanus. 2. In Romanos, qui ipsis ademerant jus omne capitalium suppliciorum. 58. Testium erat, primos jácere lapides, ac sic semet, si quid falsi subesset sontes fa∣cere caedis, populum vero, qui ipsorum auctoritatem sequebatur, absolvere. 59. Domine Jesu, recipe spiritum meum] Hinc discamus immortalitatem animae. Est haec inter primas veritates, quod anima humana sit immortalis, vid. Eccl. 12.7. Mat. 10.28. Luc. 12.4. 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.21, 22. 2 Pet. 1.14. v. 60. . Ne statuas illis hoc peccatum, & hoc Domini exemplo Luc. 23.34. Peccata velut ante Deum stant, vindictam petentia. Emman. Saa. SECT. XII. STephen becoming thus the Protomartyr, and first, that under the Gospel sealed the Doctrine of Christ with his blood, he was carried to his burial by devout men, who made great Lamen∣tationSee Gen. 50.10. Deut. 34.8. 2 Chron. 35.24, 25. over him. But the spite and cruelty of the Jews was not quenched by the blood of Stephen, but rather inflamed. For immediately after this, they raised a great persecution against the whole Church at Jerusalem, wherein Saul (the young man before mentioned) was very active. This mans Parents were both Jews, so that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews; he was of the Tribe of Benjamin bornHe had a double Name, Saul as he was an Hebrew by birth; and Paul as he was a Roman, being born at Tarsus, a free City of the Romans: His Edu∣cation was in the Schools of Tarsus; which as Strabo reporteth, lib. 14. was then famous for the study of Philosophy, and the Liberal Sciences. Here he at∣tained the Greek Language and Learn∣ing, and grew expert in their Philoso∣phy and Poems, his skill wherein he sheweth, in alledging Epimenides, Ara∣tus, Menander. From thence he was sent to Jerusalem for the study of Di∣vinity and of the Jewish Law. In his youth, he learned the handicraft Trade of making Tents. at Tar∣susThis City had among other pri∣viledges obtained of the Roman Empe∣ror Augustus the freedom of the City of Rome, because that in his wars against Brutus and Cassius they held with him, and had suffered much, See Act. 21.39. in Cilicia; by Sect a Pharisee, and the Son of a PhariseeAct. 23.6., and studied at that time (as it seems) at Jerusalem, and frequented the School of Gamaliel a famous Doctor among the Pharisees. He was a ve∣ry strict observer of the Law of Moses, and of the Traditions delivered to the Fathers, but a bitter, and fierce enemy against the Doctrine of Christ, and all those that owned him, and professed to believe in him. This man having received Commission from the Chief Priests impowring him to do this wretched work, made miserable havock of the Church: for entring into Houses, he ha∣led thence both men and women, that be∣lieved in Christ, and bound them, and put them in Prison, and often caused to be bea∣ten and scourged in the Synagogues; and used all scourged in the Synagogues; and used all rigid means to make them deny Christ, and blaspheme him (as it seems) he himself did [1 Tim. 1.13.]: And such as were constant to the faith, he forced to fly to heathen Cities, and then pursued them thither also. Act. 8. v. 1. And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad thorowout the Regions of Judea, and Samaria, except the Apostles. v. 2. And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great la∣mentation over him. v. 3. As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entring into every house, and hailing men and women, committed them to Prison.
Phil. 3. v. 5. Circumcised the eighth day, of the flock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the law, a Pharisee. v. 6. Concerning zeal, persecuting the church: touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless. Act. 22. v. 3. I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zea∣lous towards God, as ye all are this day. v. 4. And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering in∣to prisons both men and women. v. 19. And I said, Lord, they know I imprisoned and beat in every syna∣gogue them that believed on thee, v. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. Act. 26. v. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth: v. 10. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints did I shut up in prison; having received authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. v. 11. And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities. Gal. 1. v. 13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: v. 14. And profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. v. 23. But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times past, now preacheth the faith, which once he destroyed. Act. 9. v. 13. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: v. 21. But all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this Name in Jerusalem, and came hi∣ther for that intent that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?
SECT. XIII. THis persecution dispers'd in a manner the whole body of the Church, and scattered both the Members and Tea∣chers thereof, (excepting the ApostlesIn gravi persecutione neque omnes fugere, neque omnes debent, inquit Augustinus. Quando autem fugere fugere lice∣at, quando non liceat, generalibus regu∣lis difiniri non potest, sed prud cujusque permittendum est, ut sec¦dum circumstantias ita agat ne con¦entiam laedat.) into divers Countries, which tended greatly to the advantage of the Gospel. For the Apostles (who had an extraordinary Functi∣on, and therefore were bound to shew more than ordinary courage) remaining at Jeru∣salem, and sticking to their work there, till they should be more manifestly called by God from thence; the rest of the Disciples (of which there were now some thousands, as appears Act. 2.41. and ch. 4.4.) were scattered some into the Regions of Judea and Samaria, who spread the Gospel wheresoever they came; some went to Da∣mascus, among whom was Ananias a devout and religious per∣son, Act. 9.10. & 22.12. Others, it's like, went to Rome, and among them Andronicus and Junia, who were of note among the Apostles, and kinsmen of the Persecutor Saul, and had em∣braced the faith before him, as himself testifieth, Rom. 16.7. Others travelled as far as Phoenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the Gospel to the Jews only [Act. 11.19.] namely to those Jews, that were dispersed among the Gentiles, as may be gathered from Jam. 1.1. and 1 Pet. 1.1. Among them that went to Samaria, Philip was one, (the second in order after Stephen among the seven Deacons). He coming into that City, preached Christ so effectually, that the people with one accord gave heed to the Doctrine he delivered, and seeing the MiraclesMiracula solent comparari cum campanis, quibus homines convocantur ad verbum audiendum. wrought by him, they were perswaded to embrace the Gospel. For out of many that were possessed, he cast un∣clean Spirits who at their coming out, made loud acknowledg∣ments of the irresistableness of the power by which he acted. And others, that were taken with Palsies, or were lame he cu∣red. Before this time, there had been in the City, one Simon a Magician, who had by Sorcery, and the help of the Devil done some strange things among them, which so affected the igno∣rant people, that they cryed him up as a person in whom the great power of God did wonderfully manifest its self. But they now seeing far greater Miracles done by Philip, they were converted to Christianity, and many among them, both men and women be∣lieving, were baptized by him in the name of Christ. And a∣mong others Simon Magus himself was convinced, and belie∣vedNon puto fidem Simonis fuisse meram simu∣lationem, sed fidem historicam, quâ verè convictus credidit Jesum Christum (in cujus nomine Phi∣lippus praedicabat, & miracula faciebat) esse Deum, & se, ac Diabolo (cujus vi ipse suas edebat prae∣stigias) majorem: Sicut Magi Aegyptiaci comparantes sua miracula cum miraculis Mosis, credebant, & fatebantur per Mosen operari digitum Dei, Exod. 8.19. Stres., and was also baptized.
Act. 8. v. 1. And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusa∣lem, and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Ju∣dea, and Samaria, except the Apostles. v. 4. Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went every where prea∣ching the word. v. 5. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. v. 6. And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. v. 7. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them: and many taken with Palsies, and that were lame, were healed. v. 8. And there was great joy in that city. v. 9. But there was a certain man, called Simon, which before time in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one. v. 10. To whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. v. 11. And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had be∣witched them with forceries. v. 12. But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women. v. 13. Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondred, beholding the miracles and signs which were done. v. 8. Magnum gaudium factum est in illa civitate non tantum ob tot sanatos obsessos, paralyticos, & claudos, sed praecipuè ob manifestatam aeternae salutis viam. v. 10. . Metalepsis pro . v. 12. ] de regno illo, quod hic inchoatur, & consumma∣bitur post resurrectionem. v. 13. Simon qui totam urbem fallaciis suis infatuaverat, Dei veritatem simul cum aliis recipit. Quamquam non tam suâ unius, quam totius gentis causâ illuminatus fuit in Evangelii notitiam, ut scandalum tolleretur, quod imperitos morari poterat. Voluit enim Dominus hunc, quem pro semideo habebant Samaritae in triumpho ducere: quod fit dum excussà inani jactantiâ veris miraculis gloriam dare cogitur. Fides autem Si∣monis erat temporaria cujus meminit Christus, Mar. 4. Sentit veram esse Evangelii doctrinam, & conscientiae suae sensu ad eam recipiendam cogitur, sed deest fundamen∣tum, h. e. sui abnegatio. Et Baptizatus est] Hoc Simonis exemplo clarè patet non conferri, omnibus indiffe∣rentèr in baptismo gratiam, quae illic figuratur. Nos sciamus offerri nobis à Domino per sacramenta quicquid sonant annexae promissiones, & non frustrà, & inanitèr offerri, modo side ad Christum directi ab ipso petamus quicquid Sacramenta promittunt. Adhaerebat Philippo] Quod cum Philippus admisit, in eo apparet, quam difficile sit hypocritas discernere. Sic Demas temporarius Pauli comes, postea factus est perfidus desertor. Cum igitur interdum improbi, & fraudulenti homines se nobis adjungunt, & se nobis astutè insinuant, sedulo cavenda est facilitas quoslibet sine delectu admit∣tendi, quae saepè ignominiam aspergit Evangelio atque eò prudentius attendere nos de∣cet quando magnos viros deceptos fuisse audimus, Calv. in loc.
SECT. XIIII. THe Apostles which remained at Jerusalem hearing of the success of Philip's preaching at Samaria thought fit to send PeterHoc observatu dignum est, quod Petrus mittitur, & deputatur à caeteris Apostolis. Ubi igitur primatus Petri, cui Papa superstruit suum? and John, to confirm the new Converts there in the Faith, and to settle all convenient order among them. They accordingly coming thither, by their prea∣ching and exhortation confirmed them in the Doctrine of the Gospel. These believing Samaritans had received the grace of the Spirit, whereby they were enabled to believe in Christ; but the miraculous gifts of the Spirit were not as yet fallen upon any of them; whereupon the Apo∣stles by their earnest prayer unto God obtained this mercy for them, and accordingly by the impositionFrat Apostolica praerogativa per impositionem manuum Ecclesiis impe∣trare charismata Spiritus Sancti ad aedi∣ficationem Ecclesiae necessaria. Hi Sa∣maritani habuerunt quidem antea Spi∣ritum regenerationis, sed non Spiritum Prophetiae, seu dona illa, quae quibus∣dam in Ecclesiâ data erant ad Ecclesiam aedificandam, de quibus agitur 1 Cor. 12.28. Et quum datus esset hic Spiritus, ex∣ercebat se per visibilia effecta, e. g. per eloquutionem variarum linguarum per patrationem miraculorum, &c. Stres. Lucas hic non de communi Spiritûs gra∣tiâ loquitur, quâ nos sibi Deus in filios regenerat, sed de singularibus illis donis, quibus Dominus, initio Evangelii, quos∣dam esse praeditos voluit ad ornandum Christi regnum. Hic autem illorum e∣rat usus, ut quisque pro facultatis suae modo Ecclesiae prodesset, Calv. The imposition of the Apostles hands mentioned here and elsewhere, was not upon all that believed, and were baptized, but on some certain persons, whom they were directed by the Holy Ghost to lay hands upon, not for their confirmation in grace, but as those God intended to imploy in the propagating of his Gospel, See Lightf. in loc. of their hands upon certain persons among them, whom they were directed by the Holy Ghost to lay their hands upon (as those God had appointed to be prea∣chers, and ministers of the Gospel, and whom by these their gifts he would enable to understand the language and sense of the Scripture, and to be instructors of the peo∣ple) those miraculous powers were confer∣red on them. Simon Magus seeing this, and being touched with a secret Ambition to get this power of conferring these miracu∣lous gifts of the Holy Ghost upon whom∣soever he pleased, (which would have made him famous and renowned in the world) he offered the Apostles a sum of (c) money to inable him to do it. Peter inflam'd with an holy indignation at this wretched moti∣on, said unto him, Thy mony perish with thee. Assure thy self, No share, or portion of so glorious a priviledg as this is, belongs unto thee.From this deed of Simons, 'tis called Simony to seek to buy spiritual gifts or offices, with money or gifts. For I perceive thou art not upright before God, but thy hypocrisie and ambiti∣on, by which thy heart is as it were bound and fettered, is as odious to him as the bitterness of Gall can be to any mans taste. Repent therefore, and humble thy self un∣feignedly before the Lord for this wicked project of thine, and earnestly seek his pardon, which if thou wilt do sincerely 'tis not impossible but thou mayst obtain it. Simon at this besought them that they would pray for him, that God would pardon this wick∣edness of his, and not inflict on him such punishments as they see∣med to intimate, were like to fall upon him. When these two Apostles had finished their ministry in those parts they returned to Jerusalem preaching, and disseminating
the Gospel, in the Villages of Samaria as they passed along. Act. 8. v. 14. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John. v. 15. Who when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost. v. 16. (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were bapti∣zed in the Name of the Lord Jesus) v. 17. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost. v. 18. And when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was given, he offerred them money, v. 19. Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the holy Ghost. v. 20. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. v. 21. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. v. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. v. 23. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. v. 24. Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things, which ye have spoken, come upon me. v. 25. And they, when they had testified and preached the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many villages of the Samaritans. v. 16. In nomen Jesu] i. e. in hunc finem, ut testarentur se credere in Dominum Jesum, nec non in Deum Patrem & Spiritum Sanctum, qui simul hic intelligendi sunt per Synecdochen membri, Mat. 28.19. v. 17. Manus imposuerunt illis] Fuit haec ceremonia antiquitùs usitata cum alicu aliquod bonum apprecarentur, & alicui benedicerent, Gen. 48.14. Non quod in Ce∣remoniâ aliqua vis esset, sed quod esset visibile signum cordialis, ac sincerae compreca∣tionis, vel benedictionis. v. 20. q. d. Apostolus, Malim te, & pecuniam tuam perire, quàm me acceptation illius pollui, vid. 2 Reg. 5.16, 17. Pecunia tua tecum maneat in exitium, i. e. tibi ma∣neat, & tibi cedat in exitium, Pisc. v. 21. Non est tibi pars neque sors  pro re. Rom. 9.28. Hinc interpretor in hac re, nempe in dono Spiritus Sancti. Tu potestatem tribui cupis etiam aliis donandi Spiritum Sanctum? Absit. Nam ne ipse quidem portio∣nem ullam habes in hac re, De Dieu. Secundum aliquos,  hic significat beneficia per sermonem Evangelii promissa. v. 22. ] interna cogitatio, consilium, & machinatio cordis. Si forte remittatur] Apostolus non docet dubitantèr precari, sed vehementèr precari, & Simonem eò magis ad poenitendi studium inflammat. v 23 . Vocatur  amaritudo tanta quanta est sellis, vel veneni. De felle amaritudinis, vid. Deut. 29.18. ubi similis phrasis, & Heb. 12.15. De nexu injustitiae, Isa. 58.6. 2 Tim. 2.26. Hisce verbis describit malitiam Simonis, scilicet, hypocrisin, & ambitionem, qua animus ejus veluti devinctus erat, quâque Deum gravissimè offendebat, ut amaritudo sellis offendit hominis gustum, Pisc. v. 24. Sensit se talem esse intus, qualem Apostoli dixerant. Itaque cum ipsos judi∣cet Deo charos, eorum deprecatione uti vult, ut Jobi deprecationi, qui eum laeserant. Grot.
SECT. XV. FRom Samaria, Philip is warned of an AngelMinisterium verbi dignissimum est officium, cum Angelorum interventu ad id vocentur homines. Speciali man∣dato Angeli, & speciali instinctu Spiritus Sancti, v. 29. mittitur Phi∣lippus ad Aethiopem. Sic Petrus speci∣ali visione & instinctu mittitur ad Cor∣nelium, Act. 10. Sic Paulus, & Barna∣bas speciali mandato mittuntur ad Mace∣dones, Act. 16 in a Vi∣sion, that he should go to Gaza, but he must not travel the ordinary road; but the other way which was through the desart, and lay through the mountains. In this way he meets with a great man an Eunuch, Treasurer of Can∣dace Queen of the AethiopiansAethiopia est regio inter Arabiam, & Aegyptum, sub zonâ torridâ. return∣ing in his Chariot from Jerusalem where (being as it seems a proselyte) he had been to worshipFuit vir pius, sed opus habuit ma∣jori illuminatione, & speciali recepti∣one Messiae exhibiti. at the feast of Pentecost. Philip by the instinct, and motion of the Spi∣rit joining himself to his Chariot, finds him well imployedQui cupit Deum habere comi∣tem itineris, in divinis sit occupatus. namely reading the Fifty third Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, and being courteously invited by him to come up into his ChariotEn signum animi discendi cu∣pidi, & de salute solliciti. and to in∣terpret that Scripture to him, (which he acknowledges he did not well understand) Philip accordingly expresses himself ready to serve him therein. The words propriè comprehensio, i. e. pars sermonis, quâ continetur cer∣tum pronunciatum, certá ve pronunci∣ata. the Eunuch was reading are the seventh and eighth verses of that Chapter. He was led as a sheepChristus non tantum passus est, sed patientèr passus est., so opened he not his mouth. The next clause in the Hebrew Text was this. He was taken from prison, and from judg∣mentIsa. 53. v. 8. In Hebraeo est  a coarctatione & à judicio tollitur: in LXX . In ipsius depressione judicium ejus sublatum est. Ju∣dicium aliquando pro jure sumitur, Job 34.5. vid. Lightf. in loc. Aliqui haec verba sic exponunt, De angustiâ, & ju∣dicio sublatus est, hoc est, à passionis. vin∣culis, & morte solutus est, & liberatus per Patrem suum, cum à mortuis resur∣geret: & in depressione ejus, i. e. cruce & morte, judicium ejus, h. e. jus, seu causa ejus asserta est à Deo, vid. Freidl. in loc., that is, hurried from thence to execution; but the Septuagint (which Luke follows, and possibly the Eunuch at this time read) hath inlarged the sense, by change of the phrase, reading it thus, In his de∣pression, or humiliation, his judgment was ta∣ken away, that is, his right was taken away, and no right at all done him, and Who can sufficiently declare the wickedness of that ge∣neration, which dealt so unjustly with him, as to take and cut him off from the land of the living, who was so innocent a person. Philip shews him that the Prophet in this place speaks not of any other person but the Messias, who was now come into the world, and had done and suffered all that was prophesied of him. And having large∣ly instructed him in the Doctrine of Christ, and (as 'tis proba∣ble) concerning Baptism also, the Eunuch desired to be baptized, professing his Faith in Christ. Thereupon Philip immedi∣ately baptized him, which when he had done, he was strait-way transported, and carried outSee 1 King. 18.12. & 2 King. 2.16. of his sight by the SpiritInsigne exemplum quod ministri mittantur à Spiritu Sancto, quippe qui Philippum non tantum inspiratione suâ ad Eunuchum perduxit, sed & deindo transportavit in alium locum ubi conci∣onari debebat.
of the Lord (which might be an evidence to him, that he was sent to him of God, and was no mercenary person, seeing he staid not to receive any reward) and found himself set down at Azotus or Ashdod, one of the five Cities of the Philistins [See Josh. 15.47.] The Eunuch went on his way rejoycing at this won∣derful mercy of God in revealing Christ to him, in whom he be∣lieved for the remission of his sins; But Philip passing through the Country, whither the Spirit had carried him, he prea∣ched the Gospel in all the Cities and Towns thereof, through which he went, till he came to Caesarea Stratonis here it seems he stayed a great while. For fourteen years after t ul coming with the collections of Asia, and Achaia to carry t  o Jeru∣salem he found Philip there with his whole Family,  lodged with him, See Act. 21.8. Act. 8. v. 26. And the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the South, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert. v. 27. And he arose, and went: and behold, a man of Ethiopia, an unuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who hd the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship; v. 28. Was returning, and sitting in his chariot, read Esaias the prophet. v. 29. Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go neer, and joyn thy self to this chariot. v. 30. And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou readest? v. 31. And he said, How can I except some man should guide me? And he desired Philip, that he would come up, and sit with him. v. 32. The place of the Scripture which he read, was this: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so o∣pened he not his mouth: 33. In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away; and who shall de∣clare his generation? For his life is taken from the earth. v. 34 And the Eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, Of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man? v. 35. Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. v. 36. And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the Eunuch said, See, here is water, what doth hinder me to be bapti∣zed? v. 37. And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayst. And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 38. And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. v. 39. And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way rejoycing. v. 40. But Philip was found at Azotus: and passing thorow, he preached in all the cities, till he came to Cesarea. v. 27. Candaces nomen commune Reginarum Aethiopiae fuisse, à Plinio traditum est, lib. 6. cap. 29. v. 40. , ut suprà, v. 23.
CHAP. II.Anno Christi 35. Tiberii 30. Containing the Acts of the Apostles, from Saul's Conversion to his First Journey with Bar∣nabas. SECT. I. SAulSaulus erat ex tribu Benjamin, in quâ tribu c nomen videtur isse usitatm, quod primus Rex Isaelis hoc nomen hbeus, ex eâdem tribu erat. No∣tat nomen aliquem, quem Parentes pre∣cibus à Deo impetrarunt. having for some time made havock of the Church, and still breathing out threatnings and slaughter against the Disciples of Christ, went at length to the Sanhedrim the supream Council at Jerusa∣lem, wherein the Priests made a great part, and were the most active men, (which Cuncil had the Cognizance, and supream Judgment of all matters appertaining to the Jewish Religion and that in the Synagogues, which were withoutSee 2 Chron. 9 8 9.10. the land of Judaea, as well as those within) and obtained of them letters of Commission to the Synagogues of DamascusThis was the chief City of Sy∣ria situate on one side of Mount Libanus, about five or six days journey from Je∣rusalem, a Hahe City but wh re ma∣ny of the dispersed Jews dwelt, and had Synagogues. Hi udaei etsi extra Judaeam hbitabant, tamen communi∣onem suam colebant cum Templo & Synedrio Hierosol mitano. Itaqe à summo faerdote, ynedrii praeside, literas petit aulus ad Synagoga Da∣mascena, ut harum operâ, & interces∣sione à Damascenorum Rege impetra∣ret libertaem inquitendi si qui essent Damasci Christiani, eosque vinciendi, & Hierosolym m perducendi Romani Synedrio permittebant jus prehensionis, & verberum; non tantum in Judaeos Pa∣lestinae, verum etiam extra Palaesti∣nam, ubi erant Synagogae, quae spon∣te su jurisdictionem Synedrii in rebus ad religionem spectantibus agnosce∣bant. Grot., that if he found any there that pofest Christ, he should bring them bound to Jerusalem, that they might be punished. And journeying towards Damascus to prosecute this cruel design, when he came nigh to the City, at mid∣day, a Light from Heaven above the bright∣ness of the Sun, shone round about himHinc discendum quod gratia con∣versionis non datur secundum praevisa merita, aut praevisas bonas dispositiones., and those that journyed with him. When they were all fallen prostrate on the earth, he heard a voice speaking to himExemplum rarae clementiae, quae est in Christo, qui hunc suum persecu∣torem ex coelo dignatur instituere, eique se manifestare. Multum erat quod in∣credulitati Thomae ita succurrit, ut ei la∣tera sua, & cicatrices estenderet, sed hic infidelitati Saulis ita occurrit, ut se ex coelo ipsi conspiciendum exhibeat & propriâ voce seipsum ei praedicet. in the Hebrew tongue, Saul▪ Saul, why persecutest thou me? Saul trembling, and full of fear, said, Lord, Who art thou? The Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; 'Tis hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Saul said, Lord what wilt thou have me to do? Je∣sus answered, Arise go into the City, and there it shall be told thee what thou must do. The mn, that journeyed with Saul rising up from the earth were greatly amazed, and stood speechless, having seen indeed a great Light, and heard a sound of wordsComites Pauli viderunt lucem, & audiverunt vocem, sed non intellexe∣runt articulatum sensum, qui cum illâ voce pemixtus erat, & à solo Saulo au∣diebatur, vi. Joh. 12.28.29. Erant prostrati, & tamen dicuntur stetisse muti. Prostrati surrexerunt quidem, attamen manserunt in loco at∣toniti. Comites percelluntur, ut Judaeis testarentur vocem ex coelo factam ad Saulum., but neither saw Christ who spake, (as Saul
did) nor understood distinctly any thing he spake. Saul also being risen up, there were SealsSquamae oculis ejus inductae ip∣sum effecerant caecum, ut per corpora∣lem caecitatem, caecitatem mentis disce∣ret. Hactenus non fuerat caecus, i. e. non agnoverat caecitatem suam in rebus fidei, sed visus sibi fuerat sapientissimus, Gal. 1.14. vid. Joh. 9.39.41. come over his eyes, so that when he oped them, he could see nothing; Christ teaching him by this bodily blindness the blindness of his soul in spiritual things, which he was before insensible of. Being led therefore by the hand into Damascus he was there three days without sight, and did neither eat, nor drinkSee Mat. 15.32. & Mark 8.2., (men being better able in those hot Countris to en∣dure long fasting, than in our colder Climate) and probably he spent a great part of that time in prayer, and humbling his Soul before the Lord for his former sins, and particularly his vio∣lent persecution of the Church of Christ. And in this time, (as some learnedVid. Ludov. Capell. histo∣riam Apost. pag. 8. men think) he had that extasie, and was rapt up into the third Heaven, where he saw, and heard, what was not lawful for him to utter, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. For from his Con∣version to the writing of that Epistle, fourteen years inter∣curr'd. Now there was at this time a certain Disciple at Damascus, named AnaniasSee Sect. 13. of ch. 1. to whom the Lord spake in a VisionAnaniam allcutus est per reprae∣sentationem aliquam internam; qualis fieri solet in somniis, vel in exsibus., that he should go into the street that is called Straight and inquire in the house of Judas for Saul, telling him that he was then in prayer, and had it revealed to him he should receive his sight. Ananias is startled at this command, being a∣fraid to go to him, because of his former violent persecution of the Saints, and his present commission and authority from the chief Priests to pursue that bloody design; but Christ tells him, he was a chosen Vessel, one whom he had chosen to conveigh the Divine Treasure of his Gospel, not only to the Jews but the Gentiles also, even to the greatest and highest among them, and that he should do and suffer great things for his Name sake. Ana∣nias hereupon went to him, and laying his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus who appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest hither, hath sent me to thee, that thou shouldst receive thy sightNon est putandum Ananiam non plura dixisse Paulo, quàm quae hic nar∣rantur. Nam non tantum ad sanandum, sed etiam ad docendum Paulum fuit mis∣sus. Et quod Act. 26.16, 17, 18. Chri∣stus scribitur dixisse Paulo, id forsan non immediatè ex caelo sed per hunc Anani∣am dixit. Plurima igitur Ananias dixit Paulo quibus ipsum tum de Christianis∣mo, tum de Apostolatu ejus latè, insti∣tuit.; and be filled, and en∣dued with those admirable gifts of the ho∣ly Ghost, which may enable thee in the discharge of that divine Office to which thou art called, and confirm thee in the faith and belief of Jesus. Arise therefore, and be baptized for a Sign and SealSacramenti vis non est alia, quam obsignatio promissionum Evangelii, & medium roborandi fidem. that thy sins are washed away in the blood of Christ▪ and by such an open owning and professing of him, declare thy self to be his true Disciple, Ananias having thus spoken, straitway there fell from Sauls eyes as it were Scales, and he received his sight, and was baptized, and
when he had received meat he was strengthened. And then he continued with the Disciples there certain days. Act. 9. v. 1. And Saul yet breathing out threatnings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, v. 2. And desired of him letters to Damascus, to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. v. 3. And as he journeyed, he came neer to Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven. v. 4. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? v. 5. And he said, Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Je∣sus whom thou persecutest: It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. v. 6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. v. 7. And the men which journeyed with him, stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man. v. 8. And Saul arose from the earth, and when his eyes were opened, he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Da∣mascus, v. 9. And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink. v. 10. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias, and to him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. v. 11. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold, he prayeth, v. 12. And hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and put∣ting his hand on him, that he might receive his sight. v. 13. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: v. 14. And here he hath authority from the chief priests, to bind all that call on thy Name. v. 15. But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel. v. 16. For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my Names sake. v. 17. And Ananias went his way, and entred into the house, and putting his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord, (even Jesus that ap∣peared unto thee in the way as thou camest) hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost. v. 18. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized. v. 19. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the Disciples, which were at Damascus. v. 5. Adversus stimulos calcitrare. Eodem adagio & Euripides & Pindarus, & Menan∣der apud Stobaeum utuntur. A bobus deducta metaphora, qui cùm , aut stimulis recalcitrant, seipsos laedunt. v. 7. Viri comites vocem quidem audiverunt, sed neminem viderunt. At Saulus vi∣dit aliquem, quem comites non videbant. Videtur ipsum gloriosum corpus Domini Jesu vidisse, sicut Stephanus Act. 7. & sicut aliâs, Act. 22.18. & 23.11. & 2 Cor. 12.2. Dicit enim ipsemet expresse, quod Christum viderit post resurrectionem, 1 Cor. 15.8. 1 Cor. 9.1. That Christ at this time was seen of Paul appears v. 27. & ch. 22.14.
but whether this was done by a Vision of the Spirit only, as it happened ch 22.18. or with the eyes of his body before he was blinded, is not made known unto us Certain it is, God could as well strengthen the sight of Paul, that he might see Christ in Hea∣ven opened, as he did the sight of Stephen, Act. 7.56. v. 9. Poenitentiam sic ostendens saevitiae in Ecclesiam exercitae. Hoc est quod He∣braei dicunt . v. 15. , est, praedicatione Evangelii Christum ejusque bene∣ficia mundo cmmendare; sed quod de Regibus dicitur quomodo impetum? Nusquam legitur quod Regibus Evangelium praedicaverit, nisi soli Agrippae, Act. 26, quem ta∣mn lucratu non est: sed non tantum hic intelliguntur Reges, sed Magnates, qurum multis Evangelium praedicavit, tandem etiam fortassis ipsi Imperatori, Act. 27.24. Et deinde viru ministerii Paulini non est restringenda ad tempus vitae ipsius. Cando enim, quam vivus accendit, etiam post mortem ejus multis illuxit, parvis, & magnis, eosque ad idem Christi adduxit. Act 22. V. 5. As also the high priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate of th elders: from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to Dmscus to bring them which were there, bound unto Jeru∣salem, for to be punished. v. 6. And it came to pass, that as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto Dmscus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me. v. 7. And I fll unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Sul, why prscuest thou m? v. 8. And I nswered, Who art thou, Lord? and he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nzarth whom thu prscutest. v. 9. And they that wre with the law indeed the light, and were afraid; but they herd not th voice of him that spak to me. v. 10. And I said, Wht shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and g into Dsus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for th to do. v. 11. Ad when I cold not see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of thm that were with me, I came into Damascus: v. 12. And one Annis, a devout man according to the law, having a good rport of all the Jws which dwelt there, v. 13. Cam unto me, and stood, and sad unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him. v. 14. And he said, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst know hs will, and see that just One, and shouldst hear the voice of his mouth v. 15. For thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and hard. v. 16. And now, why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash a∣way thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. Act. 26. v. 12. Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and com∣mission from the chif prists, v. 13. At mid-day, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me, and them which journeyed with me. v. 14. And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Sul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. v. 15. And I said, Who art thou Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. v. 16. But arise, and stand up upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witnss, both of these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee.
v. 17. Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I now send thee, v. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me. SECT. II.An. Christi 36, 37. Tiberii 21, 22. THe Lord now reveales to Saul what he would have him do; and among other things, he was taught that he should not confer with flesh and blood, nor debate the matter, either with himself or others, (who might cause him to question the reality of his Call, or discourage him from yielding obedience to it, by representing dangers to him); nor go to Jerusalem to those that were Apostles before him (to consult with them and be in∣structed by them, or to obtain a permission or commission from them to discharge his Office, he being so extraordinarily, and im∣mediately called, and instructed by Christ himself) but that he should go for some time into Arabia, and the places near Da∣mascus. Being now therefore well instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, he begins straitway to preach Christ in the Sy∣nagogues of the JewsSemper enim Apostoli primùm Judaeos affati sunt, ut aut eos converte∣rent, aut omnem eis excusationem adi∣merent. in that City, and to declare to them, and convince them by plain demonstrations, that he is the true Messias, and the Son of God; the praedi∣ctions of the Prophets, concerning the Messias being exactly fulfilled in his person. They that heard him were amazed at this thing, knowing what he had done at Jerusalem, and with what intent he came up to Damascus. When he had for some time preached Christ here, he went into Arabia, where for the space of about three years he preached the Gospel, and then return∣ing to Damascus again, and strenuously preaching the Doctrine of Christ in that City, the Jews being enraged at him consul∣ted to kill him, and being encouraged by the Governours un∣der Aretas King of Arabia, (who kept the City with a Garri∣son) they watched the gates day and night, that they might take him, and put him to death; but he being let down by the Disciples in a BasketSee 1 Sam. 19.12. over the Wall in the night, escaped their hands. Gal. 1. v. 11. But I certifie you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me, is not after man. v. 12. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. v. 13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews re∣ligion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: v. 14. And profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
v. 15. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, v. 16. Hoc vlt Aposto∣lus, Se non homines con∣suluisse uid sibi esset faciendum, sed solo Spiritûs divini motu & instinctu actum, & ab ipso Christo in raptu triduano post conversionem suam edoctum, statim praedicasse Christum. Neque hoc est ali∣cuju arrogantiae, sed justae defensionis contra criminationes aliorum, quasi non esset plenus Apo∣stolus, utpote qui ipsum Christum, ut reliqui, non habuisset magistrum, Freidl.v. 16. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the hea∣then, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood. v. 17. Neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles be∣fore me, but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Act. 9. v. 20. And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God. v. 21. But all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this Name in Jerusalem, and came hi∣ther for that intent that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests? v. 22. ] Verbum  sig∣nificat, efficere condescensionem ut sic dicam, i. e. argumentis propositis efficere ut aliquis tecum in eandem sententiam descendat.  scilicet  i. e. assentiri eos cogens quòd hic Jesus sit Christus, Pisc.v. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ. v. 23. And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him. v. 24. But their laying await was known of Saul, and they watched the gats day and night to kill him. v. 25. Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a bask. Act. 26. v. 19. Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision. v. 20. But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and Jerusalem, and tho∣rowout all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. 2 Cor. 11. v. 32. In Damascus the governour under Aretas the king, kept the city with a garison, desirous to apprehend me: An. Christi 38. Tiberii 23. In which year he dyes, and Caius Caligula succeeds.v. 33. And thorow a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands. SECT. III. SAƲL escaping in this manner at Damascus, he goes from thence to Jerusalem, to visit PeterHe desired to go see Peter, and to have some acquaintance with him; not for any homage to his Primacy (as the Papists plead) for he maketh no distin∣ction between him, and James, and John, in point of dignity, Gal. 2.9. nay is so fr from homaging him, that he re∣buketh him, and reproveth him, Gal. 2.11. But he desired to be acquainted th Peter, because he understood he was the Minister of the Circumcision, as he himself was to be of the Uncir∣cumcision, Gal 2.8. and because there had been some kind of Parallel betwixt them in their recovery; the one having denyed, and forsworn Christ, and th other having violently persecuted h in his members., and the other Apostles, in the fourth year after his Conversion; but essay∣ing to join himself to the Disciples there, they were all afraid of him, not believing him to be a true Disciple, and sincere Con∣vert, till BarnabasPossibly there had been some ac¦quaintance in former times betwix Paul, and Barnabas, they being bot Grecizing Jews; the one of Cypras, the ¦ther of Cilicia; and both probb brought up and educated at Jerusale see Act. ch. 4. v. 36 bringing him to Peter, and James the Kinsman of Christ (for of the rest of the Apostles he saw none, they being as it seems at this time gone abroad to pro∣pagate
the Gospel) declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way, who had spoken to him from heaven, and that he had boldly preached in the name of Christ at Damascus with the hazard of his life, and so he was set right in their opinion, and con∣versed familiarly with them. Whilst he is here, he preaches Christ undauntedly, and disputes with the HellenistsSee Sect. 9. of Chap. 1., (or Jews that cohabiting among the Greek Nations, used the Greek Tongue, and the Septuagints Tran∣slation of the Old Testament) proving to them that Jesus was the true Messias, who were so enraged at him, that they went about to kill him. But being in the Tem∣ple in prayer, he fell into a trance, wherein he saw Christ, who bad him make haste out of Jerusalem, for there they would not receive his Testimony. Against this, he humbly argued with the Lord, alledging, That his former zeal against Christ, and his Doctrine having been so remarkable, and notorious a∣mong the Jews in this place, it might be an argument to them, that so strange a change as this was not wrought in him but up∣on great and sufficient grounds and reasons, and so he might in all likelyhood be a more fit instrument to propagate the Gospel here, by how much the more he had opposed it formerly. But this did not prevail for staying at Jerusalem, but Christ commands him to depart from thence, telling him, he would send him to preach to the Gentiles. Saul hereupon readily obeys, and forth∣with departs from thence having stayed there only Fifteen days; several brethren that dwelt at Jerusalem accompanying him as far as Caesarea, from whence he sailed to Tarsus his own City, the Metropolis of Cilicia; and from thence was shortly after fetch∣ed by Barnabas unto Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria; being all this while not so much as known by face to the Churches of Judeae, which had embraced the Faith; only they had heard of his preaching the Doctrine of Christ, which before he had per∣secuted, and they glorified God for his Grace so powerfully ma∣nifested in him. Act. 9. v. 26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to joyn himself to the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple. v. 27. But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the Apostles, and declared unto them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the Name of Jesus. v. 28. And he was with them coming in, and going out at Jerusalem. v. 29. And he spake boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: but they went about to slay him. v. 30. Which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to Ce∣sarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.
Gal. 1. v. 18. Then after three years I went to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. v. 19. But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords bro∣ther. v. 20. Ju∣ramentum adhibet, ut Rom. 1.9 2 Cor. 1.23. Causa autem gravis erat, ut crederetur Apostolus à Christo factus non ab aliis Apo∣stolis substitutus.v. 20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God I lie not. v. 21. Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia, v. 22. And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judea, which were in Christ. v. 23. But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times past, now preacheth the faith, which once he destroyed. v. 24. And they glorified God in me. Act. 22. v. 17. And it came to pass, that when I was come again to Jerusa∣lem, even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance, v. 18. And saw him saying unto me, Make haste and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me, v. 19. And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every sy∣nagogue them that believed on thee. v. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was stan∣ding by and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. v. 21. And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles. An. Christi 39. Caii Cali∣gula 1.SECT. IV. NOw after Sauls miraculous Conversion, the Churches which were planted by Philip, and others (who fled from Jeru∣salem upon the persecution raised by him, Act. 8.1.) through all Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, had much rest and peace, and were greatly edifyed, and built up in Knowledg, Faith and Love, the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit daily increasing in them, and the number of believers was daily augmented. In this time Peter went forth to visit the Churches newly plan∣ted in those parts, and to confirm them in the Faith. Who com∣ing at last, to the Saints which dwelt at Lydda, he there in the Name, and by the Power of Christ heals Aeneas, who lay sick of the Palsey, and had kept his bed Eight years. Upon this Miracle the inhabitants of Lydda and Saron generally received the Faith, seeing this man to be so strangely, suddenly, and per∣fectly cured. From thence he goes to Joppa, where he finds a very good woman full of good works (whose name in Syriac was Tabitha, but in Greek Dorcas, signifying a Roe) newly deadNon mortua est Dorcas, ut mi∣seriam fuam finiret, & in gloriae posses∣sionem transferretur, sed ut esset obje∣ctum in quo Christus suam gloriam ma∣nifestaret, & suorum Apostolorum au∣ctoritatem ac vocationem confirmaret, planè ut Joh. 11.4. whom they had washedMos lavandi, & pollinciendi ca∣davera mortuorum non est ceremonia Judaica divinitus instituta, sed est con∣suetudo tum Judaeorum tum Gentilium sapientiorum, orta ex naturali instinctu & spe futurae resurrectionis. Sic Enmus Tarquini corpus bona faemina lavit & unxit. Huc accommodndum illud Pau∣li, 1 Cor 15.29. q. d. si non est animis nostris naturaliter inscriptum, futurum aliquam resurrectionem mortuorum, quid est quod plerique homines tantum curae, & lotionis adhibent super cadave∣ribus mortuorum? Stres., and laid out according to the mannner of the Ancients, who as some think did thereby intend to signifie their hope of a Resurrection. Peter being brought up into the Chamber where
she lay, the poor Widdows, which had been cloathed by her liberality came weeping to him, and shewed him the evidenceTextilia manuum ejus monumenta. Videmus hinc quae sint optimae Sanctorum reliquiae, quibus post mortem possunt manere in memoriâ hominum, scil. benefacta in pauperes. of her Charity, the Coats and Garments which she made, or caused to be made for them. Upon this Peter putting them all forth knee∣led down, and prayed, and then raised her to lifeHabemus in Scriptura octo ad minimum exempla eorum qui verè mortui in vitam redierunt, viz. filium viduae Sareptanae, 1 Reg. 17.19 filium sunamitidis, 2 Reg. 4.32. Virum in Sepul∣chro Elizae vivificatum, 2 Reg. 13.21. Filiolam Jairi, Mar. 5.22. Filium viduae Naimiticae, Luc. 7.11. Lazarum, fratrem Mariae & Marthae, Joh. 11.33. Ipsum Dominum Jesum Christum, Mat. 28. Ta∣bitham hauc, Act. 9. Praeter illam innumeratam turbam sanctorum quae cum Christo resurrexit, & in urbe sanctâ visa est, Mat. 27.52.53. Haec exempla probant resurrectionem mortuorum, quam speramus, & quae toties in Scripturâ promissa est, non esse impossibilem sed certò futuram. againSee Mat. 9.25. Mar. 5.41.. And by these miracles very many in those Quarters were brought to believe in Jesus. Act. 9. v. 31. Then had the churches rest thorowout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied. v. 32. And it came to pass, as Peter passed thorowout all quarters, he came down also to the Saints which dwelt at Lydda. v. 33. And there he found a certain man named Aeneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsie. v. 34. And Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole: arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately. v. 35. And all that dwelt at Lydda, and Saron, saw him, and turned to the Lord. v. 36. Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas: This woman was full of good works, and alms-deeds which she did. v. 37. And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick and died: whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper Chamber. v. 38. And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come to them. v. 39. Then Peter arose and went with them: when he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber. And all the widows stood by him weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them. v. 40. But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed, and turning him to the body, said, Tabitha, Arise. And she opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up. v. 41. And he gave her his hand, and lift her up: and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive. v. 42. And it was known thorowout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord. v. 43. And it came to pass, that he tarried many days in Joppa, with one Simon a tanner.
An. Chsti 40. C. Caligulae 2.SECT. V. DUring Peter's stay at Joppa, Cornelius a RomanHtenus descripsit Evangelista praecipua acta Apostolorum inter Hiero∣solymitanos, Judaeos & Samaritanos; Nunc incipit describere acta eorum in∣tr gente & hoc capite conversionem imi Ethnici describit in quo Apostoli didicrunt in posterum etiam Ethnicis Elium praedicare. Conversi an∣te fuerant Samaritani, conversus quo∣que Eunuchus Aethiops, sed hi potius inter Proselyto & circumcisos adeoque inter Judaeos numerandi, cum per pro∣fssionem Religionis Judaicae, Ecclesiae fuerint insiti. Cornelius autem est pri∣m incircumcisus, cui annunciatum est Evanglium. In eo ergo ordinaria gen∣tim vocatio incaepit. There were two things shl mainly differenced the Jews f m other people, Circision, and Singularity of Dit, or Proibition of cr∣tain meats. But the more proper diffe∣rece was the tter. For  the ale  d of Arham was ccucised nd  in rerd of that ceremon, there was no difference btwixt an  and a Jew. But bsining  such and such meats, w a  mono, a singuity,  an Is¦r . Ad  any mats  lerty of conver∣sing wth any  and their the en∣larging  one in the enlarging the o∣the. T Hthen w  off at the confusion of el, and had lain so long in Darkne, Sin, Superstition and Ido∣ltry, and all the world (Israel only excepted) were strangers to God. Peter the Minister o the Circumcision was ap∣pointed the instrument of bringing in the Gentiles. Some think Christ inten∣ded this, when in Mat. 16.19. he gave him the kys of the Kingdom of heaven, and threby put into his hands a pecu∣liar priviledg to open the door of Faith and the Gospel to the Gentiles, and gi∣veth him withall, power to bind and loose the use of Moses's Law among the Heathens when he brought the Gospel among them; some of it being to fall and some to stand, according as the Spirit should drect him; and according∣ly it shoud be ratified in Heaven, See Lightf. in loc., and Captain of a Band of Italian Souldiers, who with others kept Garrison for the Romans at CaesareaCaesarea was the City where the Roman Governour or Pro Consul resided, see Act. 23.23. & 24.6. and tht partly for the bravery o the City, but chiefly for the commodiousness o the Haven. (being a very pious and religiousCornelius non erat extùs Judaeus aut Proselytus. Judaicam religionem publicè nondum profitebatur, sed tamen sacram Scripturam, inter Judaeos con∣versans, legerat, & ex illa veri Dei cog∣nitionem aliquam hauserat, miseriam suam agnoverat, gratiae & salutis cupi∣dus erat factus, fortè etiam generalem aliquam cognitionem venturi Messiae imbiberat. Habet regeneratio suos gra∣dus. Primus gradus est contritio & emol∣litio cordis, quâ quis adigitur ad sensum peccati & miseriae; quo sensu gravatus sitit & esurit liberationem. Secundus gradus est, agnitio Christi, quâ quis de suf∣ficientiâ Christi ad liberandum convi∣ctus, seipsum abnegat & ad Christum confugit, eique vivâ fiduciâ cordis inseri∣tur, & cum filiali fiducia liberationis in ipsum recumbit, & filialis in Deum amor in crde ejus accenditur cujus ductu & impulsu servit Deo ingenuâ obedien∣tiâ & novâ vitâ. Primus gradus vocari solet spiritus servitutis & est propriè ef∣fectus legis: posterior spiritus adoptionis & est propriè effectum Evangelii. Fieri potest in Cornelius habuerit primum gradum regenerationis, scil. ut fuerit contritus corde & onustus sensu mise∣riae, sitiensque gratiam, eamque quae∣rens; sed non novit veram viam inve∣niendi & verum medium quaerendi, sed sine dubio eam quaesivit per propria o∣pera & honestam vitam; quae tamen opera Deus propter veram contritio∣nem cordis non aspernatus, sed se iis mo∣veri passus est ad dandos majores rege∣nerationis gradus ad salutem necessarios. Non enim est contra sanam Theologiam, quod primitiae gratiae regenerantis bene usurpatae, sint causae impetrantes gratiam majorem. Habenti enim dabitur ut a∣bundantius habeat, Mat. 13.12. Mora∣libus virtutibus, quibus homo seipsum ab aliis per liberum arbitrium naturale nonnihil discernit, nullis promissioni∣bus alligata est gratia regenerationis sal∣visica: sed initiis gratiae regenerantis bene usurpatis est alligata, Joh. 7.17. Et praecipue contritum cor habet mag∣nas promissiones, Psal. 51.19. Isa. 57.15. Stres. per∣son, and one that worshipped the true God, with all his Family, and was very charita∣ble to the poor, though only a Proselyte of the GateThere were two sorts of Proselytes. 1. Proselytus foederis or justitiae, who submitted himself to Circumcision and to the whole Mosaical Paedagogy. 2. Proselytus portae, a Proselyte or Stran∣ger within their Gates, Deut. 14.21. such were suffered to live among them though not circumcis'd, neither did they conform to the Mosaical rites and Ordinances, only were obliged to ob∣serve the seven precepts of Noah of which see Godw. Jewish Antiq. pag. 10. (as they called them), and un∣circumcised) had in that City, as he was Fasting and Praying, about three of the Clock in the afternoonThough Corneliu was not pro∣selyted to the Jewish Church, yet he followed their manner and form of Worship. This was the hour of their Evening Sacrifice. a Vision of an holy Angel, (not in an extasie or rapture of Spirit, or in a dream, but waking, ocu∣larly and sensibly) who appearingAngeli frequenter solebant fieri visible assimiendo formam hominis & humano dentes motus, quod & ipse fili∣us Dm V. T. saepinsculè fecit in prae∣ludium s Incarnationis. to him, told him, that his prayers and almsPrtionem subvehi alis dua∣bu, aiunt veteres, jejunio & misericor∣diae operibus. had found acceptance with God. And the Lord designing to manifest his Grace now in a more especial manner unto him, com∣manded him to send to Joppa, to inquire for one Simon Peter, who should come un∣to him and further instruct himMajor erat legatio Apostolica, quam Angelica. Angelus Apostolum monstrat; Apostolus Christum: tantum honorem tstibus suis habuit Christus. Cur non ipse Angelus edocet quid Cor∣nelio faciendum sed ad Petrum remittit? Quia non Angeli sunt instrumenta rege∣nerationis & sanctificationis sed ministri Evangelii. Sic Deus Saulum remittit ad Ananiam, Act. 8.26. Quo exemplo non immerito monentur Magistratus Politici, ne spiritualem administratio∣nem regni Christi ad se rapiant; fed eam relinquant iis qui à Deo ad hoc vo∣cati sunt. con∣cerning the Mind and Will of God toward him. Cornelius immediately yeilds obedi∣ence hereunto, and accordingly sends two of his Domestick Servants, and a devout Souldier that constantly attended him, to Peter who was now at Joppa. Peter about the time that Cornelius his messengers drew near the City, knowing nothing of their coming, went up of his own accord, about noon to the Battlements of the house as a place of privacy to pray in; and be∣ing there he became very hungry and desi∣red to eat: but whilst they made ready, he fell into a trance, such as in which men were wont to receive Visions from Heaven. And in a Vision of his SpiritGod revealed himself to his peo∣ple of old, 1. By Dreams and Visions in the night when they were asleep. 2. By Apparitions when they were a∣wake. 3. By Voice from Heaven. 4. By Urim. 5. By inspiration. 6. By Rapture and Extasie. (without the help of his outward Senses) he saw a great sheetPer hoc Vas commodissimè intel∣ligitur totus mundus cum quatuor suis plagis. Ecclesia N. T. colligitur ex toto mundo, & ex omnibus quatuor mundi angulis. Huic visioni adjungi∣tur vox scilicet imaginaria quae Petro dixit macta & comede: macta, h. e. para Domino in sacrificium gratum., full of all sorts of living crea∣tures, clean and unclean, let down unto him from Heaven, and a voice spake to him, that he should eat freely and indifferently of any of them: which he doubting to do, the Voice spake again to him, saying, What God hath cleansed call not thou common. By which Vision he is taught that he should not
despise the Gentiles nor account them un∣clean, but converse with them and preach freely unto them as well as to the Jews; and hereby also was intimated that God had taken away those interdicts and prohi∣bitions concerning some meats, and conse∣quently those differences and separations between Jews and GentilesDiscrimen inter Judaeos & Gen∣tes per discrimen ciborum adumbratum erat. signified by them, and therefore he was not to make a di∣stinction where God now made none. Whilst Peter thought on these things, Cornelius's messengers were come to the house where he was, and asking for Peter delivered their Mssge unto him: The Apostle the next d very readily went along with them, (bing incouraged thereto by an inward revlaion or afflaion of the SpiritVidei Spiritus Sanctus internas cogitationes ac dubitationes Petri super hac visione easque prohibet & declarat se esse eum qui miserit eos viros. Qui loquitur & prohibet ac jubet, persona est. Qui cogitationes cordis videt, Deus est. Qui ministros Evangelii vocat, imò qui Angelos mittit ad aliquid expedien∣dum, divinam authoritatem habet. At∣que haee omnia de se dicit Spiritus San∣ctus. Est igitur Deus verus.) and some other believing Jews also accom∣panied him to Caesarea. When he was come thither, Cornelius being stricken with an extraordinary reverence at the presence of so great a Srvant of God, and exceeding the bounds of meer civil respect, fell down at his feet and worshipped him. But Peter would by no means receive that honour from him, but told him that he was an ordi∣nary man, such an one as himself; though thus employ'd at present in Gods message unto him. Then entring into the house he found many of Cornelius's Kinsmen and Friends there met together; to whom ad∣dressing himself, he spake after this man∣ner, Ye all know that its counted unlawfulIllicitum non lege Mosis sed decreto sapientûm quod pari loco cum lege habebatur. Ubi e∣nim interdictum homini Judaeo sese commiscere cum alienigenis? Expressum praeceptum de hac re non legimus nisi illud particulare de non contrahendo cum incircumcisis matrimonio nec faciendis cum illis foederibus, praesertim cum illis septem gentibus Anathemati devotis Deut. 7. à 1 ad 7. Etsi autem lex sola conjugia & politica foedera cum Ethnicis interdicit, tamen constitutionibus hu∣manis, ac consuetudinibus paternis illa lex fuit ampliata, ut etiam à conviviis & convictu & privato congressu Ethnicorum abstinuerint; unde etiam gentes omnes contempserunt tanquam canes. Non igitur tam divinae institutionis, quam humanae consuetudinis erat, abstinere à congresso politico cum Ethnicis. for us Jews to converse familiarly with you Gentiles, but God hath now by a Vision from Heaven, and the inspiration of his Spi∣rit, shewed me that I should not make any difference between Jews and Gentiles. For I perceiveLegerat hoc antea Petrus in Prophetiis V. T. de futurâ vocatione Gentium; audiverat ex ore Christi mandatum dantis de docendis omnibus gentibus, sed rem non comprehenderat, non in∣tellexerat, convictus non erat donec non solum per visionem ex coelo esset instructus, sed etiam propriis oculis videret hunc incircumcisum Cornelium à Deo donatum initiis verae conversionis. Nulla ferè est veritas quam non audiunt homines saepe propositam declaratam, demonstratam & tamen centessimâ tndem concione, vix intelligunt, comprebendunt, credunt. Videmus etiam regenitos posse graves errare errores in re religionis. that the Partition wall is now broken down, and that national Preroga∣tives or personal excellencies find no accep∣tance with God, but any man of any Na∣tion whatsoever, if he fear God and work righteousness, is accepted with him. Hear ye therefore the Doctrine. Hebraismus pro , hoc illud verbum, i. e. hoc patet & manifestum est ex ilio verbo, quod Deus misit Israeli. Haec est descriptio Evangelii prout missum est itis in V. T. per Prophetas. which God appointed his Prophets of old to publish to the Children of Israel, to wit, that of reconciliation and peace between God and man by Christ Jesus, (who is Lord of all). Which Doctrine, was first published in Ga∣lilee,
presently after John Baptist began to preach and baptize, which you cannot but have heard of, and how God indued the humane nature of Christ with the fulness of the graces of his Holy Spirit and with power to work Miracles, and anointed and consecrated his whole person to the the office of the Mediator, which he ac∣cordingly executed with much tenderness and compassion, going about doing good, curing diseases and casting out Devils, for God was with him in the fulness of the Deity, as he was his eternal Son [Col. 2.9.] and in power, grace, and favour, as he was man and Mediator [Joh. 8.29. & 16.32.] And though the Jews put him to death and cru∣cified him, yet God raised him up the third day and manifested him openly, not to all the Jews, but to his Apostles and Disciples that attended on him, who were chosen for this end that they might testifie what Di∣vine Doctrine he preached and what Mi∣racles he wrought, and might be witnesses particularly of his resurrection, having had the honour to eat and drink with him and to see him eat and drink after he rose from the dead. To these he gave command that they should preach his Gospel to the world, and should testifie that he is appointed of God, to be Judg of all men, even of all that shall dye before, or shall be found a∣live at his Coming. And he further shews them, That this Jesus is he whom all the Prophets foretold as the sole Author of Reconciliation with God, and Remission of sins through faith in him.
Whilst Peter was thus preaching to Cornelius's family and those other persons there present, they were by the powerful work of the Spirit of God converted to Christ, and the holy Ghost by his wonderful Graces and Gifts, viz. of Illuminati∣on, Regeneration and the gift of Tongues descended on them all, of his own accord, without any laying on of hands by Pe∣ter, to the great wonder and astonishment of the believing Jews, that had accompanied the Apostle thither, who thought this Promise, of sending down the holy Ghost, belonged only to the House of Israel. Then Peter seeing what was done, and how these Gentiles had been baptized with the holy Ghost, concluded that they ought to be baptized with Water, and re∣ceive the external sign or seal of incorporation into Christs Bo∣dy, the Church; therefore commanding all things to be made ready, either He baptized them himself, or gave order that some of those who accompanied him (who probably were Mi∣nisters and Teachers), should do it. This done, they desi∣red him to stay some days with them, that they might be fur∣ther instructed confirmed and comforted by his Ministry. Act. 10. v. 1. There was a certain man in Cesarea, called Cornelius, a cen∣turion of the band, called the Italian band, v. 2. A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway. v. 3. He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day, an an∣gel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. v. 4. And when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. v. 5. And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose sirname is Peter. v. 6. He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner whose house is by the sea-side; he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do. v. 7. And when the angel which spake unto Cornelius, was departed, he called two of his houshold servants, and a devout souldier of them that waited on him continually. v. 8. And when he had declared all these things unto them, he sent them to Joppa. v. 9. On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the house to pray, about the sixth hour. v. 10. And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance, v. 11: And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet, knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth: v. 12. Wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. v. 13. And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter: kill and eat. v. 14. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean. v. 15. And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed that call not thou common.
v. 16. This was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into heaven. v. 17. Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had seen, should mean: behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius, had made enquiry for Simons house, and stood before the gate, v. 18. And called, and asked whether Simon which was sirnamed Peter, were lodged there. v. 19. While Peter thought on the vision, the spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee. v. 20. Arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them. v. 21. Then Peter went down to the men, which were sent unto him from Cornelius, and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are come? v. 22. And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that feareth God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned from God by an holy angel, to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee. v. 23. Then called he them in, and lodged them: And on the morrow Pe∣ter went away with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompa∣nied him. v. 24. And the morrow after they entred into Cesarea: and Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his kinsmen and near friends. v. 25. And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him. v. 26. But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my self also am a man. v. 27. And as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were come together. v. 28. And he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation: but God hath shewed me, that I should not call any man com∣mon or unclean. v. 29. Therefore came I unto you without gain-saying, assoon as I was sent for. I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me? v. 30. And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was falling until this hour, and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and behold a man stood before me in bright clothing, v. 31. And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God. v. 32. Send therefore to Joppa, and call hither Simon, whose sirname is Pe∣ter: he is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner, by the sea-side, who when he cometh, shall speak unto thee. v. 33. Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and thou hast well done, that thou art come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. v. 34. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons. v. 35. But in every nation, he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him. v. 36. The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, (he is Lord of all). v. 37. That word (I say) you know which was published thorowout all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached: v. 38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with powr, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil: for God was with him.
v. 39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree: v. 40. Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly. v. 41. Not to all the people, but unto witnesses, chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. v. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testifie that it is he which was ordained of God to be the judg of quick and dead. v. 45. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his Name who∣soever believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins. v. 44. While Peter yet spake these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. v. 45. And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many as came with Peter; because that on the Gentiles also was pow∣red out the gift of the holy Ghost. v. 46. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnifie God. Then answered Peter, v. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? v. 48. And he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry certain days. V. 2. ] Incircumcisus sed qui idololatriâ relictâ uni Deo se dederat, & quae pie∣tati consentanea judicabat, sequebatur v. 10. ] Hc loco significat constitutionem hominis extra se rapti. Cecidit super eum exstasis, id est. in exstasim incidit: nam proprie loquendo non  in nos sed nos in  incidimus. v. 11. Videbtur linteum illud à coelo pendere ut significaretur libertas coelitùs indul∣ta. ] quorum multa immunda, Lev. 1.27. v. 15. ] id est, noli tu pro polluto habere. Do not thou pollute, that is, Do not thou call or count polluted, that which God hath made lawful. 'Tis the use of the Scripture, very frequently to speak as in an effective or active sense, and to intend only a declarative; and in the very same sense is the binding and loosing to be understood, Mat. 16.19. & 18.18. for teaching what is bound, and what loose; what lawful, and what unlawful, Lightf. There was a distinction of clean and unclean beasts before the Flood, as appears Gen. 7.8. But this was in reference to sacrifice only, and not in reference to dyet. After the Flood God gave Noah liberty to eat any thing that was wholesom for det; and in this liberty the world continued till the Law given at Sinai, save only that the Israelites did not eat the sinew that shrank, which was the first distinguisher that ever began to inclose Israel for a peculiar from other people, Gen. 32. Pecudes immundae à mensis semotae non modò ante legem sed & ante diluvium, Gen. 7.2. Ea tamen distinctio tandem sublata est ut umbra rerum futurarum, quarum corpus erat in Christo, Col. 2.17. Ex mundis sanguinem attingere nefas, Gen. 9.4. tum quia in sanguine est anima, i. e. vita pecudis, tum quia Deus sanguinem destina∣verat ad expiationem faciendam in altari pro animabus nostris, Lev. 17.11. Quod cum mere sit ceremoniale, nihil quicquam causae fuit cur Apostoli gentibus sanguinem ad tempus prohiberent, Act. 15.20. quam spes Judaeos infirmos hac ratione lucrifaci∣endi, qui ab esu sanguinis tantopere abhorrebant, ut eos omnes populos gladio destru∣endos scribnt qui rennunt huic mandato se subjicere. Ideo hoc observatum quamdiu visum est Judaeo in hisce ritibus educatos, posse ad Christum allici. At post de illorum conversine desperari jam coeptum, etiam hoc interdictum ut partem legis ceremonia∣lis abrogvit Apostolus, 1 Cor. 10.25. & alibi non raro. Itaque Augustini aevo si qui putarent ab esu sangunis eà lege se prohiberi, à caeteris irridebantur, ut docet contra Faustum, lib. 32. c. 13. Bochartus. v. 20. Ego misi eos] Activum pro duplici activo, i. e. Feci ut mitterentur. v 22. Alter ille Gen ui huic non dssimilis, Luc. 7.5. v. 30. Hora nonâ orbm  imiatus in hoc Judaeos. v. 36.  sub . Audite igitur sermonem illum quem misit, i. e. promulgacit sius Israel annncians pacem per Jesum Christum, hic est omnium Dominus, velquie mnium Dominu. v. 37. Bptimus Jhnnis se sumitur pro doctrinâ Johannis. Sicut sit, Mat. 21.25. Ast. 18.25. & 19.3.4. Doctrina Johannis erat, Messiam olim expectatum jam venisse
in Mundum & propediem esse revelandum. Tempus igitur esse ut unusquisque per ve∣ram poenitentiam se paret ad filium Dei vera side receipiendum, Mat. 3.2. Si hunc re∣jiciant, adesse terribilem illum diem reprobandi totius populi, Mal 4.1. v. 39 Dicuntur Judaei Christum suspendisse à ligno quia praetextu seditionis con∣tra Csarem Pilato persuaserunt ut Romano more eum crucisigeret, clmntes, cruci∣sige, crucisige. Factum hoc secundam consilium Domini qui in Veteri Tesamento prae∣figuraverat hunc modum mortis Christi. v. 41. Christus edisse memoratur, Luc. 24.34. ut verum se hominem etiam à re∣surrectione demonstraret. Edit non quia opus habuit, sed quia oluit. Christus etsi glorificatus tamen nondum voluit uti sua ple â glor á sed accommodavit se homini∣bus & cum illis ut homo conversatus est. Edit, cum non indigeret, Inde colligo eum etiam bbisse: utrumque enim est hominis ut vivat: exprimere autem id, necesse non fuit, quia potus passim sub cib comprehenditur. Invitat Christus à resurrectione dis∣cipulos suos ad prandium, Joh. 21.12. , inquit . Ipse panem distri∣bt ae pisces. Verisimilé nè est pransos discipulos sine potu? quod si & ipsum ser∣vatorem pransum cum illis dicamus, cum alimento potum rectè conjungimus, De Dieu. v. 43. In fide nostra sunt duo distincti actus qui requirunt duplex fundamentum: In fide requiritur, 1. Certitudo intellectus ut de veritate ejus quod credimus simus cer∣ti & in dabii. Hujus certitudinis fundamentum est testimonium Apostolorum. 2. Fi∣ducia cordis, qua cor oneratum & onere peccati fessum, anhelans acquiescit & se su∣stentat. Hujus fundamentum est Christus. In Christum collocatur haec siducia, & nunquam in Apostolos. v. 44. This was a second confirmation that the Gentiles were to be taken in. For when G ured out the holy Ghost upon the Uncircumcision, as well as upon the Cir∣cumc it was evidence sufficient that now God had made no difference betwixt them. v.  st fruit of te gift of tongues was that they that had it were enabled to spek &  Originals of the Scripture, Lightf. v. 48. Apostoli ad baptizandos homines etiam aliorum utebantur operâ. SECT. VI. THe Apostles and Brethren that were in Judea, namely Those that had been converted out of Judaism to Christ hearing of this, when Peter came shortly after to Jerusalem, began to quarrel with him, that he had conversed with Ʋn∣circumcised persons, and eaten with them. But when he had declared unto them the whole matter (which he confirmed by the Testimony of those six persons that accompanied him to Caesarea), they were satisfied, and glorified God, who also has given unto the Gentiles repentance unto life, graciously chan∣ging their hearts, and drawing them to believe in Christ. Act. 11. v. 1. And the Apostles, and brethren that were in Judea, heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God. v. 2. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him, v. 3. Saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them. v. 4. But Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order unto them, saying, v. 5. I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, a certain vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from hea∣ven by four corners, and it came even to me. v. 6. Upon the which when I had fastnd mine eyes, I considered, and saw four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. v. 7. And I heard a voice saying unto me, Arise Peter, slay and eat. v. 8. But I said, Not so, Lord, for nothing common or unclean hath at any time entred into my mouth.
v. 9. But the voice answered me again from heaven, What God hath clean∣sed, that call not thou common. v. 10. And this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into heaven. v. 11. And behold, immediately there were three men already come unto the house where I was, sent from Cesarea unto me. v. 12. And the spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. More∣over these six brethren accompanied me; and we entred into the mans house: v. 13. And he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose sirname is Peter: v. 14. Who shall tell thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. v. 15. And as I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning. v. 16. Then remembred I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost. v. 17. Forasmuch then as God give them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ: what was I that I could with∣stand God? v. 18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. SECT. VII. Anno Christ. Calig. 41 3 42 4 43 5 44 & 45 Claudii   1   2   3 A Door being thus opened for the promulgation of the Gospel to the Gentiles, some Disciples born in Cyprus and Cyrene, who after the martyrdom of Stephen were disper∣sed and went about publishing the Gospel, but hitherto to the Jews only; now understanding (as it seems) what had passed between Peter and Cornelius and the liberty granted unto them, began to preach Christ to the GreeksHe seemeth not to mean here the Hellenists or Jews who used the Greek tongue in their Synagogues, as ch 6.1, (for of them he spake, v. 19.) but the Grecians which were Gen∣tiles. at Antioch in Syria, who were Gentiles. And God prospered their endeavours exceeding∣ly and brought in many ConvertsDescribitur hic prima Ecclesia ex gentibus collecta, saltem ex Ju∣daei, simul & Gentibus. Caesareae una aliqua familia Gentilis ad fidem fuerat conversa, sed Antiochiae colli∣gitur integra & magna Ecclesia, Stres. in loc. to them daily. The Apostles that remained at Jerusalem hearing of it, sent Barnabas to con∣firm those Disciples there in the Faith, (See Sect. 13. of ch. 1.) who coming and seeing with what good success, the Gospel had been preached among them was exceeding glad and exhorted them stedfastly to hold fast to Christ. For he was a very pious person, a man of excellent gifts and graces, and by his means also many others were won to the Faith of Christ. And having great a desire that the Gospel might still be more and more propagated, he went to Tar∣sus to seek out Saul, (knowing as 'tis probable, that he was de∣signed for minister to the Uncircumcision) that they might joyn together in the work of Christ. And having found him he brought
him with him to Antioch, where for a whole year they instructed the Church in that City, and taught much people. And the Dis∣ciples (viz. such as had received the Faith of Christ, being formerly called by the Jews, Nazarites or Galilaeans; but a∣mong themselves, Disciples, Believers, Saints, Brethren, and those of the Church), did now first in this place obtain the name of Christians. Act. 11. v. 19. Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecu∣tion that arose about Stephen, travelled as far as Phenice, and Cy∣prus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none, but unto the Jews only. v. 20. And some of them were men of Cyprus, and Cyrene, which when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus. v. 21. And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number be∣lieved, and turned unto the Lord. v. 22. Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church, which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch. v. 23. Who when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. v. 24. For he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and of faith, and much people was added unto the Lord. v. 25. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul. v. 26. And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and taught much people, and the disciples were called Christi∣ans first in Antioch. v. 19. ] Propter Stephanum. Drusius verti posse ait, post Stepha∣num, scil. lpidtum. Erasm. & Beza, Ob Stephanum. v. 20. ] Certò legendum , quomodo ha∣bet ille in Angliâ. M. S. & ita legit Syrus. Grot. v. 26. ] Ubi sedes fuit regni istius quod Magog Ezechieli, septentri∣onale Danieli: & eversum erat ante adventum Christi, secundum oracula.
SECT. VIII. ABout this time certain persons who had the gift of Pro∣phesie, and foretelling future things; came from Jeru∣salem to Antioch; one of whom (by nameThe same person, Act. 21.10. foretold Pauls bonds. Agabus) by revelation from the Spirit of God, foretold that there would shortly be a great famineFamis hujus meminerunt Sue∣tonius in Claudio, cap. 18. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2. over all Judea, and several other parts of the world,The Septuagint often tender the Land (when it signifies the Land of Judea) by  the world. See Dr. Hammond. which according∣ly came to pass in the reign of the Emperor Claudius; The Christians therefore of Antioch, resolved to send relief to their Brethren the Christians in Judea, in this time of dearthEusebius in Chron. & Orosius l. 7. c. 6. affirmant, Helenam Adiabe∣norum Reginam (quam ad Christum conversam essem scribit Orosius) Ju∣daeis in hac fame, magnâ munificen∣tiâ succurrisse.; and having gathered it, sent it to the EldersSeniores vocantur penes quos erat Ecclesiae regimen, in quibus pri∣mum gradum tenebant Apostoli. Sic mensis praefuerunt Diaconi, ut Pres∣byteris tamen subessent, nec quic∣quam nisi ex eorum authoritate age∣rent, Calvin. Haec prima est Presbyterorum in Ecclesiâ mentio. Vocantur Patres Synagogarum. Totum autem regimen Ecclesiarum Christi, conformatum fuit ad Synagogarum Exemplar. Grot. of those ChurchesAgnoscebant enim eos quasi Patres suos utpote primos fideles: tum quia fideles in Judaeâ spoliati bonis à Judaeis, majori indigentiâ laborabant: tum quia ipsi sponte se bonis abdicarant, posuerantque eorum pretia ad pedes Apostolorum, c. 4. 34. quare prae caeteris merebantur juvari. A Lapide. by the hands of Barnabas and Saul; who having performed this their charge, returned again to Antioch taking with them John whose sirname was Mark, Nephew toSee Col. 4.10. Barnabas. Act. 11. v. 27. And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto An∣tioch. v. 28. And there stood up one of them, named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit, that there should be great dearth thorowout all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Cesar. v. 29 Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea. v. 30. Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Bar∣nabas and Saul. Act. 12. v. 25. And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with them John, whose sirname was Mark. SECT. IX. LƲke having thus related what was done at Antioch he returns now to Judea, and shews how about the same time King He∣rod AgrippaQuatuor sunt Herodes in sa∣crâ Scripturâ noti. 1. Ascalonita sub quo Christus natus est, Infanti∣cida, aliàs Herodes magnus. 2. Antipas, filius ejus, Tetrarcha Galilaeae, qui Johannem Baptistam occidit, Math. 14. Mar. 6. & Christum ludificatus est, Luc. 23.11. 3. Herodes Agrippa, Aristo∣buli filius, & Herodis M. nepos. Hic Romae cum esset, Caio erat familiaris nondum Caesari, opta∣batque Tiberio Caesari celerem mortem, ut Caius citò ad Imperium veniret; quo nomine à Tiberio in Carcerem conjiciebatur. Caius autem Imperator factus, eum carcere liberatum fecit Regem Judaeae. 4. Agrippa Junior, prioris Agrippae filius de quo Act. 25.13. qui tamen in Scripturà non Herodes, sed simplicitèr Agrippa appellatur. (Son of Aristobulus and Gran∣son of Herod the great) having obtained a
Herodes Magnus Rex Judaeae per Annos XXXVII. Hoc regnante Joann. Baptista & Christus nati, Luc. 1. Mat. 11. hic Magorum adventu & abitu territus occidit Infantes. Ibid. Β Filii, Tetrarchae. Nepotes ex Aristobulo jussa Patris strangulato. Archelaus rarcha Ju∣rum per os 7 aut 8.  hoc Chri∣ rediit ab io, Mat. 2. Δ Philippus Tetrarcha Ituraeae & Trachonitidis regionis, Luk. 3.1. maritus Herodiadis, Matth. 14.3. ε Herodes Antipas Te¦trarcha Galilae ae, Luc. 3.1. raptor Herodiadis, Mat. 14.4. interfector Baptisiae, ibidem, vul∣pes insidias struit vitae Christi. Luc 13.31. il∣lusor Christi, Luc. 23.11. Hujus procurator Chuza, Luc. 8.3. Cum hoc educatus Manahen Act. 13.1. Conspirat cum Pilato adversus discipulos Christi, Act. 4.27. Herodes Rex Chalcidis, qui regnum à Claudio Im∣per. interces∣sione fratris Agrippae ob∣tinuit, Jose∣phus. ζ Agrippa Major uni∣versum regnum avi obtinuit. Imperat an∣nos 7. Inte ficit Jaco∣bum: in vincula con∣jicit Petrum, ab an¦gelo percutitur, Act. 12. ubi etiam Herodes vo∣catur in hujus praeto∣rio, Caesareae, custodi∣tur Paulus, Act. 23.35. Herodias pri∣mum Philippi deinde pr consensum fratris ejus ntipae uxor. Matth. 14. Josephus. Bernice, Act. 13.14. Haec primum Herodi chal∣cidis regi, pa∣truo, deinde Polemoni Ci∣ciliae Regi nupta, à quo discedens cae∣pit Regem A∣grippam se∣ctari, non sine manifesta in∣cesti suspicio∣ne. η. Agrippa Minor reg∣nat annos 56. oram hoc, & Bernice sorore, causam dicit Paulus. Act. 26. Drusilla. Haec primum Emesenorum Regi, circum∣cisionem ad∣mittenti, de∣inde promissis persuasa, ab∣jecta religio∣ne patriâ, Fe∣lici, procura∣tori nupsit, Act. 24.24. Joseph. l. 20. 5.
great part of his Grandfathers Dominions of Claudius the Em∣peror, came into Judea, to take upon him his Government, about the latter end of the first, or beginning of the second year of Claudius; and being willing to gratifie the Jews, (who he saw desperately hated the Christians), he began to vex and persecute certain of the Church at Jerusalem; and in that per∣secution he slew JamesCatalogus Apostolorum duos habet Jacobos. Prior est Jacobus fra∣ter Johannis, filius Zebedaei, in ordine Apostolorum tertius; à Theolgis vocatur Jacobus Major, & à Marco 3.17. Boanerges. Alter est Jacobus fra∣ter Domini. Gal. 1.19. filius Alphaei, in ordine Apostolorum nonus, Mat. 10. Ab alii vocatur Jacobus minor ex Marc. 15.40. & est is, qui Hie∣rosolymitanae Synodi Praeses fuit, Act. 15. cujus mentio, v. 17. hujus capitis; habeturque pro auctore E∣pistolae, qua Jacobi vocatur. Brother of John, and Son of Zebedee with the SwordIta cntigit ei calix iste de quo Christus erat loquntus, Mat 20.23. Jacobus primus omnium Apostolo∣rum mortem obiit. Gladio decollare, supplicium fuit inter Judaeos non usitatum▪ quod le∣gimus; sed à Romanis acceptum, sicut & Johannes Baptista gladio decollatus est., who was called Boanerges (Mark 3.16.) because he was a zealous and thundering Preacher against the Vices of the Times. And per∣ceiving that the Jews were well pleased there∣with, He proceeded further and apprehen∣ded Peter also, the Passeover of the Jews be∣ing then at hand. And having imprisoned him, he set sixteenTot militibus Petrum custodiri curavit, quia veritus est, ne miraculosè evaderet, sicut fe∣cerat antea, Act. 5.19. See Sect. 7. of 1. Chap. Souldiers to guard him, four at a time, and to take their turns in the four watches of the night, meaning after the Feast of the Passeover was over to bring him forth to the Jews, and probably (if they desired it) to put him to death also. Peter being thus cast into prison, fervent and importunate prayers were made by the Church to God in his behalf. He continues there till the very nightGod many times suffers his Children to come to the Pits-brink, and then delivereth them, that they may be more sensible of his mercy, and have the more evident matter of praising his name. before Herod intended to bring him out to the peo∣ple; at which time sleeping between two Souldiers to whom he was bound with two Chaines, and the Souldiers keeping watch before the door, an Angel came to him, and the light with which he appeared shone in the prison, who rai∣sing him up and causing his Chaines to fall off from his hands, He commands him to make himself ready to go out immediate∣ly with him; which accordingly he does, but as yet was not assur'd that this was really done, but in this transport, appre∣hended he had been in a dream or trance. And the prison, as it seems, being in the Suburbs, after they were out of prison, they past thorow two watches, or wards which stood every night without the gates of the City, and at last came to the Irongate, which leads into the City, which opened to them of its own ac∣cord, and when they had passed together thorow one street, the Angel left him, and departed. Peter now perceiving that it it was no vision, but a real deliverance, said within himself, Now I see clearly that God hath sent his holy Angel and hath deli∣vered me from the hands of Herod and from the malice of the Jews. And when he had considered what course was fittest for him to take, he resolved to go to the house of Mary, Mark's
mother, where many Christians were met together at this very time of the night to seek the Lord in prayer for him: And as he knocked at the door, a Damosel came to ask Who was there? and knowing Peters voice, she stayed not to open the door for gladness, but ran in and told them Peter was there. They at first thought she spake idly, but she persisting in it, they then said, It is hisSo the word Angel does some∣times signifie no more than a Messen∣ger, Luk. 7 24.27. Angel; that is, some Messen∣ger come from him, who mentioning his name, the Maid by mistake, concludes it to be Pe∣ter himself; or else possibly by his Angel they might mean that some holy AngelAngelum ejus nominant qui divinitus illi appositus sit custos, & salutis minister. Quo sensu Christus dicit Angelos parvulorum semper vi∣dere faciem Patris, Matth. 18.10. Quod antem vulgò hinc eliciunt sin∣guls hominibus attribui singulos An∣gelos qui eorum curam gerant, nimis infirmum est. Nam Scriptura testa∣tur magno interdum populo unum Angelum dari, & uni tantum homi∣ni, ingentem exercitum, Gen. 32. Nam Elizaei ministro aperti sunt ocu∣li, ut multos currus igneos in aere cerneret, qui ad tuendam Prophetae salutem ordinati erant, 2 Reg. 6.17. apud Danielem verò non nisi unus Persarum Angelu, & unus Graeco∣rum nominatur, Dan. 10 5.13.20. Nec Scriptura suum cuique certum & peculiarem Angelum promittit▪ sed potius quod Angelis suis mandaverit Deus, ut singulos fideles custodiant, Psal. 91.11. Item ut castrametentur in circuitu piorum. Psal. 34.8. Er∣go figmentum quod passim invaluit, de binis cujusque geniis, profanum est. Nobis sufficiat quod pro Eccle∣siae salute tota coelestis militia excubat: atque ita pro temporis necessitate, nunc unus Angelus, nunc plures suo praesidio nos protegunt. Certè inaestimabilis haec est Dei bonitas, quod Angelos qui radii sunt divini fulgoris, ministros nostros esse pronunciat. Calv. in loc., had assumed his shape and voice, and stood at the gate in his resemblance. But whilst they thus debated the matter, Peter continued knocking, and when they had opened the door, they were amaz'd to find that it was indeed Peter himself. Then he related to them how miraculously the Lord had deli∣vered him, and giving order, that James the less (the Son of Alpheus, called the bro∣ther, that is, the kinsman of the Lord, Gal. 1.19.) and the rest of the Brethren in that City should be certifi'd of the manner of his deliverance; he withdrew himself to some more secure place, (probably to An∣tioch) not being willing to put himself in∣to the same danger again, out of which God had so wonderfully delivered him, [See Mat. 10.23.] In the morning there was a great stir among the Souldiers, what was become of Peter. And Herod not finding him, strict∣ly examined the Watch, and being frustrated of his intention against the Apostle, he vents his rage against the Souldiers, and commanded they should be carried away sig∣nificat abduci, hoc est, rapi ad sup∣plicium, vel duci in vincula. either to prison or to execution, and to be punished as malefactors. Act. 12.1. Now about that time, Herod the king stretched forth his hands, to vex certain of the church. v. 2. And h killed James the brother of John with the sword. v. 3. And bcause he saw it pleasd the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread) v. 4. And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and de∣livered him to four quarternions of souldiers to keep him, intending af∣ter Easter to bring him forth to the people. v. 5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him.
v. 6. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Pe∣ter was sleeping between two souldiers, bound with two chaines, and the keepers before the door kept the prison. v. 7. And behold, the ngel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shi∣ned in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands. v. 8. And the angel said unto him, Gird thy self, and bind on thy sandals, And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garments about thee, and follow me. v. 9. And he went out, and followed him, and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel: but thought he saw a vision. v. 10. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came un∣to the iron gate that leadeth into the city, which opened to them of his own accord, and they went out, and passed on thorow one street, and forthwith the angel departed from him. v. 11. And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews. v. 12. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose sirname was Mark, where many were gathered together, praying. v. 13. And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda. v. 14. And when she knew Peters voice, she opened not the gate for glad∣ness, but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate. v. 15. And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed that it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel. v. 16. But Peter continued knocking; and when they had opened the door, and saw him, they were astonished. v. 17. But he beckning unto them with the hand to hold their peace, de∣clared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison: and he said, Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place. v. 18. Now assoon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soul∣diers, what was become of Peter. v. 19. And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he exa∣mined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death. v. 11. ] Ubi ad se redierat, stupore excusso. SECT. X. HErod shortly atfer goes from Jerusalem to Caesarea and abode there: And being highly displeased with the Ty∣rians and Sidonians he intended to make war had an inten∣tion to make war. Sic Hammondus. upon them. They being sensible, that their own narrow circuit of Land was not sufficient to maintain them, and that they depended on Galilee and Judea, (now under Herods jurisdiction) for a great part of their provisions, they judged it their wisest course to seek peace with him. Having therefore gratifi'd Blastus his Chamberlain, and got him to be their Friend, they sent their Commissioners to request the King that he would be graciously pleased to be reconciled to them. Herod being a proud Prince
and pufft up with his prosperity, on a solemn, day appointed (as 'tis like) for the audience of these Tyrian and Sidonian Commissioners, being clad in a Royal Robe all glistering with Silver (whereon the Sun shone, and so made it more glorious and illustrious, as Josephus reports, lib. 19. Antiq. ch. 7.), and sitting upon his Throne, made a speech unto them to shew his magnificence and eloquence, and possibly extoll'd his own cle∣mency, that having a just cause to chastize them with his arms, yet he was graciously inclin'd to spare them. At this the peo∣ple gave a shout and with impious flattery, cry'd out, It is the voice of a God and not of a man. Herod priding himself in this acclamation and assuming this divine honour to himself, imme∣diately theIn morbis immittendis saepè Angelorum ministerio Deus utitur, Exod. 12.29. 2 Sam. 24.16. Angel of the Lord smote him with a loathsom disease, so that he was eaten up either of lice or worms, and dyed misera∣bly. And this Tyrant and Persecutor of the Church being thus removed, the Gospel prospered exceeding∣ly, and was preached up and down with great success. —And he went down from Judea to Cesarea, and there abode. v. 20. And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the kings chamberlain their friend, desired peace, because their country was nourished by the kings countrey. v. 21. And upon a set day Herod arayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne and made an oration unto them. v. 22. And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man. v. 23. And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory, and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost. v. 24. But the word of God grew, and multiplied.
CHAP. III. Anno Christ. Claud. 46 4 47 5 48 6 49 7 50 8 51 9 Relating Saul's first journey from Antioch with Barnabas, to preach the Gospel to the Gen∣tiles, John Mark being their Minister, which for distinctions sake we call, Iter Asiaticum.Iter Asia∣ticum. SECT. I. BArnabas and Saul having carried the Alms sent from the Disciples in Antioch to their Brethren in Judaea in the time of the dearth (as we have seen Sect. 8. of Chap. 2.), returned to the Church at Antioch again; in which there were at that time se∣veral ProphetsProphetae dicuntur qui prae∣diti erant dono interpretandi Scrip∣turas Propheticas ex revelatione Spi∣ritsis Sancti; & nonnulli eorum eti∣am praediti erant dono praedicendi futura, quae scire Ecclesiae intererat, qualis erat Agabus, Doctores sunt qui in Scholis sive Ecclesiâ, doctri∣nam sacram tradunt & alios erudiunt, qui Eph. 4.11. à Pastoribus distin∣guuntur. and Teachers, and among others one very eminent, viz. Manaen, who was a person of that high rank and quality, that he had been brought up with Herod An∣tipas, and yet contemning the world, had em∣braced the Gospel, and thought it no dis∣paragement to him to be a Teacher there. Thus God manifests the freedom of his Grace, in effectually calling some of all sorts and ranks of men to a participation of the bene∣fits offerr'd in and by his Son. Barnabas and Saul had not been long in that City, before the holy Ghost on a day when the Church fasting and praying, by some instinct or revelation to one or more of the Prophets and Teachers there, commanded that these two, viz. Barnabas and Saul should be separatedCum non dixerit Spiritus San∣ctus segregate Domino, sed mibi, osten∣dit unam esse potestatem & virtutem. from the service of that Church (where there were for the present Teachers enough) and sent to preach the Gospel in other parts. The Church here∣upon with prayer and fasting commended them to God, and by imposition of handsFuit haec ceremonia antiqui∣tus usitata cum alicui aliquid bonum apprecarentur, & alicui benedicerent. Gen. 48.14. non quod in ceremoniâ aliqua vis esset, sed quod esset visibile signum cordialis ac sincerae compre∣cationis vel benedictionis, Stres. This is the first ordination of El∣ders since the Gospel, that was used out of the Land of Israel. No bet∣ter reason I suppose can be given of this present action, than that the Lord did hereby set down a platform of ordaining Ministers in the Church of the Gentiles for future times, Lightf. set them apart to this particular employment. Thus having recei∣ved their Commission from the holy Ghost, they set forth for the work to which they were designedNon opus habebant vocatione & missione ut possent paaedicare lige∣timè Evangelium; erant enim antea vocati & missi, & diu jam functi erant ministerio: sed opus habebant speci∣ali vocatione & missione ad praedican∣dum Gentibus, Stres., taking John Mark along with them, to be assistant to them, and a fellow-labourer in the work of the Lord, and to be by them sent to any part of their charge, whither they themselves could not go. Having begun their journey, they first
came to Seleucia a port in Syria and from thence sailed to CyprusHaec olim Macaria dicta ob beatam rerum omnium corporalium abundantiam, sed nunc demum beata facta per communicationem Evange∣lii. In hac Insula erat inclytum illud Templum Paphiae Veneris de quo multa Tacitus lib. 2. hist. In hanc tamen corruptissimam & impurissi∣mam insulam Deus omnium primo Evangelium suum misit, & Ecclesias ibi plantavit. Est enim Cyprica Ec∣clesia prima ex transmarinis. Non est ergo currentis sed miserentis Dei, Rom 9., Barnabas's own Country [Act. 4.36.], and at Salamis one of the Cities of that Island, they first began to preach the Gospel in the Synagogues of the Jews. For though these two holy men were sent to the Gentiles, yet were they so far from forbearing to preach to the Jews, that they constantly began with them first in all places where they came. And travelling over that Island as far as Paphos, they there found a false Prophet a magical Jew [See Act. 19.13. & Mat. 24.24.], called Bar-jesus Filius salutis, qui salutis sanitatisque adferendae artem prositetur., and sirnamed Elymas or Magus, who opposed them, and particularly endeavoured to hinder and di∣vert Sergius Paulus (who govern'd that Island for the Romans) from hearing them and from embracing the faith. Saul seeing the wick∣edness and malice of this man and having a great incitation of the Spirit of God upon him, looked earnestly on him, and spake to him to this purpose, O thou vile sorcerer, who like the Devil by whom thou workest, shewest thy self and an enemy to the truth and to all goodness; wilt thou not cease to lay false imputations on the gospel, and the way of salvation to hinder and discourage men from embracing of it? It is most just that thou that shuttest the eyes of thy mind so perversly against the light of the Gospel, shouldst lose thy outward sight; and therefore by the immediate power of God it shall be taken from thee for some time; and immediately Elymas was struck blind and was not able to go without leading. The Governour seeing this miracle, and hearing the Doctrine of the Gospel opened and explained, and perceiving it accompanied with so much power, was converted to the Faith. And from this time forward Saul was always called PaulHoc loco imprimis coepit esse Gentium Apostolus, itaque etiam sor∣titur nomen Gentibus usitatum., which name possibly was first given him by the houshold of Sergius Paulus. So that though he was called Saul, so long as he con∣vers'd among the Jews, Syrians and Arabians, yet afterwards, when he was by Gods special Call principally sent to the Gen∣tiles, viz. to the Greeks and Romans, he then had the name of Paul given unto him, that being a name more agreeable unto them. From Paphos, Paul and his company went to Perga in Pamphilia, a Country in Asia the less, at which place John MarkReditum hujus Johannis Marci ad officium quod deseruerat, ejusque cum Paulo reconciliationem, vid. 2 Tim. 4.11. Phil. 2.4. (possibly being weary of those travels or having and earnest desire to visit his mo∣ther and friends) left them (which Paul took very ill) and returned to Jerusalem, where he stayed till Paul and Barnabas came thither again: in whose place (it seems) Paul took Titus, for he was with him, when after he had finished this peregrination, he went up to the Council at Jerusalem.
Act. 13.1. Now there wee in the church that was at Antioch, certain prophets and teachers: as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen which had been brought up with He∣rod the tetrarch, and Saul. v. 2. As they ministred to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, Sepa∣rate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. v. 3. And when they had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. v. 4. So they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia, and from thence they sailed unto Cyprus. v. 5. And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John to their Mi∣nister. v. 6. And when they had gone thorow the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet a Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus. v. 7. Which was with the deputy of the countrey Sergius Paulus, a pru∣dent man: who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God. v. 8. But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) with∣stood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith. v. 9. Then Saul (who also is called Paul) filled with the holy Ghost, set his eyes on him, v. 10. And said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? v. 11. And now behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness, and he went about, seeking some to lead him by the hand. v. 12. Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord. v. 13. Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphilia: and John departing from them, returned to Jerusalem. v. 2. , i. e. . Vocare hic est destinare: praeteritum passivum usurpatur in significatione activâ. v. 11. ] adversum te. Manus enim Dei dicitur super eum esse, quem protegit, at contra vel adversus illum quem punit. vid. Psal. 80.17. & 1 Sam. 12.15.
SECT. II. PAul and Barnabas from Perga go to Antioch in Pisidia (a Country of the lesser Asia) and entring into one of the Synagogues of the Jews on the Sabbath day, after the rea∣ding of some portions or sections in the Law and ProphetsMore recepto ab Esdrae tem∣poribus, ut prater particulas de lege (quod vetus erat) etiam de prophe∣tis particula aliqua Sabbatis singulis legeretur. Grot. (as their manner was every Sabbath, See v. 17. & ch. 15.21.) they are invited by the RulersSynagogae habebant suos prae∣fectos, qui erant quasi consistorium Ecclesiasticum, qui lectiones & ad∣hortationes peragebant disciplinam exercebant & ordinem curabant, Stres. See Harmony of the four Evange∣lists, Sect. 10. of Chap. 3. of the Synagogue to give a word of instructionIt was the custom of the Jew∣ish Doctors to expound and apply some part of Scripture to the in∣struction of the people. Hamm. unto them if they were pre∣pared so to do. Hereupon Paul standing up, and bespeaking all both Jews and Proselytes to give audience, in a most excellent Sermon he setteth forth the mercies of God to the Children of Israel, in chusing them at first for his own peculiar people and exalting them thereby above all the Nations of the World, and delivering them by his Almighty power from the bondage of Egypt, exercising longsuffe∣ring, and forbearance towards them, notwithstanding their pro∣vocations Forty years in the wilderness, and driving out the sea∣ven nations out of the Land of Canaan, and giving it to them for a possession. And after his providence had been thus over them for about the space of Four hundred and fifty years; He gave them Judges and spirited them for their places, and raised up some particular eminent persons to rule over them, and to fight their battles: which way of Government lasted to the time of Sa∣muel, who being a Prophet, ruled them in Gods name, and stood for some years. After this, they desired a King, and God gave them Saul, whose reign, (reckoning in also the precee∣ding government of Samuel), continued for the space of Forty yearsSamuel and Saul governed be∣tween them both about Forty years; the years of the government of ei∣ther of them are not distinctly and particularly express'd. 'Tis proba∣ble that Samuel might govern before Saul was set up about Thirty years and consequently that Saul did not reign above Ten years at the most. See Allens Chron. p. 109. Saul non regnavit annos quadra∣ginta sed includuntur in hoc nume∣ro anni Samueli▪ quibus ille ante & cum Saulo regnavit vel potius judi∣cavit.; and after him, he gave them Da∣vid a man after his own heart and ready to perform] Om∣ne id quod ipsum jubebo praestare. Non enim hoc de ipsâ lege intelli∣gendum est, sed de peculiaribus man∣datis ad Davidis vocationem & regi∣men populi spectantibus. David was a man after Gods mind in the main of his life, though not in every particular action, the deno∣mination being from the greater part. what he enjoyn'd him in gover∣ning the people. Of this mans seed he shews, God according to his promise [Isa. 11.1.] had raised up to Israel, Jesus a Saviour. To whom John Baptist bare witness, preaching the Doctrine of Repentance and pressing con∣trition, humiliation, and brokenness of heart for sin, that so there might be stirr'd up in the people a hunger, and thirst, and earnest de∣sire after Christ, who was then ready to ap∣pear, and to enter on his prophetick office. He shewed that John did not only exhort to repentance in his Sermons, but by administring the ordinance of Baptism he obliged them to it, and to an humble acknowledgment and confession of their sinfulness and impurity, which washing with water might suggest unto
them. And as John went on fulfulling his ministry, he was so far from arrogating to himself the Title of the Messias, that he avowed himself only for his forerunner, declaring, that shortly the Messias would come in person and preach among them, which accordingly he did. Now this Gospel and Word of Salvati∣on, which Christ brought into the World (he shews) is sent, and is to be proclaimed and made known unto them. He ac∣knowledges the Sanhedrim, and people that then dwelt at Jeru∣salem, did not indeed understand him to be the Messias as they might have done, had they considered the Predictions of the Prophets, contained in those Sections and Portions of Scripture which every Sabbath-day are read in their Synagogues; but in∣stead thereof, they adjudged him to death, and in so doing, fulfilled those very prophesies they understood not. And though they found not in him any cause of death, yet they desired Pi∣late, that he might be slain. But after he was crucifi'd and bu∣ried, he shews them, that God raised him from the dead, and for Forty days he continued upon the earth, and was several times seen by his disciples and divers others who from the be∣ginning attended on him, who do now with great assurance testifie these things unto all the Jews. He further shews, that now God had actually fulfilled his promises made unto their fathers, in that he had sent his son into the world to be incarnate, and to accomplish the work of our redemption, whom he had rai∣sed from the dead, after he had been crucifi'd according to the promises and predictions that are recorded of him in sundry places of Scripture, as particularly in Psal. 2.7. where Christ is said in the day of his resurrection, to be be∣gottenDeus Pater, ter dicitur Chri∣stum filium genuisse, & ter vitam ei dedisse. 1. Ab aeterno ex se gene∣rando, deinde ex semine Davidis ex∣citando, & denique ex mortuis resusci∣tando. Verba haec non sunt ita accipienda quasi tum demum post resurrectio∣nem suam Christus coepit esse filius Dei, & ab eo gigni, sed quia tum De∣us potentissimè per resurrectionem declaravit Christum esse filium suum. In scriptura enim res tum dicuntur fieri vel nasci, cum manifestantur & se produnt: confer Prov. 17.17. Amicus nascitur in die malo, h. e. tum sese prodit, cum premit nos angustia. C∣meon. of the Father, because he was then most eminently declar'd to be the Son of God [Rom. 1.4.] And in Isa. 55.3, God not only promises to raise him from the dead, but to secure him from ever dying any more, say∣ing, I will give you the sure mercies of David, that is, perform unto you the gracious promises made to David. Now it was promised to Da∣vid, that of his seed should arise the Messias, who should have an everlasting Kingdom, and who should not see corruption, as 'tis Psal. 16.11. If therefore God should suffer his Son to return again to the place of corruption, viz. the grave, how could he make good the promises he had made to Dvid. For these words cannot be applyed personally to David; for David after he had served his generation, dyed and never rose again▪ but his body putrified in the earth. But Je∣sus in whom this prophesie is compleatly fulfilled, was raised again from the dead, and saw no corruption▪ nor was his body putri∣fied in he earth. This therefore he shews is the Gospel that they preached unto them, namely, that this Jesus is the true Messias, by whose merits and intercession, remission of sins is to
be obtained and whosoever believes in him shall certainly be freed from the wrath of God, and the punishments attending sin in another world; from which the law of Moses could not of it self, by all its ceremonies, washings, and sacrifices, purge or cleanse, or free, any person whatsoever. For the Law of Moses had only a shaddow of the good things which were to be performed by Christ. Upon the whole matter therefore he ex∣horts them that they should take heed lest by their obstinate re∣sisting and rejecting this way of Salvation, now preached to them, they should bring a remarkable astonishing destructi∣on upon themselves, such as God threatned to bring upon the Jews of old from the Caldaeans [Hab. 1.5.] where he speaks to them to this purpose, Behold ye despisers, and be amazed, and cover or hideApud Suidam , est , facere ut non appareat. Sic Plutarch. de Pyth. orac. ; non vult abscondere aut tegere veritatem,  disparete, nempe ut illi qui prae pudore se foras proripiunt, Be∣za. Sequitur Apostolus hoc loco versio∣nem  LXX, qui  baggo∣im, i. e. in Gentibus. Hab. 1.5. (ut videtur) legebant , quia vertunt . errore orto ex affinitate litterarum ף & ך. Non est autem quod turbetur quisquam quod errorem hunc non emendave∣rit Evangelista noster. Etsi enim in verbis, in re tamen ipsa nullus est error. Nam contemptores arguuntur Judaei, quum Gentes magistros aspi∣cere jubentur. Sensus itaque rectè constat, imo mentem Prophetae, qua∣si per commentarium explicat. De Dieu. your selves, for I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe if any man declare it unto you. And as the Caldaeans demolished their first Temple and ruin'd their City, for their impenitent going on in their sins, against all the messages sent them from God by the Prophets; so he advises these pre∣sent Jews to take heed, lest by despising Christ and his Gospel, they bring upon them∣selves a like destruction. The Apostle having ended his Sermon, as they went out of the Synagogue, the Prose∣lytes (who were of Gentile parentage, but had embraced the Jewish religion, and though uncircumcised, frequented their religious as∣semblies) desired to hear more of this sub∣ject the next Sabbath. And some pious per∣sons of the Jews, together with these religi∣ous Proselytes, followed the Apostles to their Lodging, who exhorted them to continue stedfast in the doctrine of the Gospel. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole City to hear the Gospel preached by them. But the chief men of the Jews, seeing how the people thronged to hear the Apostles, were horribly enraged at it, and contradicted, and cavilled at the doctrine they preached, and reviled and calum∣niated their persons. However, this nothing discouraged Paul and Barnabas; but putting off all fear, they openly declar'd, that they had performed their charge from Christ of preach∣ing the Gospel first to the Jews; but seeing they beha∣ved themselves so obstinately and perversly, and by their con∣tempt thereof shewed and declared themselves unworthy of so great a blessing, they were now by Gods appointment to leave them, and to preach to the Gentiles. For this was the directi∣on of God, that the Gospel being first preached to the Jews, and rejected by them, it should then be preached to all other people of the world. And this is the sum of that old prophe∣sie, Isa. 49.6. I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, to give
the people that sate in darkness knowledg of the way to eternal life. When the Gentiles heard this good news, and understood their own interest in it, they rejoyced exceedingly, and magnified, and highly approved the Gospel and word of the Lord, and as many as were chosen of God, and by the conviction of his Spi∣rit, prepar'd and dispos'd to seek after eternal life, believed. And the Gospel was preached over the whole Country. But the Jews being enraged hereat, stirred up and exasperated some of the female proselytes of honourable quality (who were led with a blind zeal against the Gospel, which they understood not, and accordingly, as it seems, stirred up their husbands against it), and other chief persons in the City against the Apostles, and drave them out of their Coasts; who shaking off the dust of their feet against them (as our Saviour had commanded, Mat. 10.14.), departed and went to Iconium, a City of Lycaonia, in the lesser Asia. Yet the Disciples in this City, and the parts adjacent, were nothing discouraged with the Jews Blasphemies, calumnies, and oppositions, but were fill'd with spiritual Joy that they had embrac'd the Gospel, and went on couragiously in their profession of it. Act. 13. v. 14. But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down. v. 15. And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. v. 16. Then Paul stood up, and beckning with his hand, said, Men of Is∣rael, and ye that fear God, give audience. v. 17. The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people, when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it. v. 18. And about the time of fourty years suffered he their manners in the wilderness. v. 19. And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he divided their land to them by lot. v. 20. And after that he gave unto them judges, about the space of four hundred and fifty years, untill Samuel the prophet. v. 21. And afterward they desired a King, and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years. v. 22. And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their king, to whom also he gave testimony, and said, I have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall ful∣fill all my will. v. 23. Of this mans seed hath God, according to his promise, raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus: v. 24. When John had first preached before his coming, the baptism of re∣pentance to all the people of Israel. v. 25. And as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not h. But behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoos of his feet I am not worthy to loose. v. 26. Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whoso∣ever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.
v. 27. For they that dwelt at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets, which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him. v. 28. And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain. v. 29. And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre. v. 30. But God raised him from the dead: v. 31. And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people. v. 32. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, v. 33. God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. v. 34. And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption; he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David. v. 35. Wherefore he saith also in another psalm, Thou shalt not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. v. 36. For David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. v. 37 But he whom God raised again saw no corruption. v. 38. But know  nto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this m is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. v. 39. And by him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which you  not be justified by the law of Moses. v. 40 Beware therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the prophets; v. 41. Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for I work a work in in your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you. v. 42 And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue, the Gen∣tiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath. v. 43. Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who speaking to them, perswaded them to continue in the grace of God. v. 44. And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God. v. 45. But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with en∣vy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contra∣dicting, and blaspheming. v. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judg your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. v. 47. For so hath the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth. v. 48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. v. 49. And the word of the Lord was published thorowout all the region. v. 50. But the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barna∣bas, and expelled them out of their coasts.
v. 51. But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came un∣to Iconium. v. 52. And the disciples were filled with joy, and with the holy Ghost. V. 14. , pro  enim in plurali, sig∣nificatione singulari dicere, in more est Evangelistis, ex usu LXX Interpretum. Ut Exod. 20.10. & sic passim. De Dieu. v. 19. Septem Gentes] Sex nominantur Exod. 3.8. Cananaei, Hitthaei, Amoraei▪ Perizaei, Hevaei; sed addendi his Girgazeni ex Neh. 9.8. quos in Africam ivisse i Hebraei. Est ubi una ex septem omittitur, vel quia minima, vel quia minus po∣tens. v. 20. , scil.  & post-hac circiter 450 annis, scil. facta, dedit judices, usque ad Samuelem prophetam. Nume∣rus positus respicit antecedentia in Sermone Pauli, cujus initium est electio patrum, v. 17. terminus, distributio terrae Canaan, v. 19. Electio caepit eo tempore, quo Deus Ismaelem separans, Isaacum semen promissionis posuit, & in illo cum posteritate ejus faedus pepigit, Gen. 17.6, 7, 19, 21. Ab illo igitur anno (fuit autem unus ante na∣tum Isaacum, cap. 17.1. cap. 21.5.) ad tempus usque distributionis terrae Canaan per Joshuam ducem & Judicem plenariae, decurrerunt anni 450, minus uno; quod ad iodicandum  particula additur. Haec simplicissima videtur conciliatio Chrono∣logica, ut ad corruptionem in textu statuendam non opus sit consugere. Vid. Junium in Paral. l. 1, par. 95. Classius. Omnino assentior iis, qui hic annos, quibus rexerunt Judices, supputari nolunt (sic enim annos hosce 450 cum 480 qui ab exitu ex Aegypto ad Templi Salomo∣nici initium effluxisse dicuntur 1 Reg. 6.5. conciliare impssibile videtur) sed qui à nato Isaaco uque ad udices fluxre, quasi scriptum sit, ; ut non quamdiu rexe∣rint Judices, sed uando eos Deus dederit, indicetur: nempe post ea quae v. 17, 18, 19. natrata fuerunt, quae 450 circiter annis gesta fuere, convenit conmputus Nam à nato Isaaco ad natum Jacobum sunt 60 anni, inde ad introitum in Aegyp∣tum 130 inde ad exitum 210. inde ad introitum in terram Canaan 40. inde ad distributionem terae, anni 7. qui simul faciunt 447 annos, id est, circiter 450 de∣sunt enim solummodo tres. Rectè autem ad nati Isaaci tempus refertur illud, ver. 17. Elegit Deus patres nostros; tum enim Deus qui jam Abrahamum elegerat ex omnibus terrae populis, ex omnibus Abrahami liberis elegit Isaacum, in cujus familiâ foedus consisteret, dicens, In Jsaaco vocabitur semen tuum. De Dieu. v. 21. Samuel munere suo prophetico functu est partim ante Saulis regnum, par∣tim dum consiliis Saulum rexit simul annis XL nam quatuor tantum ante mortem Saulis mensibu editur Hebraeis mortuus Samuel. Sauli tribuit Paulus annos qua∣draginta, nempe adjuncto tempore Gubernationis Samuelis, cujus Regimen fuit à majori Regis dignitate velut absorptum. Osiander. v. 22. Qui exequetur omnes voluntates meas] nerape in regendo populo idem est quod dicitur, Psal. 78 72. v. 29. Posuerunt eum in monumento] i. e. qui eum de cruce detulerunt, Josephus Arimathensis & comites ejus, Mat. 27.58, 59. v. 34. Non amplius reversurum  in corruptionem] At Christus nun∣quam in ullâ corruptione fuit, Psal. 16.10. ubi  pro , videre pro pati experiri, & experiri de mortuo non nisi improprie dicitur: est ergo duplex . At quomodo dici potest Dominus eo reverti, quo nunquam devenit? Sciendum ergo est Lucam Graecos veteris T. interpretes secutum,  convertere id quod Hebraeis dicitur  i. e. sepulchrum. Beza. ] Ad verbum, Sancta Davidis fidelia  vetustâ in∣terpretatione sanctus, i. e.  sancta David cum potius denotet benignitates David, i. e. Davidi factas aut promissas,  i. e.  firma robusta. Drusius. Ex Helenistarum usu , & , at quomodo ex daebo vo∣bis sancta David fidelia colligit Apostolus resurrectionem Christi & vitam ejus nulli am∣plius corruptioni obnoxiam? Quum  sint benignae Dei promissiones Davidi factae. Davidi autem promissum esset, ut ex semine ejus oriretur Messias, qui tanquam sanctus Dei non videret corruptionem recte colligt Apostolus non potusse Deum sancta Davidis fidelia dare quin & sancto suo, Davidi promisso, incorruptibilem per resurrectionem vitam largiretur. De Dieu. v 40. Quod dictum est in Prophetis] i. e. in uno Prophetarum, nempe Hab. 1.5. In Prophetis i. e. volumine prophetarum minorum Synecdoche integri, q. d. vi∣dete ne idem vobis eveniat quod olim parentibus vestris, urbe & Templo exciso, ipsis deportatis ob contemptum beneficiorum Dei. v. 42, ] pro . Vugatus et Erasmus recte interpretati sunt sequente Sabbto, ut idem sit quod, v. 44. , quo tota civitas dicitur convenisse ad audiendum verbum, nempe quia postulationi
Gentium Paulus annuerat. . Capell. v. 43. ] Ita per metonym. vocatur doctrina Evan∣gelica quae summo Dei beneficio nobis contigit. Sic Heb. 12.15. 1 Pet. 5.12. v. 46. Indignos vos ipsos judicatis vitâ aeternâ] Beza  vertit decernitis, h. e. hoc vestro facto, quasi sententiâ in vos ipsos lata, statuitis & decernitis: Osten∣derunt non minus clarè quam judex qui sententiam pronunciat. Solent actionibus nomina tribui aliarum actionum, quarum pares sunt affectus. Grot. v. 48. Glorisicabant sermonem Domini] i. e. Gloriosè ac magnifice de sermonem sive verbo Dei loquebantur. ] Ordinati ad vitam, h. e. quotquot erant cupidi salutis, & bona men∣te praediti. Non tamen contendo illam ipsam cordis praeparationem aut promptitu∣dinem, Naturae esse, cum haud dubiè etiam illa ipsa quasi prima apertio cordis, aut studium cognoscendae veritatis sit merum donum, ac beneficium ingens Dei, Ex im∣mensâ ejus gratiâ proficiscens, & trahens corda Auditorum ad Filium. Credo idem in hac sententiâ dici quod in parabolâ de semine in varium solum cadente, cum in alio planè nullum fructum ferat, ac nec radices quidem agat, in alio aliquem me∣diocrem, denique in alio etiam uberem. Flac. Illyr. manifeste opponuntur iis qui se eâ vitâ indignos ju∣dicaverant, i. e. ostenderant. Parant se vitae aeternae, qui si ejus spes detur gravissi∣ma ob id velint facere ac pati. Tales sunt  ut Lu∣cas loquitur, cap. 9. 62. & facile credunt Evangelio, Joh. 7.17. Cum haec dicimus non excludimus praevenientem gratiam. Facere enim homines dicuntur id quod fa∣ciunt per Dei gratiam excitati: sicut se dicuntur convertere, est enim quaedam gra∣tia ante fidem, quae Patris tractio vocatur. Grot. SECT. III. AT Iconium they continue long and preachNon fuerunt Paulus & Barna∣bas ex duodecim illis Apostolis qui Christo servierunt tempore carnis, sed tamen post ascensionem Christi Pau∣lus fuit immediatè ex caelo ad Apo∣stolatum vocatus, Act. 9. Et nunc u∣terque per Spiritum Sanctum missus ad Gentes, Act. 13.1.2. powerfully and with good success, the Lord giving testimony to the Gospel (which is the word of his Grace), and working many Miracles by their hands; insomuch that great store both of the Jews and of the Greeks that were Proselytes (and frequented the Synagogues of the Jews) re∣ceived the Faith. But here some refractary unbelieving Jews exasperated the minds of the Gentiles against the Apostles, and all others who had re∣ceived the Faith of Christ by their Ministry. So there grew a divisionAliud est, schisma facere in mun∣do, aliud in Ecclesiâ. Mundum scin∣dere non potest verti vitio ministris Evangelii. Quoniam enim non pos∣sunt totum mundum convertere, ne∣cesse est mundum scindere, & aliquos à mundo separare, quod dum faciunt, mundus istos separatos odit, ac op∣pugnat, & qui oppugnantur se defen∣dunt, & sic necessariò mundus scin∣ditur. Sed Ecclesiam scindere & schis∣mata in ea concitare peccatum est. Quod faciunt illi, qui populum fun∣damentales salutis doctrinas retinentem, novis quaestionibus turbant, 1 Tim. 1.4. vel propter exiguas quaestiones salutem non magnopere concernentes, tumultuosè committunt, ut se invicem oderint. in the City, some taking part with the persecuting Jews, and some with the Apostles. At last the rage of the unbelieving Gentiles and Jews proceeded so far, that they were bent to use the Apostles despitefully and stone them; which they having notice of, slipt away to Lystra, according to our Savi∣ours command, Mat. 10.23. See Act. 8.1. Act. 9.25. At Lystra they preach the Gospel, and Paul cures a Crip∣pleSee Act. 3.2, 3. Ille sanatus sine fide, hic per fidem. (that had been so from his infancy) by a word of his mouth, perceiving that he had a Faith wrought in , that he should be healed of this his malady, which was discovered to the A∣postle,
either by divine revelation, or some external signsEx externis signis cordis com∣moti, lacrymis, suspiriis, complica∣tione manuum, vultu laeto, &c. prae∣cipuè per spiritum propheticum, seu per revelationem singularem illius spiritus à quo ipse excitabatur ad fi∣dem illam, quâ hoc miraculum im∣petravit. Sic Petrus noverat Simo∣nem Magum Act. 8 21. & Anani∣am Act. 3.3 quod fidem, & sinceri∣tatem non haberent. Stres. in loc. thereof. The Lystrians are so affected with this miracle, that they cryed out, The GodsThis opinion seemeth to have sprung from some Apparitions of the Angels made to the Fore-fathers; which the Heathens changed in to Fa∣bles, as that of Lycaon, &c. are come down to us in the shape of men. And they call'd Barnabas, Jupiter, (which the Heathen held for their highest God); and Paul, Mercurius; whom they held for the In∣terpreter and Messenger of the Gods, because Paul here appeared the chief speaker. And the Priest of Jupiter (whose Temple, Altar, or Statue stood, as it seems, without the Ci∣ty) came presently to the gates of the House where the Apostles lodged, and brought Oxen trimmed and adorned with Garlands of Flow∣ers (according to their Heathenish rites) verily purposing to offer sacrifice unto them. Which when the Apostles understood, they rent their Clothes in detestation and abhorrence of such vile Idolatry, and told the people, they were meer men of like passions with themselves, and in the same condition of mortality; and preached to them to turn from Idols (which are no Gods, what∣ever they accounted them, but meer vanities and nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4.) to the living God, who created Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures therein; who in times past, in a just judgment, left the Gentiles to their own blind Wor∣ships and Idolatries, and yet whilst he did so, left not off to evidence himself sufficiently to them, to be the true God, in the works of his wisdom, power, and providence, and by that great goodness of his, in giving them rain and fruitful seasons, and the like; which are acts of his particular Power and Boun∣ty [Rom. 1.19.]; thereby filling their hearts with gladness, from the abundance with which he crowned the years, and by these means inviting and drawing them off from their impieties and idolatries. All which discourse of the Apostles could yet hardly restrain them from sacrificing to them. Not long after this, some unbelieving Jews from Antioch of Pisidia and Ico∣nium, who had driven the Apostles out of their own Cities (as we have seen before) came hither, and by fair words gai∣ned the inconstant multitude, who even now would have sa∣crificed to the Apostles, to be on their side and to joyn with them against them: So that being desperately enrag'd, in a fu∣rious tumultuary manner, they threw stonesMalum quod multis viris san∣ctis contigit. Mosi ferè Exod. 17.4. & Numb. 14.10. Davidi 1 Sam. 30.6. Zachariae 2 Chron. 24.21. Chri∣sto Joh. 8.58. & 10.31. Stephano Act. 7.58, 59. Multis fidelibus Heb. 11.37. at Paul as a Blasphemer [Lev. 24.16. Deut. 13.10.] and thinking they had killed him, dragg'd him as a dead man out of the gates of the City [See 2 Cor. 11.25.]. But as the Disciples came about him, think∣ing, as it seems, solemnly to interr him, if he were dead, or to administer help to him if there were any life yet remaining in him; by the wonderful power of God he re∣viv'd again, and rose up in the midst of them, and returned
into that injurious City to refresh himself, and the next day he went with Barnabas to Derbe. Act. 14.1. And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both of the Jews, and also of the Greeks believed. v. 2. But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil-affected against the brethren. v. 3. Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and won∣ders to be done by their hands. v. 4. But the multitude of the ciy was divided: and part held with the Jews, and part with the Apostles. v. 5. And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and al∣so of the Jews, with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them. v. 6. They were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra, and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the region that lyeth round about: v. 7. And there they preached the gospel. v. 8. And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mothers womb, who never had walked. v. 9. The same heard Paul speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and per∣ceiving that he had faith to be healed, v. 10. Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he lea∣ped and walked. v. 11. And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lift up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men. v. 12. And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker. v. 13. Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen, and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people. v. 14. Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, v. 15. And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein. v. 16. Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. v. 17. Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. v. 18. And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto them. v. 19. And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who perswaded the people, and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, supposing he had been dead. v. 20. Howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up and came into the city, and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.
v. 1. Judaeorum simul & Graecorum] Quicunque Judaismum non profitebantur, Judaeis  dicebantur; & totus mundus ab his dividebatur in  & . Idem ergo in libris sacris . Salmas. v. 3. Liberè loquentes in Domino] i. e. In nomine Domini, vel propter Domi∣num. ] scil. Evangelio, quia ex summâ Dei benignitate is nuncius processit. v. 9. ] nempe à malo suo. vide Math. 9.28. v. 11. Lycaonica lingua non fuit specie distincta à Graecâ, sed ejus saltem dialectus. Lingua Lycaonica, lingua Cappadocum. Dii assimilati hominibus descenderunt ad nos] Jupiter apud Ovidium, primo Me∣tamorph. Et Deus humanâ lustro sub imagine terras. v. 13. Sacerdos Jovis stantis] i. e. cujus simulachrum stabat ante urbem. More Gentium, Jovis simulacro Jovis nomen dedit. Grot. Tauros vittatos] Minutius in Octavio. Victimae ad supplicium saginantur, hostiae ad poenam coronantur. Tauros & Coronas] i. e. Tauros coronatos seu vittatos, qui mos erat priscus Gen∣tilitiorum sacrificiorum. Virgil. Victor velatumque auro vittisque juvencum. v. 16. Sivit omnes Gentes suis ipsarum viis incedere] Hoc comparatè, dictum ut sequentia ostendunt. Nec legem illis dedit nec Prophetas, quibus pravos cultus com∣pesceret. SECT. IV. AT Derbe they preach the Gospel, and instruct many; Among others that there gave their Names to Christ, Timothy was one, with his holy Mother Eunice, and Grandmother Lois, who had taken great care of his education and had instructed him in the Scriptures from his infancy. He was well acquainted with the sufferings of his spiritual Father Paul at Antioch of Pisidia, Iconium, and Lystra, as Paul afterwards intimates, 2 Tim. 3.10, 11. The Apostles went no further than this City at this time, but returned the very way they came, travelling back again to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch of Pisidia, confirming in the Faith, as they went along, those whom they had before converted to Christ [See Act. 15.32, 41. & 18.23.], and exhorting them to persevere, and to make account that they must meet with many tribulations in the way to the Kingdom of Heaven. And in all the Churches they constituted (a) Elders. Sic differunt  & . ad Electionem pertinet, & de Ecclesiâ seu populo dicitur, qui solebat extensione manuum leges vel magistratus sciscere, & approbare. Sic 2 Cor. 8.19. est actio Presbyterorum qui aliis ad Presbyterium electis ac vocatis solebant imponere manus; ut precationibus, votis, & congratulationibus suis, illis impetrarent confirmationem dono∣rum, quibus ad functionem redderentur apti. Tribuitur  Apostolis quia ipsi hujus  à populo factae auctores & ductores fue∣runt. Illi enim populum convocarunt, aliquos idoneos viros ipsis praestituerunt, jusseruntque ut Ecclesia extensione manuum approbationem suam declararet. Apostoli ergo ordinarios Presbyteros elegerunt cum approbatione Ecclesiae. by fasting and prayer to teach and guide them. And having commended them to the care of Christ, on whom they believed, they took their leaves of them.
Per Presbyteros intelliguntur omnes qui ad aliquam Leiturgiam seu functionem publicam in Ecclesiá vocatur; sivè sint Doctores & Pastores qui verbum, & Sacramenta administrant; sivè Re∣ctores qui in disciplinae administratione Pastoribus auxilio sunt 1 Tim. 5.17. sive denique ipsi Diaconi qui Elcemosynas administrant: omnes inquam illi officiarii Ecclesiastici, qui Rom. 12.6, 7, 8. diversis enumerantur nominibus, hic uno generali nomine vocantur Presbyteri. Stres. in loc. Then travelling over Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia, and ha∣ving preached the word at Perga, they went down unto Atta∣lia, and thence sailed to Antioch in Syria, (from whence they set out two years before, when they were by the prayers of that Church commended to the Grace and Assistance of the Spirit of God, to be carried on in this great work of conver∣ting the Gentiles. And being come thither, and calling the Church in that City together, they declared what God had done by them, and how he had co-operated with them in their Ministry, and how he had opened a door of Faith to the Gen∣tiles, so that great numbers of them came in, and believed in Christ. Act. 14. v. 21. And when they had preached the Gospel to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch. v. 22. Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to con∣tinue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. v. 23. And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed. v. 24. And after they had passed thorowout Pisidia, they came to Pam∣phylia. v. 25. And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into Attalia. v. 26. And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been re∣commended to the grace of God, for the work which they ful∣filled. v. 27. And when they were come, and had gathered the church toge∣ther, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles. v. 28. And there they abode long time with the disciples. v. 23. Zonaras in Apostolorum Canonem prolixè & elegantèr docet Chirotoniam ab initio designasse suffragia, postea antiquitatis primis rltibus pro consecratione u∣surpatum. uistorpius. nihil aliud declarat quam constituere, creare, ordinare designare, sivè id fiat per suffragium unum, sivè per plura, sivè absque suffragiis omninò. Boifius. . constituentes, non verò ordinantes sensu hodierno Ecclesiastico. Non enim vel argumento vel testimonio adhuc vincor ut credam  per se tunc temporis vel à multis post diebus significâsse vel  vel , vel ordinationem, vel consecrationem. vide 2 Cor. 8.19. Ibi frater iste (cujus laus fuit in Evangelio) dicitur  constitutus ab Eccle∣siis socius peregrinationis Pauli. Ubi vix eredo quenquam velle asserere eum or∣dinatum fuisse ab Ecclesiis, sensu Ordinationis hodierno Ecclesiastico. Euseb. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 6. c. 29. . Omnibus enim fratribus, electionis gratiâ, in Ecclesiâ congrega∣tis. Clariss. Knatchbullus. Hesychius , constituere, decernere▪ ligere. erunt duorum generum; vel enim docendi munere in Ecclesiâ fun∣gebantur, & alio nomine Pastores seu Episcopi dicuntur; vel Pastoribus, & verbi Ministris adjuncti, morum censuram agere, & disciplinam tueri solebant, 1 Tim. 5. Utrosque eligere necesse erat cum Apostoli non diu in uno subsisterent loco, ne per absentiam ipsorum Ecclesia idoneis privaretur ministris. Freidl. v. 27. ] cum ipsis 2 Cor. 6.1. Vocantur Dei . vide eti∣am, 1 Cor. 3.9.
CHAP. IV. Relating Paul's second Journey or Peragration with Barnabas and others, Anno Christi Claudii 52. 10. from Antioch to that famous Council at Jerusalem, which we call, Iter Hierosolymitanum.Iter Hierosoly∣mitanum. SECT. 1. PAul and Barnabas stayed now with the Disciples at Antioch a great while. After which, as it seems, Paul propagated the Gospel as far as Illyricum, (a Country lying on the Adria∣tick Sea, bordering on Macedonia, now call'd Slavonia) prea∣ching such things to them, concerning Christ, as they never heard before; as he himself testifies, Rom. 15.19, 20, 21. Through mighty signs by the power of the spirit of God, so that from Jeru∣salem, and round about Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gos∣pel of Christ: yea so have I striven to preach, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another mans foundation. But as it is written [Isa. 52.15.] To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, and they that have not heard, shall understand. During this time, 'tis probable, he suffered some of those things, which in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, ch. 11. v. 24, 25. he makes mention of, to wit, that he had five times received forty stripes save one from the Jews [See Deut. 25.3.] and thrice been beaten with wands, probably, by the Lictors or Roman officers at the command of the Gentiles; and had thrice suffered ship∣wrack, in one of which it seems, he was a day and a night floa∣ting in the Sea, and yet by the wonderful power and provi∣dence of God, was preserved and delivered out of that extream danger. SECT. II. ABout this time, it seems, certain Jews of the Sect of the Pharisees, who had embraced the Gospel, came down from Judea to Antioch, and taught, that the Gentiles, conver∣ted to Christianity, ought to be circumcised, and keep the Law of Moses, if they would be saved; disturbing and disquieting the Consciences of many of the Brethren in Syria and Cilicia,
by this their perverse DoctrineHinc patet neminem jure offendi posse, si videat in Ecclesiâ hy∣pocritas, falsos Doctores, schismata. Sic enim fuit inde ab Apostolis, & sic oportet esse 1 Cor. 11.19. Mat. 18.7. Haereses non inveniuntur ex∣tra Ecclesiam, sed in Ecclesiâ. Non igitur propter Haereses Ecclesia dese∣renda; si modo sine communione ma∣li licet in eâ manere.. Against these Paul and Barnabas stilly oppose them∣selves, and not without great reason. For many of the Jews were yet zealous for the observance of the Ceremonial Law, as ap∣pears Act. 21.20. And thy were not only hard to be brought off themselves from those Rites wherein they had ever been trained up, but they would have imposed them upon the believing Gentiles also. This bred great disturbance at present, and in time an Apostacy of very many from the Gospel. Paul and Barnabas therefore (who had chiefly to deal in the ministration to the Gentiles) are now sent from Antioch to consult the Apostles at Jerusalem about this case. This is the journey that is spoken of, Gal. 2.1. Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jeru∣salem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me: and I went up by revelation, &c. Not but that he was sent by the Church, but the Church was directed by a special revelation from God, (ei∣ther first signified to them, or else to Paul immediately, and by him made known to them) to take this course for the settling this Question. Paul and Barnabas being brought on their way and accom∣panied by some of the Brethren of Antioch (that it might ap∣pear they went not of their own accord, but as sent by that Church), they declared, as they passed along, to the Brethren, every where, for their comfort and confirmation, what great things God had done by their ministry, in the conversion of the Gentiles. When they came to Jerusalem (being kindly re∣ceived by the Apostles, and Elders, and the Church there), They began to open their Message, acquainting them what suc∣cess God had given to their preaching among the Gentiles, and how wonderfully his Spirit had co-operated with them; Yet so it was, that some Judaizing Christians of the Sect of the Pharisees coming to Antioch had taught, that such Gentiles who embraced the faith, ought to receive Circumcision, and were ob∣liged to the observation of the Ceremonial Law. So that faith in Christ was not judged sufficient (by these men) to justifica∣tion, but according to them, Circumcision, and an observation of the Ceremonial Law must be joyned with it. These things they intimate had bred a difference among them: They were therefore come thither from the Church at Antioch to consult the Apostles in this case; and to desire their determination therein. Hereupon the Apostles and Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, met in Council to consider of this matterv. 6. ] By a common Hebraism, word is put for the business spoken of.. After there had been much dis∣putation and reasoning pro and con; at length Peter stood up, and declared his judg in this case, shewing them, that a good while ago, God made choice of him among all the Apostles first, To preach the Gos∣pel to the Gentiles, as particularly to Cornelius and his Family
[Act. 10. See Sect. 5. of Chap. 2.] And God who alone knows all hearts, and can alone judg of the purity of them, bare witness to those Gentiles, that they were accepted of him, though they were not Circumcised; a clear evidence of which was his giving them the Gifts of his Holy Spirit, both ordinary and extraordinary [Act. 10.44.] as he had done before to the A∣postles themselves. Neither made he any difference between the Jews and them, as to the Gifts and Benefits which are com∣mon to those who believe in Christ; but instead of the exter∣nal purifications of the Law of Moses, he hath purified the hearts both of believing Circumcised Jews, and believing Uncircum∣cised Gentiles, by faith in his Son, whose blood cleanses from all Guilt, and whose Spirit sanctifies and purifies the Heart and Conscience from dead works. He demands therefore why they did press that which was so contrary to the Will of God, and refus'd to believe that, which was so plainly testified to be his Will, namely, that the believing Gentiles were pure, though uncircumcised, so that the Jews might freely converse with them. He further shews, this was a provoking of God, To impose upon the believing Gentiles the yokeDeus propriè non potest dici Legis jugum collo nostro imponere, sicut hi Judaizantes, quia non eo fi∣ne legem mandat quo hi Judaizan∣tes eam volebant mandari, scil. ut medium cujus observatione justifice∣mur & salvemur; sed tantum eo fine ut legis onere pressi, desideremus e∣um, qui nos à lege liberet. Sicut du∣rum onus servitutis collo Israelita∣rum in Aegypto imposuit, ut pressi desiderarent liberationem ex Aegyp∣to. of the Mo∣saical Law, [See Gal. 5.3.] which never be∣longed to them, and which the Jews them∣selves were never able to bear, nor so to per∣form as to be justified thereby. But as our Fathers (saies he) were not saved by the works of the Law [Gal. 3.11. Rom. 3.20.] but by the Grace and Favour of God meri∣ted by the righteousness and sufferings of the Messias, in whom they believed [Heb. 11. Rom. 3.25. Rom. 10.8.]; so do we expect to be saved by the same Grace, and no otherwise. Peter having ended his Speech, Paul and Barnabas declared what Wonders and Miracles God had enabled them to do, in the converting of the Gentiles, which was another argument from Heaven, that God was well-pleased with their Ministra∣tion to the Gentiles, and that the Gentiles were accepted by him, though uncircumcised, seeing they had received the Gifts of the Spirit, as well as they of the Circumcision. Next after them, James the Son of Alphaeus [See of him Act. 12.17. & Sect. 9. of Chap. 2.] began to speak, saying, SimonEbraeum nomen est  quod Graecis litteris scribitur . Graecum verò nomen est . Lu∣cas hic Ebraicam pronunciationem sequutus est, quia Ebraeum Ebraeis in∣inducit loquentem: Peter hath sufficiently demonstra∣ted, that it pleased God sometime since, to look down in mercy upon the Uncircumci∣sed Gentiles, and out of them to take a peo∣ple to himself, to bear his Name, to acknow∣ledg and worship him for their only God. And this is agreeable to what was foretold by the Prophet Amos ch. 9:11, 12. where God declares, that in the latter days, viz. the days of the Gospel, he will raise up and restore the house
or tabernacleRe aedificabo Tabernaculorum David, i. e. Ecclesiam in quâ habi∣tat, & regnat Christus, filius Davi∣dis: cujus olim typus suit tribus Judae cum Benjamin, in qua tabernacu∣lum & sedem quasi Rex, & modera∣tor fixit David. Hoc tabernaculum cecidit in Judaeis incredulis qui Chri∣stum recipere noluerunt; suscitatum est in Apostolis & aliis credentibus è Judaeâ; sed plane restauratum ex Gentibus quae loco Judaeorum huic Tabernaculo & Domni Dei ex toto orbe, quasi vivi lapides, inaedificata sunt. Hieron. in Amos. 9.11 James here speaks the same sense with the Prophet Amos, in words somewhat varying from him, that there should be other nations besides the Jews, which should be called the Lords, and seek after the Lord. of David, (though at present it was low, by the falling off of the Ten Tribes, and other breaches that were made upon it) and change it into a spiritual and everlasting Kingdom under the Messias (of whom David was a Type), which shall comprehend and take in, all the chosen Gentiles; yea, even some of their greatest enemies (typified by Edom) shall be brought under the obedience of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, and operation of the Holy Ghost; so that this Kingdom in this sense, shall be in a more flourishing estate, than in the days of old, [See Ephes. 3.5, 6. & Eph. 2.12, 13, &c.] And this though it were not brought to pass actually, till these latter days, was yet fore∣seen and predetermined by God long ago, and accordingly fore∣told by that Prophet. Therefore thus I judg (says he), and this is my opinion in this matter that we ought not to impose Cir∣cumcision upon the converted Gentiles, nor lay Yokes and Burdens on them, which Christ hath freed them from. Yet that the Jews, who are so zealous to have these Yokes imposed, might have less offence, and the Gentiles no burden neither; he pro∣poseth this temper, viz. That the believing Gentiles for avoid∣ing of scandal to the weak Jews, be required to observe these Four things. First, To refrain from eating things offered to Idols, because it is a kind of participation in that Idolatry, [See 1 Cor. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. & 1 Cor. 8.10.] Secondly, From fornicati∣onJuxta illud Comici, non est flagitium Adolescentem scortari. Per  simplex scortatio intelligitur quae apud Gentes pro peccato non habebatur, praesertìm, si quis faeminis ad hoc venalibus uteretur. Ita Bren∣tius Homil. 68. in Acta., which though against the Moral Law, yet the Gentiles, (it seems) for the most part held to be no sin, or at least no great sin, be∣ing practis'd out of marriage [See 1 Cor. 6.13, 14, 15.]. Thirdly, From things strang∣led, that is, from eating of Beasts which dy∣ed without letting blood, which was an abo¦mination to the Jews [Gen. 9.4. Lev. 17.14.]. Fourthly, From bloodUsus sanguinis non est pecca∣tum, pugnans contra legem naturae, & Decalogi, sed tantum contra legem ceremonialem quae Christianos non obligat. Deus enim discrimen cibo∣rum sustulit, Act. 10.15. Rom. 14.14, 17. 1 Cor. 8.8 & cap. 10.25, 27. Col. 2 16. 1 Tim. 4.3. Tit. 1.15. Non est igitur ab Apostolis interdictus esus sanguinis, nisi quatenus est scan∣dalum fratris infirmi. Ubi igitur non offendit, ibi non est illicitus. Stres., namely, separated from the Beast, whether congealed, or not congealed; which God had (as some think) forbidden, to affright men from all cruelty and blood-shedding, [See Lev. 3. 17.] And besides, blood being, among the Jews, destina∣ted to sacrifices, and to represent the blood of the Messias that makes attonement for sin [Lev. 17.11.], the common use of it was very odious to the Jews. These Four things he advises, that the converted Gentiles be required to forbear, that they might not give offence to the Jews, who could not but have a great ab∣horrence for them, they hearing Moses's writings read in their Synagogues every sabbath day, wherein they are so strictly for∣bidden.
Therefore he thought it fit for the present, That the Gentiles should in a charitable compliance so far condescend to the Jewsq. d. Auctoritas Mosis adhuc nimis magna est apud conversos Ju∣do. Nondum desueverunt à Patriis institutis, & libertatem suam quam in Christo habent, nondum statis intel∣ligunt. Etsi ergò lex ceremonialis Gentes non obligat, tamen Christiana Charitas reuirit, ut se infirmis Judae∣is accommodet quantum possunt, & ab iis altem abstineant, quibus illi maximè ffenduntur.. This proposal of James, the rest of the Council readily agreed unto. And the matter being thus determined, by the ac∣quiescing of all in the judgment of James, the Apostles and Elders thought fit (the whole Church thereunto consenting) to send Judas and Silas, (two of their own number, and men eminent among them) along with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch▪ that by the Testi∣mony of their own Commissioners, and the Letters and Decrees of the Council, the false Teachers might be silenced, and the believing Gentiles confirm'd in the truth, and assured that the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem held the same Doctrine, that Paul and Barnabas had before preached; and that these their Commissioners might also help to compose the minds of those, who by the Adversaries had been disturbed and disquieted. By these four therefore, they send their Letters and Decrees to the Churches in Antioch, and also in Syria and Cili∣cia. (For among them also, the false Teachers had spread their leaven, which afterwards diffused it self further as may appear by Pauls Epistles to the Romans, Galatians, and Philippians, &c.). In their Letters, they give them to understand that they had re∣ceived advertisement, that some Judaizing Christians which went from thence, endeavoured to subvert them, teaching new do∣ctrines, which they never commanded them to teach, mingling the Legal Ceremonies, and the Judaical Observances with the Gospel, and injoining them as necessary to justification: Where∣fore they thought fit, to send two eminent men of their own number to them to accompany Paul and Barnabas (who were persons with whom they fully agreed in this matter of difference, and such to whom they could not but give this Testimony, That in preaching the Gospel, they had behaved themselves with great sincerity and uprightness, and had run the hazard of their Lives for the service of Christ). With them therefore they had sent Judas and Silas, that they might tell the Churches by word of mouth, more largely, what here they had written but brie∣fly. They further tell them, that they had determined in this Case as they were guided by the SpiritHoc discriminis est inter Apo∣stoles, & nos, quod Apostolorum fi∣des erat fundata super testimonio in∣ferno, quo Spiritus Sanctus eorum conscientias efficacitèr persuadebat, & illuminabat ut ita crederent, nec ad aliam auctoritatem provocare opus habebant, quam ad illud testimonium Spiritus quod in corde sentiebant, quamvis mjoris convictionis causâ am saepè ad Scripturam veteris Te∣stamenti provocabant. Nos autem et si etiam internâ il psuasione Spi∣ritus opus habemus, nec sinè eá cre∣dere possumus, tamen ad illam non provocamus, tanquam ad fundamen∣tum cui fides nostra nititur, sed pro∣vocamus ad externum illud testimo∣nium, quod Spiritus Sanctus in Scrip∣turâ sacrâ deposuit. Hic noster Spi∣ritus, cui nititur nostra fides, 1 Joh. 5, 6. Ideò hoc, vel illud credimus, quia legimus in Scripturâ, quod Spi∣ritui Sancto visum sit, nos ita do∣cere. Streso. of God, whose Inspiration and Conduct they had followed, and therefore had decreed, That the believing Gentiles should not be ob∣liged to Circumcision, or other Judaical ob∣servances, but only to those Four necessary things before mentioned; whereof, though abstaining from fornication, and eating things offered to Idols, as such▪ (which was a kind of participation in that Idolatry) be only sim∣ply and absolutely necessary, as being for∣bidden
by the moral Law) yet the other two are necessary in respect of the present time; and for the peace, unity, and edification of the present Church, and to avoid giving scandal to the weak believing Jews: so that there was an accidental and temporary necessity only of abstaining from them, till the infirm Jews were better inform'd, and better understood their liberty in Christ. For afterwards▪ Paul sheweth that nothing is unclean that God hath made for mans use; as we may see, 1 Cor. 8.8. & 10.19. 1 Tim. 4.4. Tit. 1.15. These four persons therefore being dismiss'd by the Council at Jerusalem, came with the decretal Epistle to Antioch, and cal∣ling the Church together, presented it to them; which when they had read, they much rejoiced, that their practise was ap∣proved by the Apostles, and received the exhortation given them in that Epistle with much gladness. Here Judas and Silas (be∣ing men of eminent Gifts in teaching and interpreting the Scrip∣tures) employed themselves in confirming and building up the Brethren in the Faith. After they had stayed at Antioch some∣time, they were with all kindness dismiss'd of the Church there, to go back to Jerusalem; but it seems, for some particular rea∣son, Silas was not willing to return yet, but chose to stay with Paul and Barnabas, who continued at Antioch, instructing those who had received the Faith, and so likewise did many others also. Act. 15. v. 1. And certain men which came down from Judea, taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Mo∣ses, ye cannot be saved. v. 2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissention and dis∣putation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and cer∣tain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders about this question. v. 3. And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed thorow Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and they caused great joy unto all the brethren. v. 4. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things that God had done with them. v. 5. But there arose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees, which belie∣ved, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses. v. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came together for to consider of this matter. v. 7. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them; Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. v. 8. And God which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the holy Ghost, even as he did unto us,
v. 9. And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. v. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? v. 11. But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, even as they. v. 12. Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought a∣mong the Gentiles by them. v. 13. And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me. v. 14. Simon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his Name. v. 15. And to this agree the words of the prophets, as it is written. v. 16. After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of Da∣vid, which is fallen down, and I will build again the ruines thereof, and I will set it up: v. 17. That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my Name is called, saith the Lord, who doth all these things: v. 18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. v. 19. Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned to God. v. 20. But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions of of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood. v. 21. For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day. v. 22. Then pleased it the Apostles, and elders, with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas: namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men a∣mong the brethren, v. 23. And wrote letters by them after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, and brethren, send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia. v. 24. Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us, have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law, to whom we gave no such commandment: v. 25. It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas, and Paul. v. 26. Men that have hazarded their lives for the Name of our Lord Je∣sus Christ. v. 27. We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by mouth. v. 28. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary things: v. 29. That ye obstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well. v. 30. So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the Epistle. v. 31. Which when they had read, they rejoyced for the consolation. v. 32. And Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them.
v. 33. And after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in peace from the brethren unto the Apostles. v. 34. Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still. v. 35. Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preach∣ing the word of the Lord, with many others also. Gal. 2. v. 1. Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me also. v. 2. And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that Gospel, which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain. v. 3. But neither Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised: v. 4. And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage. v. 5. To whom we gave place by subjection no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you. v. 6. But of these, who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me, God accepteth no mans person) for they who seemed to be somewhat, in conference added nothing to me. v. 7. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the uncircum∣cision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the uncircumcision was unto Peter, v. 8. (For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me towards the Gentiles) v. 9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, per∣ceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barna∣bas the right hands of fellowship, that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision. v. 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I also was forward to do. SECT. III. PEter (as it seems) about this time came from Jerusalem to Antioch, and for a while using his Gospel-liberty did eat, and familiarly converse with the believing Gentiles; but cer∣tain Brethren of the Jews, that were FriendsCausa hujus perniciosae dissi∣mulationis indicatur, nempe, eum timuisse Jacobi familiares. Fl. Illyr. of James, and very tenacious of the Ce∣remonial Law, coming thither from Jerusa∣lem; He for fear of offending these men, or incurring their ill will, withdrew himself from the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful to have any fellowship with uncircumcised persons; the lawfulness of which converse, he very well knew, and therefore feigned, and dissembled in this matter. And some other Jewish Converts of the Church of Antioch followed this Example, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their cowardise and dissembling. Paul not brooking this, as contrary to the Gospel liberty, did by virtue of his Apostolick Office, and with authority, rebuke Peter, and openly and freely opposed himself against him in this
matter, expostulating with him, that he being a Jew (and so more bound to observe the Ceremonial Law, which was given to the Jews, and not to the Gentiles), had cast off that Yoke himself, and yet should go about to inforce it upon the Gen∣tiles. And as far as appears, Peter did yield to Paul in this de∣bate, as having truth on his side. Gal. 2. v. 11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. v. 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gen∣tiles: but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision. v. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. v. 14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews: why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? SECT. IV. ABout this time Paul (who desired not only to plant Chur∣ches but also to water them) propounded to Barnabas, that they might go and visit the Churches which they had plan∣ted in several Countries, and see whether they did thrive and grow in the knowledg of Christ, and obedience to him, and ac∣cordingly might exhort, and confirm them. To this Barnabas readily agreed, only desired that they might take his Nephew John Mark along with themSee Col. 4.10.. This Paul was by no means willing to, because he had deserted them before at Pamphylia, and had not accompanied them constantly in their work of preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles [See Sect. 1. of Chap. 3.]. Barnabas took this very ill, that such a blot should rest on his Sisters Son. The contention hereupon grew so sharp between these two holy men, and proceeded to such an exasperationCulpa fuit penes Barnabam. Paulus quaerebat quod justum erat, Barnabas quod humanum. Sunt eti∣am qui notant severitatem hanc Pau∣li profuisse Marco, qui per eam mo∣nitus, fortior in posterum sit factus, ut talis à Paulo salutetur, Col. 4.10. (they therein shewing them∣selves to be men of like passions with others) that Barnabas went away with John Mark to his own Country Cyprus, and Paul chose Si∣las to go along with him. Yet God (who useth to bring good out of evil) turned this to the best; for though they differed about John Mark, yet neither of them forsook his office or ministry, and though they were separated as to their persons, yet not as to Faith or Doctrine and being thus parted the one from the other, the Gospel was published by them in more places.
v. 36. And some days after, Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. v. 37. And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose sirname was Mark. v. 38. But Paul thought not good to take him with them, who de∣parted from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work. v. 39. And the contention was so sharp between them, that they depar∣ted asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus. v. 40. And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God.
CHAP. V. Containing Paul's Third Journey being accom∣panied with Silas, Anno Christi Claudii 53 11 54 12 to visit the Brethren in thse Cities, where He and Barnabas had before preched the Gospel. Which we call, for diinctions sake, Iter Graecum, sive Macedonicum,Itr Grm, sive o∣nium. His Macedonian Journey. SECT. I. PAl being accompanied by Silas, and Titus, and re∣commended to the blessing of God, by the prayers of the Church, travels thorow Syria and Cilicia, to confirm those Churches which he and Barnabas in their first jour∣ney tother had planted. And as they passed thorow the Cities they delivered them the Decrees to observe, which were or∣daied by the Apostles and Elders, met in the Council at Je∣rusalem, whereby those Churches were established in the Faith, and many more every day converted unto Christ. Act. 15. v. 40. And Paul chose Silas, and dparted, being rcommended by the brethren unto the grace of God. v. 41. And he went thorow Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Chur∣ches. Act. 16. v. 4. And as they went thorow the Cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders, which were at Jrusalem. v. 5. And so were the Churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily. SECT. II. ABout this time, as 'tis probable: From Tarsus a Haven in Cilicia, Paul sailed to Crete, and there having for some
time preached the Gospel, left Titus to set in order the things that for want of time were unsetled by him. Tit. 1. v. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed thee. SECT. III. FRom Crete sailing back to Cilicia: At Lystra he sound (a∣mong other Disciples) Timothy born of a Father that was a Greek, though his Mother Eunice was a believing Jew, 2 Tim. 1.5. This young man had been religiously educated by the care of his pious Mother and Grandmother, being from a Child trai∣ned up in the knowledg of the holy Scriptures [2 Tim. 3.14, 15.], but was not circumcised in his infancy, after the custom of the Jews. He was well-reported of by the brethren at Lystra; and some remarkable prophecies, and predictions had passed concer∣ning him, what an eminent instrument he should prove in the Gospel, 1 Tim. 1.18. Paul intending to take him along with him, as his Companion, and to imploy him in preaching the Gospel, that his ministry might not be ineffectual among the Jews, (who knew him to be uncircumcised, and the Son of an uncircumcised Father, and thereupon would not admit him to speak in their Synagogues) he took and circumcisedPaul would not permit Titus to be circumcised being a Gentile, Gal. 2.3. nor suffer that Yoke to be imposed upon the Gentiles, which God had never imposed on them. But Timothy being descended of a Jewish Mother, he circumcised him, to remove scandal from the Jews, Quod non est necessarium ad sa∣lutem, factu vel omissu; aliquando tamen laciendum, vel omittendum est, cum ita conducit ad aedificatio∣nem aliorum, vid. 1 Cor. 9.19, 20. &c. sed cum factio vel omissio talium in∣cipit haberi pro cultu necessario, & Christianae libertati insidiae struuntur, & aedificatio Ecclesiae per illa non pro∣movetur sed impeditur, abroganda sunt & non facienda. Stres. in loc. him. The Apostle and his Companions desired now to propagate the Gospel into the other Provinces of A∣sia, properly so called, (to wit, that part of it which lay about Ephesus) but when they had passed thorow Phrygia and Galatia, (where Paul was most kindly received and welcomed by them, even as if he had been an Angel from heaven, Gal. 4.14, 15.) they were forbidden by some revelation, or in∣ward speaking of the holy Ghost to them, for that timeFor afterwards Paul preached the Gospel there for about two years, See Act. 19.10. to go any further. For this blessed Spirit prescribed to them, what order and course they should hold in preach∣ing the Gospel, directing them to go to one people first, and then to another. Therefore being come to Mysia, they purposed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not, intending to hasten them into Macedo∣nia, to a new work; so that passing by Mysia, they came to Troas, where Paul had by night a VisionManifestationes divinae quae fi∣ebant Prophetis & Apostolis, sivè fi∣erent per visiones sivè per somnia, sivè per instinctus, &c. semper secum habebant tamen lucem Spiritus San∣cti per quam in animis ipsorum essi∣ciebantur sides, & convictio, quod manifestatio esset à Deo; sicut Angeli apparentes hominibus semper appa∣rebant cum claritate Domini, ex quâ constabat quod essent Angeli Domini, Luc. 2. v. 9. Ita divinae compella∣tiones quae fiebant Prophetis & Apo∣stolis semper erant vesttae claritate Spiritus Sancti, ex quâ & per quam divinitas earum testata reddebatur. Stres. from God, and saw a man in a Macedonian habit stand by him, who prayed him to come over in∣to that countrey to help them; the like call he had not in all his travels to any other place. Hereupon he determined to pass from Asia
into Europe, concluding that God had cal∣led him to preach the Gospel in Macedonia. And here Luke seems to have join'd himself to Paul, and ever after to have been his constant Companion. For having spoken in the third person before, he speaks in the first here. Act. 16.1. Then came he to Derbe, and Lystra: and behold, a certain disciple was thre, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewesse, and believed; but his father was a Greek: v. 2. Which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium. v. 3. Him would Paul have to go forth with him, and took, and circum∣cised him, because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for they knew all that his father was a Greek. v. 6. Now when they had gone thorowout Phrygia, and the region of Galati, and were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia, v. 7. After they wre come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spiri suffered them not. v. 8 And they sing by Mysia, came down to Troas. v. 9. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: there stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. v. 10. And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the Gospel unto them. v. 3. Timotheus non fuit circumcisus, quia, ut Talmudici tradunt, non erat jus matri silium circumcidere, patre invito; Patris enim potestas praevalebat. Paulus circumcisionis & usum & omissionem ex temporum & locorum utilitate metiri nove∣rat, & in his rebus dijudicandis lumine fuit perfusus majore quàm aiii Apostoli. Spe∣rabat, Timothei operâ multos ex Judaeis, nondum conversos, ad Christum posse converti. v. 9. Vir quidam Macedo stabat] Nocturnum visum fuit per quietem à Deo im∣missum, ut in Pauli imaginatione compareret vir habitu Macedonico: vel certè, ut ait Menochius, Angelus viri Macedonis speciem & vocem assumpsit; videturque An∣gelus fuisse Tutelaris Macedoniae, Paulum invitans ut ibi Evangelium praedicaret. Confer quae sunt apud Danielem, cap. 10. v. 5.12.13.20.21. Adjuva nos] Angelus curator Macedonum se Macedonibus accenset. Grot. v. 10. ] Argumentum inde trahentes, Nempe ex illo nocturno viso. Consentientes, pariter hoc statuentes, Deum nos vocasse, &c. De Dieu. Ʋt autem visionem viderat, statim studuimus proficisci in Macedoniam] Mutantur per∣sonae, unde liquet Lucam hoc tempore associatum esse Paulo in Troade, quod Gro∣tius primò observat factum, cap. 20. v. 5. At illud, secundum erat tempus cum profiscerentur à Philippis Troada; nunc verò profecti sunt à Troade Philippos. Knatchbull. SECT. IV. PAul, and Silas, with Luke, and Timothy now loosing from Troas, came with a very fair gale to Samothracia, an Island in the Aegean Sea, not far from Thracia, and thence to Neapolis (a City on the borders of Thracia and Macedonia), and from thehce they pass'd to Philippi the chief City of that part of Macedonia, and a Roman Colony. Here on the Sabbath day,
they went out of the City to a place, where a house of prayerUbi domus Orationis lege san∣cita est, esse, est enim  lege sancio. Knatchbull. was appointed by the Law to be by the River side. In this place, Paul preached the Gospel to several women there met together, the men it seems refusing to hear him. And in the time of his preaching, Lydia a stranger, born in Thyatyra (a City that lay on the borders of Mysia and Lydia), a Proselyte of the Jews, had her mind enlightened by the SpiritSpiritus aperit cor sed per Verbum. of God, and her heart graciously inclin'd to embrace the Gospel, and to believe in Christ. Whereupon she her self was forthwith baptized, and desiring to consecrate all within her Family to Christ, her whole hous∣hold was baptized also. Then to testifie her gratitude, she cour∣teously entertained Paul and his Companions in her house. After this, as they went again toward the place of Prayer, a certain maid servant that was possessed with a Devil (who speaking from within her, revealed secret, and future things, and thereby gained much to her Masters) followed them, crying out, These are the servants of the most high God, who declare unto us the way of salvation. Paul not brooking that the truth should be thus rendred suspected by the Testi∣mony of the Father of Lyes, commanded the unclean Spirit, in the Name of Christ, to come out of her, and he came out immediately. The Masters of the Maid seeing their gain, which came in by her divination, now at an end, they drew Paul and Silas before the principal Rulers and Commanders of the Co∣lony there, telling them that these men being Jews, did much disquiet and disturb the City, teaching a religion contrary to theirs, and to the Roman Laws, which permitted the practice of no Worship, but what was approved by the Senate of Rome. The multitude also being by this suggestion enraged against them, the Rulers commanded them to be stript, and beaten, and cast into prison; where they were harshly used by the Gaoler, being thrust into the inner prison, and their feet made fast in the stocks. At midnight as they were praying and singing Psalms (rejoycing that they suffered for Christs sake), there was a great Earthquake, and the prison doors were thrown open, and all the prisoners bands were loosed. The Goaler awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, and appre∣hending his prisoners had made an escape, was ready to have laid violent hands on himself, But Paul cryed out to him that he should not harm himself; for they were all there. Then he came trembling in, and fell at the Apostles feet, as one that would intreat pardon for his hard usage of them; and bring∣ing them out of the inner prison, he spake to them to this pur∣pose. Sirs, I now see and acknowledg that the doctrine taught by you is the truth of the Eternal God, and he hath by this mi∣racle testified to me, that you are his true and faithful servants. Tell me therefore I beseech you, what I must do to be saved. They
tell him, He must believev. 3. , Phrasis insignis, quae satis declarat, quod vera fides sit inclinatio, & in∣nixio cordis in Christum tanquam in fulcrum sustentans. Sicut Adonijah reus mortis apprehendebat cornua Alta∣ris, 1 Reg. 1.50. Ita cor metu sui reatûs contritum, apprehendit cru∣cifixum Christum ut ejus merito tu∣tumsit. on the Lord Je∣sus Christ, which if he, and his Family (b) shall do, they shall be saved. Then they more largely opened to him and his houshold the Doctrine of the Gospel, and he to testi∣fie his love and thankfulness to them washed their stripes, and used the best remedies he could to asswage the pain,Salvaberis tu & domus tua] Fides patris-familias non salvat fa∣miliam directè sed indirectè quatenus patrem-familias impellit, ut famili∣am quoque suam in doctrinâ Evan∣gelii instituat, vel institui curet, ut credant sicut ipse. Streso. and heal the wounds and soreness, that remained to them from their scourging: Then immediately the Goaler and all his houshold, were baptized un∣to Christ, and dedicated unto his service. And further to testifie his respect and kind∣ness to the Apostles, he set meat before them to refresh them, and rejoiced exceedingly that he and his had obtained so great mercy from God, as to be brought to believe in Christ. When it was day, the Magistrates (possibly being terrified with the Earthquake, or considering how injuriously they had used the Apostles, only for casting out a Devil) sent their Serjeants to release them (yet privily) out of prison. The Goaler be∣ing glad of their release, chearfully brought them the news of it. But the Apostles refusedChristiana humilitas nos non obligat ad negligendam famam vel ad admittendam infamiam cum eam legitimè possimus à nobis avertere. Nam post bonam conscientiam non est majus bonum, quod homo magis tenetur custodire, quam bona fa∣ma, vid. Prov. 22.1. Prov. 15.30. Eccles. 7.1. Phil. 4.8. Hoc fine ergo voluit Paulus honorificè e∣duci ne ad impedimentum Evange∣lii spargeretur de ipso haec infamia, quod incarceratus Philippis, formi∣dine malae conscientiae effracto car∣cere clam aufugisset. to be thus privily released, alledging that the Rulers had without any legal tryal scourged them, who were not only innocent persons, but free men of Rome, and had the right and pri∣viledg of the Citizens thereof; and so by the Valerian Law, might not be bound; and by the Sempronian might not be scourged with∣out a legal Processe [See ch. 22.25.]. The Governours understanding this, and know∣ing that the punishment was great for any man to injure a Citizen of Rome, they came themselves, and brought them out, and be∣sought them to depart. And from the prison they went to the house of Lydia, and having spent some time in confirming and strengthning the brethren, they departed thence. Act. 16. v. 11. Therefore loosing from Tarsus, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis: v. 12. And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that city abiding cer∣tain days. v. 13. And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made, and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither. v. 14. And a certain woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatyra, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. v. 15. And when she was baptized, and her houshold, she besought us, say∣ing,
If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she constrained us. v. 16. And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination, met us: which brought her masters much gain by sooth-saying. v. 17. The same followed Paul and us, and cryed, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation. v. 18. And this did she many days: but Paul being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the Name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And he came out the same hour. v. 19. And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the market-place unto the rulers, v. 20, And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city, v. 21. And teach customs which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans. v. 22. And the multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commnded to beat them. v. 23. And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jaylor to keep them safely. v. 24. Who having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks. v. 25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them. v. 26. And suddenly there was a great earth-quake, so that the founda∣tions of the prison were shaken, and immediately all the doors were opened, and every ones bands were loosed. v. 27. And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled. v. 28. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm, for we are all here. v. 29. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas. v. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be sa∣ved? v. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thin house. v. 32. And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house. v. 33. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was baptized, he and all his straightway. v. 34. And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house. v. 35. And when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, Let those men go. v. 36. And the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul: The magi∣strates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in peace. v. 37. But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondem∣ned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison, and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily, but let them come themselves, and fetch us out. v. 38. And the sergeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared when they heard that they were Romans.
v. 39. And they came, and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the city. v. 40. And they went out of the prison, and entred into the house of Lydia; and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed. v. 13. ] Est locus Judaeorum ubi orant. Oratorium sive locus oratio∣tionis. Dic ubi consistas in quâ te quaero proseuchâ. Juven. Sat. 3. v. 16. Puellam quandam habentem spiritum Pythonis] Epitheton Apollinis qui responsa dabat pretentibus , unde Apollo Pythius, qui & Delphi∣cus, â loco illo celebri dicebatur, cui etiam nomen fuit Pytho, quem Graeci inter∣pretes aliquoties in Bibliis  sunt interpretati, quod ex obsessarum mu∣liercularum ventre oracula soleret edere, Hebraei  vel  istud Daemonium vocare solent, q. d. utres quod mulierum eo daemone correptarum ventres instar u∣trium intumescerent. v. 20. ] licet  sit ille, qui militibus praeest tamen in mu∣nicipiis etiam civiles & urbani magistratus  dicebantur. v. 22. Scindentes vestimenta illorum] Factum hoc ex more Romanorum, qui virgis caedendos vi spoliabant vestimentis, scindentes quae ultro detrahi non pote∣rant. v. 27. Stricto gladio erat seipsum interempturus] Metu nimirum gravioris sup∣plicii. Solebant enim commentarienses, si effugissent vincti, eandem pati poenam quam vincti passuri erant. v. 32. Sermonem Domini] i. e. Evangelium de Christo, ejusque beneficiis. v. 33. Baptizatus est ipse & omnes domestici illius  illic] Similia exem∣pla dati sine mora baptismi habemus supra c. 8. 38. & 10.48. & 16.15. v. 37. Viros Romanos Synecdochicè in plurali dicit. Nam jus civitatis Romanae solus habebat Paulus. Civem Romanum omnino virgis caedi non licebat per leges Porcias & Sempronias; quanto minus causâ indictâ. Novit Paulus ad innocentiae & causae bonae praesidium etiam legibus uti. Grot. v. 38. ] Ita enim constituerant leges ut in cive Romano laeso ipsa po∣puli Romani majestas laesa crederetur. SECT. V. FRom Philippi (where they had been thus ill used, See 1 Thes. 2.2.), they came to Thessalonica the chief City in Mace∣donia; and here being a Synagogue of the Jews, (Paul as his manner was) went unto them, and first preached the Gospel to them, and for three Sabbath days together, plainly shewed them, that it was foretold in the Scriptures, that the Messias promised to the Jews, must suffer death and rise again, and that this Jesus whom he preached, is, that long expected Messias. Some of the Jews hereupon were perswaded to believe and embrace the Faith, and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and so likewise did many of the Greeks that were Proselytes, and ma∣ny women also of the better quality. Here Paul instructed them, not only concerning faith in Christ, but also concerning Antichrist, and when he should be revealed (as appears from 2 Thes. 2.2, 3, 4, 5.). And here also he received relief from the believing Philippians, once and again for the supply of his necessities, as he testifies, Phil. 4.16. But several of the Jews in this city, continuing in their unbelief, and being enraged at the Apostles, took to them certain lewd people of the Town, and assaulted the house of Jason, where they lodged, intending to drag them out to the people, and possibly to stone them. But finding them not there, they haled Jason, and some other
believers, who, as it seems, had newly receiv'd the Gospel, before the Magistrates vehemently accusing the Apostles and their followers, as disturbersNon alio modo turbant orbem quam Medicus suis Pharmacis turbat aegrotum. of the peace, and enemies to Caesar; whereas they only endea∣voured to advance the spiritual kingdom of Christ, without doing any injury to the Ro∣man Empire. However these (though false) suggestions and criminations much troubled the people and the Magistrates. But when they had received satisfaction and security from Jason, and the rest that they would appear when called for, they dis∣missed them. However the Brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by nightDisce hinc, Fugâ evadere peri∣culum persecutionis, licitum esse. Mat. 10.23. unto Beraea; whi∣ther being come they found there, persons beter bred, and of a more ingenuous tem∣per than those they had met with in Thessa∣lonica, and who examined whether the Doctrines taught by Paul were agreeable to what the Scriptures foretold of the Messias, or no: and here thier endeavours were blessd with the Conversion of many of the Jews, and likewise of the Gentiles, and several of them were persons of the betr sort. But the unbelieving Jews of Thessalonica hear∣ing of this, follow the Apostles hither also, with their persecu∣tion. Hereupon the Christians of this place (to cause these Persecutors to give over their pursuit), sent Paul towards the Sea-side, as if he meant to take ship, and to go quite away out of those parts: In the mean time some of them conducted him to Athens. But Silas and Timothy not being so much known or malic'd, as Paul was, stayed a little while longer, further to edifie the believers here. Act. 17. v. 1. Now when they had passed thorow Amphipolis, and A∣pollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews. v. 2. And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures. v. 3. Opening and alledging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and ri∣sn again from the dead: and that this Jesus whom I preach unto you, is Christ. v. 4. And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas: and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few. v 5. But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lew fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people. v. 6: And when they sound them not, they drew Jason, and certain bre∣thren unto the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also. v. 7 Whom Jason hath received: and these all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying, Tt thre is another King, one Jesus. v. 8. And they troubled the people, and the rulers of the City, when they heard these things.
v. 9. And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go. v. 10. And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea: who coming thither, went into the synagogue of the Jews, v. 11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they re∣ceived the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so. v. 12. Therefore many of them believed: also of honourable women, which were Greeks, and of men not a few. v. 13. But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledg that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people. v. 14. And then immdiately the brethren sent away Paul, to go as it were to the sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there still. v. 15. And they that conducted Paul, brought him unto Athens, and recei∣ving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus, for to come to him with all speed, they departed. v. 1. Amphipolis urbs vicina Philippis. Apollonia mari adsita Corinthiorum & Cor∣cyraeorum celonia. Thessalonica urbs praeclara Macedoniae ad sinum Thermaicum, condita à Philippo Amyntae filio, post victoriam de Thessalis, unde urbi nomen. v. 3. ] intellige , ponens ob oculos Christum debuisse pati. v. 4. ] significat plane illos addictos fuisse Paulo & Silae, sicut & res haereditariae apud Hebraeos. Graeci religiosi erant qui legem quidem Mosis non sus∣ceperant, sed idolatriâ, & pravis moribus relictis, unum colebant Deum. v. 5.  sunt circumforanei, qui otiosi & ignavi forum frequentabant. Tacitus vocat sordidam plebem Circo & theatris assuetam. v. 6. Qui orbis terrarum statum subverterunt: , h. e. , hoc est, qui caelum terrae miscuerunt & novis inauditisque dogmatis omnia repleverunt. Politici qui saepe dogmata vera à falsis, salubria à noxiis non norunt distinguere, omnia nova suspecta habent. v. 7. Regem alium dicentes nempe Jesum] Nec populus Romanus olim, nec posteà Caesares permisère in regionibus devictis quenquam regem dici nisi suo permissu. Nec Pilatus nec Macedones hi intelligebant regnum Christi ejus esse ingenii, ut Regibus mundi hujus non obstaret, imo & illorum firmaret imperia multis modis. v. 9. ] Satis accipit cui cavetur, quantum legi aut Judici, aut vi∣ro bono satis est. Grot. v. 10. Beraea urbs Macedonia non Procul à Pella. v. 11. h. e.  magis ingenui, generosiores: Audiebant patien∣ter, cogitabant de re, inquirebant; non generis nobilitatem, sed mansuetudinem ani∣mi designat hoc loco . Boisius. v. 15. ] qui Paulum constituebant, h. e. qui conabantur Paulum constituere scil.  in tuo. Verbum actionis pro conatu. Qui deducebant, i. e. illi qui pro satellitibus & stipatoribus erant in perieuloso iti∣nere.
SECT. VI. PAul being come to Athens, he sends for Silas and Timo∣thy speedily to come to him, foreseeing a need of more Labourers in that placeEx totâ historiâ satis clarum est, quod conatus Pauli in hac civi∣tate reformandâ major suerit quam in aliis civitatibus, sed effectus mi∣nor.. In the mean time, he diligently views and observes their  by which is un∣derstood any thing where divine worship is offered, or whereby di∣vine worship is practised. their Temples, Idols and Al∣tars, and takes notice how that City was  more full of Idolatry than any o∣ther. At this, his Spirit was much stirred within him, a holy indignation being kind∣led in his breast, to see their horrible Idola∣try and Superstition. He therefore sets himself to reform this great evil. And first, he applies himself to the Jews, and re∣ligious proselytes there, teaching Christ in their Synagogue. Then in the Market-place, and such places of publick concourse, he took occasion to make known the Doctrine of Christ to such as he met with there. And some of the Philosophers, of the Sect of the Epicureans, and Stoicks, encountred him and dis∣puted with him; and some of them derided and slighted him, calling him Babler: Others said, he was a publisher and setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached Jesus, and the resur∣rection. Hereupon they brought him to Areopagus, the place of Judicature in Athens, and examined him more strictly, what new religion it was he taught; the temper of that people being very inquisitive after new things. Paul being brought before the Judges in Areopagus spake to them, to this purpose, Ye men of Athens, I look upon you, as those which are generally given to the worship of moreAthenienses adeò superstitiosi erant ut putarent sibi colendum quic∣quid uspiam terrarum pro Deo co∣leretur & quia timebant ne omnium populorum Dii sibi non essent cog∣niti, etiam incognitis altaria erige∣bant. gods or Daemons than other cities are. For as I passed up and down in your City, beholding your Altars and Images, I found an Altar with this Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD: Whom ye profess to worship, and yet know not, him do I preach unto you, namely, The invisible God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, who cannot be con∣tained in any Shrine, or Temple of mans framing. Nor can any Image made by mans hands be a proper instrument to re∣present him; Neither does he need any of the Sacrifices, or Gifts that are offered to him by men, seeing he gives to all their very life, and all that they have. And of one man and woman, viz. Adam and Eve, hath he made the whole race of mankind, and hath ordained their time, and place, when, and where, they shall dwell on the face of the earth: And the end of all this is, That they might seek after Him, that crea∣ted them, and worship him sincerely. And though they were lest through their fall, and degeneracy from Him, as in the
dark yet is this invisible God palpably to be discerned, and his glorious wisdom, power and goodness (manifestd in his works of Creation and Providence), distinctly, and clearly to be known, if men would but seek and grope after him. And indeed we need not go out of our selves to find him, for he is very near every one of us. For our life, motion, and subsistence is wholly by him, and by his power, according to that which Aratus (a Poet of your own who hath written of the course of the Heavens) once delivered, saying, We are also his offspring, that is, we are descended from God by Creation. God therefore being our Creator, can in no rea∣son be supposed to be the work of our hands, as an Image of Gold, or Silver, or Stone is: And how irrational is it for man, the Image of God, to adore an Image, or work made by his own hands, which falls so short of representing the infinite, and invisible God, that it cannot represent the Spirit and Soul, the Reason and Understanding of man. And though God in his infinite patience hath long born with the world, thus lying in ignorance, and going on in such prodigious conceits, yet now he causeth his Gospel to be preached to all Nations, and thereby calls and invites them to repentance, and to forsake their Idols and sinful ways, which they ought seriously and speedily to do, because he hath appointed a day wherein he will judg the world in righteousness by his Son Jesus Christ, of which he hath given assurance by raising him from the dead. [vid. Act. 10.42.] When Paul had mentioned the resurrection of the dead, some of those learned men (probably those of the Sect of the Epicureans who denyed all uture life) fell a scoffing; but some others of them desired to hear him again concerning those matters. So for the presnt he left them, having performed his part in sowing the good seed of the Gospel among them. And though we read not of any great success Pauls ministry had in this famous University, yet it pleased God to incline the hearts of some in this place to believe, and embrace his Doctrine, and to adhere to him. Among whom were Dionysius (one of the Areopagites, or Senators and Judges in Areopagus), and a wo∣man call'd Damaris with some others. Act. 17. v. 16. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry. v. 17. Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him. v. 18. Then certain Philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountred him: and some said, What will this bablr say? Other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection. v. 19. And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know, what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?
v. 20. For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean. v. 21. (For all the Athenians and strangers which were there, spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing). v. 22. Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars-hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. v. 23. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. v. 24. God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwelleth not in Temples made with hands. v. 25. Neither is worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things. v. 26. And hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. v. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us. v. 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being, as certain also of your own Poets have said, For we are also his off-spring. v. 29. for as much then as we are the off-spring of God, we ought not to think that the God-head is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art, and mans device. v. 30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now command∣eth all men every where to repent: v. 31. Because he hath appointed a day in the which he will judg the world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. v. 32. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mock∣ed, and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. v. 33. So Paul departed from among them. v. 34. Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius, the Arcopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and o∣thers with them. v. 16. ] h. e. Civitatem idolis refertam. Athenae urbs fauorum referta. Cicero. Zenophon in Atheniensium repub. inquit festa duplo plura agitant quam alii. Sic Geographis dicuntur loci , multis arboribus referti. Syrus vertit civitatem plenam idolis. v. 16. Epicurei à Stoicis in doctrinâ valde discrepant. Illi enim pro summo bono voluptatem habebant, Deum & providentiam nec non animorum imortalitatem nega∣bant. Hi vero summum bonum in virtute collocabant,  asserebant, affe∣ctus è naturâ tollebant, absolutum & irrevocabile fatum, Deo ipsi leges praescribens, introducebant. : non à  dico sed à  colligo. Metaphora ab aviculis sumpta, quae sata in agris depascuntur, & semina legendo, i. e. colligendo, victum sibi quaerunt, ut columbae, semina per arvum sparsa. Inde apud Atticos ad homines istos translata fuit ista vox, qui circa mercatus & fora versantur, ut quae ex saceis defluunt colligunt, atque inde vivant; eoque viles, & contempti ho∣mines describuntur, qui foro perreptantes dicta aliorum captant, & quae ex ore cu∣jusque velut grana è sacco, excidunt, colligans ut habeant quod fabulentur, & garriant. Syrus, quid vult hic collector verborum? Quid vult vilissimus iste homuncio dicere? Sic Boi∣sius. Novorum Deorum nuncius esse videtur] Non rarum id, publico scito extranea Numina admittere, & maè audiebant quòd faciles essent in admittendis sacris peregrinis. Hic igitur perperàm interpretantes verba ejus, tam Anastasin quam Jesum Daemonium seu seu Numen adorandum esse, eum indicare voluisse, sunt opinati, quod & Chrysostomus ibi annotat. Seldenus. v. 19. In Areopagum] Erat Areopagus, teste Stephano, vicus Athenis à Templo Mar∣tis sic dictus. In templo Martis Judices, dicti Areopagitae, judicabant. De Dieu.
Areopagus erat locus judicandi, & Areopagitae ipsi Judices quos Solon instituit. Duxerunt eum ad Arepgum, non ad Judicium, sed quod ibi multi esse solerent ho∣mine, eruditi, senatores, oratores, & alii vid. infra 34 Grot v 21. Peregrint qui ibi ad tempus diversabantur, facile imbibebant civium vitia.  hic est quod Plinius lib. 1. ep. 13. Vocat in stationibus sedere, tempusque audien∣ds fbuis conterere. & ep. 22. gmnasia, particus, & tonstrinas sectari longsque fabula∣t onibu suum aliorumque otium delectare. Pricaeus. Hanc levitatem sui civibus saepe ex probrat Demosthenes, ut in Oratione illa, quâ respondet Epistolae Philippi v. 2. ] i. e.  inquit Chrysostomus. Beza, Conspicio vos quasi religiosiores vulgo, supersttiosiores. Boisiu sic. Quacunque eo (inquit Pau∣lus) con picio quaedam quae quam sitis vos O Atheniense cltu divino dediti, cla∣rum & testatum aciant. Nam petransiens, &c . A Worshipper of Dae∣mons, or dead Hero's. See Mr. Mede's Apostacy of the la times. v 23.  Philoni  nt ea per quae Dii coluntur, Unde culturas hic non mae vertit Latinus. Grot.  propriè est id ipsum quod colitur, quae quidem apud Athenienses erant sm  Mlim t men numina vestra reddere. Sic Paulus 2 Thes. 2.4. . De Dieu ] Laertius Orginem hujus rei narrns, dicit ab Epimenide monitos Athenienses, pestilenti Athenis obortá, ut scra facerent , i. e. ei Deo ad quem ea re prtineret, & qui poest tm habuit pestilent ae averiu cndae, quis∣quis i tandem foret. uod utem verus Deus Judaeorum Ath niensibu ignotas erat, videtur inde proenisse qud Judaei  Dei nomen non offerebant vul∣gò, ne Getium ludibrio exponeretur, vl etiam in Populo Dei vilesceret. Nec po∣terant Gentes ex cul u Judaico, (qui ab Deorum Gentilium cultu plurimam distabat) certi quid coigere. Lucanus. — & delita sacris Incerti Judaea Dei — Cognitus ergo erat verus Deus aliquo modo Atheniensibus, scil. confusâ aliqu noti∣tiâ, ignotus distincte, & actu: Ignorantes coluerunt istud numen quod Paulus iis an∣nunciavit, & quàdam conuâ notitiâ invocarunt tanquam naturae opificem, & si non ante, sltem Hadriani Caesaris temporibus (qui à nato Christo CXX annis claruit) Deo suppl carunt Gentilium sapientiores ut teis est Arrianus▪ n bilis ejus temporis scriptr Dissert. Epictet l. 2. c. 7. ubi inquit , Deum invocantes precamur eum, Domine miserere nostri, quae est Eccle∣sia Chnae precatio. 26. Ex uno sanguine] i. e. Ex semine unius Adami, ut eo, quoque modo nos om∣nes quodam naturali cogntionis vinculo collgare. v. 27 Ʋt quarerent Dominum, si sortè palpando eum invenirent] Ostendit aliquam rei difficultatem. Nam palpare aut caecorum est, aut noctu incedentium. Sic Deus in crea∣turis invenitur, qando post diligentem inquisitionem & serutationem actu contrecta∣tur, & aeternita, omniscientia, omnipotentia, & bonias ejus quasi tanguntur. Non longe abest ab unquoque nostrum] nempe vi poteniae suae 8en ep 41 Prope est à te Deus tecum est, inius est Nihil Deo clusum est. Interest animis nostris & cogitatio∣nibus meds intervenit. Jovis omnia pletia. Virgilius. v. 28. In ipso vivimus, movmur & sumus] In ipso id est per ipsum, ipsius beneficio. , Animo scil. quod de Jove dixerat Aratus in Phaenom: id vero Deo ptat Paulus. Claruit Aratus tempore Ptolemaei Phildelphi. In aureis Pytha∣gorae carminibu simile extat hemisticum. , sensus est, Hominem naturae suae praestantiâ Deum quodammodo referre, quod Scriptura dicit ad imaginem Dei esse conlitum. 29 Non debemus existimare auro, argento, lapidi. ] i. e.  arie & ingeniu hominis sculptis. Ad veroum scripturae artis & cogita∣tionis hominum, & sic reddidit Vet Interp. Nemo persuadere i quit sibi debet Deum esse auro similem argento vel lapidi, quem ars aut humana cogitatio formavit Heinsius. Per  non modo sculptile opus, sed etiam pictum & omnia ea intelliguntur, quae homines colendo aut repraesentando numini solent commin sci. Beza. v. 30.  i. e. Cum eluti connivendo praeteriisset. v. 31. ] Hoc est, ceto & side digno argumento probans Chri∣stum fore Judicem, quum eum  mortuis suscitaverit. Deus Jesum resuscitando è mor∣tuis maximum doctrinae ejus testimnium praebui In eâ autem doctrinâ & hoc erat, se fore Judicem humani generis. Math. 25 31. Joh 9.28.29. v. 32. Aliqui sannis cum excipiebant] Nempe Epicurei. lii verò, audiemus te rusus de hac re] Nempe Stoici qui hominis mortui restitutionem non putabant impossibilem, ut ostendimu ad lib. 2. de V. R. Christianae. Grot.
34. Dionysius Areopagites] Unus ex illo nobilissimo Senatu, qui & in republicâ multum habebat authoritatis & de caedibus & vulneribus judicabat. Graeci vocant . Valerius Maximus sanctissimum Concilium. Multum proculdubio profuit Evangelio, viri tam gravis, & publico testimonio probati, con∣versio. SECT. VII. SIlas and Timothy being now come to Paul from Beroea, He sends Timothy to the Thessalonians to confirm them in the Faith. For he bare a great love to them, and had a great de∣sire to have gone to them himself, but was hindred, 1 Thes. 2.18. & ch. 3. 1, 2. Which journey Timothy performing and re∣turning again to him, e're he left Athens [1 Thes. 3.6, 7.] and bringing him good tydings of their perseverance in the faith and growth in grace, he sends him (together with Silas) again in∣to Macedonia further to confirm the Churches there [Act. 18.5.] ordering them to come to him to Corinth, whither he was now going. SECT. VIII. PAul now leaving Athens comes to Co∣rinthHujus urbis subactio sub obedi∣entiam Evangelii ab ipso Paulo, habe∣tur pro nobilissima parte sui Apostola∣tûs, super qua maxime triumphat vo∣cans illam Ecclesiam Sigillum sui A∣postolatus, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. Luxus & libidines Corinthiorum in proverbium abierunt. Unde, Paulus nullibi quam in Epistolis ad Corinthi∣os contra scortationem magis invehi∣tur, 1 Cor. 5. & 6. 2 Cor. 12.21., where he found Aquila a Jew of the Province of Pontus in Asia and Priscilla his wife, who were come lately from Italy, because ClaudiusQuae Claudio causa fuerit hujus exilii, non certò constat. Aliqui pu∣tant quod propter fervidas disputato∣nes de Messiâ sen Christo quae erant inter Judaeos Christianos, & non-Christianos, fuerint ejecti à Claudio, aliquid mali à Christi regno sibi me∣tuente. had by his decree banished all Jews from Rome. He being there in a strange place, and out of moneys, be∣takes himself to work with his own hands for his subsistence. It seems he had learn'd the trade of tent-making before he set him∣self to his studies, it being the Custom of the Jews to learn some tradeThe Jews have a saying among them, What is commanded a Father toward his Son? To circumcise him, to redeem him, [Num. 18.15.] to teach him the Law, to teach him a Trade, and to take him a Wife. R Judah saith, He that teacheth not his Son a Trade, does as if he taught him to be a Thief., yea, though they were to be Students. He had indeed power and warrant to challenge maintenance for his preaching, as he intimates many times in his Epistles. But there was not yet any Church at Corinth to maintain him; and be∣sides the Corinthians being ordinarily very covetousAvaritia apud ipsos maxme graslata est, quae unica videtur fuisse causa ob quam Paulus necessarum putavit Corinthiis, , 1 Cor. 9.13. 2 Cor. 11.7, 8, &c. & 12.13.14. Venerant etiam ad hanc Ecclsim Pseudo Apostoli illi, qui in Synodo Hierosolymitanâ condemnati, per in∣vidiam ubique obsisteb ut Paulicon∣tibus, & hoc sine se passim sserebnt ad gratis docendum., and greedy of gain, he would not take any thing of them, lest it should have hindred the success of his ministry. He therefore being of the same trade with Aqui∣la and Priscilla, he took up his lodging with them, and wrought at their trade. On the Sabbath-days he went into the Synagogue of the Jews, and reasoned and discoursed with them concerning the Messias promised to the Fathers, and endeavoured to perswade both
Jews and Proselytes to embrace his Doctrine. But when Silas and Timothy were come to him, and had brought him tydings of the great proficiency and growth of the Macedonian Churches, he was then pressed in Spirit, and grew more earnest, to bring on the Jews of Corinth to embrace the Gospel, and accordingly te∣stified to them that Jesus was the Christ, the true Messias whom they had so long expected. But they vehemently opposed him and railed at him and his Doctrine most contumeliously. Where∣upon he shook his Garments, and told them plainly, Their blood was upon their own heads (See 2 Sam. 1.16.) and that they were guilty of their own destruction [See Act. 13.46, 51.]. And seeing they were so obstinate, he would now leave them, and with Silas and Timothy go preach to the Gentiles. And so go∣ing out of the Synagogue, he went into the house of one Ju∣sius, (by birth a Gentile, but a Jewish Proselyte) whose house, it's probable, he chose as a fit place to preach the Gospel in, to such as would be willing to heat him And his endeavours here were not without success. For Crispus the chief RulerThe Rulers of the Synagogue were as Ecclesiastical Counsellers set o∣ver the Synagogues to keep and go∣vern them in good order. See Act. 13.15. See Sect. 2. of ch 3. Note (b). of the Synagogue, and his houshold were brought to believe, with several others, among whom were Gaius, and the houshold of Stephanas, whom He baptized, 1 Cor. 1.14, 16. But notwithstanding this good success, the Apostle (as it it seems) was now through human frailty possessed with some fear and apprehension of danger to his person from the Jews, and therefore had thoughts of going thence, and leaving the City. But whilst he was agitating these things in his mind, it pleased God to speak to him in a Vision by night, that he should fear nothing, for He would be present with him to secure him from all harm, and bad him go on confidently to preach the Gospel there, for he had much people in that City, whom he in∣tended effectually to call by his ministry. Hereupon he conti∣nued there a year and half, preaching the Gospel; and as we may gather from 2 Cor. 12.12. he wrought many miracles for Confirmation of his Doctrine, and converted many. Act. 18. v. 1. After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth, v. 2. And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome) and came unto them. v. 3. And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought (for by their occupation they were tent-makers). v. 4. And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and perswaded the Jews and the Greeks. v. 5. And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in spirit, and testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ. v. 6. And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads, I am clean: from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles. v. 7. And he departed thence, and entred into a certain mans house, na∣med Justus, one that worshipped God, whose house joyned hard to the synagogue,
v. 8. And Crispus the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord, with all his house: and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. v. 9. Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: v. 10. For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee, to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city. v. 11. And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them. v. 2. Eo quod edixisset Claudius  ut excederent omnes Judaei Roma]. Memi∣nit hujus edicti Suetonius in Claudio. Exierunt igitur Româ cum Judaeis ipsi Christi∣ani, quia illi ad seculi morem generali Judaorum nomine erant contenti. v. 5. ] tenebatur animo testificari Judaeis Jesum esse ipsum Christum, Had an earnest mind, or was earnestly minded.  pro . Participium pro infinitivo ponitur verbis animi affectionem sig∣nificantibus. Knatchhull. Testificabatur Paulus Judaeis Jesum esse Christum sed absque successu. Atque ideo , h. e. in dolore crat summo, & intimis angebatur sensibus, quod opera sua nusquam inutilius poneretur quam apud fratres suos, & cognatos se∣cundum carnem. Boisius. v. 6.  ves;timemta, h. e. vestem exteriorem nimirura togam oblongam. Pluralis pro singulari. Sanguis vester super caput vestrum]. q. d. Si quid vobis mali evenerit, scitote id vestrâ culpâ evenisse. ] Steti in specula & clamavi, vid. Ezek. 33.4. v. 13. ] Nempe . Populus multus] Populus hic dicuntur ii qui facilè Christi populus fieri poterant ut oves, Joh. 10.16.
SECT. IX. DUring his abode here, in his own name and in the names of Silas and Timothy he writes his First Epistle to the Thessalonians. In which Epistle there are these two principal parts. First, He endeavours to confirm them in the Faith of Christ, and to assure them of his sincere affection to them, and encourages them to constancy in the profession of the Gospel, notwithstanding the ma∣ny afflictions they met with, on that account, Chap. 1.2, 3. Secondly, He instructs and exhorts them to holiness of life and conversa∣tion, inserting a consolatory discourse touching the resurrection of the dead, Chap. 4, 5. The First Epistle n the Thessaloni∣ans.IN the First part, (After his Apostolical Salutation to the Church of the Thessalonians, which by the Grace of God, and Gospel of Christ preached unto them, had been converted to the Faith, and which was established in the Faith and belief of God the FatherIn Deo Pae & Do∣mo nostro J Chrsto i. e. Qe clit Deum & Jesum, vel quae perseverat in fide in Deum, & in Christum. aabus. and Jsus Christ, whom he hath sent), he declares, 1. H w th ofl he was to God for their sincere conversion, and how he daily md mntio f thm in his prayers, humbly beseching the Lrd thy might prsere. And how jyfully and continually he remembred that good work of thir sith, by which they so curagiously embraced the Gospel of Christ, that exclent chrity which they had tstified by their care, and pains, and industry for the god f the Saints, that patience and constancy which their hope in Cri d wught in them; all which graces, as they had manifested (by their ff) re men▪ so h doubted not, but they endeavoured to approve their hts to GdAcer stimlus ad b  gen∣dum est me∣moria prae∣sentis Dei. in the exercise of thm (as became good Children to their  Fthr), in whse sight thoe graces are highly pleasing, v. 2, 3. 2ly. He prfsss his firm blif f their Election, which was manifested to him by many clr signs thref 1. His ministry among thm had been accompa∣ni with xtradinary and miraculus gifts, and the powerful operation, and ff cacy of the H ly Ghost in their heartt, so that they were fully assur'd and per∣sud of the truth of the Gospel which he had preached unto them. And they thmslves might remmber what manner of entrance, he, and his fellow-labou∣rers in the Gspl had among them, in so much, that they not only embraced the Doctrine f Christ, but firmy adhered to it, though attended with persecution, and that with demonstration of such aTalia dona non largitur D us nisi cum vult salvari audientes. secun∣dum consilium bene placiti sui in Christo. Quare ex docentium donis retè colligitur Dei cnsilium de E∣letione Auditoum Nihil magis admirabile, quia nihil magis naturae contrarium, quam in tribulatione gaudere, sed Spiri us per tribulationes bona coelestia & divina promitters efficite ut homo, haec bona sibi proponen in tribulatione gau∣det. joy, which none but the Hly Ghost could produce in thm; by which things they rendred themselves in a sort like unto the Lord Christ, and like unto his servants the Apostles who suffred for the truth, and preached the Gospel with joy in the midst of afflictions. 2. Their exemplariness to the neighbour-Chur∣ches in Macedonia and Achai. For the Gspel which he had preached amng them, was, by means of their tra∣fiquingMulti ex Thesslonica Mercato∣re per Graeciam omnem negotiaban¦tur. people carried not only into the neighbour-Countreys, but into thse that are far distant, so that thir conversion to God, and faith in Christ was so famous, and spread into so many plcs of the world that 'twould be superfluous for him to say any thing more of it, the thing neding no other testimony than it self. And fur∣ther
he shews, that the faithful far and wide tell the history of the Thessalo∣nians conversion, and declare how the Apostles entrance among them was strangely and singularly blessed to the turning of them from dead idols to serve the true and everliving God, and to believe in his Son Jesus Christ, whom the Father hath raised from the dead, and to expect his second coming, (namely, to judg∣ment), at which time he will reward their faith and patience; having by the me∣rit of his death and passion delivered all that believe in him, fm the wrath to come. From v. 4. to the end. 3dly. He sets before them the sincerity and uprightness of his ministry a∣mong  them, and the successfulness of it. For though he had been bfore very ill used at Philippi for preaching Christ [Act. 16.], yet, (trusting in the assi∣stance of God), he boldly published the Gospel unto them, though he met with much contention and opposition from the still-necked Jews, and ignorant Gentiles. In the preaching of which, he had no design to seduce or corrupt any, by instilling any false doctrine into them, or to incourage them in any impure courses of life, (as the manner of false Teachers is); nor to procure to himself esteem, or any worldly advantage thereby. But as God was graciously pleased to chuse him to be an Apostle, and to approve him and think him meet for so great a trust; so he had endeavoured to approve his heart to God in the discharge of it, not accommodating his doctrine to the pleasing of mens humours, but preaching such things as are agreeable to the wil f God, whose eye pierceth into the heart, and discovers the secretest intentio thereof. He shws he never used to flatter them or soothe them in thir sins,  themselves could tstifie, nor carried any covetous dsign under a Cloak of piety, as God knw, to whom he could appeal. Neither was he ambitious of vain glory and esteem among men, as false-Teachers are wont to be. And where∣as he might have exercised severity, and authority] Cum possemus in onere seu molestiâ esse, i. e. Onerosi,  molesti. Infra phrasis. Et praecedens & sequens sententia videa∣tur postulare ut haec verba de autho∣ritte Apostolicâ vel potius de illius usu intelligamus. Pisc. among them as an Apostle of Christ, yet he had not done it, but had used such mildness and tenderness towards them as a nurse does to a little child whom she feeds and cheri∣shes. He was so affectionately desirous of their eternal welfare that he was not only willing to impart the Gospel to them, but to have laid down his very life for them if it had been necessary for the procuring their salvation. And as an evidence of his cordial affection to them and earnest desire of their good, they might remember that he had wrought with his own hands, not only in the day-time but sometimes part of the night, to get something to maintain himSee Act. 18.3. 1 Cor. 4.12., that he might not be chargeable to them. He appeals to them, who saw his outward actions, and to God who saw his heart, how holily, justly, and unblmeably he had behaved himself among them. They could not but be sensible, that he had carried himself towards them as a Father towards his Children, exhorting them to do their duty, and comforting and encouraging them in the performance of it, and testifying unto thm all that they ought to walk worthy of God, that is, as be∣comes those that know God and profess his name, who had called them by his grace to a participation of his kingdom and celestial glory. From v. 1. to 13. 4ly. He mentions (with great thankfulness to God) some other evidences of the divine favour towards these Thessalonians; As first, their receiving the Gospel] Sermo∣nem auditus Dei, scil. per quem ipse Deus auditur, & intelligi∣tur. not as the word of man, but as the word of God, which testifyed it self to be divine, by its efficacious operation in the hearts of believers. 2. They shewed them∣selves like to the Christian Churches in Judea in patient suffering persecution from their own friends, kinsfolks, and fellow-citizens, as they did from the unbe∣lieving Jews; whom he dscribes as the most perverse enemies of the Gospel of any other, setting out their wickedness in several particulars, declaring how, They kil∣led Christ, and before him, their own Prophets that were sent unto them [Math. 23.31, 37.], and now they persecuted the Apostles; they shewed themselves adversaries to God in persecuting his servants; they were ene∣mies to mankind by endeavouring to obstruct the Gospel which brings sal∣vation
to men. They forbad the Apostle to preach to the Gentiles; and so daily more and more filled up the measure of their sins, in so much, that the wrath of God seems come upon them to the uttermost in their judicial obduration. From v. 13. to 17. 5. He labours to assure them that he had a great love and affection to them, though he did not as yet come to them (as they might expect) to strengthen and comfort them in their afflictions. He tells them, he was not absent from them in heart and affection, though in body; and the more he was hindred from coming to them, the more earnestly he desired to see them. He designed to come to them once and a∣gain, but Satan still cast in impediments in his way. He tells them, he had great reason highly to value them, for he accounts them among the chifest Churches con∣verted to the faith by his ministry, and so he hopes they will be found, when Christ shall come to judg the world, and will be his crown andSunt hic tria Enuncia∣ta Metony∣mica. 1. Vos estis mea spes, id est, ii ex quibus spero me adepturum laudem apud Deum. 2. Vos estis meum gaudium, id est, ii qui gaudium mihi afferunt. 2. Vos estis mea corona, i. e. ii propter quos coronabor à Christo laude fidelitatis, & praemio beatitatis quum dicet, Euge bone servè fidelis fu∣isti, &c. Intra in gaudium Domini tui. Pisc. joy at that day. From v. 17. to the end. 6. He goes on to give them further assurance of his love to them, and to esta∣blish them in the faith of Christ. 1. He tells them that being no longer able to bear the vehement desire he had of hearing how things went with them, he had sent Ti∣mothy unto them, and was content to deprive himself of the company of a person very dear to him, and to stay at Athens alone, that they by him might be comfor∣ted and confirmed in the faith; and that nne of them might be troubled at the affli∣ctions which the profession of the gospel exposed them unto, as if some strange thing had happened to them. For they themselves could not be ignorant that this is the condition unto which all true believers are call'd, God having ordained that they should first partake of the sufferings of Christ, before thy partake of his glory: and they had been hereof before advertised by him, when he was with them (that they might prepare for sufferings) and it hath accordingly so come to pass; so that now they know it by experience. Having therefore so great sollicitude in his mind for them, he could not any longer forbear the sending of Timothy to them, to know the state of their faith, and to know whether they continued constant in it, or whether the Devil and the world bringing persecutions upon them on that account had not caused them to warp under those trials, and so rendred all his labours among them fruitless. But when Timothy return'd and brought him the welcom news of the firmness and constancy of their faith, and of the continuance of their charity, and of their kind remembrance of him, and great desire to see him, this, he tells them, was matter of exceeding great joy unto him; and the testimony he heard of their faith, did more comfort him, than all the afflictions which he suffer'd did deject him. For now we liveVivere sic sumitur in il∣lo dicto, mi∣ci dum vivi∣mus vivamus. (says he), that is, are lively, chearful, and couragious, if ye stand fast in your faith in Christ. He tells them he knows not how to be sufficiently thankful to God for their perseverance, and for giving him occasion to rejoyce so sin∣cerely before him for their proficiency. He further acquaints them that he daily pray'd unto the Lord that he might see their faces again, and might be instrumental more perfectly to instruct them, and to increase the measure of their faith by opening to them more fully the mysteries of the gospel. He accordingly prays for a prosperous journey to them, and that the Lord would grant that they may increase, and abound in love one towards another, and towards all men, as he did towards them. And lastly that their hearts may be established in holiness, unblameable before God (who is our recnciled Father in Christ) and that continuing so, they at the coming of Christ with all his Saints and Angels to judgment may not be ashamedApostolus Sritu ple∣ns conglomerat hic multa quae affectus suggerebat, nec de verbis est sollicitus, sed verba nonnulla ubticet & ubaudit. A Lap.. From v. 1. to the end.
He comes now to the second part of his Epistle which contains exhortations, and  precepts to duties of holiness. The doctrine concerning the Resurrection of the dead, and last judgment being by the way taken in. In the First place, he tells them, He exhorts and intreats them in the name of the Lord Jesus, that as they had received of him how they ought to walk, and please God, so they would labour daily to excel and advance therein. They might remember what Commandments he had given them from Christ. Particularly, 1. That they should pre∣serve themselves in Chastity, and purity from the sins f the flesh. For this was the will of God that they should be holy both in soul and body, and that they should abstain from fornication, and continually keep their bodies as vessels consecrated to the Lord, and not defile them; whereby they would distinguish themselves from the Gentiles, who know not God, but live in impure lusts. 2. That they should not defraud any man; for God will avenge such kind of injuries as he had before assur'd, and warn'd them. And they should remember, that the end of Gods cal∣ling them to the Grace of Christ, is, that they should not defile themselves with any kind of sin hic generalitèr su∣mitur ut supra, v. 2, 3. & tam latè patet quam quod ei opponitur, .. And he that rejecteth these whole∣som exhortations, he shews is guilty of rejecting the divine authority f God, by the inspiration of whose holy Spirit, he had given them thse precepts. 3. Touching brotherly-love, and how it is to be exercised, he tells them, he need not write much; for he found they were eminently taught, and inclin'd by the Spirit of God to the exercise of that grace, and that they manifested it not only at home but towards the Brethren round about in Macedonia. And he desires they may daily more, and more increase and excel therein. 4. He exhorts them to use their best en∣deavours] significat Eni∣ti, i. e. Magno conatu quicquam age∣re, translate à more hominum ambi∣tiosorum qui summo studio, & animi Contentione nituntur ad honores Estius. to live quietly, and to follow their own bu∣siness [See 2 Thes. 3.12.], and to work with their own hands (as he had commanded them when he was with them), that by imploying themselves in honest labour, they may both preserve their reputation among the Gentiles (who will think ill of Christianity if it make men idleMos est Paulo peculiaritèr ea vitia tangere quae quoque in loco vi∣gebant maximè., and that they may earn so much by their labour as may sup∣ply all their wants and necessities that they may have no need of help or relief from others. From v. 1. to 13. 2. He advises them not to mourn immoderatelyHe forbids not all sorrow for the dead, which Christ himself shew∣ed for Lazarus, Joh. 11.35. The Church for Stephen, Act. 8 2. And Paul for Epaphroditus when he was extreamly sick, Phil. 2.27. But he speaks against Heathenish and immo∣derate sorrow. For though many of the Gentiles believed the immortali∣ty of the soul, yet they never were able to comprehend the resurrection of the body, and the re-uniting it to the soul. See Act. 17.32. for their deceased Christian friends as Heathens do, that have no hope of a resurrection. He tells them he would not have them carry themselves as if they were ignorant of the happy state of those that dye in the faith of Christ. For as they believe, that Christ is risen from the dead, so they ought also to believe that those who have dyed in the faith of Christ, God will bring forth, and cause to appear with him, in the day wherein he shall judg the world, having first raised their bodies from the graves, and united them with their souls. And he tells them by revelation from the Lord, that the change of the faithfulPaul by an ordinary  reckons himself, and his Asso∣ciates among the survivers at Christs Coming, not as thinking that him∣self and those then living should be found of Christ in the body at that time, but knowing that all the Righ∣teous make one body in Christ, and reckoning himself one of that num∣ber, He says We that remain, that is, those of the faithful that shall sur∣vive to Christs Coming. See Dr. Sla∣ter in loc. that are alive at his Coming shall not prevent the resurrection of those that are dead in Christ. For when Christ shall appear in that his great glory, and shall by the voice or trump of the Arch-Angel raise the dead, then the dead in Christ shall rise before the living be changed. And the faithful that are then alive being suddenly changed from mortality to an immortal glorious condition, shall be caught up together with the Saints that are raised from the dead, to meet the Lord in the air, and there being acquitted and absolved by the sentence of the Judg, shall enter into the kingdom pre∣pared for them, and so shall remain for ever with the Lord
in endlss blss. As for the wicked he says nothing of them, sing h had ¦wrd of Comfort for them. But as for the other he bids them comfort one ano∣thr with these words, that is, draw matter of consolation to themselves against the lss of thir dcesd friends from the consideration of the resurrection, and the future y. From v. 13. to the end. 3dly. He tells thm that if any among them did curisly inquire into the pre∣cise time of Chrits cming to judgment, it was to no purpos for him to write any thing about it, seeing it was not revealedThat there should be a second coming of Christ, viz. to judgment, and that this coming should be sudden and at a time when least expected, was revealed when Paul wrote this Epi∣stle. But that it should not be till the departing rom the faith, the revea∣ling o Antichrist, and his destruction by the beath of the Lords mouth [2 Thes 2 3.], it seems was an after-revelation; for the Lord did not at once reveal all his secrets to his ser∣vants, but by parcels, Dr. Slater in loc.. How∣svr this thy could not be ignorant of, (having so often hard it from himslf and his associats) that Christ will cme suddnly, and unexpectedly, as a thief in the night, and will surprize secure impenitent sinners unawares. But believers need not fear that day because thy sleep nt in the darkness of sin and ignorance; The last day cn∣not as a thief in the night surprize them, because they are children of the light, and of the day, living and walking in the light of Gospel-truth, and in holinss f conversation. From v. 1. to 6. 4ly. Having thus spoken of the manner of Christs coming to judgment. He takes occasion from thence to exhort them to watchfulness and sobriety, that they may nt far bing surprized by that day. Let us not therefore (says he) live in car∣nal scurity as infidels do, but be vigilant and sober; for they that slep scure∣ly, or give themselves to drunkenness usually do it in the nigt and darknss, but such a course as this, would ill become us who are Christians, and the children of the day, and live in the light of the knowledg f Christ; we ought to be sber, and watchful remembring our life is a spiritual warfare, and therefore we ought al∣ways be upon our guard, having on a breast-plate compos'd of faith and charity to defend us against the assaults of Satan, and on our head the hope of salva∣tion for an Helmet. And this should further ncourage us in the doing of our duty, because God hath not appointed us to be vessels of his wrath, but hath cl∣led us to the obtaining of salvation in and through his Son, who dyed for us, that whether we wakeSicut dormie dicuntur qui mor∣tem obire, ita vigilare qui ad cum mortis somnum non pervenerunt. or sleep, that is, live or dye, we should live with him, namely, a spiritual life here, and hereafter an eternal life of glory. From the whle he exhorts them to comfrt and build up one another in faith and holinss. From v. 6. to 12. 5ly. He comes n to direct the people how to carry themselves twards their Pastors and spiritu Guides, who labour among them, and faithfuly admonish and counsl them (as their need requires) and are over them in the Lord, by vertue of his c mmission and authority in the things appertaining to their souls. He injoyns them to give thm due respect, Hic significat debitâ reveren prosequi., thank∣fully to acknowledg their pains, and highly to esteem and love them on that account; and that they should live in peace and concord among themselves, and especially with their Pastors. V. 12.13. 6ly. He directs the Ministers how to carry themselves towards the People, namly, that they should admonish thse that are unruly, and wlk disrderly, that they should comfort the feeble-minded, and such as are dejected under their afflictions, that they should bear with the weak and infirm in the saith, that they should be patient towards all. V. 14. 7ly. He gives now general directions to all. 1. That they abstain from all private revenge, not rendring evil for evil, but ever following that which is good both among themselves, and twards thse that are without. 2. To rejoyce evermore in the sense of Gods love to them in Christ, upon which account, they should be of good courage, and well content, even in the midst of all tribula∣tions. 3ly. To pray without ceasing, that is, upon every occasion, in all their
necssities, and in every business, as the matter required, yet not so as never to in∣termit; but so, as not to give quite over, but to return to it again. 4ly. In every thing to give thanks, in adversity, as well as prosperity. For so gracious is the will of God in Christ towards them, that they have reason so to do. 5ly. To take heed of quenchingLux Salutaris agnitionis Dei per Spiritum Sanctum accensa extin∣guitur per neglectum verbi divini, & precationis devotae, per securitatem, impietatem & ingratitudinem. Glass. the gifts and graces of the Spirit in themselves, but to labour to stir them up by pray∣er, and the due exercise of them. 6ly. That they con∣temn not, nor neglect those holy, publick exercisesProphetia hoc loco est verbi divini interpretatio. wherein the Ministers of the Gospl do interpret the Scrip∣tures by the singular revelation of the Spirit, and speak unto men to edification, exhortation and comfort [See 1 Cor. 14.3.]. 7ly. To prove all doctrines and opinions, and to examine them by the rule of the word, and analogy of faith, and to hold fast that which is good rejecting that which is otherwise. 8ly. That they abstain from all sorts of evil, and the very appearance of it. From v. 15. to 23. Lastly, He concludes his Epistle solemnly praying for them, that God who is the author of all true peace and comfort, would please to sanctifie them in every part, namely, that their Spirit [that is their intellectual part, their understanding and will], and their Soul, [that is, their affections and appetite], and their body, and outward man, may be kept immaculate, so that if it should so happen, that they should live to the Coming of Christ to judgmentSee Notes to 1 Tim. 6.14. and to the 6. v. of ch. 1. to the Philip., he may find them in this excellent condition at his Coming. He declares his confidence that he who hath called them to a participation of his grace, will carry on his own good work in themv. 24. . Sic complutensis legit. Deus est fidelis & vitam cae∣lestem sicut vos sperare jussit ita & praestabit:  dicitur quod re∣ipsâ imoletur. ut Rom. 4.16. Grot.; and having begun to sanctifie them, will continue to do it; for he is faithful, and his gifts and calling are without repentance. See 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. And so desiring their prayers for him, and injoyning them to salute one another, with the kiss of peace and charity (as believers were wont to do in those times, according to the custom of those countreys). He strictly charges them that this Epistle be read to the whole church, to all the holy BrethrenHence the Papists are to be reprov'd who prohibit Lay-people from reading the Holy Scriptures., and so shuts up all with his Apostolical benediction. From v. 23. to the end.
SECT. X. PAul thus going on couragiously with his Ministry, the Jews were so horribly enraged at him, that they banded against him, and brought him before the Tribunal of Gallio the Pro∣consul of that Province, accusing him that he taught another way of worshipping God, than what the Law of the Jews pre∣scribed, and according to which the Romans had permitted them to live. But Gallio told them, if it were a matter that ap∣pertained to the civil government, it was but reason he should hear them, and do them justice; but seeing the Question betwixt them, was concerning things appertaining to their Religion, he would be no judg in such matters. The Jews, as it seems, were not satisfied with this answer, but press'd him again with vehe∣ment and somewhat uncivil importunity, that he would take some course with Paul; Gallio being offended at this their carriage, by his Officers drave them out of the Court. But they continuing yet to be troublesom and importunate, some of the Natives of Co∣rinth, fell upon Sosthenes (one of the Rulers of the Jewish Consistory, who probably was their Captain and Leader in this complaint against Paul) and beat him in the place; the Pro-consul taking no notice of it, or reproving it. Act. 18. v. 12. And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judg∣ment seat, v, 13. Saying, This fellow perswadeth men to worship God contrary to the law. v. 14. And when Paul was now about to open his mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, If it were a matter of wrong, or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you. v. 15. But if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to it: for I will be no judg of such matters. v. 16. And he drave them from the judgment seat. v. 17. Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes the chief ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat: and Gallio cared for none of those things. v. 12. Gallio] Erat hic frater magni Senecae, dictus cum Junior esset, Novatus, sed adoptatus posteà à Junio Gallione. v. 13. Contra legem]. Haec accusatio inde obtentum sumebat quòd Apostoli qui Judaei erant, incircumcisos ad suum coetum admittebant. v. 14. Secundum rationem vos ferrem]. i. e. Rationi consentaneum esset ut vos ferrem, & paterer quantum velletis dicere, fuisset hoc mei officii. v. 17. Sosthenem praefectum Synagogae]. Nempe Synagogae alterius ab eâ cui prae∣erat Crispus. Nam in magnis urbibus plures erant Synagogae, & singulis sui Archi. synagogi.
SECT. XI. ABout this time, as it seems, a certain Egyptian came into the Province of Judaea, who termed himself a Prophet, and gathered together Four thousand men, and brought them from the wilderness to the mount of Olives, and there told them, that by his command, they should see the walls of Jerusalem fall down, by which they might enter into the City. But the insurrection of this Egyptian and his Complices com∣ing to Faelix the Roman Governours ears, he brake in upon them with his Roman Horse and Foot, and killing Four hun∣dred, he took Two hundred Prisoners, and dispersed the rest; but their Prophet and Leader escaping, it was not known what became of him. Joseph. l. 2. c. 12. Of this man Lysias the Captain spake, when he said toAct. 21.38. Paul, Art not thou that Egyptian, who before these days, mad'st an up∣roar, and leddest out into the wilderness four hundred men, that were murderers. SECT. XII. PAul tarried a good while at Corinth after he had been brought before Gallio, and had came off so well. During which time 'tis probable, he wrote his Second Epistle to the Thessalonians. For having in his former expressed his longing desires to visit them [1 Thes. 3.10, 11.] and finding by the inter∣vention of other affairs, and perhaps of dangers, that he was still hindred, he hastened to send this Second Epistle to supply the want of his presence.
he Second Epi∣ to the Thessa∣ians.In which Epistle there are these parts. 1st. AFter his inscription and salutation (which are the same with that in  his former Epistle), He labours to comfort and strengthen these Thessa∣lonians, against those perscutions and afflictions, which he understood they were exposed to, for the profession of Christ and his Gospel. The Arguments he uses, in order hereunto, are these; 1. He shews the Con∣dition of their Church was very happy, because their faith did daily grow and in∣crease; and loveFides & dilectio duae res maximae in quibus est  Chri∣stianismi. vide Eph. 4.15. did so much abound among them. 2. Their faith and pa∣tience was so eminent that he gloried in them, and set them forth as a pattern to other Churches. 3. The afflictions they so unjustly suffered from their unreasona∣ble Persecutors, were a manifest demonstration, that there will be a day of Judg∣ment, wherein God will give to every one according to their works. And He in his infinite wisdom sees it good to suffer them his servants, here to be sorely affli∣cted that they may be meetv. 5. Loquitur hic non de merito, sed de dignatione gratuitâ. Quis enim meritus est Vocari? Pa∣raeus. Digni, dignatione Dei, non dig∣nitate nostrâ. and fitly qualified accor∣ding to His order and constitution (who hath appointed that they should suffer with Christ, before they be glorifi∣ed with him), to enjoy the kingdom of Heaven, for the obtaining of which they suffered such hard things. And at the great day, He will manifest his righteous judgment in punishing their oppressors and persecutors, and will give them (together with the Apostles, and other Martyrs of Christ), rest and refreshment from all their trou∣bles and miseries. And this they may assuredly expect when Christ shall visibly come from heaven royally attended with all his glorious Angels, and shall in a terrible manner execute vengeance on all that regarded not to know God, nor to worship and serve him as they ought, and obstinately refused to entertain and obey the Gos∣pel of his Son. These shall be punished with everlasting perdition, when they shall appear before Christ the Judg, and shall see his glorious powerA facie Domini & à gloriâ vir∣tutis ejus] i. e. Cum conspexerint fa∣ciem Domini & gloriam roboris, & potestatis ejus. Vatablus.. And in that day wherein he shall thus pu∣nish his adversaries, he shall be highly glorifyed in the glory, which he shall impart to his Saints; the measure of which shall be so great, that it shall fill them with won∣der and admiration, they finding their expectation so much exceeded. And this he tells them, he spake for their comfort, because his testimony (that is, the Evan∣gelical doctrine he had preached) had found belief and entertainment among them. He further tells them, that he daily prayed for them, that the Lord would vouch∣safe to make them meet for that glory, to the participation of which he had so graciously called them (see Eph. 4.4.); and that he would accomplish all things which according to his good pleasure and bounty he had determined to do for them; and that he would powerfully compleat the grace of faith, which be himself had wrought in them; that the name of Christ may be glorifyed by them here, and they be glorified by him in that happy day, and all according to the riches of his free grace and mercy manifested in his Son. From 1. to the end. 2d. He rectifies a mistake which he understood they were in, concerning the day of Judgment, as if it were now at hand, and would happen presently in that age. He beseeches and obtests them, that as touching hic positum est pro  ut 2 Cor. 8.23. Christs second coming, and the Saints gathering to∣gether from all quarters of the world, at that time, to meet him, [of which he had spoken in his former Epistle, Chap. 4. v. 15, 16, 17.] they would not be soon shaken and dri∣ven from what Hic expono sententiam. Ne facile dimoveamini ab illâ senten∣tiâ quam me docente imbibistis. Grot. he had taught them by any seducers whatsoever, who either by some pretended revelation from the spirit, or some speech of the Apostle (which they pretended they had heard, or from some passages in his former Epistle (which they mis-understood), endea∣voured
to perswade them, that the day of judgment was at hand. He tells them there are several things which must prcede Christs second coming, which he will acquaint them with, that they may not be deceived. 1. A great and general Apostacy from the faith [see 1 Tim. 4.1.]. 2. The revelation of the greatEbiou and Cerinthus and other Hereticks who denied the Deity of Chrsst, the Apostle calls Antichrists. 1 Joh. 2.18. as fore-runners of the great Antichrist. and chief Antichrist, whom he characteri∣zeth after this manner, calling him the man of sin, the son of perdition, one who opposeth and exalteth him∣self above Christ, (who is very God), in all his offi∣ces, Regal, Sacerdotal, and Prophetical, yea exalteth himself above every thing that is worshipped, that is, above magistrates [who in Scripture are called Gods, Psal. 82.6.], and are  August, or illustrious. Yea, who exalteth himself above all that is cal∣led God; one way or other [that is, above all powers whatsoever], arroga∣ting such things to himself, as only belong unto God, and thereby endeavouring (as it were) to dclare that he is God. He sits and rules in the Temple of God, that is, among the people that bear the name of Christ, the visible external Christian Church, (the society that profess themselves the Temple of God), he tells them, he fits and rules, and exalts himself, as if he were God, uncon∣troulably, antiquating, or dispensing even with the laws of God himself. All which things they might remember he had acquainted them with before. He comes there∣fore now to shew them what it was that with-held, and hindred, and stayed his revealing and manifesting of himself for the present, so that he could not pub∣lickly appear as yet, nor should before that time and season, which the divine pro∣vidence had appointed. That which hindred (as it seems) was the entireness of the Roman Empire, which (probably) he had hinted to them before, but mentions not here (possibly) that he might not provoke the present Roman power against the Christians, who promised themselves that their Empire should never have an end. And if any should enquire whether Antichrist was not yet in the world, he answers, the mystery of iniquity was even now working, that is, there was something now working in the world, that was a type and figure of that which should shew it self more plainly in the great Antichrist, viz. the spirit of conten∣tion for rule and prioritySee Dr. Mo∣ris learned piece called the mystery of iniquity.. This bore some similitude with the spirit of the great Antichrist, who should appear in his season. But this Antichristian heat of ambition must play at lesser game, till the  the Roman Emperor be removed, who possess'd Rome, which was to be the Seat of Antichrist; which Seat being once void, Antichrist would enter, and discover himself, and advance himself above all laws, both divine and humaneHe is therefore called here .. So that this man of Sin doth not intimate one individual man, but the series of shavelings that were to succeed in one Seat. As Heb. 9.7, 25. , The high Priest denotes the whole series or succession of Priests. And  signifies not one Pastor, but the series of faithful ministers. is to be understood of one that is to appear after the breaking of the Roman Empire in piecesIf any ask Tertullian who this  is, that hindreth the re∣vealing of Antichrist, he tells him, Quis nisi Romanus status? cujus in decem Reges abscessio dispersa, Anticichri∣stum super inducet, & tunc revelabitu iniquus.. The Apostle further shews, that Jesus Christ our Saviour shall destroy this Antichrist by the sword of his mouth, that is, by the preaching of his Gospel, and the power of his spirit concurring therewith, and by the brightness of his coming, that is, by clear and convictive reasons and arguments divulged by such, as shall speak by the spirit of Christ. He further declares that the coming of this Antichrist, his raising, and first advancement to his kingdom, will be with such kind of working, as Satan is wont to use to seduce men, name∣ly, with the power of signs, and wonders, and diaboli∣cal illusions, which Satan will produce to confirm the do∣minion, and false doctrine of Antichrist; and which are beyond humane, but not Angelical power; and with all unjust and fraudulent dealing and deceit, with all arts and tricks of cosenage, that the Devil himself can invent, which will take place and prevail in such whom God (because they received not the truth in the love of it, but had pleasure in unrigh∣teousness) will judicially give over to strong delusions, to their perdition and dam∣nation. From v. 1. to 13.
3dly. Having uttered this sad prophesie; lest the Thessalonians should be startled at it, he tells them they need not fear seduction by this Antichristian spirit, because God had chosen them to salvation through sanctification of his spi∣rit, and belief of the truth, having effectually called them by the Gospel, which he had preached unto them, that they might obtain the glory purchased by Christ. Wherefore he exhorts them to constancy in the faith, and to maintain the tradi∣tions, instructions, and doctrines delivered to them by him, and which they had received either by his preaching or writing. Lastly, he earnestly prays for them, that Jesus Christ our Lord, and God our gracious father in him, (who hath given all true believers solid grounds of perpetual comfort, and good hope of eternal life through his free gracev. 16. ] pro  vel  He∣braismus. Pisc.), would comfort their hearts in all their afflictions, and strengthen them unto every good word and workv. 17. ] pro ., that is, that they might so speak and so act as may be most pleasing, and acceptable in his sight. From v. 13. to the end. 4ly. In the close of his Epistle, he exhorts them to pray earnestly, that the Gospel may have a free course and be glorified by the conversion of the uncon∣verted, and by the edification and further improvement of those that are effectu∣ally called, as it was among them; and that himself and other preachers of it might be delivered from unreasonable and absurd men, who perversly opposed it. And of that sort of men, he tells them, there be too too many in the world, among whom the Gospel will not be entertained, nor meet with faithAd fidem vocantur omnes quibus annunciatur Evangelium. Sed qui in vitiis sibi placeut, non credent nobis in∣quit Lactantius etiamsi solem manibus gestemus. and obedience. However as to them, he de∣clares his confidence, that God who hath effectually called them, and who is constant and faithful in promoting his own work, will establish them in faith and holiness, and will defend them against the evils, dangers, and tempta∣tions of Satan and his instruments; and that which further encouraged him to hope it, was their ready obedience to his injunctions. He prays that the Lord would by his Spirit direct and incline their hearts to express that ardent love to him∣selfIn Chari∣tatem Dei, i. e. in Cha∣ritatem suam. Emphaticè nomen cognatum pro reciproco., which they of duty owe him, and to an imitation of the patience of Christv. 5. .. From v. 1. to 6. 5ly. He prescribes the practice of Church-discipline, towards such as walk disorderly among them, and not according to the rule and doctrine by him de∣livered. He forbids them all familiar converse with such that they may be asha∣med, and (reflecting upon their evil courses) may repent and reform. By the disorderly, he means, such as liv'd idly, and were busy-bodies sciscitor,  Curiosus. vid. 1 Tim. 5.13.  Curiose agentes, i. e. Curâ rerum alie∣narum districti. in other mens matters; which kind of course, he shews, was very contrary to his practise among them, who did not eat any mans bread gratis, but wrought with his own handsMos hic Paulo ubique, 1 Cor. 4.12. Act. 20.34. 1 Thes. 2.9. in the day time, and sometimes part of the night, at his trade of Tent-making [see Act. 18.3.], that he might not be chargeable to any of them, though he had power to have challenged mainte∣nance for his preaching the Gospel among them, as other Apostles did [see 1 Cor. 9.3, &c.]. But he had departed from his right, and had done that to which he was not bound, to incite them by his own example to labour, each one in his Calling very diligently. For this he injoyned them, when he was with them, that if any lived idly, and would not work, [having health, strength, and opportunity for it], they should not eat, namely be relieved by the Charity of the Church, who are only to take care of those that are indigent and necessitous. He there∣fore
exhorts the disorderly, and commands them in the name of Christ to reform, and to live peaceably upon the fruit of their own labour. As for those of them that were free from these misdemeanors, he exhorts them to go on constantly in their duty, and not to be weary of doing that which is good. And if any disorderly persons among them would not obey these admonitions, given in this Epistle, he in∣joyns, that they should be noted as persons not fit to be conversed familiarly with, that so (entring into a consideration of their evil ways) they may be brought to repentance. Yet he tells them, they must dispense this severity with wisdom, not reckoning these offenders as enemiesVide Lev. 10.17. Haec enim ex∣communica∣tio non est instar veneni quod hosti datur ad exitium, sed medicina quae fratri datur ad salutem. Quod autem objicitur, Math. 18. Excommunicatum habendum esse instat Ethnici, illud non repugnat huic sententiae, quoniam illud à Christo non absolutè dicitur, sed tantum ratione Còmmunionis sacrae; à quâ arcetur, ne suâ con∣tagione reliquos inficiat. Gomarus., (as of whose repentance and reforma∣tion they despaired), but as long as they made profession of the Christian Religion, they should consider them as lapsed brethren, and accordingly exhort and admonish them as those they desired and endeavoured to reduce and reform. From v. 6. to 16. He shuts up the Epistle praying for them, that God, who is the author of peace, would give them peace, at all times and in all places (f),v. 16 . Vetus inter∣terpres legit, . Quae lectio videtur genuina, Piscatori, Grotio, & Bezae. and every manner of way, namely with himself and with one another. The Conclusion of the Epistle (wherein he salutes them), he wrote with his own hand, that they might discern it from any counterfeit, that might be carried about in his name. Vers. 17.18.
SECT. XIII. THE Apostle having continued a year and half at Corinth, and fairly planted a Church there (though it were mise∣rably degenerated soon after) he now determines to sail to Ephesus; Aquila and Priscilla resolving to accompany him: And having taken his leave of the Brethren there; at Cenchrea a Haven on the East side of that City, he sha∣ved his headQuod Cenchreis dicitur aut Aquila aut Paulus crinem totondisse quia votum habebat, de sacro voto id non potest intelligi, quia deponendus erat capillus votivus Hierosolymis & supponendus ollis pacisicorum. Ci∣vile istud votum fuisse videtur quod sumpserat vel Paulus vel Aquila qua∣lia multa, faciebant udaei Non ante capillum tondebo quam ad illum locum pervenero. Quae vota erant peregrinan∣tium. Ita Paulus votum fecit tonden∣di Capilli ubi Cenchreas pervenisset. Salmas.. The reason of which, pro∣bably was this: He had (it seems) before ta∣ken upon him, for some time, the Vow of the Nazarites, whereby he was obliged to ab∣stain from wine, and shearing his head, and tou∣ching of the dead. But having now accomplish'd his Vow, he shore his head, and returned to the common way of living, according as was prescribed, Numb. 6.18, 19, 20. The reason of this Vow we may gather from 1 Cor. 9.20. namely, in things indifferent he was willing to comply with the weak Jews; to shew, that he was no con∣temner of the Law: And for the same reason he caused Timothy to be circumcised; and for the same reason, purified himself in the Temple at Jerusalem, Act. 21.23, 24. The Apostle being now come to Ephesus, he taught in the Synagogue of the Jews; but thought not fit (though desired) to stay long there then, being prompted (as it seems) by some secret instinct of the Spirit, now to go up to the approaching Feast at Jerusalem; not that he now took himself obliged to observe the Feasts, or antiquated Ceremonies of the Law, (see Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16. Rom. 14.5.) but he was willing to go to this Feast, that he might in that great solemnity and con∣course of people, have more advantage to spread the Gospel among the Jews. Leaving therefore Aquila and Priscilla at E∣phesus, he sailed thence to Caesarea, and thence went up to Je∣rusalem; where it seems he stayed not long, finding possibly not such success of his endeavours as he expected and hoped for. Whereupon he hastened from thence and went down to Anti∣och in Syria, where he stayed for some time. Act. 18. v. 18. And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila: having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow. v. 19. And he came to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself en∣tred into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews. v. 20. When they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consen∣ted not: v. 21. But bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that cometh, in Jrusalem; but I will return again unto you, if God will: and he sailed from Ephesus. v. 22. And when he had landed at Cesarea, and gone up, and saluted the Church, he went down to Antioch.
CHAP. VI. Anno Christi Claudii 55 13 56 14 Containing Paul's Fourth Journey, which he began from Antioch in Syria; which we call Iter Ephesinum, His Ephesine Journey.Iter Ephesi∣num. SECT. I. PAul having spent some time at Antioch, he departed thence; and went thorough Galatia, and Phrygia, and travelling from place to place, as he went along, he visited and confirmed the Disciples in those parts. When he came among the Gala∣tians, he was received by them with all imaginable joy and gladness, they being not only not offended at the tribulation which was outwardly brought upon him, but they gladly and kindly received him as if he had been an Angel of God, nay even as the Lord Jesus himself, Gal. 4.14. Among other things which he now injoyneth them, he appointeth that they should make collections, and set apart their Charity for the poor eve∣ry Lords day, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Act. 18. v. 22. And when he had landed at Cesarea, and gone up, and sa∣luted the Church, he went down to Antioch. v. 23. And after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went over all the countrey of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples. SECT. II. IN the mean time, whilst the Apostle is thus confirming the Churches formerly planted in Galatia and Phrygia (see Chap. 16.6.), a certain man born of Jewish Parents at Alexandria in Egypt by nam Apollos, being a judicious, learned and elo∣quent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, and something instru∣cted in the way of the Lord, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel (though as yet but imperfectly), came to Ephesus, and being of great zeal and fervency o spirit, he taught boldly in the
Jewish Synagogues, the Doctrine of the Gospel according to his knowledg: for he knew only so much of it, as John Baptist had taught his Disciples, and confirmed and sealed with Baptism, by which the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were not im∣parted, as they were to many by the Baptism of the Apostles Act. 8.15, 16, 17. And possibly he had been in Judaea in John Baptists time, and so either was baptized by him, or else by some of his Disciples, who were now dispersed abroad. Aquila and Priscilla hearing him preach, and perceiving that he wanted something of that knowledg, that they had attained to, they took him home to them, and in private conference informed him more fully and clearly concerning Christ and the Gospel; shewing him what Christ had done and suffered to save sinners, and what was required of those that shall be saved by him. Apollos being thus more full instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel desires to travel into Achaia (viz. to Corinth, the chief City thereof), that he might preach the Gospel there. The Brethren therefore at Ephesus, incouraging him in this design, and accompanying him with their Letters Testimonial to the Bre∣thren at Corinth; when he was come thither, he watered what Paul had before planted [1 Cor. 3.6.]; and much confirmed the Disciples in that place; and mightily convinced the Jews (who were his great opposers), that Jesus was the true and only Messias promised to the Fathers. Act. 18. v. 24. And a certain Jew, named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus. v. 25. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, know∣ing only the bptim of John. v. 26. And he bgan to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of G d more perfectly. v. 27. And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote, ex∣horting the dicipls to receive him: who when he was come, helped them much which had believed through grace. v. 28. For he mightily convincd the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures, that Jesus was Christ. v. 24 ] Vir eloquens, vel, vir prudens & sapiens. v. 25. Initiatus vtà Domini] prima elementa Christianismi acceperat, & docebat diligenter ea quae sunt Domini pro modo cognitionis quam acceperat. Sciens tantum Baptisma Johannis] h. e. Doctrinam ejus; neme scivit, Exhibitum esse Messiam, & aliquo modo ejus officium & beneficia; sed ignoravit quod Jesus sit Messias, quòdque sit crucifixus pro genere humano, resuscitatus, & glorificatus, & alia non pauca huc pertinentia. Per baptisma Johannis intelligenda est Doctrina de Christo quam Johannes tradi∣derat, & baptismate obsignuverat discipulis sais. Synecdoche Metonymica. Piscator. SECT. III. VVHil'st Apollos was thus imployed at Corinth, Paul ha∣ving visited the Churches in Phrygia and Galatia,
came to EphesusEphesus erat Metropolis Ioniae, clara conditoribus Amazonibus, grai diluvio quod pssa est, templo Dn e ejusque incenio, viris doctis, & arti∣ficibus inde ortis, arte magic ibi usi∣tat; epistol Paui ad era scripta, n e non diuturni Johannis Evangelita in hac urbe resilentiâ; epistolque ad ca scripta, Apoc. 2.1., (according to his pro∣mise made to them, chap. 18. v. 21.), and there he found Twelve Disciples, no further instructed in Christianity than the Doctrine by John; having received Baptism from him, or some of his Disciples scattered abroad, as was the case of Apollos before mentioned. Paul asks them whether they had received the Ho∣ly Ghost? They answer, they had not so much as heard whe∣ther there were any Holy Ghost; that is, that there were now any miraculous Gifts imparted by the Holy Ghost. In which words, they seem to speak after the common Tenet of the Jewish Na∣tion, which was, That after the death of Ezra, Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi the Holy Ghost departed from Israel; and they pro∣fess they never heard of his being a new given, with his mira∣culous Gifts. He asks them then, Ʋnto what were ye baptized? they say, unto Johns baptism; that is, into the Doctrine which John taught, and sealed by Baptism; which being published to them, and by them own'd and profess'd, they were baptized; by which Baptism, the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost were not given or imparted to any. To this Paul replies, that the ministry of John was not to gather Disciples to himself; but he exhorted his hearers to repent and believe in him that was shortly to appear and manifest himself, viz. in Christ Jesus, and to expect remission of sins only by Him. Which they, to wit Johns hearers, understanding and consenting unto, they were baptized by him in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Paul having thus instructed them concerning the true tenden∣cy of Johns Baptism, and how it pointed to Christ, he laid his hands on them, and the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost were immediately conferred on them. And they spake divers Tongues, which before they understood not, and were indued with the Gift of prophesying, that is, of declaring things to come and interpreting the writings of the Prophets, that they might be fit Teachers of others. Act. 19.1. And it came to pass, that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul ha∣ving passed thorow the upper coasts, came to Ephesus, and finding cer∣tain disciples, v. 2. He said unto them, Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye belie∣ved? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost. v. 3. And he said unto them; Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto Johns baptism. v. 4. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the pople, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. v. 5. When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. v. 6. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they spke with tongues, and prophesied. v. 7. And all the men were about twelve.
v.  Num Spiritum Sanctum accepistis?] i. e. Dona illa eximia Spiritûs Sancti ex qui∣bus colligeretur vos ad sanctum ministerium divinitus vocari, scilicet donum linguatum & Prophetiae. Nam etsi ista dona omnibus credentibus & baptizatis tunc temporis non erant communia, nec necessaria, tamen cum hi discipuli Johannis destinabantur ad docendum in Ecclesià & haud dube zelo ferverunt, (ut Apollo, itidem Johannis dis∣cipulus, cap. 18.24.), requirebantur in illis hujus modi dona, in quibus pateret, ipsos divinitus ad sacrum ministerium vocatos esse. v. 5 Breviter indicat Paulus discrimen baptismi Johannis à praesenti baptismo; quod Johannes quidem baptizavit in venturum Messiam ac populum jussit in eum credere; ipsi vero baptzabant in exhibitum, passum, & glorificatum; simulque eos proculdubio de totâ sacrâ rtade, & mysterio Christi, plane instituebant. Audientes verò] i. e. qui ex populo hanc Johannis concionem audierunt sideque acceperunt, ii baptizati sunt ab illo, scil. Johanne. Sic Streso & Glassius. SECT. IV. THE Apostle after this private instruction of these Twelve Disciples, having a long time to stay at Ephesus, for the first three months he preached the Gospel in the Synagogue of the Jews, labouring to convince them; but when instead of be∣ing convinced, he saw them remain obdurate and refractory, and not only not to embrace the Gospel, but to oppose it, and speak contumeliously of it, and vehemently to contend with him for preaching of it (which as some conceive he calls, his fighting with beastsSee note on 1 Cor. 15.32. at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. v. 32.), he left them, and separated the Christians of that place from them, whom with o∣thers that came to hear him he daily instructed in a certain place, called theVerus cultus N T. non quae∣rit differentiam locorum s in om∣ni loco vult exerreri. ulus non reormidat Scholâ Philosophica E∣vangelium docere. Vide Ioh. 4.20.21. 1 Tim. 2.8. School of Tyrannus; and this he did for the space of two years: so that the sweet savour, and report of the Gos∣pel was spread abroad thorow all Asia, properly so called (namely, which lyes a∣bout Ephesus), both among Jews and Gen∣tiles [1 Cor. 16.9.]. And it pleased the Lord greatly to confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel here preached by the Apostle, by en∣abling him to work many Miraclesiracula, Ecclesiae non sunt sempr necessaria, adeo ut illa Ecclesia quae dnum miraculorum non habet, ca si no Charactetico unde ag∣nosctur esse vera . Nam 1. Nulla est promissio. la enim quae est, Mat. 16.1. 1 Cor. .28. non est perpetua, sed  2. Mi∣racula exige  dmatur Joh. 4.48. 1 Cor. 1.2. 3. Vetamur miraculis fidere fine Scripturâ aut quae fiunt ad consi andum doctrinam Scripturae contarim, Deut. 13. 4. Miracula ultimorum temporum declarantur es∣se signa Antichristi. 2 Thes. 2.9.10. in this place. For he did not only cure those that came to him, but by his touching linnen clothes and sending them to those that were sick, or possessed with Devils, they were thereupon immediately cured. Some Jewish exorcistsExorismus significat vehe∣mentem obtestationem quâ in nomine Domini aliquem obligamus ut hoc vel illud faciat vel dicat, vid. Numb. 5.19. 1 Reg. 22.16, Math. 26.63. 1 Thes 5.27. In veteri Testamento nihil legitur de Exorcistis sicut neque de obsessis, sed circa Christi tempora Diaboli in∣ter Judaeos licentiose & evidenter grassabantur, & corpora hominum va∣riis mod ffligebant, quod eo fine po∣tissimum à Deo concessum est, ut gloria Christi tanto magis fieret per pcua. Christus igitur, potestate suâ divinâ usus, plurima daemonia ejecit, & Apo∣stolis quoque suis haue poestatem concessit. Luc. 10.17, 18, 19. Verum quod Christus & Apostoli secerunt, ve∣rè ex potestate divinâ cui cedere Dia∣boli cogebantur, id quidam Judaei ex  Christi & Apostolorum fe∣cerunt praestigioè, quibus Satan ce∣debat non coactus, sed volens, ut eos in superstitione confirmaret & quo∣ties obdurandis in malitiâ hominibus consultum esse videret. Tales fu∣runt hi, & tales quoque videntur fuisse illi Judaeorum filii de quibus Christus, Mat. 12.27. qui nomine Christi hy∣pocriticè utebantur, sicut illi de qui∣bus, Mar. 9.38., the Sons ofOne of the 24 Heads of the Fami∣lies of Priests, See 1 Chron. 24.4. 2 Chron. 36.14. Math. 2.4. Sceva, who went about preten∣ding to cure diseases, and cast out Devils; seeing what great miracles Paul wrought in the Name of Jesus, they likewise attempt∣ed to cast out a Devil out of a man possessed, by using the same name, though in Jesus they believed not. But the Devil would not o∣bey themDiabolus hic fit concionator Propheta, Angelus lucis, graviterque reprehendit exorcistas qui tamen in∣stinctu Diaboli omnia sua agebant, idque non alio fine quam ut Pauli au∣thoritatem & integritatem suspectam redderet., as not having any authority from Jesus as Paul had, though they us'd his Name: Nay, he was so far from obeying them, that he made the man that was possessed, fall violently on them, and tear off their Clothes
and wound them; so that they were forced to run away. Which thing being once noised abroad, fear fell both upon Jews and Gentiles, and many were hereby brought to believe in Christ. And several that were thus wrought upon, came to the Apostles, and acquainted them with the actions and courses of their for∣mer lives, and desired advice and counsel from him. And many that had practised magick and sorcery, & such like wicked Arts, brought out, & publickly burnt their conjuring Books, though they were of very high value and price in that City, so much given to Magick; and if estimated by what they might have been there sold for, the price would amount to about a Thousand five hundred pounds of our money. So mightily the Gospel prevail'd upon the A∣postles preaching. Act. 19. v. 8. And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three months, disputing and perswading the things concerning the kingdom of God. v. 9. But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the dis∣ciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus. v. 10. And this continued by the space of two years, so that all they which dwelt in Asia, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. v. 11. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, v. 12. So that from his body were brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs, or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. v. 13. Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits, the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preacheth. v. 14. And there were seven sons of one Sceva a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so. v. 15. And the evil spirit answered, and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? v. 16. And the man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt on them, and over∣came them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked, and wounded. v. 17. And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus, and fear fell on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. v. 18. And many that believed, came, and confessed, and shewed their ds. v. 19. Many also of them which used curious arts, brought their books to∣gether, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of thm, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver. v. 20. So mightily grew the word of God, and prevailed.
v. 9. In Schola Tyranni] Sophistae sive declamatoris cui nomen Tyrannus, vel aedifi∣cium publicum à quodam ejus nominis magnate erectum, ut populus ac juventu in si∣entiiis & artibus liberalibus ibi exercitaretur. v. 12. Et discederent ab iis morbi] Ita praestitum quod dixerat Christus, Joh. 5.12. & Act. 5.15. v. 19. ] Curiosa, i. e. magica. Ephesus ante alias civitates his pravis stud dedita erat.  Beza per denarios vertit; sic etiam vulgatus, Arabs per drachmas quae tantundem fere valebant atque denarii. SECT. V. VVHilst the Apostle is thus imployed, he understands, that since his departure from the Galatians, some cor∣rupt and false teachers coming from Judaea, had crept in among them, who professing Christ in outward shew, taught, that the observation of the Mosaical institutions ought to be joined with Faith in Christ as necessary to Salvation: These false Teachers had infected most, if not all the Churches in that region with their erroneous Doctrine, And they, it seems, pretended to be sent thither by those three eminent Apostles Peter, James, and John, and that they taught nothing but what was agreeable to their minds. These Apostles they highly magnified, as having seen Christ in the flesh, but vilified Paul, not allowing him the name or right of an Apostle, nor granting that he was ever cal∣led by Christ, or owned for an Apostle by the other Apostles. Hereupon Paul thought it necessary to write an Epistle to the Galatians; wherein his scope is to convince them of their er∣rors, to reduce them to the right way again, and to instruct them in the duties of a holy life.
In which Epistle there are these three parts,The Epistle to the Galatians. 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. IN the Preface he declares, he was a true Apostle, not call'd or commissina∣ted  by any meer man, but by Jesus Christ, after he was raised from the dead, and had ascended into Heaven: And his calling was so much the more excellent, be∣cause Christ, who called him, was then invested with greater and more excellent glory, than when he was upon the Earth. And he was called also by the will of God the FatherSee 1 Cor. 1.1. Eph. 1.1., who raised Jesus Christ his Son from the dead, and gave all power unto him for the governing of his Church. And that he might make this his admonition and address to the Churches of Ga∣latia more effectual, he joins all the rest of the faithful Brethren that were with him in it, wishing unto them in his own and their names abundance of grace and peace from God the Father (the Fountain of all blessings), and from Je∣sus Christ the Mediator (who is the Conduit pipe by whom they are conveyed); which Jesus, he shews, gave himself unto death for the expiation of our sins, and to redeem us and recover us out of that sinful and miserable state wherein the world lies, according to the gracious appointment of God the Father, who is worthy to receive all honour and glory from us, for so inestimable a benefit thorow all eter∣nity. From Verse 1. to 6. He now cmes to the Body of his Epistle, wherein we may observe these parti∣culars. 1. He sharply reprehends these Galatians, that they had so soon forsaken God who ha add them t a participation of the grace of Christ [to save them by his race  the wrks of the Law] and had embraced a new strange Doctrine  Gospel fgnd by men. He tells them, that there was no other Gospel than that true Gospel of Christ which he had preached among them. Only there were some seducers, who had crept in among them, who disturbed their peace, and quite perverted and changed the Doctrine he had preached to them, mingling the righteousness of works with the righteousness of faith, and maintaining, that justification is nt by faith only, but also by the observation of the Mo∣saical rites, and the works of the Law. He tells them, that he had taught the Gospel of Christ so sincerely and so certainly, that whosoever should teach them ano∣ther Gospel not agreeing thereto, whether he were Angel or Man, they ought  hold him as a person deserving to be abhorr'd hath of God and all good mn. And that he might shew them, he spake it not from any perturbation of mind, but deliberately, he repeats it again, to fasten it the more upon their minds. From Verse 6. to 10. 2. He endeavours to convince them of their great error in forsaking the Gos∣pel preached unto them by him, and undervaluing his Apostleship, shewing them. 1. The integrity he had used in his Ministry. For he did not perswade that men but that God should be heard and obeyed, that so their saith might be founded on divine authority, and nt n humane, nor did he aim at pleasing men but Christ Jesus. For should he now study to please men, as he did in times past, when he was a Pharisee (when to please the high Priest and Jews he persecuted the Church), he could not be a faithful servant of Christ, but might justly be reckon∣ed the servant of those whom he endeavoured to please. 2. He sets before them the divinity of his Doctrine, which he assures them was not given him, or taught
him by man, nor did he receive it at the second hand, only by tradition; but it was immediately revealed to him by Jesus Christ. And that they might the more readily be perswaded hereof, he tells them, that they cannot but have heard of his former enmity and hstility against the Gospel and Church of Christ before his con∣versionSee Act. 26.27.  , and how he had attained to a great measure of knowledg in that re∣ligion which he then ps ssed; and had ability to defend it beyond many of those that were equal in a with him; and how he was as strict a maintainer of the Jewish custms, and of the unwritten traditions of the Fathers (which they super∣added to the Law), as an man what ever. Now they could , n imagine, that so great a change could be wrought in him by any dinary mans, but must needs be from God, who (accrding to the richs and  s his ace), having determined even from his infancy to set him art fr his  service, in his due time actually and effectually called him, and illumid his mind with th saving knowledg of his Son, appointedAct 9.15. that he should rch him and make him known to the Gentiles. He shews, that being thus miraculously calld and commissionated to preach the Gospel, he immediately set about it, not consulting with any man living whether he were rightly intructed in the Gospel, or whther he had power sufficient to preach it. Neither went he up to Jrusalem to consult Peter, or James, or any of the twelve, that were in∣stated in that ff bef him, but went presently from Damascus into Arabia, and there preached the Gspl for three years, and so return'd to Damascus a∣gain. After th h wnt up to Jerusalem to see and visit PeterSee Sect. 3. of Chap. 2., but he abd with him only  days, and besides him, he saw no other of the Apostles there, save only , Chri insman, the rest (probably) being gone out to preach the Gospel abroad. N was t the truth of what he here delivered, (it being a matter of grat import  and  which the success of his Ministry much depen∣ded, that these things shul  lieved concerning him), he solemnly calls God to witnss, confirming it by ath. After this (he tells them) he preached in Syria and Cilicia, with the approbation of the Apostles and Churches of Judea, that received nd,  the Christian faith, who knew him not so much as by fce, (so far was he  being intructed by them), but hearing of him, and be∣ing certified of his wandful conversion, and how he was turned from being  pr∣secutor to be a preacher of the Gospel, they glorified God for his grace s extra∣ordinarily manifested towards him. From Ver. 10. to the end. 3. He farther shws them, that fourteen years after, being mved by an extra∣ordinary ins, and command from God, he went up to Jerusalem again with Barnabs and Titus, and there did particularly acquaint them steminent of the Apostles with the Doctrine which he had prached among the Gentiles, that by their consenting unto it, as the fame which thy themselves did preach, his by∣past and future labours might have the more success; which otherwise (as it seems) were in danger to be hindred and frutrated by the Calumnies of his ad∣versaries, who affirmed, that the Apostles at Jerusalem did not approve of the Do∣ctrine which he preached. Therefore as a testimony of their agreement with him, (he tells them) the other Apstles did clearly jin with him, in the point contro∣verted between him and his adversaries, judging Circumcision t be a thing not necessary to salvation, else they would have required Titus (who came with him, and was born of Gentile Parents) to be circumcised, which t they did not. And the reason why they did it not, he shews, was, because sm  brethren that  grat urgers f the necessity of Circumcision, and the other Levitical ordinncs (and were brought in to be members of the Church of Jerusalem by frud, and h reason of their large pretences t piety), had secretly conveyd them∣sls that mting which he had with the other Apostles, and that pursly to seeth th he would, before them, stand to, and defend that liberty and free∣dom  the Ceremonial Law, which he had preached among the Gentiles, as a part of Chri purchase. If he had d ne it, they wuld have triumphd ver him as  it had eanted befre the Apstl s, what he had before others affirm, and
so would have endeavoured, to bring back the Christian Gentiles and the whole Church to the bondage of the Ceremonial Law. And hence it was, that neither he nor the other Apostles would yield to the importunate desire of these false Brethren, no not for an hour, (that is, so far as to use Circumcision, that one time), and that because this had been to subject the Apostles and the truth to their adversa∣ries, and so the purity of the Gospel Doctrine would not have been maintained a∣mong the Churches of Christ, and particularly not among the Galatians. And as a further evidence, that his calling and office were from God, he shews them, that at that meeting which he had with those Apostles, who were looked upon as the chiefst, viz. Peter, James, and John, and which his adversaries boasted of as his Superiors, when they had heard his Doctrine, they corrected nothing in it, nor added any thing to the knowledg he had before. And for their personal priviledg s, viz. that they had seen Christ in the flesh, and were Apostles be∣fore him even when he was a Persecutor, &c. these things he took no notice of, because Gd regards no man for external things, by which they are outwardly va∣lu or esteemed among men; and can make use of the meanest as well as the most excellent instruments in his service. But on the other side, when those same Apo∣stles who were deservedly reputed pillars of the Church (as being under God great upholders of it by their gifts, dilligence, and fidelity) had by certain evidences found, that the Apostolick office to preach to the uncircumcised Gentiles was committed to him, as the Apostolick office to preach to the Jews was committed to Peter, and that the like assistance, blessing, and success did accompany the la∣bours of the one as well as of the other; these three Apostles (perceiving the grace and gifts, both ordinary and extraordinary which were bestowed upon him, fitting him for the Apostolick office), they did, without much more ad, acknow∣ledg him and Barnabas for their Collegues or fellow-Apostles, giving them the right hand, in testimony thereof. And as a token of their mutual agreement in dividing their Charge, they consented that Paul and Barnabas should go to the Gentiles, and that they three would go to the JewsWhich Paction is nothing contrary to what is held forth, Act. 15.7. For  Peter speaketh not there, that his ordinary Charge was to preach to the Gentiles, but only of that act of his mentioned Act. 10. whereby he was at one time imployed to preach to them.. And as a further testimony of their agreement, these three Apostles did earnestly recommend to Paul and Barnabas the collecting of some charitable contribution among the Chur¦ches f the Gntiles1 Cor. 16.1., for the supply of the por Christian JewsRom. 15.25., which they very readily agred to, and diligently performed, as we may see, 2 Cor. ch. 8. & ch. 9. Lt y, to evidence yet further the divine authority of his office unt them, and that he was nt inferiour to the other Apostles, he tells them, that as an Apostle f Chrit, and by vertue of his Apostolick office, he did with authority , and boldly and freely oppose himself to Peter, one of the chief Apostles, when in his practice at Antioch, he declined from the Doctrine taught by him∣self, concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law. For whereas befre sm Jws (that wr friends f James)Causa hujus perniciosae dissimulationis indicatur, nempe eum timuisse Jacobi familiares. Hac Illr. came from Jerusalem, Peter did hld fellowship with the Christian Gentiles, and did eat freely with them (which h di agreeably t the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, by which all differences f mts and nations were removed under the Gospel, as Peter himself was instru∣ctd by Vision, Act. 10.15.), but when thse Jews were come, he separated him∣self from the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful for him to eat with them, and this thorough fear of offending those fre mentioned Jews (who were tenacious of the Ceremonial Law); by which bad example of his, some of the other Christian Jws, that were at Antioch, were drawn aside, yea and Barnabas also was drawn into the same dissimulation, carrying it so, as if fellowship with the Christian Gentiles had been unlawful, whereas both himslf and Peter very well knew the contrary. Now when Paul saw that they walkd not uprightly according to the true Dctrine of the Gospel, he publickly expostulated with Peter, and de∣manded of him, why he (being a Jew) had cast off the Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, and usd hss Christian Liberty, (living after the manner of the Christian Gen∣tiles when he saw occasion) and yet infrced this yoke on the Gentiles, endea∣vouring thereby to induce them to think that it was ncessary now for them under the Gspel, to bserve th Cremial law whereas it was never given unto them,
nor they ever obliged to observe it, no not before the coming of Christ. Ʋpon the whole matter, for ought that appears to the contrary, Peter did herein yield to Paul as having truth on his side. From Ver. 1. to the 15. 4. He comes now to assert and confirm the Gospel-doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ, (which he had before preached to them), against the cor∣rupt Doctrine of his adversaries, who urged the strict observation of the Cere∣monial Law as necessary thereunto, by vertue of a Divine Precept standing yet in force, as may be gathered from the Ap stles reasoning. Chap. 3.19.25. & Chap. 4.3, 4, 5. And that he may strike at the root of this most dangerous error, he excludes all works in general, not only those of the Ceremonial Law, but of the moral also, yea all works of our own whatsoever, from having any influence upon our Justification. This he proveth, 1. Because they that were Jews by birth, and so faederally the holy people of God, (and not such profane idolatrous sinners as the Gentiles were, who were ignorant of the Law of God, and strangers from the Covenant of God), found it necessary to renounce the works of the Law in point of Justification, and to seek righteousness only thorow Faith in Christ; there∣fore much more ought they Galatians, and other Gentiles so to do, and espe∣cially seeing the Spirit of God affirmeth, Psal. 143.2. That no man, whether Jew or Gentile shall be justified, to wit, by the works of the LawThis Clause is here supplied by the Apostle without adding to the sense. The like addition of words for explication without wronging the sense is frequently used in the N. T. where Scriptures are cited out of the Old T. as Math. 4.10. compar'd with Deut. 6.13. Heb. 10.5. compar'd with Psal. 40.6, 7, 8.. 'Tis therefore by the Faith of Jesus, or by Faith receiving and resting on Jesus Christ, and that most perfect righteousness of his, that we are justified. But here he prevents an Objection which he foresaw some of the adversaries of this Doctrine would be apt to make. They will say, that if we seek to be justified by Faith in Christ alone, and not by the works of the Law, then people may live as they list, and freely indulge themselves in sin. He answers, That though it should so happen, that some who profess to seek Justification by Faith in Christ alone, should be found notorious sinnersSee 1 Cor. 12.28. Faith here and elsewhere (see Chap. 1.23.) is taken for the Doctrine that is to be believed., yet it would not from thence follow that Christ is the Minister, Author, or Teacher of sin. That inference, he rejects with abhorrence and detestation. For he had in delivering this Doctrine of Justification unto them, shewed, That the same Faith, that lays hold on Christ for righteous∣ness, doth rest upon him also, for grace, and strength to subdue corruption, and he had by many serius admonitions strove to bat down sin among them, there∣fore if he should now, by any thing he should preach, encurage sin, he should trans∣grss against the Laws of uprightness, which ought to be found in every faithful Teacher. And that this Doctrine doth not of it self encourage to sin, he proves by his own example. For (says he) I thorow the Law am dead to the LawSi modo frustrà, q. d. Non tantum frustrà passi estis, sed etiam cum damno & detrimento, nisi ad bonum mentem redeatis. that I might live unto God; that is, by the knowledg of the spirituality of the Law, and the perfection it requires, I have learned, that I am a great sin∣ner, that I have not power perfectly to perform it, that I am therefore subject to the Curse of it, and so I cannot be justified by it. I am so far dead to the Law, as not to put any confidence in my obedience to it, for my justificationDe Scripturâ loquitur . Scriptura hic sumitur per Metony∣miam effecti, pro eo qui eam dedit. Chrysost.; yet I am not so dead to it, as to look upon my self as freed frm it, as it is a rule of holy living: But despairing of obtaining Justification and Salvation by my obedience to it, I am forced to fly to Christ, that from him I may receive not only Justification, but grace and power to inable me to live unto God. And as Christ was crucified on the Cross, so by grace derived frm him, I crucifie my corruptions, and s I live a new and spi∣ritual life, not having this life from my self, but from Christ, who liveth in me by his spirit. And he being the root and spring of this new life, I derive it from him by vertue of my union with him; and the band of my union with him, is my faith in him. And the consideration of his great love in dying for me, is a strong induce∣ment to me, to endeavour to live holily, that so I may please him. He further shws that if we should be justified by the law, or works dne in obedience to it, we should frustrate and make vid the grace of God. For if Justification be by works, it cannt be by grace, Rom. 11.6. And lastly, Christ's death had been in vain, if the Justification of a Sinner could have been obtained by his own works, from ver. 15. to the end.
5. Having sharply reproved these Galatians for their defection from the truth,  (among whom Christ had been so evidently preached, and his sufferings, with the causes of them, so clearly opened and set forth, as if all had been done before their eyes); he useth several other arguments to reduce them, and to demonstrate to them, that justification was by Faith and not by Works. And in order here∣unto, he first appeals to their own experience, and demands of them, whether the gifts and graces of the Spirit, both ordinary and extraordinary, that were now found in their Church, were conferred on them till the Gospel was preached among them?The calling of the Gentiles, and their Justification by Faith, was foretold about two thousand years before it fell out. He asks, whether they received them by the works of the Law, [that is, by hearing the Doctrine of justification by works preached], or by the Hearing of FaithTanquam laetum aliquod nuncium praedicavit, pro evangelizavit, h. e. Deus ei indicavit, quod postea in Scripturas sacras relatum est., that is, by hearing the Doctrine of justification by Faith preached. And if so, Was there any reason, that having by the preaching of the Gospel (which is a ministery of the Spirit) received such great benefits, and so begun to be a Christian Church, they should now think it necessary to take in the Law? Would they now end in the flesh, and return to those external Mosaical carnal Rites, as if their justification could not be perfected without them? This he shews would be a point of great folly and absurdity in them. 2. If they should seek justification by works, or partly by faith, and partly by works,Qui de fidelium numero sunt. they would lose all the fruit of their former sufferings for the truth; which would have been rewarded if they had proved constant to the last; but now they will be in danger not only of losing their reward, but of incurring fur∣ther dangerSee Notes on Rom. 1.17., and bringing a heavier condemnation upon themselves fr their defection. 3. He resumes and amplifies his first argument, shewing, that the Lord had not only accompanied this Doctrine of justification by faith, with the saving graces of his Spirit among them, but also with other extraordinary gifts, such as the working of Miracles, speaking with strange Tongues, curing of Di∣seases; which were so many confirmations, that this Doctrine was of God. 4. Ha∣ving put a close to that argument brought from their own experience, he adds another, brought from the example of Abraham, who though he did abound with many virtues and good works, yet he was not justified by those, but by faith only; which he proves from Gen. 15.6. where 'tis affirmed that Abraham be∣lieved in the Lord for the accomplishment of that prime promise of the Cove∣nant made unto him, that in the Messias (who was to come of him), he him∣self and all the nations of the earth should be blessed, Gen. 12.3. And the multiplication of his Seed was promised as a means to bring it about. This faith of Abrahams laying hold on the meritorious obedience of the Mediator, the blessed seed promised; he shews, was imputed or reckoned to him for Righteous∣ness, or accepted of God for his justification. And hence he inferreth, that only they who are of the faith (or seek after justification by faith), are the true Children of Abraham, who following his steps, shall succeed him in the inhe∣ritance of that great Blessing, viz. of gratuitous righteousness and justification thereby, which he by faith obtained, See v. 9. And the SpiritEx fide sunt qui innituntur merito Christi pro nobis satisfacientis. Ex operi∣bus Lgis qui impituntur propriis meritis & probitati & sanctitati propriae. (who speaks in the Scriptures) knowing this to be the Counsel of God, that the Gentiles also should be justified by faith, he revealed this promiseUt promissionem Spiritûs acciperemus, i. e. promissum Spiritum. Est autem illa Spiritus sancti promissio, Jr. 31.33. & 32 40. Ezek. 11.19, &c. 36.27. Joel 2.29. Zach. 12.10. (which is called the preaching of the Gospel) to AbrahamCete smence don, c' est Christ c' est à dire. L' Eglise qui constitue son corps, par la for pr loquell elle l'embrasse. Amirant fur les Epistres., viz. that In his seed, that is, Jesus Christ, (who was to come of him, Gen. 22.18.) all nations should be blessed. So that all that are of faithAct. 7.38. Heb. 2.2., or true believers, whether Gentiles or Jews, do partake by faith of all those saving blessings, which believing Abra∣ham did partake of; among which, free justification is the chief. 5. He shews, that they who are of the works of the Law, that is, who seek to be justified by works done in obedience to the law, are under the curse of God, and so not justified; the Law pronouncing a curse upon every one who fulfilleth it not in eve∣ry particular, Deut. 27.15, 16, 26. 6. He further adds that no man can be justified by his personal obedience to the Law, because righteousness and life co∣meth by faith, as he proveth from Hab. 2.4.Ver. 15. Humanitus loquor. The just shall live by faith. Now the way of justification which the Law requireth, cannot consist with the way of justification by faith (t). For the Law promiseth life to him only who
performs exactly what it prescribeth, and so hath a perfect inherent righteousness in himself, as he proveth from Lev. 18.5. where the voice of the Law is, The man that doth them (viz. those things which the Law requires) shall live in them or attain eternal life by them: But the voice of the Gospel is, that They that believe in Jesus shall be saved. 7. He shews not only, That we are justified by Faith, but How Faith doth justifie, viz. not for any merit or worth in it self, but as it closes with Jesus Christ, whereby all the blessings purchased by Him, are made over to us: for Christ hath delivered us from the Curse of the Law, by taking upn him the Curse due to us, and subjecting himself to death, even the cursed death of the Cross for our sakes, Deut. 21.23. And from his death, he shews, a double benefi dd flow: First to the Gentiles, the blessing of Abraham coming upon them, viz. the blessing of Church-priviledges, divine ordinances, of re∣conciliation with God, adoption, &c. which before the time of Christs death they were Strangers unto: The Second to the Jews jointly with the Gentiles, who be∣ing by Christs death joined in one body, and becme one seed of Abraham do by Faith in Christ receive a plentiful communication of the Spirit. promised in the times of the Gospel. 8. He reasons from humaneGen. 12.3, & 17.4. & 22.17.18. transactions, viz. From Covenants made among mn which if solemnly confirm'd by Oath and other u∣sual solemnities cannot without injustice be broken or disannul'd, nor any condition de∣structive to them be afterwards superadded. In like manner he shews, God made a Covenant with Abraham, and his spiritual seed, wherein he promised spi∣ritual and eternal blessings, to all those that shall believe in his Son, the promised Messias. Now Abraham had two seeds *, a spiritual (represented by Isaac) who seek justification by Faith only; and a carnal (represented by Ishmael), who seek justification by the works of the Law. He shews, that the Cove∣nant was not made with Abraham and both these seeds, but only with one of them, that is, with all true believers, who are the mystical Body of Christ, and by virtue of their union with him, collectively called here by his Name. This Covenant he shews, was made and confirmed unto ChristMediator non est unius partis sed duarum, earumque dissidentium. Cum igi∣tur Mese Mediatorem ageret inter Deum & populum, hoc ipso testatur, esse dissidi∣um inter du ista partes. Deus autem unus est. Isque semper idem, semper sibi constans. Dissidium igitur illud non Dei, sed hominis mutationi deputandum est. Jac. Ca∣pollus. or with res∣pect unto Christ, and to all true believers in him both Jews and Gentiles (of whom he is the head) four hundred and thirty years before the Law was given. And therefore if any should say, The way of justification by Faith in the promise, did hld god before the Law was given; but when the Law was given, that way was altered, and justification by works established: this he shews, cannot be, seeing the Law was given so many years after the Covenant was confirmedScripturae tribuitur quod Deo. vid. Rom. 11.32. Ver. 21. Fides Jesu Christi, i. e. in Jesum Christum, Apoc. 14.12.; and therefoe cannot vcuate or disanull it. If therefore the inheritance of eter∣nal lfe (whereof the Land of Canaan was a type and pledg) be to be obtain'd by obdience to the Law, it cannot be obtain'd by Faith, whereby the grace and blessing promised in Christ is received. For these two cannot stand together. Now God gave it to Abraham freely, and of pure grace, promising it unto him on condition of his Faith without any merit on his part. And in like manner all that desire to approve themselves the true Children of Abraham, must obtain it, seeing there is but one way of Salvation. From v. 15. to 19. 6ly. He comes now to answer some Objections, which might be made against what he had said. Object. 1. If works done in obedience to the Law do not justifie, then the Law upon Mount Sinai seemeth to be given in vain. For why was the Law given, enjoining so many moral, judicial, and ceremonial duties, promising life unto the obedient [Lev. 18.5.], and threatning Gods wrath and curse to the dis∣obedient [Deut. 27.26.], if the inheritance come not by the Law? In answer hereunto, the Apostle sheweth, that one main end why the Law was added to the Promise was to discover sin [Rom. 3.20.], and restrain from Sin, and to make men seek out for a remedy, and so to be a Covenant subservient to the Covnant of Grace. And this dispensation (as having more of terror than love in it) was to continue during the infant-state of the Church, ven till Christ should come in the flesh, to whom the inheritance was promisd, as being Head of all those that shall be heirs, and by whom they shall obtain it. And
this God shewed by the glorious and dreadful manner of his giving the Law, by the ministry of Angels,Act. 7.38. Heb. 2.2. and his appearing then in such terror that there was no access for sinful man to him, but by a Mediator; and therefore upon the peoples request, Moses was appointed the Mediator between God and them at that time [Exod. 20.19. Heb. 12.19.]; being therein a type of Christ, the only Media∣tor of Propitiation. Now he shews, that there is no need of a Mediator, but when there is a disagreement or difference between two partiesAs he is call'd our hope, 1 Tim. 1.1.. And God is one party of the two here, who is offended with sinful man, and is to be aton'd. Since therefore the people by reason of their great guiltiness, and manifold violati∣ons of Gods Law were not able to make atonement for themselves, they might from hence learn how much they needed a Mediator to make atonement for them. Object 2. Then it will he said, that the Law is against the Promises of God. He answers, No. For the Law was not given on Mount Sinai to afford life and justification by obedience to it (seeing it could not perfectly be kept); but rather to convince of sin, and condemn for sin, that men, dispairing of any help in them∣selves, might speedily betake themselves to Christ for life. So that the Law is not contrary unto, but subordinate and subservient to the Promise. For God in the ScripturesSub elementis mundi, i. e. sub Ceremoniis quibus Deus veterem mundum  erudiit. Pisc. Framu subjecti ritibus illis qui nobis cum mundo erant communes; qualia sunt, Templa, Arae, Victimae, liba, , & similia, imposita Israelitis in hoc ne talium amore ad idol dilaberentur. Grot., (or in the legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, which stood in force during the time of the Old Testament), hath concluded all under sin, that is, hath declared all men by nature, since the Fall, to be under sin, that so laying aside all confidence in themselves, they may fly by Faith to Christ for righteousness and salvation, which are the great things promised in the Covenant of Grace. From v. 19. to 29. Object. 3. Seeing the Law, or that legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace was so useful to the antient Church, and so subservient to the Promise, Why then did Paul cry down the use of it, especially the practice of the Ceremonial Law, now? He answers, that, Before Faith came [that is, the Object of Faith, viz. Christ Jesus Hic ego vertendum puto non quonsam sed qud , sensusque sit, Quod autem filii sitis, inde manifestum est quia misit Deus Spiritum filii fui in corda vesta. Hac. Illyr., or the more clear and full manifestation of the Doctrine of Faith, which was about the time of Christs death and ascension], the Law was very useful to the Jews, because they were by it, as by a military Guard, kept from being mix'd with other Nations in Religion, and were shut up thereby as in a prison under sin, and the curse due to sin, that so they might be the more prepa∣red, and as it were necessitated, to embrace the Doctrine of Salvation by Faith in Christ (which was, during that dispensation, but darkly revealed), when it should be more clearly discovered; the full revelation whereof they were by this means kept more intent upon. So that the Law, that is, Moses's Oeconomy, confin'd them with∣in the bounds of Faith, that they should not seek for justification by their own inhe∣rent righteousness, or works, or any other way than only by Faith in the Messias. Yea the Law was their School-master in their minority, to instruct them to repair to Christ for pardon. Thus (he shews) the legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace was of good use to the ancient Church; but denies that the use of it ought to be continued now, when the Doctrine of Faith is so clearly manifested: Yea on the contrary, (he declares), that it is now to be abrogated, and the Chri∣stian Church freed from the observation of it, because it was to exercise the office of a School-mast r only over Children in their minority; but can have no autho∣rity over believers now, who in comparison of them, are to be loked upon as grown men. For the Christian Church, viz. all true believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, and in particular, all the faithful among the Galatians were now like a Son come to age by reason of their Faith in Christ (who is now come in the flesh) and therefore are not under the childish paedagogy of Ceremonies, or the Mosaical outward legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace. Object. 4. But false Teachers might here object, that though it be admitted, that the Law or Mosaical dispensation given on Mount Sinai was added to the
Promise to be subservient to it; yet Circumcision was given to Abraham with the Promise, as the iitiatry seal of it, Gen. 17.10. Therefore though the Law or legal dispensation be abrogated; yet Circumcision was to be kept in the Church, as that which was given before it, and without which none can be ac∣counted Abraham's Seed, or Heirs according to the Promise. The Apostle answers, that Baptism, which signifieth and sealeth our ingrafting into Christ [Rom. 6. 4.5.] was substituted in the place of Circumcision, and is sufficient for compassing all those ends for which Circumcision was instituted; because they who are bap∣tized into Christ do put on Christ, and so are incorporated and made one body with him; they carry his Name, prfess to be his, are esteemed to be in him as members of his ody. And all that have true Faith in Christ are thus really in∣corporated into him, and made one body with him, of what Nation or Condition soever they be. So that Circumcision, which by virtue of its institution, did serve to keep up a distinction between Jew and Gentile [Exod 12.48.] cannot here be useful, seeing now all distinctions are to be removed, and Circumcision, being one main part f the partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile, was not any longer to stand in frce. For whatsoever Nation, Rank or Sex any be of, it is all one in this matter. None are debarred from Christ, nr yet the more accepted by him, for any of these things. And all Believers of what condition soever, are all one body in Christ Jesus; and if they be Christs, and by Baptism ingrafted into him, they are true Children of Abraham, though they be not circumcised, and apparent heirs of the heavenly inheritance, given unto Abraham by Promise. From v. 23. to the end. 7ly He goes on further to clear the freedom of Christians from the Mosaical Oconomy by the similitude of an Heir, who while he is a minor, and under-age, is n at his own liberty or disposal, but in point of subjection, like a servant under the Guardianship of Tutors or Governours, until the time appointed by his Father be come out; longer than which, he is not to remain in the state of subjection. So says he, Gods Church (whereof we are members) formerly was kept in bondage and subjecti∣on under that strict and rigid administration of the Mosaical Oeconomy, and tyed to a number of Ceremonial observancesIdola Dii nuncupativè non substantivè. Bernard. and bodily significant rites and figures whereby Gd instructed the former age of the World, and which were a kind of bon∣dage and slavery to the outward man. But when the fulness of time was come, which God had appointed for the finishing this Oeconomy; he sent his Son into the Wrld, who was incarnate, and subjected himself both to the Precepts and Curse of the Law, that he might redeem them that truly believe in him from the Curse of it, and the whole Church in general from that rigor and servitude under which they formerly had been, as to their outward estate [Eph. 2.15.], and that they might attain to the adoption of Sons grown up. And as a Testimony of their Adoption, and dvancement to the priviledg of Sons now grown up, God had sent forth the Spirit of his Son into their heartsCogniti estis à Deo, i. e. in gratiam recepti, & pro filiis habiti; nam verba sensûs apud Paulum per usitatum Hebraismum conntant affectum: Ut Cognisco oves, Joh 10. i. e diligo. clearly testifying this to them, and inabling them (togther with other Sons of God, both among Jews and  tiles), with a cheerful voice to call God FatherClamare Metaphoric  & fiduciam illum fidelium significat, de quâ 1 Joh. 5.14. Heb. 4.16. quod Spiritui sancto tribuitur, quia illius illustratione & in∣stinctu contingit. Gomar.. And as to this, they miht consult their own experience. They might therefore assure themselves they were no more in that servile condition under the Yoke of Ceremonies, but in a free state, as Sons grown up, and Heirs actually partaking of their Fathers Goods, (viz. of his spiritual Graces), and that in a larger measure than the ancient Church enjoyed before; and all thorow Christ who hath merited and procured these blessings for us. From v. 1. to 8. 8ly. Having now sufficiently proved by Scripture and Reason the freedom of Christians from that ancient legal dispensation, and more especially from the Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, he endeavours further to fasten this truth upon their minds, both by sharp reproofs, and most affectionate insinuations. And first, he shews them, that when that legal dispensation was in force, they (viz. the Galatians who were Gentiles) were ignorant of the true God, and worship∣ped
dumbQuomodo convertimini ] Vocula  respicit non rem eandem sed similem. Galatae rebs terrenis, & in utilibus servierant, viz. idolis, jamque denuo se convertere volebant ad servitutem Ceremoniarum Legalium, quae itidem erant re ter∣renae ac per se neminem servare poterant, neque, Christo exhibito, quicquam ampli∣us utilitatis habere poterant. Glass. Repicit voculi  non continuationem actus prioris, sed similis novi incho∣ationem. Egena vocat Elementa quia facta erant evanida postquam Corpus vene∣rt, unde á Christo ad Ceremonias Mosaicas relabi, nihil aliud erat quam neglectis summis opbus mendicitatem fectari. Idols, and consequently were not born, or brought up under th pae∣dagogy of the Law as the Jews were, wh therefore might pretend some excuse for their unwillingness to depart from it. But afterwards by the preaching of the Gospel (which God of his free and rich mercy sent unto them, and not for any desert of theirs), they were brought off from their ignorance; and came to know the true God: whereas, before they look'd not after him, but lay immers'd in their Idolatry: and they were not only brought to know him, but to be known of himDies observatis] nimirum consuetudine judaic, prout erant umbrae futu∣rotum., that is, to be acknowledged and owned for his: whereas before their Conversion, they were not known of God in this sense. And being thus brought into the Liberty of Sons grown up, he wonders at their folly and ingratitude, that they would subject themselves to the bondage of the Mosaical Elements or Cere∣monies, which had now no figurative or sacramental signification as formerly they had (when they were shadows of Christ to come), and therefore were weak, yea poor and beggarly, not being able to afford any solid consolation to thse who observed them. He wonders that they who had been in bondage formerly unto Ido∣latry, should desire to be in bondage again. Fui aliquando quales vos nunc estis, existimans pietatem esse Circumcidi, &c. viz. to those weak and poor Elements, under subjection to which they never had been before. He instances in some of those Elements unto which they had turned. He tells them, he under∣stands they observedHieronymus suspictur Apostolum cum primum Galatas adiret aliquâ infirmi∣tate corporali detentum fuisse. Nm tradunt eum grvissimum capitis dolorem fae∣pe perpessum, & hunc esse Satanae nglum qui oppositus ei uerat ut eum colaphi∣z t. (after the manner of the carnal Jews expecting to be justified thereby) their Sabbaths, New-moons, Anniversary Feasts, as f the Passeover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, and the Year of Release which was the Seventh, and the year of Jubilee which was the Fiftieth. Which things made him fear he had preached the Gospel and the Doctrine of free Justification by Faith in Christ in vain among them. From v. 8. to v. 12. 9ly. He lovingly exhorts them to return to that wholesom Doctrine of Justifica∣tion by Faith, without the works of the Law. Brethren I beseech you (says he), be as I am, for I was as you areQuae igitur tum erat beatitudo vestra, i. e. Qualis & quanta! Quantus ubique erat rumor vos beatos praedicantium!, that is, Take me for your ex∣ample, who was once as zealous for those Legal Rites, as any of you are at this pre∣sent. But now I count them, and all things else, but dung in comparison of the excellent knowledg of Christ [Phil. 3.9.]. He tells them, that they had no rea∣son to suspect that what he spake proceeded from any ill will towards any of them, or from any particular resentment; for they had not done him any personal injury. H only pladed the cause of Christ, and did not vent any private passion of his own. Nay he was so far from apprehending any injury from them, that he acknow∣ledges they had shewn much love, and respect to him, when being infirm in body, and much broken with afflictions, he came first to preach the Gospel unto them; and yet by those trialsSi, salâ pietate & je naturae, fieri potuit. wherewith it pleased God to exercise him, they were not tempted to despise his Person or Doctrine, but received him as if he had been one of the holy Angels of God, nay as Jesus Christ himself. He asks them, where is that, i. e. me Paulum: non enim legendum . Piscat. blessedness now, which they once thought they enjoyed by his coming amng them! Time was, when they thought themselves so blessed by his presence, that thy could then even almost have plucked out their eyesq. d. Non consideratis sensum  verborum Mosis. for him, to have done him good. And (says he) am I, who formerly was so preci∣ous to you, become now your enemy, because I declare the truth of God to you? As for the false Apostles, they indeed pretend great love to you, and zeal for you; but what  their ends therein, but that they may exclude usHe had also seveal Sons by Kturah, Gen. 25.2. But these two are only men∣tnd, as being appointed by God to prefigure the present purpose: that you may affect them. He tells them, they were once zealously affected towards him and his Dctrine; and 'tis good (he shews thm) to be constantly zealous in a good thing, and so he would have them to be, and that as well what he was absent from them, as when he was present with them. He further tells them, they were his Children, whom with much pains and travail he had brought forth to Christ, and had brought them to take on them the Christian profession, but now they hd shamefully fallen off from it, so that he was in travail and pain a second time, till the pure Doctrine of Christ be again established among them, and till they receive again the right shape of Christians. He tells them, he much desired to be with them, that being fully acquainted with their state he might accommodate himself accord∣dingly
to thm, either in meekness or severity: and might change his voice, either by turning his complaints into praises; or his speech into groans, and his words into tears to bewail their Apostacy: and by those true significations of his affection, perswade them to return to their former profession; for now he was some∣what perplexed and pzd how to deal with them. From Ver. 12. to the 21. 10ly. He comes now further to clear the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and not by works, from an instance taken from Abrahams Family, where by a typical Allegoy, this whole matter is represented. The plain import of which is this, that they who seek Justification by works are in a servile, misera∣ble, and cursed condition, and at last shall be cast out from the presence of God, and the Society of the Saints; and they that seek Justification by Faith in Christ are ree Sons of the Family of God, and blessed, and shall at last cer∣tainly attain to an inheritance of life eternal. He expstulates therefore with the Galatians, that they should affect this servile, miserable and cursed con∣dition. And first, He cites his Adversaries, and all others who (contrary to Gds command) did voluntarily again put themselves under the Yoke of the Msai∣cal Law, and sought to be justified by works, to hear what the Law it self (or that Collection of the five books of Moses, which is called the Law) doth say, that is, to consider the sense and scope of the LawCausam reddit cur Agar, illud foedus significavit: Quia, & Mons Sinai ubi sactum est illud foedus, vocatur Agar  (nempe, quia ibi est oppidum Aga, unde Agarni) & Gens Agarena. & singuli ad eam pertinentes, subjecti erant Circumcisioni & Sacrificiis, & dierum discrimini; quanquam, non Lege Mosis, sed ex suis Legibus, aut moribus Ismaelitarum, qui & Agareni & Saraceni. Grot. Mon Sinai ab Arabibus dicitur Agar. inhabitavit Agar desertum istud, & inde Ara∣bum natio illa, dicta est Hagarena: scilicet ut Populo, ita & Monti nomen dedit Hagar.. Then he propounds the typical History of Abrahams Family, taken from Gen. ch. 16. & 21. the sum whereof is this; namely, That Abraham had two SonsVer. 4. Qui per legem justificamini, h. e. justificari conamini., to wit, Ishmel and Isaac, whose condition did differ in two things; 1. Ishmael was born f a Bondwoman or Servant, to wit, Hgar [Gen. 16.1.15.]; and so he was but as a servant himself, and not the Heir [Gen. 21.10.]: but Isaac was born of a Free-woman, viz. Sarah [Gen. 21.2, 3.], who had never been a Servant, but was the Mistris, and therefore Isaac himself was no Servant but a Free-man, and the Heir to his Father, v. 22. A second diffe∣rence there was in the principle of generation and birth: For Ishmael was born after the flesh, or by the ordinary strength of Nature, his Mother Hagar being a young Woman, and fit for conception; but Isaac was not conceived or born from any such principle, Sarah his Mther being Ninety years old when she conceived him [Gn. 17.17.], and so according to the course of Nature, unfit for con∣cepti [Heb. 11.12.], but he was born by Promise, or by virtue of that pro∣mise made t Araham, Gen 17.16. Which Story, the Apostle shews, was an allegy, that is, besides the literal sense of the words, God intended they should shaddow forth the stte of his Church in the following particulars; namely, Abrahams two wives should represent the two Covenants, to wit, the old Covenant, or the old Administration of the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8.7. (which Covenant was greatly mistaken by the Jews, and did degenerate into a plain Covenant of works in the sense of many who did adhere to it); and the nw Covenant, or the new Administration of the Cvenant of Grace, Heb. 8.8. The first of which Cvenants was prefigured by Hagar the Bnd∣woman; and dscribeth it, 1. From the place where it was given, viz. upon Mount Sinai, 2. From the lik effect produced by it, as by Hagar, to wit that as Hgar, so this Covenant (especially as it was gnerally mistaken for a Cove∣nant of works) did beget Children unto bondage, that is, they who adhered to it (as so understood) were not thereby freed from their bondage to Sin, Satan and Gods Wrath (S e Gal. 3.10.), but were of a servile mercenary dispositi∣on, doing what they did in Gods service, not from love, but slavish fear, and thinking to merit Heaven by their works. See Mar. 10.17. And having, as it were in a Parenthesis, shewed the fitness of the former re∣semblance (because M ut Sinai, where the old Covenant was first given, is cal∣ledFaln from Grace] that is, ye renounce Christ and the Covenant of Grace;  ye are faln from the gracious way of Justification by Faith. Agar by the Arabians), h further describeth this Covenant by con∣sidering the condition of those wh now did tenaciously adhere to it. And first, he shews them, that the earthly Jerusalem, or the Jewish Church (not as she was in her best times, but as she was then in that present age), did answer or
bear a kind of resemblance with that Covenant, because that Church and her Children did remain in a servile condition, which was the fruit of their adhering to this Covenant, as it was mistaken, and misunderstood for a Covenant of works. 2ly. He shews, that the new Covenant, or the new Administration of the Covenant of Grace was prefigured in Sarah, and that they who adhere to it are called the Jerusalem that is from above; and all those who are the truly rege∣nerate of the Christian Church, and make claim to life, according to the tenour of the Covenant of Grace, are to be reckoned as belonging hereunto. And this Church is here called Jerusalem, because that City was a Type of the true Church by reason of its compactness and order, Psal. 122.3. and beauty, Psal. 48.2. and the divine protection that was over it, Isa. 31.5. And is said to be from above, because her Original is from Heaven [Jam. 1.17, 18.], and the Mem∣bers thereof have their Conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. He further shews, the happy state wherein those are who adhere to this Covenant; namly, in a state of freedom from sin [Rom. 6.18.], and the Curse of the Law [Rom. 8.1.], and the Yoke of that ancient legal dispensation [Eph. 2.15.]. 3ly. He shews, who are the Children of this Covenant [or Members of the true Church adhering to this Covenant], even all sincere Believers, whether Jews or Gen∣tiles. 4ly. He confirmeth the truth of the former mystery, by a quotation out Isa. 54.1. Which words in their first sense are a Prophecy of the joy∣ful deliverance of the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, and call upon the material City of Sion or Jerusalem as on a Woman that had been Barren to rejoice, because though all the time of the Captivity she had been empty of Jews, yet now she should be mre populous than ever she was at any time before her Capti∣vity, or than other Nations were, that had not been led into Captivity. This the Apostle excellently adapteth to the new Covenant, which when Christ was here on the Earth had but few Children, few that were brought forth by it, but after his death, upon the preaching of the Gospel by his Apostles to the Gentiles, it had very many, so that the Jews in comparison of the Christians were but few. Lastly, The Apostle applies this Typical History, and partly comforts the truly faithfl among the Galatians thereby, and partly instructs them In order to which, he represents to them these particulars. 1st. As Isaac by virtue of the Promise, above the power of nature, being born of a Free-woman, was Heir to his Fathers goods; so all they who seek Salvation, not by the Law, but by Faith in Chst are supernaturally begotten by the power of Gods Spirit, and by Grace are the tree Children of God, and such to whom eternal life is promisedNos silii promissionis] h. e. qui promissionem vera side amplectimur., and are Heirs of it, as Isaac was of his Fathers estate. 2ly. He shews them, that by suffering pescution by false Brethren (Patrons of Righteousness by Works), they therein were like to Isaac, whom Ishmael persecuted with bitter mocking, Gen 21.9. 3ly. As Hagar and Ishmael were cast out of Abrahams House, (at first by Sarah, Gen. 21.10. and the sentence afterwards confirmed by God himself, v. 12); so they who seek Justification by works (prefigured by Hagar and Ishmal) shall be cast out of the Church of God, (the Society of the Saints, v. 31.) and shall not obtain the inheritance of eternal life: but they who seek Salvation by Faith in Christ, shall abide therein, and shall be eternally saved. Lastly, he shews them, that all true faithful Christians are not Children of the Bond-woman but of the Free; and all that desire to approve themselves to be such, mut take heed of that error of seeking Righteousness by the works of the Law, but mut hold fast the Doctrine of Righteousness by Grace through Faith in Jesus Christ, if they would not exclude themselves from the heavenly inheritance. From Ver. 21. to the end. Having spoken thus much in the vindication of the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, he shuts up the whole disputation with a double exhortation. 1. That  they would stand fast in their Christian liberty, without subjecting themselves again to the Mosaical Yoke. Which exhortation he enforceth more directly by six Arguments. 1. Because Christ had purchased this freedom for his Church by
his own blood. 2. The holding Circumcision necessary, and as a part of mans Righteousness, doth cut off the observer of it from all benefit by Christ; because to maintain Circumcision, is by consequent, to maintain the whole bulk of the Mosaical rites to be in force, and so in effect to declare, that Christ is not yet come, seeing all those things were to be done away at his coming [Heb. 9.10.]. And Christ must either be our whole Righteousness, and our compleat Saviour, or not at all [Act. 4 12.]. 3ly. He testifies that they that engage themselves to observe Circumcision (in the way wherein it was urged by the false Apostles, Act. 15.1.), d hereby engage themselves to perform the whole Law, viz. Ce∣remonial and Judicial, (Circumcision being the initiatory Sacrament engaging the Receiver to the whole Mosaical Paedagogy, Exod. 12.48.), and the whole moral Law, and that under the penalty of condemnation. For no less then uni∣versal and perfect obedience to the Law in all its precepts, is required unto Justification by works. 4ly. He shews, that whoever among them observe the Levitical Ordinances, as they were pressed by the false Apostles, or soughtVer. 5. Ex fide spem justitiae expectamus] h. e. Vitam aeternam justis ex fide promissam, Tit. 2.13. to be justified by observing of them; in so doing, they renounced Christ, and all benefit by him, and were falen away from the DoctrineFides operabunda. of free Grace. For works and Grace are not consistent in the matter of Justification. 5ly. He declares that he himself and other Jews (who before their Conversion to the Christian Faith were circumcised), being now savingly taught and inlightened by the Holy Ghost, did renounce all confidence in their own works or carnal pri∣viledges, and did look to obtain heaven, (here called their hopeVer. 13. Vos ad libertatem vocati estis; tantum ne libertatem in occasionem carni, scilicet arripite vel eâ abutimini., because the object of their hope, Tit. 2.13.) only by virtue of the Righteousness which is laid hold on by Faith. 6ly. In the state of the Church, under the Gospel, since Christ was manifested in the Flesh, he shews, that neither the observing of Circumcision, nor the omitting of it, does of it self commend a man to God: but that which he now requires, is a true lively FaithSo the word Spirit, when 'tis opposed to the Flesh is usually taken. See Joh. 3.6. in his Son, evidencing it self to be such, by the fruits of true love to God and our Neighbour, which is called the fulfilling of the Law, Rom. 13.10. Yet this is not so to be under∣stood, as if the use of the Sacraments of the New Testament or other pieces of instituted worship were hereby excluded and declared useless, they being helps of our Faith, with ut which, it is impossible to perform any duty of love to God or our Neighbour, sincerely and acceptably. From Ver. 1. to 7. Secondly, He further presseth this his exhortation by other arguments, and that as it were by the By. 1. He commends them for their formr forwardness in embracing this now controverted truth, (which he calls a Running well), and he sees no reason why they shuld depart from it. 2ly. Lest they should say, they were fully perswaded in their Consciences, that this way they were brought into by their new Apostles was the way of God; He tells them, that what per∣swasion soever they may have of that kind, it is but a meer delusion, and comes not from God (who had called them to true Christian Liberty), but from the Devil and his Instruments. 3ly. Lest they should say, he needed not make so much ado about this matter, seeing they had not embraced the whole body of the Jewish worship, but only observed some particular Ceremonies there∣of, and as to other things they practised as the Christian Faith required: He an∣swers, that a little Leaven, a little false Doctrine entertained [Mat. 16.12.] may easily in time corrupt a mans judgment in other points, and a small number of such seduced persons may easily infect the whole Church [1 Cor. 5.6.]. 4ly. He expresses his confidence (grounded upon Charity) that through the Lords gra∣cious assitance, they should be reclaim'd from this their errr and brought to embrace the same truth again, which he had preached to them; and that he that thus troubled and perverted them (whoever he be) should hear his own judgment and punishment from God, except he repent. 5ly. He presses his exhortation by confuting a Calumny, which (as it seems) his adversaries mad use of, to perswade the people, that he by circumcising Timothy to prevent the stumbling of the weak Jews [Act. 16.3.] had declared himself to be of the same judg∣ment
with them in the present cntoversie. In answer to this, he gives them to understand, that he did not rge Circumcision to be observed by the Gentiles at all [Act. 21.25.], nor allw it to be us'd by the Jews, in the sense of his Ad∣verss,  as miht appear t them by these two Reasons: 1. If he had preached Circisin, the Jews would not have persecuted him as they did. 2. They would not he  sch ffence at his preaching Salvation through Christ crucified as they did, which is called here the Dctrine of the Cross, 1 Cor 1.18. For that Dctrine mst nded them, because by it, Circumcision and the whole frame of the old al Administration (under which they were born and educated) was laid asid [Se Act. 21.28.]. 6ly. He wishes that their prime Seducers, (who troubled their outward and inward peace) were cut off from Communion with the Church, by the Sword of Excommunication, because they did burden them with the observation of such things, as were contrary to Evangelical liberty, to the en∣joyment whereof they were called by God. From Ver. 7. to the middle of the 13th. v. He cmes now to the second part of his Exhortation; namely, That they take heed lst they abuse their Christian libertyVer. 17. Nam caro concupiscit adversus Spiritum, Spiritus autem adversus earnem (haec autem inter se opposita sunt) ut non quaecungue volueritis, eadem saciatis: . e. ideò Spiritus se carni opponit, ne ea faciatis quae alioquin velletis (nempe si caro sola vos duceret), vid. Rom. 8.13. Grot.; as if they were freed from all obligation to serve God or man in the duties particularly required of them. He gives them therefore these two Rules; 1. That they would not take encourage∣ment from this Dctrine to give licence to sin and corruption within them, to break all bnds and to fulfill its lusts and inordinate desires. 2. That they would by love serve one another; that is, That every one, notwithstanding this Liberty, would from a principle of Love, imploy himself in all the duties of Love for the bring∣ing about the ad of his Neighbour, and accordingly would either strengthen or in∣large himself in the use of it, as might be most cnducing to his Neighbours spiri∣tual ood and edification, and not by an indiscreet use of his Christian Liberty of∣fend his weak Brethren [Rm. 14.13, 15. 1 Cor. 8.9.]. And this serving one another in Love, he shews, is the most compendious way to keep the whole Law which is sum'd up in that one word or Precept, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self. For true and regular Love to our Neighbour suppseth Love to God, and springeth from it, as its Fountain [1 Joh. 5.1.], and is a great evidnce of it [1 Joh 4.21] But he tells them, If there continue bitter strifes and hck-bitings among them, they will in all likelyhood, come at last to devour, and dtroy one another. And that he may further press his first Rule, to wit, That ty should not use their Liberty for an occasion to the flesh, he ex∣hrts them, to walk in the Spirit, that is, to follow the guidance and motions of the sanctifying Spirit of God, and these benefits would ccrue to them hereby. 1. So the Lusts of the flesh should not rule over them, but they should be victo∣rious in the contest betwixt the fl sh and the SpiritSi animus noster Dei Spiritu movetur, actibus id ipsum exprimamus., that is, betwixt the corrupt nature, and the renewed part. For the Spirit will mortifie and keep un∣der the flesh; so that though the first motion of imbred Corruption be not totally suppssed, yet they shall not be fulfilled, or brought into act with deliberation and cnss For as the evil lustings of the flsh will strive and struggle against the god motions and inclinations which the Holy Ghost stirreth up; so the Spirit or renwed part struggleth against the flesh and the evil motions thereof, lestNil tam ad misericordiam inclinat, quam proprii periculi cogitatio. We must help our Brethren out of their sins by direction; out of their affliction, by consolation. the regenerate should do the things which their corrupt nature (that still dwel∣leth in th) would therwise incline them unto. 2ly. Thy that are led by the Spirit and inward principle of grace within, are not under the condemning power of the Law, though they are under it as a Rule, which their renewed part complies with. But the Law doth manifestly condemn the Works of the Flesh, (of which he recs up a Catalogue of Seventeen, p ssibly too commonly practised Lyme in thse Regions and Countries), and those who practise them, he shews, (xcpt they repent) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 3ly If they follow the Spirit, and exercise the gracius virtues thereof (of which he reckons up Nine), they will not have the Law against them, to curse or condemn them. For such virtues and gracious qualities, the Law is so
far from condemning, that it enjoins them, cmmands them, and encourageth in the practice of them. He further shews, that all they who are Christs (one as well as another) have in some good degree (though not equally) crucifid the flesh, with its corrupt affections and lusts. For they fetch virtue from Christ crucifi'd for that purpose: Christs death for their sins, strongly obliges them to it. And thy are not only bund to it but they actually endeavour it, through the assitance of the Spirit of Christ, who dwelleth in them. In Conclusion, he shews, that they that are raised up by the power of the Spirit of God from the death of sin unto  new life, ought in their lives and conversations t manifst it, and to endeavour to walk Christianly and Spiri∣tuallyAliorum vitia & imbecillitates quae vobis oneri esse possint mansueto animo to∣lerate, & emendare studete. Huc pertinet proverbium, Amici vitia noveris, amicum non oderis.. From the middle of v. 13. to v. 26. He comes now to dhrt these Galatians from some particular sins (which it seems were too rife among them), and to exhort them to some particular duties, which they needed to be exhorted unto. 1. He dhrts them from Ambition and its evil attendants, Reproach and Envy; which Evils, possily, their Church at that time was infected with. Ver. 26. 2ly. He exhorts thse among them, who were spiritual (that is, who had received  a larger measure of Grace, and are called strong, Rom. 15.8. and perfect, to wit, cmparatively, Phil. 3.15.), to endeavour to restore and reclaim those who were overtaken with any sin, and that with the spirit of meekness, considering their own frailty, and how easily, under a temptation, they themselves might also fall into the like sinThose that are dejected under the burden of their sins, they should relieve and succour by good counsel and advice.. He shews, this is the end of reprehension, namely, to raise up our Brother that is fall'n, and not proudly to insult over him. He exhorts them therefore, to bear one anothers burdensSalsedinem correptionis amor Christi temperet, & dilectionem proximi sal justitiae condiat., that is, to have compassion on their Brothers failings and infirmities, which lie upon him as a heavy lad andNon deteriorum comparatione. burden) and to use the best means they can to ease and relieve him, and by discreet reprehensin to amend him; and so they shall put in practise that command of Christ, which He, nt only by his Precept but by his Example, so effectually recom∣mended to his Disciples, Joh. 13.34. & ch. 15.12. (f). And he that insulteth over others that are overtaken, and thinketh himself more strong, deceives himself, and may possibly be found among the weakest when he is tempted. He adviseth them therefore, nt to compare themselves with others that are worse than them∣selves (which may stir up pride and arrogancy in them), but to compare them∣selves with those that are better than themselves, that so they may be humbled. Lt very one (saith he) try their own works by the rule of Gods Wrd, and not by the Works of others, and so they shall find mattr of rejoicing in themselves alone (g), that is, in the testimony of their own Consciences, and shall not need to borrow matter f rejoicing from the faults and sins of others; for every man shall bear his own burden, that is, give an account of his Works to God, who will absolve or condemn men, not as they have done better or worse than others, but as they shall be found in themselves, absolutely considered. From Ver. 1. to 6. 3ly. He exhorteth the people to exercise liberality towards their Teachers and spiritual Guides, by whom they were taught and instructed. For men shall reap according to what they have sown, whether it be much or little, good Seed or bad: and more particularly, as they have employed their temporal goods, either for pious uses, or for pampering their flshly Lusts; so they may expect an answerable reward or punishment from the Lord. They that spend their Means and Estates upon the service of their flshly Lusts, shall of this abuse of their goods, reap corruption (that is, eternal perditin as 'tis here opposed to eternal life): but they that bstw their goods to advance the work of the Spirit in themselves and others, (to further Gods Glory, and Mans Salvation) shall of the Spirit (that is forasmuch as they have mplyed their goods abut spiritual things) be gra∣ciously rewardd with eternal life. And in duties of Charity, he tells them, they should nt be discouraged, though thy meet not presently with their reward; for in due time they shall gather the fruit which God hath promised. He closeth the
exhortation to beneficence, exhorting them while they have opportunity to do good to all (according to their ability), specially to all faithful Christians, and much mre to their faithful Pastors. From Ver. 6. to 11. In Conclusion; for a testimny of his sincere affction to them, he tells them, he had written this whole Epistle with his own hand. 'Tis true, he wrote larger Epistles to some Churches, yet he never wrote with his own hand any so large as this. As for his Adversaries, he shews, they were not acted with sincere inten∣tions in urging Circumcision upon them, but with hypocrisie, or a desire only to make a fair outward shew of Religion, by observing that flshly and carnal rite, and that they might escape perscution from the Jews, (and from the Civil Powers, who were instigated by them, Act. 18.12, 13); which we, says he, that preach the sincere Dctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ crucified are exposed unto. For the fury of those Persecutors was much abated towards such Chri∣stians as did observe the Ceremonial Law of Moses. He further sheweth, that these false Apostles, that so vehemently urged Circumcision upon them, did not themselves, in other points, observe the Law, but dispensed with it among them∣selves where they knew there were none like to publish their doings abroad [Mat. 23.4.]: yet they urged Circumcision upon them, that they might be able to boast of the multitude of their Proselytes among them; and that so many received Cir∣cumcision in their flesh, at their instigation, and carried it as a mark of their in∣structin. But as for himself, he shews them, the matter of his Gloriation was only the Cross of Christ, that is, that he had preached up the all-sufficient, expiatory, and satisfactory Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross. And for the sake of Christ crucified, all honour, favour, and respect with men was despised by him, as he for his zeal for Christ was despis'd, persecuted and cast off by the World, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. And the reason why he gloried in the Cross of Christ, and not in any fleshly priviledges, was, because in the Kingdom or Church of Christ neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor Uncircumcision, without Regeneration and renewing of the Soul by the Holy Ghost. And to as many as walk according to this Rule (that is, this pattern of Doctrine which he had taught in this Epistle) concerning Mans Justification before God, concerning Christian Liberty, and a Christian Conversation, he heartily wishes peace and mercy, that is, all manner of spiritual Blessings; they beingThe particle, and, must in this place be exegetick of one and the same thing, [as Ephes. 1.3.]; and not copulative of divers. the true Israel of God. In the close of all, with an Apostolick authority, he forbids his Adversa∣ries to make him any further work or trouble, either by gainsaying his Doctrine, or by detracting from his Authority, because he bare the marks of a Servant most faithful, and mst devoted to Christ; namely, those stripes and wounds he had rcived for the name of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.23, &c. He shuts up his Epistle with his accustomed Seal, wishing that the grace and favour of Jesus Christ might reside (both as to the effects and sense of it) in their Spirits and Souls, to enlighten and sanctifie them more and more, that from thence they may draw Consolation both in Life and Death. From Ver. 11. to the end.
SECT. VI. THe Apostle during his abode at Ephesus, had a purpose in hi mind o visit the Churches in Macedonia and Achaia, and from nce to go up to Jerusalem. But ist he intended to go to Corinth, and from thence into Macedonia, and from Macedonia to turn  to Corinth, and so to go to Jerusa∣lem [ Cor. 15 1] to which place he had appointed the God  the oor aints in Judaea to be sent: and from thnce  ght to go to Rome, and so to take a Journey in∣to Spain▪ Rm. 15.24. But agitating these things in his mind, he  moheus and Erastus into Macedonia, he himself staying in Asia for the prsent, where he seems to have prea∣ched the Gpl to the Cities that were near Ephesus, by the spce of Nine months; which with the Two years he taught in the School of Tyrannus, and the Three months he taught in the Jwish Synagoues a Ephsus, will mke up the space of Three years▪ that e sas, he laboured in Asia [Act. .31.]: A grat Door bing opned to him in that place, though there were many adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.9. Act. 19. v. 21. After thse hings were ended, Paul purposed in the spi∣rit, when h h  Madoni d Aha, to go to Je∣rulem, sying, : I hav ben there, I must also see Rome. v. 22. S e ut into Macedonia two of them that ministred unto him,  and Erastus, but he himself sayed in Asia for a sea∣son. SECT. VII. ABout this time there arose a Schism in the Church of Co∣rinth: some of them, contentiously preferring their own Teachers (from whom they denominated themselves) beore others; some sying, they were of Paul, some of Apollos, some of Cephas, and some that they owned none for their Teacher but Christ, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12.
Upon this difference, and some others, Apollos with certain other Brethren came with Letters from the Church there to the Apostle now at Ephesus, to desire his advice, concerning several weighty matters and Cases of Conscience, relating to the pre∣sent state of their Church. Paul joining Sosthenes with him (that he might be a witness to this his admonition, and so by two witnesses this his Testimony might be confirm'd), wrote his First Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent it by Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, who, with Apollos, were the Messengers of the Corinthians; But Apollos refused to return at that time with them [1 Cor. 16.12.]; pos∣sibly because he would not countenance a faction, there begun, in part under his Name.
he First Epistle to e Corinthians.Which Epistle consists of these Three parts. 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. IN the Preface we may take notice of the Writers of the Epistle, namely PaulDuplex Apostolo nomen: Hebraeum Saulus, Romanum Paulus., (called by the will and appointment of God to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ), and SosthenesSee Sect. 10. of Chap. 5. This Sosthenes it seems was now converted to the Faith; and being a man of note and repute among the Corinthians, Paul joins him wih him in this admonition., whom he joins with him, as a witness to this his Admonition, that by two witnesses his Testimony might be confirm'd. The Epistle is addressed and directed, not only to the Church of Corinth, but to all the Christians of AchaiaSee 2. Epist. 1.1., to all that are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, to all that are Saints by effectual Vocation, to all that have the Name of Christ called on themSee Dr. Hammond in loc. V 5. . Donis linguarum, & prophetandi. Haec, com∣mate sequenti, vocat . Testimonium scilicet quo astruitur sesum esse verum Messiam, cum tali dona fuerit largitus. Sic Apoc. 19.10. Testimonium Jesu est piritus Prophetiae: Non solum Doctrina quam edit Prophetia, sed ipsum donum Prophetandi. Sic 1 Joh cap. 5.8. Spiritus, & aqua, & sanguis, testimonium de Christo perhibent in terr. Spiritus, vel donum Prophetiae; aqua, vel baptismus; & sangui, vel martyrium: Nam cum ita afflerent dona extraordinaria piritûs, conflueentqu tam infinitae turbae ad baptismum in nomine Jesu, plurimique pro isto nomie sbierant mar∣tyrium, indubitatum testimonium est, Eum verum esse Messiam. Lightf., to all that in any place own him, profess him, and seek to him for help; who is the Lord of all true Believers every where. To all such he wishes, that abundance of Grace and Peace may flow from God the Father as the Fountain, and from Jesus Christ as the Conduit-Pipe. And in the first place, he declares, How thankfull he was to God for the riches of his Grace bestowed on them through Jesus Christ and the preaching of his Gos∣pel among them. For they were endowed with all manner of spiritual Gifts per∣taining to the knowledg and preaching of the Gospel; namely, with the knowledg of the mysteries of the Christian Faith, and the gift of Tongues (d). So that the divinity of the Gospel (which testifies of Christ), was by these Gifts strongly at∣tested and confirmed among them. He tells them, they wanted no spiritual Gifts, which other Christians enjoyed, tending to their edification, or confirmation, only they should look that they improv'd them well, assuredly expecting Christs second Coming. He was perswaded God would scil. Deus ex vers 4. isc. confirm them, and cause them to perse∣severe in Grace, that they may be found blameless, and unreproveable in the day of Christs appearing. For having effectually called them to a participation of the benefits of his Son, he is faithful and will not forsake them [see Jer. 32.40.], but will carry on his own work in them. From Ver. 1. to 10. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle: wherein, 1. He Pathetically exhorts them to Unity; beseeching them, for the sake of Christ, that they would all agree in the Doctrine of Salvation, and use one man∣ner of speaking of the same Faith; that there be no Schisms among them; but that they be compacted, and united as members of the same Body, in the same belief, judgment, and affections. And this exhortation, he supposes they had need of, because he had been informed by some of Cloe'sSee ch. 16.17. I am glad of the comming of Stephanus, Fortunatus and caicus; which two latter, probably, were the Sons of Cloe. Vide Grot. in loc. Family, that there were Schisms among them: and someVer. 12. ] Intelligedum hoc non de omnibus sed de multis. pretended, that the Doctrine they had recei∣ved, was peculiarly taught them by PaulEgo Pauli. Ad originem hujus Schismatis investigandam recurri ptest ad bi∣partitionem hujus Ecclesiae in Judaeos conversos, & Gentiles, quae patet ex eju histo∣riâ, Act 18. Pars gentilitia, fortè auli nomen efferebat, & Apollo: Judica, Cephae & Christi. Utraque iterum bipartitur. Quidam de parte Gentilitiâ, aulam aut solum, aut certe prae omnibus aliis sunt reveriti, ut atrem, Apostolum, primum qui inter eos in∣troduxit Evangelium; utcunque planè, humili stylo, & non secundum sapientiam ac atem humnam, praedcantem. Quidam autem Apollo ei praetulerunt, ut doctorem profundiorem, elegantiorem, & magis comptum. Vid. Act. 18.24. Hinc copiosa ita dissertatio postoli de ipsissimo hoc concionandi modo, à cap. 1.17. ad cap. 4.6. ubi di∣cit se, ista, figurâ quâdam transtulisse ad seipsum & Apollo., and so declared themselves to be his Disciples: Others cried up Apollo, as being instructed by him, after Paul's departure: Others that came from Judea, and p ssibly had been taught by Peter, cried up Peter: Others professed themselves only the Disciples of Christ, and would not take any factious Names of other Tachrs upon them, and therein did well. Hereupon be reproves their divisions, and exhorts them to Ʋnity. And that he might the better perswade them to it, he demandeth of them, whether Christ, (though he hath divers ministers and instruments) hath any more than one Church, one Body, and one Kingdom; and if so, whether one part of the Church should be nmd from Christ, and the other parts from Paul, Peter, Apollos, or other Teachers? He asks, whether Paul was crucified for them? Or whether they were baptiz d in the Name of Paul, so as they should deno∣minate
themselves from Paul. As for himself, he was so far from pretending (as some of their vain-glorious Teachers did) by baptizing of many, to bind them unto himself, (that they might acknowledg him for their head) that he baptized none amng them, but CrispusSee Act. 18 8. and GaiusRom. 16.23, (that he remem∣bred), and the Houshold of Stephanus. For Christ did not send him principally to baptize, (which others might do as well), but to preach the Gospel to those who never heard of it before. And this he was to perform in a plain and serious way, and not to set himself to attract men to the Faith by the power and artifices of humane Eloquence; lest the Doctrine of Christ crucified should be rendred sus∣pected, by such a pompous way of preaching it. He acknowledges, that the plain preaching of a crucified Saviour may seem a ridiculous thing to impenitent sin∣ners; but unto such who have been brought by Faith to embrace Christ, and have thereby part in eternal life, 'tis the glorious evidence of the power of God in thus bringing about their Salvation. What therefore the Prophet Esay threatned against the men of his time [Isa. 29.13, 14]; he applies to all Contemners of the Gospel now, namely, that God would turn their wisdom into foolishness, who contenting themselves with an outward formal devotion in their addresses to Him, regarded not inward sanctification, nor those things wherein the power of godliness consists. And he further tells them, they might consult their own experience, whether God in the Calling of the Church, did ordinarily make use of the Philosophersv. 20.  qui docet alios:  quivis literatus, ut distinctus à plebe; ac praecipi è quivi Pater traditionum:  qui profundius e concionatus atque interpretatus legem. Qui mysticè & alleoricè Scripturam interpretatu, cuus com∣mentataria interrogationibus, & quaestionibus refert sunt. v. 20. Inatuavit] scilicet declarativè, h.e. facto suo, stultam esse ostendit dum agen∣di media alia pra elegit., or the learned Heads of the World, or the Jewish Rabbies, those mystical and allegorical Interpreters of the Scripture? Nay, whether he did not make their wisdom to appear stark folly, in comparison of the glorious effects the preaching of the Gospel produced. And seeing by the glorious wisdom of God, which shi∣ned in his works of Creation and Providence, the Heathen World (notwith∣standing all their Wisdom and Philosophy) were not brought to know God aright, so as to glorifie him; it pleased God, by such preaching as seem'd to them foolish∣ness, to save those who were thereby brought to believe in his Son. For as the carnal Jews require some sign or prodigy from Heaven to be shewed them, to per∣swade them of the truth of the Gospel: So the Greeks look for profound Philo∣sophy in the Gospel, and scorn it because they think they find it not there. But we, says the Apostle, are nothing discouraged hereby, but go on in our course, prea∣ching Christ crucified; which Doctrine, is to the Jews (who looked for a victo∣rious Mssias, who should rescue them out of the power of their enemies) a stumbling block; and to the Gentiles (who are gratified with nothing but Eloquence and Phi∣losophy) meer foolishness. However, unto them that are effectually called both among Jews and Gentiles this Doctrine is deservedly acknowledged to be the great evidence of the power of God, and the manifestation of the wisdom of God above all worldly wisdom. Neither ought this to seem strange, for the institutions of God (though they may seem weak and foolish to the World) are more efficacious and powerful then all the wisdom and power of wordly men. And as God in calling of men, (as they might observe), does not, for the most part, call the wise, and noble, and great, but meaner persons; so likewise he hath not made choice of the lofty strain of preaching to serve his glorious ends in converting sinners, but the plainer way. He hath chosen the way which the World will count foolish, on purpose that by the success of it, the wise men of the World may be put to shame, (being so much deceived in their expectation); and he hath chosen that way which the World counts weak, that he may make it appear, how much more power there is in it (when his blessings concurs with it), than in those ways they account most excellent and powerful: and lastly, he hath chosen such means for the bringing a∣bout his glorious ends, which to the men of the World seem despicable, and abject, that it may appear how empty all those things are which are so much valued in the World, when these which they so much despise, shall be manifested to be more effectu∣al than they. And this he does, that no man may have any reason to boast of his wis∣dm before him; but may be forc'd to ascribe all glory to him. And he tells them, that it is of his working alone, that they are now in Christ Jesus, that they believe
in him, and are by Faith ingrafted into him, whom God hath made to all true Believers the Author of all spiritual blessings; viz. Wisdom by the revelation of the mystery of Salvation; Righteousness by his full satisfaction and perfect obe∣dience; Sanctification by the gift of his Spirit; and full Redmption from all evils and misries both of Soul and Body; That so all this great good may be thankfully acknowldged to come from God alone, and none else, as of due it ought; according to Jer. 9.23, 24. From Ver. 10. to the end. To the intent therefore that the glory of God may not be obscured, he sheweth, he had not used Eloquence of Words, in publishing the Gospel, whereby God tsti∣fies and reveals his Will concerning the way of saving sinners. Wherefore he thought it not fit to profess, or teach any other Doctrine among them, then that of Christ crucified. And when he was with them, being under some pnsivenessVide Grot. in loc. of mind, and fear of danger from enemis, h was far from stting forth hmslf with ostentation or pride, as their vain-glorious Teachers now did. Neither was his publick preaching or private exhortations garnished with humane eloqunce but though plain, yet were they accompanied with a scret pwerv 4. Figura est quam Hendiadem vocant. Spiritus & virtutis, i. e. Virtutis Spiritûs sancti, quam videlicet Spiritus sanctus suppeditat. Estius. v. 4. Neque se mo meus, &c.] , &c. significat, se simpliciter demon∣strasse seu testificatum esse veritatem Doctrinae Christianae: & per hanc demonstratio∣nem seu testifiationem Spirituam sanctum exseruisse suam potentiam, atque efficacem fuisse in cordibus Cointhiorum, ut testimonio illi Dei fidem haberent, Ergo, in de∣monstratiòne Spiritus & potentioe, perinde valet ac si diceret. In demonstratione per quam Spiritus potentiam suam exseruit. Genitivus adjuncti, & . Piscat. in loc. v. 4. .] Est Genitivus efficientis. Hunc totum ver∣sum optime ex. licat Theophylactur. Haudquaquam, inquit, meus Sermo argutiolis & peritiasionibu nitebatur, nec erat dicendi arte & cultu instructus; sed in Spiritus constabat ostensione, hoc est, prae se ferebat piritum sanctum. .] Haec illa est , quâ Christus docuisse populum dicitur; & Stephanus, Act. 6.8.10. vide Heb. 4.12. Cujus partes duae,  interpretor authoritatem illam, quam habet in Conscientus hominum is, qui recte secat verbm fidei Math. 7. ult.  vide Heb. 4.14. 1 Thes. 1.5. Dr. Guil. Slater in loc., and con∣viction of the Spirit, inlighting the mind, and perswading the Conscience. And he used such plainnss, that their Faith might not be grounded meerly on humane perswasion, but on the divinity of the Doctrine, witnssed to their hearts by the convictions of the Spirit of God. But though h usd such plainness, yet his pra∣ching was not void of all wisdom; for the Doctrine he preachd, was true and divine▪ wisdom, and appeared to be so, to all true and soundPer  intelligo quosvis verè fideles, quorum pietas sincera minimeque fucata est, &c. Slater. Believers, who have arriv'd to a higher pitch of wisdm than others. These apprehnd, ad∣mire and magnifie it, though it be of a different strain from the wisdom of the World and the Politick Maxims of the Princes and Rulers of the World who
(neglecting Christ) with all their worldly wisdom and policy dye and perish. But that which he preach'd was the wisdom of the eternal God, touching the redemp∣tion and salvation of man, hidden formerly under holy mysteriesRom. 16.25. and Jew∣ish Types, and but darkly spoken of by the Prophets, which God dtermined in himself, before the World began, to manifest in the Gospel, that by the knowledg thereof all true Believers might attain eternal glory, This wisdom few, i. e. ferè nemo. of the chief men among the Jews or Rulers of the Gentiles, had any clear under∣standing of; for had they known it, out of reverence to the divine power, they would have been afraid to crucifie the Lord of Glory, who plainly appeared, by the voice from Heaven, and his miracles, t be God himself cme down from Heaven, though cloathed with our nature. Neither is it to be wndrd at, that these witty men could not perceive this wisd m; for those things that the Gspel reveals, pass all mens understandings except they be supernaturally inlightnd. For (to accommodate the words of the Prophet Isaiah ch. 64.4. to our present purpose), Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man, naturally to perceive the glorious things that God has prepared, and holds forth in the Gospel, to them that love him. But (says he) God hath revealed these excellent things to us who believe, by his Spirit, who knows metonymicè est Cognoscere sive perspectum habere. Slat. all the secret Counsels of God, as being of the same essence with the Father and the Son. As the thoughts and designs of a man, none knoweth but his own Spirit; so these divine matters, none can know or reveal to us, but the Spirit of God. And this holy Spirit (and not the Spirit that acts the men of the world, which suggests only worldly things) is given to us who believe, that we may certainly know the things that are freely given us of God, for our Comfort and Salvation, viz. Christ and his benefits. And these spiritual things being made known to us, we desire to manifest them, not with the painted language of mans wisdom, but in a style and words which the Holy Ghost teacheth, adapting adaptare, significat, & exhibito judicio ita connectere, ut omnia quàm aptissimè inter se conveniant. Vide 1 Pet. 4.11. spiritual language, to spiritual things. But such things as thse, they that are led only by the light of humanev. 14  Est qui humanae tantum rationis luce ducitur. reason, do absolutely despise, and cannot apprehend or approve: for spiritual things are only spiritually discerned; namely, by a spiritual light, which the meerly rational unregenerate man is destitute of. But he that is spiri∣tual (that is, that is inlightened and renewed by the Spirit of God) discerneth all these things of which we speak; so that he cannot be convinced of any error in his discerning or judging of them, by any man that is not spiritualOtherwise the Spirit of the Prophets must be subjected to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. and rege∣nerate. And what carnl man can be imagined to know the mind of the Lord so well, as to be fit to inform and counsel the spiritual man, or to convince him of any error? But for us Apstles (says he), we have had the mind of Christ re∣vealed to us by his Spirit, therefore none can teach you more of the truth of God than we, From Ver. 1. to the end.See Isa. 40.13. Est convincere erroris, & sic convictum in suam sententiam adductis argumentis inducere. Significat efficere condescentionem, i. e. argumentis propositis efficere ut aliquis tecum in eandem sententiam condecendat.
He proceeds to shew a further reason, why he used such plainness when he was among them, namely, because he could not look upon the greatest part of them, as other than Babes in Christ, and carnalCarnales vocat, non simpliciter Spiritu destitutos, sed in quibus caro praeva∣let. Slat. (if compared with those who have further progress and improvement in Christianity), and therefore judged they had need of milk, and not of strong meat, which they culd not at that time bear, neither indeed could they now. And that they were yet something car∣nal (and had not attain'd to the true Christian temper), he shews, the envy, strife and contentions that were among them, did too much evidence; which while they continued in, they walked as carnal and unregenerate men: yea, their denominating themselves from certin Teachers, and making a Schism about them, and holding with thm against others, did plainly argue them to be car∣nal. And by this means, he shews, they attributed more to their Teachers then was meet. For what, says he, are Paul and Apollos but only Ministers and Instru∣ments of your Conversion and Faith, as far as God is pleased to furnish them with Gifts, and enable them in his work; and their labour, either as to Conversion or Edification, is no more available without the blessing of God, than the planting or watering of the Gardiner is, if God give not the increase. From Ver. 1. to 8. He now uses another Argument against this Schism taken from the unity that ought to be among their Teachers; who in office, labour and teaching ought to be one, and therefore neither by them, nor for them, is the Church to be di∣vided. Indeed their labour is not one, neither shall their reward be one: but their work is one, for they are by their office to be co-workers together with God in his husbandry, and in his building. And for his own particular, he shews, he had been a builder (under God) amng them, and as became a pru∣dent and faithful Master-builder, he had laid the foundation, and by prea∣ching the Doctrine of Christ crucified, had begun a Church among them, and o∣thers have come in since, and have superstructed on this foundation; but he ad∣vises such Teachers, to take heed they superstruct no other Doctrine upon it, than that which agrees with it. If they do, they will do it at their own peril. For he having laid the only sure foundation among them, viz. the Doctrine of Christ crucified, no Teachers whatsoever, ought to teach any thing contrary thereto, nor go about to direct sinners to seek for the remission of their sins any o∣ther way, then by Faith in Christ. Now whether a man build upon this foun∣dation, Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, (that is, pure, solid Dctrine), or Wood, Hy, Stubble, (that is, vain curious Subtilties, and philosophical Conceits, tnding more to ostentation than edification, which though they do not destroy the foundation yet disfigure it) every mans work shall be made manifst of what sort it is: for timeDiem ego simpliciter interpretor temporis longinquitatem. Veritas siquidem temporis filia. Per Ignem ego intelligo lucem veritatis per Spiritum sanctum in Ecclesiâ accensam. Dies aptè vocatur tempus illud, quo discussis tenebris, & caligne, illustratur veritas. Ergo denunciat Apostolis, non semper latere posse, qui fraudulent èr egerunt in opere Domini, aut qui se fidos gesserunt; ac si diceret, non semper erunt tenebrae, aliquando lux orietur, quae omnia manifestabit. Calvinus. Dies hic accipitur pro manifestâ revelatione, cum tenebrae depellentur, ut de re, prout ipsa est, judicium seratur. P. Martyr., and the light of Gods Word will manifest the
verity, or vanity of Doctrines delivered by Preachers. And if any mans Doctrine he like good metal that will endure the Furnace or trial without being consumed, he shall receive a reward for his faithfulness. But if his Doctrine will not endure the trial (as Wood, Hy, Stubble, and Dross will not) he shall lose his labour, so as it shall not be accepted or rewarded by God. Notwithstanding for his own person, if he hath held firm to the foundation, and be otherwise found sincere in the Faith of Christ, he shall be savedIpse salvabitur , i. e. beneficio lucis quâ fit ut ipse erro∣rem & agnoscat, & revocet. Slater. Docet illos qui Christum pro fundamento retinuerunt, etsi non semper optimam structuram addiderunt, servandos tamen, sed aegrè ac sic, sicut si ex igne eriperentur. Illyr., yet with difficulty, even as a man that hardly scapeth out of the fireVolunt hinc Papistae ignem purgatorium exstruere, sed ineptè. In omnibus & singulis parabolis semper unicè attendendum est ad scopum ac intentio∣nem ejus, qui illas loquitur & usurpat. Salubre Theophylacti monitum. Non oportet in omnes parabolarum partes curiosius inquirere; sed quatenus apparent proposito inser∣vire: reliquae sumendae sunt quasi parabolam contexentes & nihil ad propositum facien∣tes. Lepidè vereque illud Solomonis omnibus parabolis applicatur, Prov. 30.33. Qui vehementer emungit, elicit sanguinem.. From Ver. 8. to 16. Another Argument which he uses to move them to take heed of bringing in any false Doctrines among them, is this: All, says he, that are brought effectu∣ally to believe in Christ, are the Temple of God, a Church of God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in them. Now if any man defile the Temple or Church of God, by bringing in any impure Doctrine or Practises among them, he must ex∣pect that God will severely punish him, except he repent and amend. And all you that are true and real Christians, make up this Temple or Church, V. 16, 17. And lest any of their vain-glorious Teachrs (being puft up with a cnceit of their worldly wisdom) should notwithstanding all his admonitions, resolve to go on in their way, he advises them to take heed, that this their carnal wisdom deceive them not. For says he, I tell you, if any man among you seemeth to himself to be wise, according to the wisdom that acts the men of this world, his best way is to deny his own carnal wisdom, and submit himself to the wisdom of God, and the plain Doctrine of the Gospel, which the World accounts foolishness, and then he shall approve himself truly wise towards God, and in the matters that concern his Soul. For God accounts carnal wisdom foolishness, especially when it rejects his institutions, or (despising the simplicity of them) sets up its own inventions, which will not further a man to true happiness. So that according to the words of Eliphaz, Job 5.13. God catcheth the wise in their own craftiness; and according to Psal. 94.11.Paulus pro  posuit  quia id instituto ipsius conveniebat, & haud dubiè de iis maximè agit Psalmographus qui sibi sapere plurimum videbantur. Grot. God manifests the thoughts of the wolrdly wise to be vain. From Ver. 18. to 20. From all that he hath before said, he infers, that they should not glory in their Teachers, nor ascribe too much to them, nor depend on them, as if they were Lords
of their Faith. For all of them, even the greatest as well as the least, even the Apostles themselves, and all their gifts are ordained of God for the use and service of the Church. Yea al things in the World, life, death, things present, things to come, are all appointed to promote, advance, and accomplish the eter∣nal happinessHaec omnia propter vos sunt & ad vestram ordinantur utilitatem. Estius. of those that are the true members of Christ. And they being Christs redeemed ones, ought to reckon themselves his Flock, and to de∣pend on him, and obey him; as Christ himself, the well beloved Son of God, resigned up himself to the will of his Father. From Ver. 20. to the end. He proceeds to shw, hw he would have them judg of him, and other faith∣ful Ministers of Christ, namely, not as Masters of their Faith, but as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards and Dispensers of the Mysteries of Gd [viz. his Word and Sacraments] wherein faithfulness is especially requir'd. He de∣clares how little he valued theirVer. 3. ] Dies pro judicio ponitur, ex Cilicum idiotis∣mo, ut Hieronymo placet: Metonymia est adjuncti; nam judiciorum certi dies: Ju∣dicia autem humana appellat ea, quae ex affectibus humanis proficiscuntur. : scilicet quod ad dignitatem attinet, q. d. quanti sim, vel non sim, ego nequaquam disquiro aut dijudico: est igitur hoc Pauli dictum ad certam hypothe∣sin restringendum. judgment of him, who preferr'd their elo∣quent Teachers before him. He shews, he dare not judg himself, whether he had greater Gifts than they, nor determine how much he was to be esteemed above other Teachers, or below them; much less should they judg him, who knew him not so well. For though he was not cnscious to himself of negligence or unfaith∣fulness in his ministry, yet he durst not justifie himself, or think himself free from all blame, and so determine of his own desert. This he left wholly to the judg∣ment of the Lrd, who knows all things, and the very secret intentions of mens hearts, and at his Coming, will reward every man according to his works; and thn those who have done ill shall be ashamed, and those who have done well, shall be commended and rewarded. From Ver. 1. to 6. He concludes this whole Discourse, and shews the scope of it to be, that none of them should glory in their Teachers, or set them up so, as to disparage o∣thers. He shews, how he had used his prudence in this business, concealing the names of their ambitious Teachers; and transferring the whole matter by a fi∣gure upon himself and Apollo, not that they had any part therein, but he did it to this end, that the Corinthians might from them and their example, learn to think soberly of all Ministers, and esteem them no more than Stewards (as he had written to them before at the first verse), who were to distribute to them, what Christ had intrusted them with. For if they were not to frame Sects to themselves under the Name of Paul and Apollos; much lss ought they under the Names of others, who could not be supposed to excell in such extraordinary Gifts. And what Teacher (says he) is there, that hath cause to boast, and lift up himself above another? Who is it that differenceth him from another, but God only? And if so, he ought to think modestly of himself, and not to despise others. But ye Co∣rinthians, says he, are so proud of the parts and gifts of your Ministers, and think your selves so full, and rich, and furnished with all kind of knowldg, that you fancy to your selves that you reign like Kings, without us, as if you were not beholding to us before, nor now stood in any need of us (your Apostles and spiritual Fathers), who first converted you to the Faith. And I wish for my part, ye were in such prosperity and felicity as you dream of, that so we, who are so sharply persecuted, might come to you, as to a refuge, and enjoy some part of that pros∣perity with you. But I think God hath set us forth (who are the lastPostremos haud dubiè vocat, qui in ordinem Apostolicum post Christi resur∣rectionem asciti fuerunt. Calvinus. Apostles, and called since Christs ascension) as a spectacleq. d. Propinamur omnibus mortalibus irridendi & abominandi, nec in angu∣lo quodam id fit, sed veluti toto mundo in unum theatrum collecto, ut omnes saturen∣tur nostris miseriis. Glass. to the World, to Angels and men [to good Angels and good men, as those who compassionate
us; so evil Angels and evil men, as those that delight in our sufferings]. I say God hath set us forth, as those that are to conflict with all srts of miseries, and death it self. We are accounted Fools, both by the World, and perhaps by you, because we run so many hazzards for Christ; but you count your selves wise, and sufficiently skill'd in the Doctrine of the Gospel, whilst you mingle your worldly wisdom with it, and hazzard nothing for it. We are weak and broken with afflictions, but ye are strong as keeping your selves out of the reach of tribulation. Ye are honourable, we are despised; We are expos'd to wants of several sorts; We labour with our own hands, and suffer injuries and reproaches, and are reckoned as the filth and off-scouring of the world to this very day; and yet, as our Sa∣viour has enjoined us, We pray for our Persecutors, and return good for evil. From Ver. 6. to 14. He comes now in the last place, to mitigate his sharp reprehension of them, tel∣ling them, his intent therein was only to warn them, not to shame them, and that he did it out of his fatherly affeciion to them, whom he truly loved as his spi∣ritual Children, begotten by the Gospel which he had preached among them. For though others had since instructed them, yet they might remember that he first preached the Gospel unto them. Wherefore he exhorts them to be obedient to him as their spiritual Father; which that they might be, he tells them, he had for the present sent Timothy to them, who exactly knowing his whole course of Life, Doctrine, and Practice, and what WayVias in Christo generatim, specialiùs vias docendi., and Rule he followed in teach∣ing the Churches, should put them in remembrance of thse things that concerned them. He tells them, he hears, some among them were puffed up by reason of his absence, and despised him, as if he would not come again among them, and so they should escape censure. But he acquaints them, that he intended (with the Lords leave) to come speedily unto them, and would then try, whether in those their Teachers they so much boasted of, there be only eloquence of words, or whether their preaching be accompanied withv. 19.  Hic intelligo  illam &  in docendo, quae in veris Christi ministris cernitur. Slater. power and efficacy, so as to work on the hearts of the hearers. For the Kingdom of God is not set up in the hearts of men by eloquence, but by the power of the Spirit, accompanying the Word. Lastly, he asks them, whether they desired he should come to their correction, with the authority of Church-censures (which he resolved to do if they persisted in their Schism); or whether he should come to their comfort in the Spirit of love and meekness, which he intended, if they reformed? From Ver. 14. to the end. He comes nw to the second part of the Epistle, wherein he reprehends several  vices among them in the two following Chapters; and then satisfies some Qe∣stions or Cases of Conscience propounded unto him. And in the first place, he in∣timates to them, that they had no great reason to glory or boast of their prosperous con∣dition, seeing they had so many things among them, for which they ought to be humbled. As particularly, 1. For their neglect of Church-discipline, in not excommu∣nicating an incestuous person. He tells them, that it is commonly reported, that there is such Fornication committed among them, which is not so muh as na∣med among Heathens without abhorrence and detestation, viz. That one should
marry his Mother-in-Law, and that during his Fathers life, as seems to be in∣timated, 2 Cor. 7.12. And whereas they should have mourned, and been great∣ly humbled, that so scandalous a sin was committed among them; and should, with the open expressions of sorrowNon luxistis ut tolleretur] Concisa oratio, h. e. Vos inflati estis, & non po∣tius lugentes, seu cum luctu, id seriò egistis, ut tolleretur. and grief (as was usual in the Church), have proceeded to excommunicate the offendor, they were puffed upInflati] scilicet ex studio partium atque acrimoniâ contentionum, exultante parte ad versâ in istam in quâ tam gravis lapsus contigerat. Chrysostomus & Theodo∣retus existimant, fuisse unum ex istius Ecclesiae doctoribus., and gloried in their present condition; or possibly, one party insulted over the other, whose Teacher this offender was. He tells them, that though he was not perso∣nally present with them, ye he was in heart and spirit [see Col. 2.5.], and by vertue of that authority that belonged to him, he had already passed sentence on that ossendr; namely, that in a publick Assembly, gathered in the Name of Christ, (in which they were aso to suppse him, their Apostle, in heart and spirit present among thm), they sh uld by the authority of Christ (committed to him and them) proceed t mmunicte and deliver up into the power of Satan this incestuous person, that he may inflict some disease upon him, that may be a means to humble him, and bring him to the sight of his sin, and to repentance for it, and so be a means to save his soul at last, 1 Tim. 1.20. He tells them, their glorying and insulting one against another, on occasion of this miscarriage, was very evil and vile. Fr they should consider that sin like leaven is of a spreading nature, and therf re they shuld purge out from among them (by the dreadful sentence of excommunication) this incestuous person, and all other scandalous sinners, that their Church might be a pure and clean body (a holy Society in truth and reality), as by profession they were Saints and unleavened. And he draws an argument from the custom of the ancient Jewish Church, in the celebration of their Passeover, who were then oblig'd to purge out all leaven among them, and during the whole Feast (in commemoration of their deliverance out of E∣gypt) to eat none but unleavened bread: so (says he) we that are Christi∣ans, Christ our Pascal Lamb being sacrific'd for us, should pass our whole time; and all our days, as a perpetual celebration and commemoration of that great re∣demption wrought for us by Him, keeping this spiritual Feast continually, so as not to allow in our selves, or to tolerate among us the leaven of naughtiness and wickedness, of uncleanness and vilany; but to practise all Christian purity, and to hold fast the truth that hath been delivered to us. From Ver. 1. to 9. 2. He tells them he had wrote to them in a former EpistleIsta Epistola, de quâ loquitur, hodiè non extat. Nec dubium quin multae aliae exciderint: sed satis est quod nobis supersunt quas sufficere Dominus providit. Calv. in loc. to forbear all fami∣liar converse with Fornicators, and to avoid them, as scandalous flagitious per∣sons. But he would not have them understand it of Heathens among them, who had not given up their Names to Christ; nr that they should only avoid Hea∣thens, that were guilty of those other scandalous sins of Covetousness, Extor∣tion, or Idolatry. For the Corinthians, being for the most part Infidels, were many of them such, with whom they must needs have a civil converse whilst they liv'd among them. But he would have them to understand it of Christians. For what had his or the Churches censures to do with those that are not members of the Church? These were the only persons they were to judg and censure (as they knew by their own practice) and to leave all others to Gods tribunal. And accor∣ding to these rules, he orders them to proceed against this incestuous person. From Ver. 9. to the end.
3. He reproves their contentious Law-Suits, and impleading one another be∣fre  Infidels, rather than submitting themselves to the judgment of Christians, This he disswades them from, by several Arguments, 1. The Saints at the day of Judgment, being acquitted themselves, shall, at Assessors with Christ, and approvers of his righteous Judgment, judg the World, i. e. impios, Joh. 17.9., and Apostatiz'd Angels, therefore surely they are worthy to decide temporal differences in this life. He tells them, they had better, if their Dctors and Teachers be not at leisure to end their differencesPer Metonym.  hîc vocat res judicandas., refer them to the deter∣mination of some honest, pious, though poor] Comparativè. v. 7. ] Defectus. Christians, than bring them be∣fore Infidels. He tells them, they shame their own Society, whilst they betake themselves to the Judicatories f Heathens, as if there were never a wise man amng themselves. He shews them, that seeing they are Brethren, they ought not to vex one another with Law-Suites, especially before Heathens. It would be much more decent for them to suffr injury and wrong, than with scandal to con∣tend. And yet, those among them that were most forward to go to Law, were com∣monly the injurious persons, and such as had no Right on their side. And the root of these disorders, was want of love, mutual forbearance, meckness and righte∣ousness. He testifies t them, that these unjust contendings, as well as other scandalous wickednesses, and abominable impurities (which he there reckons up) will keep men out of Heaven, except they repent. And seeing that some of them had formerly been defiled with those, or at least with some of those vices, before their conversion, but were now (as he did in Charity judg) changed persons, washedAblutio, sanctificatio, & justificatio mixtim complectuntur justificationem & renovationem. Ablutio videri potest genus justificationis & sanctificationis. Ista asyndeta valdè amplificant: singula enim veluti novo impetu beneficia Christi exaggerant. in the blood of Christ from the guilt of their sins (of which Bap∣tism is the Sacramental Sign and Seal), and justified by Faith in him (there being no other NameNomen hic nihil aliud significat quam ipsum Dominum Jesum. Erasmus in∣telligit per nomen, virtutem ac potentiam Domini Jesu. under Heaven by which they can be saved), and sancti∣fied by the Spirit of God, therefore they ought to take heed of defiling themselves again with scandalous contentions, or with any other of the Vices there named. From Ver. 1. to 12. 4ly. He comes now to reprehend the growing Heresie of the Nicolaitans, which allow'd the Eating things sacrific'd to Idols, and Fornication, as things in∣different. And First, he grants, that all indifferent things are lawful, and may be used; but with two restrictions, or cautions. 1. When they are expedient, and may be done or made use of, without hurting our selves or our Neighbours. 2. When they do not get such a dminion over us, as to inslave us to an intemperate use of them. He instances particularly in meats, and shews the difference between the free use of them, and Fornication. He grants, that it is lawful to use any kind of meat, because God hath ordained it for the good of mans nature. Meats are or∣dain'd for the belly, and the belly for meats; but yet with a temporary conjunction: for as God will destroy meats, so he will destroy the belly also, as to the use it now hath: therefore for the sake of the belly we ought not to endanger our eternal Sal∣vation, or the Salvation of others, eating so, as may tend to encurage them in sin. But now for Fornication (he shews) the case is otherwise. This he proves, to be utterly unlawful, and that for six reasons. 1. The body was not made for Fornication (as the belly was made for meats), but for the service of Christ, and ought to be imployed to his glory, who is ordained to be the Head of man, to govern both his Soul and Body, that both may be kept holy. For Christ was sent to redeem and sanctifie the Body, at well as the Soul, and consequently to rule and
command it, being Lord of both. 2, Our Bodies are not to be abolished and ut∣terly destroyed, but to be rais'd up to glory at the last day (as Christs Body was raised up) if we be such as truly believe in him, therefore they ought not to be defiled now, with Fornication. 3. The faithful are Members of Christ, therefore they ought not to make themselves members of an Harlot. For as Wedlock makes Man and Wife one Body lawfully, so Fornication makes the Fornicator and the Har∣lot one Body unlawfully. As on the other side, he that is by Faith united to Christ is one Spirit with him, that is, is led and governed by one and the same Spirit, and becomes a Member of his spiritual and mystical Body. Therefore such a conjunction ought to be kept inviolable. 4. Other sins abuse (chiefly and prin∣cipally) some object, that is, without the Body, (as the Drunkard wine, &c.) but Fornication injuries the Body, that acts it, and that more than other sins. 5. The Bodies of Believers are Temples of the Holy Ghost, (who dwells in them, being freely given them of God), and therefore they ought to be kept pure and undefiled. 6. All true Believers and faithful Christians are not their own, but purchased with the Blood of Christ, therefore they should endeavour to glorifie God their Redeemer (whose they are) both in their Bodies, and in their Souls. From Ver. 12. to the end. Having done with the reprehensory part of his Epistle. He now resolves di∣vers Cases of Conscience; about which the Corinthians had written to him. As in the first place, concerning marriage, touching which he declares; 1. That for those that have the gift of Continency, and can live pure, and chast without marrying, 'tis better for them so to do. But for the avoiding all sorts of unclean∣ness and pllution, 'tis generally most safe, that men and women should betake themselves to the conjugal state. 2. He shews, that married persons ought not to abstain from the conjugal society of Bed and Board, except it be by mutual consent, fr a time only, and that upon great and extraordinary occasion; namely, when they desire to give themselves more solemnly to fasting and prayer; which time being ended, they should come together again; lest by long abstinence, Satan should gain advantage over them. But as to that which he had said before, viz. that it was (generally speaking) most safe that men and women do betake them∣selves to the conjugal estate, he would have them so understand him, that he spake it by way of permission, allowing them to marry that found their condition to re∣quire it; but not by way of precept, as if he commanded any to marry. For he could wish (if it were the will of God), that the Corinthiansv. 7. Omnes] h. e. Si convenientèr fieri posset. (who moved this Question), had the like gift of Continence which God had bestowed on him. But seeing this gift is not given to all, every one should consider how he is quali∣fied by God, as to this matter, namely, whether with ability to live chastly in a single life, or else had inclinations to marry; and accordingly should dispose of himself. Therefore to sum up what he had said, he tells them, that as to the unmarried and Widows, it was convenient they should abide in that estate, (if they could contain), because of the advantages of the single life; but if not, then it was better to marry, than to live inflam'd with sinful lusts. From Ver. 1. to 10. 2ly. He comes now to answer their other Case, about divorce, namely, whe∣ther it be lawful, where the occasion is not adultery, but, 1. Only some disagree∣ments and discontents between the parties where both are Christians: or 2. Because a Believer is yoked or married to an Infidel. For the first, he says, it is not lawful; in which decision, he only repeats an old command given by the autho∣rity of God, who in the institution of marriage established, that the married should be one flesh, and therefore should so continue: and not separate one from the o∣ther, Math. 19.6. Wherfore he commands, that the Wife should not depart from her Husband, on the account of disagreements between them. But if she, pretending necessary reasons of departing, as danger of her life, &c, shall for a
time depart, he commands, that either she endeavour to be reconciled to her Hus∣band, and so come to him again, or else abstain from a second marriage. And the Husband likewise, he commands, not to put away his Wife on any such account, or to give her cause to depart. For the second Case, seeing (as it seems) some among them held themselves polluted by being married to unbelievers (whom they had married before their conversion), and thought therefore of parting from them; He tells them, God had not determined in the Law, what should be done in such a Case, but he, by special revelation from the Lord, and the assistance of his Spi∣rit would determine it, namely, that they should dwell together, unbelief be∣ing no sufficient ground of parting. For the conjugal society of the unbelieving party is sanctified (that is, made lawful and allow'd) to the believing party, (to the pure, and believing all things being pure, 1 Tim. 4, 5.); and this he proves, because the Children born of such Parents, whereof the one is a Believer, and the other not, are federally holy, and are to enjoy the like priviledges, as if both Parents had been BelieversAs meats are said to be sanctified in that place, by the word and prayer, that is made pure, lawfull and allowed to Believers.. But if the unbelieving party will not co-habit, but will depart, and on his side make void the bond of marriage out of hatred to the Faith, he declares that in such a case, the Believer or innocent party is free, and not bound by the bond of marriage any longer. But he tells them, God re∣quires that we should endeavour to live peaceably with all, and therefore the Be∣liever should use all peaceable endeavours to retain the unbeliever, and not give occasion of difference or departure; because by a peaceable dwelling together, the Believer may gain the unbeliever to the Faith of Christ, and be an instrument of his Salvation, [1 Pet. 3.1.]. From Ver. 10. to 17. Nam si radix sancta, etiam rami sancti, Rom. 11.16. And now taking occasionMos est Pauli, obiter quaedam à re non aliena interjicere, ac deinde coeptum ser∣monem recipere. Grot. from what he had said, concerning the conjugal state, namely, that 'tis not to be deserted, because of the infidelity of one of the parties, he disgresses to a general Doctrine, concerning the outward condition and state of men; and shews, that every one should be content with the lot and condition which God hath distributed dicitur Deus, cum alicui sortem aliquam assignat natalium, fortunae, con∣jugii. unto him, and should frame himself to walk Christi∣anly in it, as he taught in all Churches. Particularly he shews, that if any person that was before circumcised, be converted to Christianity, he should never trouble himself to get off that mark from his flesh, as some it seems did: nor on the other side, if any man that is uncir∣cumcis'd, be converted, he need not receive Circumcision, as some it seems re∣quired, Act. 15.1. For such outward things as these, he tells them, avail no∣thing now under the new Testament, or in the Church of Christ, who looks not on the outward condition of men, but on their obedience to his commands. Therefore he advises, that every one should abide contentedly in the Calling wherein he was called, and not think that Christianity frees him from any obligation that lay on him before. If a bond-man be converted, he should not think it a disparagement to his Chri∣stianity to continue a servant still, nor be solicitous of changing his condition: yet if by any fair regular means, he can obtain his freedom, he may make use of it. However let him know, that he that is called to believe in Christ, being a ser∣vant, is by the Lord freed from the bondage of sin and Satan; and he that is called being (as to his civil and outward estate) a free-man, is yet not exempt∣ed from subjection to Christ. In short, he tells them, that being dearly bought with a price by ChristAliqui sic. Are ye redeemed with a price? become not again the servants of men. scil. of Heathens., they should not serve men in things repugnantChristianos monet, ne pravis hominum libidinibus & voluntatibus inserviant, sed ei, qui eos redemit. Lightf. to his commands, nor submit themselves to such a servitude, as their high-flown Do∣ctorsVide Grot. in loc. would impose upon them. Lastly, He urges again his former exhortation, that every one should content∣edly continue in the outward state wherein he was, when he was called, and not think of changing it, meerly on the account of Christianity, but holding to it, abide
with God, and continue faithful to him in his Church, in which he reigns. From Ver. 17. to 25. 3ly. He comes now to the third Inquiry, that the Corinthians made to him, namely, concerning Virgins, Male and Female. And first, concerning such as are at their own disposal, whether they should marry or no? To which Question, before he gives his answer, he prmises, that he had no special command whereby the state of Virginity was either injoined or prohibited, but he would sincerely give his advice, as became him to whom God had vouchsafed mercy to be faithful. Then he gives his answer in three Propositions. 1. That by reason of the present di∣stress, and danger of persecution, 'twas m st convenient, that those that were single, should so continue, if they have the gift of Continence. 2. He declares, that if they marry they do not sin, only they will be like to meet with more troubles. But he would spare to speak any more to them of that matter, lest he should seem to disswade them from marriage more than was fit. However in this advice, he consulteth their quit and advantage. 3. He advises, that whether they mar∣ried or not, they should consider, that the time is now but short, before persecu∣tion will arise, (possibly he means that under Nero); insomuch, that they ought to have their affections very much moderated to all things in the world: Those that have Wives, should be as if they had none; those that weep, like those that do not; those that rejoice, as those that rejoice not; those that buy and purchase, as if they possessed nothing; and those that use this WorldUtere nummo quemadmodum viator in stabulo utitur Mensâ, Calice, Urceo, dimissurus, non permansurus. Augustin., as not using it, i. e. tanquam non utentes, scilicet usu firmo & tenaci. Si mundo adhaerere vis, eo abuteris; quia re fluxâ, quasi non fluxâ sed firmâ, solidâ, & stabili uteris. Abusus enim est superfluus usus, & modum & naturam rei exsuperans. Cornel. à Lap.. For as a Scene which is soon changed, and shews a new face, so the fashion and shape of this present World is passing away, and the times are turning into very troublesome. He gives another reason, why the single life is to be preferr'd before the conjugal, namely, because single persons (comparatively) are more free from cares and distractions, and have (ordinarily) more time and lei∣sure to attend upon the Lord in religious exercises than the married have. For he that is unmarried, hath but one obligation of care, namely, how he may serve God most acceptably; but he that is married, hath another care on him, viz. how he may, in lawful things, please his Wife. And the like difference there is (as to this matter) between married Women and Virgins. A Wife is usually combred with houshold cares, and must, in lawful things, endeavour to please her Husband; and is not, upon that account, so free for holy exercises; but the Virgin (that has no family to care for) being freed from such distractions, and endeavouring to approve her self more eminently holy both in Soul and Body, she hath more leisure to attend on the Lord in holy and religious exercises. And what he spake concerning the advantages of a single life, he shews, he spake not that he might cast a snare upon them, or precisely to bind them to abstain from marriage, if they had not the gift of Continency, but to lead them to that which is fit and comely, that they may attend upon the Lord without distraction. From Ver. 25. to 36.
4ly. He comes in the next place to speak concerning Virgins, who are under the power of Parents and Guardians; and to answer the Question, Whether those Parents or Guardians may advisely give their Virgins in marriage? In an∣swer to this, he says, that if there be these three things in the case, 1. If any Pa∣rent or Guardian be suspected to detain his Virgin longer from marriage than is ex∣pedient. 2. If she have passed the fl wer of her age, and begin to be more than of ripe years. 3. If he see the mind of the Virgin much inclin'd to marriage, then he advises, that the Parent or Guardian should please her therein, and consent that she should marry, and in so doing he sinneth not. But if the Parent or Guar∣dian be stedfastly perswaded in his mind, that he wrongs not his Daughter, or Pu∣pil, in declining to marry her, and sees no necessity to seek a Husband for her, so that he hath power over his own willv. 37. Is dicitur voluntatem suam in potestate habere, cujus voluntas ab altero non pendet. Pendet autem hac in parte Patris voluntas à liberorum voluntate, ita ut teneamur illorum infirmitati consulere. Slater in loc., (that is, liberty to determine of her, as to this case, how he pleases), by purposing in his heart to keep her unmarried, he says, he doth a thing very praise-worthy. Whereupon he concludes, that he that gives the Virgin in marriage (if the case be, as is before supposed), doth well. But if it be not, the Parent or Guardian doth better, that is, he dth that which is more behoveful to the benefit of the Virgin, if he keep her unmar∣ried. So that there is sin in neither way, only greater conveniency on the one side than on the other. From Ver. 36. to 39. 5ly. A fifth case they propounded to the Apostle, was, Whether second mar∣riages of Widows were lawful, or no? He answers, they were: provided, 1. The Widow marry in the Lord, that is, holily, and in the fear of God; and with such an one, whom she may marry by the Law of God; and with whom she may probably expect the blessing of God: but, 2. Though it be lawful for her to marry again, yet by reason of the present danger of persecution, he thinks, she will be more happy and free from troubles, if she continue in her Widowhood. And he modestly insinuates, that his counsel is not less than divine, whatever their vain∣glorious Teachers might think of him. From Ver. 39. to the end. 6ly. A sixth Case of Conscience that they propounded to him, was, concerning  eating things offer'd to Idols; which case he resolves, by answering three things that might be brought in the defence of it. 1. They might suppose that they were all sufficiently instructed in the liberty allowed them by the Gospel, so that they might lawfully eat things offer'd to Idols. Answ. He answers, that a false opi∣nion of knowledg, or knowledg which is not temper'd with Charity, for the most part, occasions men to be proud, and to despise their weak Brethren; but know∣ledg join'd with Charity, applieth it self to the instruction of others, and accommo∣dates it self to the good and edification of others that are weak; and considers what is fit to be done in reference to them. And if any man hath such a kind of knowledg, that is not accompanied with Charity, he knoweth not all his duty, nor to what end he ought to refer his knowledg, nor how to use it as he ought; and so, upn the matter, knoweth nothing in such sort, as he ought to know. But he that knows God, and truly loves him, and his Neighbour (according to his command), the same is known and approved of God. Ver. 1.2, 3. 2. They might say, They knew an Idol to be nothing, that is, no God, nor to have any divine power in it, and therefore meats cannot be made holy or pro∣phane by being offered to an Idol.
Answ. He acknowledges that an Idol is nothingIpsum illud simulachris reprae∣sentatum, nihil est.. For says he, though in the vain opinion of men, there be many caelestial and terrestrial Gods, and many Lords, or Baalim; notwithstanding we, that are divinely inlight∣ned, acknowledg but oneThe word one, doth not here respect the persons but the nature. true God, the Father, by whose almighty power all things were made, and we for himIn him, i. e. we subsist in him, or by his power., that is, for his glory and service; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, namely, as co-working with his Father, Joh. 1.3. & 5.19. and we by him, namely, are redeemed and purchased. But all have not this knowledg, that an Idol is nothing but some even to this day, do Eat things offer'd to Idols, their Consciences sug∣gesting to them, that an Idol is somethingMultum adhuc vigebat paganis∣mus, etiam Corinthi. Grot., and that, things offer'd to them are thereby rendred the more holy, and so their weak and ill instructed Consciences, are (by so doing) defiled and polluted. From Ver. 3. to 8. 3ly. They might say, Meats are things so indifferent that neither eating bet∣te, nor not-eating makes us worse; so that neither the one, nor the other, mas us more acceptable to Gd. Answ. Th  true indeed▪ unless in case of scandal; for in such a case, he sins who uses his libty so, as it becomes a stumbling block to his weak Brother, and s, is he doth thereby build him up, and encourage him in sin. As in the frntt case, ly he that is weak, see another that hath knowledg, sit at meat, that is, at east in the Idol Temple, shall not the Conscience of that weak Christian be  y the others example, to go on in this evil way? And so he is in dang of bg encouraged in his heathenish error, and sin, and to have his mind by degrees ainatd from Christianity; whereas before, whilst he professed to be a Christian, he was in the judgment of Charity to be esteemed one of those, for whom Christ died. Now this confirming a man in his sin, and encouraging him to his after-commissions, whose Conscience was before erroneous, and his practice sinful, is, as if instead of curing a sick man (which Charity requires us to do), we should wound and hurt him more; which is not only an act of great unchari∣tableness against our Brother, but an act of injury and robbery against Christ, in betraying a soul to ruin (as much as in us lyes) and hindring his salvation, for the saving of whom Christ diedAugustimus dicit, pro omnibus valere Christi mortem quantum ad  magnitudinem, & sufficientiam. Sufficeret enim Christi  universis redimendis & servandis, si universi id fide susciperent.. He concludes, that he had rather for ever abstain from all kind of flesh, than be the occasion of the ruin, or damnation of any weak Christian; much more would he deny himself the use of his Christian liberty in indifferent things, in respect of the weak, (though not of the obstinate and wilful) and abstain, at a certain time, and place, from flesh offered to Idols. From Ver. 8. to the end. He further shews his readiness to abridg himself in his Christian liberty, and therefore exhorts them, by his example that they would do the like, especially in thse things that appertain to the Belly, and particularly in eating things offer'd to Idols. The sum of his argument is this, I being an Apostle, and no less free than any other, do not only abstain from things lawful and profitable to me, but also accommodate my self to the infirmities of all; yea I keep under my body, by abstinence for the service of the Gospel. Therefore ye Corinthians ought to do the like. The Antecedent be proves from v. 1. to 24. The Consequent, is an exhortation carried on, to the end of the Chapter. 1. He shews that he had as much right to Christian liberty as any other, for he was an Apostle, he had been honoured with the sight of Christ, and was per∣sonally spoken to by him out of Heaven [Act. 22.18. 2 Cor. 12.2, 4.], and was immediately called by him to the Apostleship, and he had a Testimony thereof in
their conversion, which was as a Seal confirming his Apostleship (at least among them), and afforded him a defence against those that called his Apostleship into Question. Ver. 1.2, 3. 2. He shews, he had power to eat and drink at the cost and charge of the Church, as well as others; that he had liberty to marry, and to take a wife, and lead her about with him, as some other Apostles had done, (particularly, those that were Christs Cousin-Germans, and Peter, Mat. 8.14.): That he and Barnabas had power, as well as others, to forbear working with their hands at manual Trades, to get a livelihood; and might require maintenance from the Churches; it being a debt justly due to the Preachers of the Gospel; as be proves by several Arguments. 1. By the Law of Nations, which appoints and allows to Souldiers, Vine-dressers, and Shepherds, and those that labour for the use of others, in their respective Callings, a due reward and wages: Why therefore should there not be a reward by the same reason, due to the Ministers of the Gospel. From Ver. 4. to 8. 2. He shews, he does not ground this, only upon human reason, equity, or custom, but upon the Provision made by God himself in the Levitical Law for the Ox that treadeth out the Corn. Now the end of Gods LawQuod de bobus praecepit id propter homines secit. is not only to shew and prescribe how Oxen should be fed, but to enjoin, that equity should be used, in the just rewarding those that labour for us; that he that ploweth, and thresheth in hope of reward, should partake of his hoped-for reward, which encourages him in his work. Why then should not they that labour in the Gospel, partake of the fruit of their labours? 3. From common justice. If the Apostles have sown unto them spiritual things, 'tis nothing but justice they should, instead thereof, reap of their carnal things. 4. From the example of their other Teachers at Corinth, who made use of this power, which was as law∣ful for him to do, as for them; but he had forborn it, lest he should hinder the course of the Gospel. 5. From the example of the Levites, to whom mainte∣nance, and a part of the Sacrifices was given by God for their ministry. Even so hath Christ ordain'd, (says he), that they who preach the Gospel should live of the GospelSee Mat. 10.10. & Luk. 10.8.. From Ver. 8. to 15. Having thus asserted his liberty, he shews, his moderation in the use of it. He tells them, he had not h¦therto made use of this power among them, (though from other Churches he sometimes received some liberality, 2 Cor. 11.8.), nor desir'd to do it; nor did he write these things, that that should be done for him, that was done for other Teachers; for he had rather dye, than that false Teachers should be able to take this honour from him, which was so justly due to him, namely, That he had preached the Gospel for sincere ends, and not sought what was due to him for his pains. He shews, that if he had preached the Gospel, meer∣ly out of respect to profit, he had had no cause to boast. For he was obliged to preach it by virtue of his office, and the command of God, which he must not dis∣obey; but if he hath done it willingly, and without respect to any worldly pro∣fit thereby, it will be rewardable. But if he hath done it unwillinglySi ergo invitus hoc facio (nam viderer quasi invitus facere si refugerem sumptu proprio id facere) dispensatio quaedam mihi credita est à quâ gloria mihi non est expe∣ctanda. Sin volens & sponte hoc facio, h. e. non expectatâ ab aliis mercede vel sumptu, haec est mea merces & mea gloria. Clarius. (as they do, who preach not out of any love to God, or desire of the conversion of Souls, and would not do it, if it were not for lucres sake) then it may be said, that a dispensation or office hath been com∣mitted to him, from which he is not to expect any glory or reward. This therefore was that which gave him hopes of a reward from God, namely, that he had preached the Gospel to the Corinthians, without being chargeable to them. For if he had received maintenance there, where his Reproachers endeavour'd to bring an ill report upon him, to the prejudice of the Gospel which he had preachedIn hoc casu cum aut detrimen∣tum gloriae divinae accrescere, aut scandalum proximo oriri verisimile sit, abutetur libertate suâ, si quis uta∣tur. Slat., then
he should have abused his liberty in receiving of it. From Ver. 15. to 19. He goes on to shew, how he did abridg himself in the use of his Christian Li∣berty; for though he was as free as any man, (being bound to none), yet he had made himself a servant to all, that he might gain the more to embrace the Gospel. For he had in a charitable condescention compli'd with the Jews (in cer∣tain external Ceremonies, Act. 21.21, 24, 25. who thought themselves bound to observe the Ceremonial Law), and that he did by the advice of the Council at Jerusalem, which left to the Jews (born under that yoke) a liberty to use those Ceremonies for a time, but in no wise to impose them on the Gentiles. When he had to deal with the Gentiles, (that were not born under the Ceremo∣nial Law), he abstained from the use of those Ceremonies, as if he had been without the Law, as they were; yet as to the Moral Law, or Law of Love, (which is the perpetual Law of God, and re-inforc'd by Christ, and requires us to love God above all, and our Neighbour as our selves), he did never account himself free from that, but only from the Ceremonial Law, from which indeed he was freed, and when he saw it for the advantage of the Gospel, he did freely abstain from the observance of it. When he had to deal with those that were weak, and doubted of their liberty, he abstain'd from things lawful, as they did. Finally, in all things indifferent, he accommodated himself to all men, that he might gain as many as possible he could, at least-wise, some. And this he did, that the Gospel might be better esteem'd among all, and more propagated, and that he himself might partake of the glorious eternal rewards promised therein, together with them to whom he had preached it, and who had effectually entertain'd it. From Ver. 19. to 24. Hitherto he hath set before them his own example; now he cmes to the ex∣hortn which he infers from thence, namely, that the Corinthians would imi∣tate him in denying themselves. And particularly, that they would labour after empnce, and not so mind their Bellies, as to eat with offence that which was offerr'd to Idols. To ths end he shews them, that Christianity is a race, and they must run carefully this race; in which, not only one (as was usual in their common races), but all that run (according to the LawsSee 2 Tim. 2.5. of God) shall be Crowned. And as those that contended in those famous Games (whether run∣ning or combating, usually celebrated neer to Corinth), did not indulge them∣selves in gluttony and pleasures, but were temperate in all things, inuring them∣selves to a spare diet, by way of preparation, that the conquering Crown might be won by them: After the same manner, he would have the Corinthians to be moderate in the use of worldly things, and to abstain from whatsoever may hin∣der them in their Christian course, that they may attain an incorruptible and an eternal Crown. And to press his exhortation yet further, he propounds his own example again, who first did so run, not as at uncertainties, or as if he did not aim at a certain Goal, or as if he knew not his reward, if he ran well; and secondly, did so fight (not as making a flourish only in the air like a fencer), but he did fight in good earnest, against the bodyCastigo corpus me∣um, h. e. ad∣versus car∣nem meam pugn. of sin, and the old man, and the lusts of the flesh, that they might be subdued in him; and he denied himself in some indifferent liberties, that his body might be subject to his spirit: And all this, lest having prescribed to others the way of striving and getting the Crown, he himself should at last prove a Castaway ., or one unworthy to be approved or rewarded by God. From Ver. 24. to the end. He comes now to treat of the eating of things offered to Idols under a  twofold difference; the one publick in Idol Temples, simply unlawful. From ver. 1. to 23. The other private, in private houses, which (when there was no scandal in the case) was lawful, otherwise not, and accordingly he dehorts them from it. From ver. 23. to the end.
1. He disswades from a publick eating of things offered to Idols in Idol-Tem∣ples by several Arguments. 1. If they preceed to be present at nd t partake of such idlatrous Feasts, they will be in danger to fall into such kind f sins, as the Israelites, on such an occasion fell into, and so consequently will expose them selves to such punishments as they suffered. He tells them that the Israelitesv. 1. Patres nostri] i. e. Hebrae∣orum, quorum erat Paulus. (who came ut of Egypt with Mo∣) were such to whom God vouchsased many high dig∣nations; as particularly they had the favour of the Cloud t over shadw them [Exod. 13.21.] which was their protection and conduct, and they all passed through the red sea, Exod. 14.22. And by the Clouds ver∣shadning them, and by their passage through the red Sea (both which possibly sprinkled them) they were baptizd, as it were, and confirm'd in a beliefUnto Moses] i. e. Under the Ministry and Guidance of Moses: Vel in doctrinam & legem Mosis. of Moses (the Typical Mediator) as a person imploy'd by God, and were obliged to obey his Doctrine, and the com∣mands which he should give them from God. And this ws a figure to which our Baptism answers, by which we are confirm'd in the Faith of Christ, and obliged to profess him, own him, and obey him. He farther shews, that God fed them with Manna from Heaven, and gave them for drink, the water that flowed out of the Rock (which he caused to follow their Camp). And this Manna and water, he calls spiritual meat and drink, because they had a spiritual meaning, and did figure and signifie the same grace and benefits of Christ, which the Supper of the Lord doth to us; yet notwithstanding all this, he shews, that many of thse Israelites (by reason of their inordinate lusts) perished in the Wilderness. N w thse things, he tells them, were to be examples to the Corinthians and other Christians, that they do not indulge themselves in fleshly Lusts, as those ancient Israelites did, nor frequent idolatrous Feasts, (made in the honour of any Idol) lest they suffer the like punishment the Israelites did, who sacrificed to the honour of the Golden Calf, and rose up, and danced before it, Exod. 32. And they should take heed, that they mix not with Idolaters in their Feasts, lest they should be given up to Fornication, as the Israelites were in the Wilderness [Numb. 25.] with the Daughters of Moab, and so fell in one day three and twentyNumb. 25.9. Mention is made of four and twenty thousand that fell: whereof possibly three and twenty thousand died by the imme∣diate hand of God; and execution was done upon another thousand by Phineas, and his Companions. Vide Grot. in loc. thousand. Further they should take heed of tempting Christ, and trying, as it were, how long his patience will last; as the Israelites provoked the Angel of the Cove∣nant, or Christ (who went before them in the Wilder∣ness, Numb. 8.21.), and so perished by fiery Serpents. And Lastly, they should take heed of murmuring, because 'tis not lawful for them, by the Christian Religion, to be present at the Idolatrous Feasts of their Friends in the Idol Temples, lest they should perish with the murmuring Israelites, who for that sin were destroyed by the Angel of God, and perished by the plague, Numb. 14.37. Now he shews, that all these sins and judgments of the Israelites are Emblems of their state, and shew what will befall them, that do not beware of such sins; and these judgments are set down in the old Testament for warnings to Christians, who should live in the latter times. Wherefore he adviseth them to take heed of vain-confidence in themselves, and that those among them that seem∣ed to themselves to stand firmest, should be sensible of their danger, if they fed se∣curely upon things offered to Idols, in Idol-Temples. From Ver. 1. to 13. But hre they might object, that if they abstain'd from idolatrous Feasts, there was dnger hung over their heads from their Fellow-Citizens, (that were Ido∣laters) who would interpret this forbearance, as an abhorring of their society. He answers, that that temptation was no other then what was ordinary to men. But God was faithful who would not permit them to be tempted above their strength, but wuld open a way for them to escape those dangers, if they continued faithful to him, or else would so strengthen them that they should be able to bear whatsoever befll them. Therefore he exhorts them to fly from that Idolatry which
is join'd to the publick eating of things offered to Idols. And to excite their ttention, he tells them, he would make them Judges themselves (who were understanding men) in this matter, whether they must not necessarily commu∣nicate in tht Idolatry, for which these Feasts were instituted, if they join∣ed in those Feasts: And first he reasons from the example of Christians com∣municating in the Lords Supper. For as all that partake in that Sacrament d prfess themselves, in that act, to have cmmunion with Christ, and with such as profess Faith in him. S communicating in thse Idol-Feasts, is no less a sign, and profssion of communion with those Idols, to whom the Sacrifice was offered, and with those Idolaters that worship them. For as Christians, though many, yet by virtue of their society in the same worship, are compacted together, as it were, into one Loaf or Lump, that is, into one mystical Body (whereof Christ is the Head) in that they partake of one and the same Sacramental Bread; so those that communicate with Idolaters (in participating of idolatrous Sacri∣fics), by virtue of their Society in the same worship (signified by their idolatrous fting together in Idol-Temples) are compacted together, as it were, into one body, forasmuch as they communicate in one and the same Sacrifices. 2. He reasons from the like example of the present carnalv. 18. ] q d. nos  Israe∣litae sumus qui in Chri∣stum credi∣mus. Illi . Jews, who had their Temple yet standing, and their Jewish worship in use. For as they, cating of the Sacrifices, did, in that, communicate with the Altar, and profess themselves Members of the Jewish Church, and worshippers of that God, whose the Altar was: So they that eat of Idol Sacrifices, in the idolatrous Feasts, have communion with those Idols, to whose honour they were instituted, and with those that wrship them. He shews, he need not affirm, that an Idol was any thing, that is, had any thing of divinity in it, or that that which was offered in Sacrifice to Idols, was in it self, at all different from any other ordinary meatSee 1 Cor. 8.4.. But the plain truth was, Those Sacrifices of the Heathens were Sacrifices to Dvils [2 Chron. 11.15.], and whosoever did eat of those Feasts, was supposed to join in those Sacrifices, and so to do service to Devils. Now the communicating with Christ in the Lords Supper, could not consist with communi∣cating with Devils in Idol-Feasts; for this were to do homage to two Lords, God and the Devil, and profess service to both. He concludes this matter, by shwing what desperate madness it was, to provoke the omnipotent God to jealousie, by jining Devils in competition with him. From Ver. 13. to 23. Having thus resolved the case concerning publick eating of things offered to Idols, namely, in the Idol-Temples; He comes now to answer another Case con∣cerning private buying, and private eating of things offered to Idols. And first he prmises that all things (that are of an indifferent nature) are lawful, unless when it was not expedient in respect of our weak Brother to use them, or when they edifie not. And in the use of liberty, we must regard, rather the Sal∣vation of another, than our own temporal profit. Having premised this, he tells them, They may lawfully buy what is sold in the shamblesIt was a Custom, it seems, to set to sle in the Market, Flesh that was sacrificed, as well as other Flesh, the gain whereof went to the Priests., and freely eat thereof, without any scruple of Conscience. And he gives them this reason for it, because, the earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof, that is, those things that are sold for food in the Market, are to be look'd upon as the Creatures of God, made for the use of man, and so lawful to the faith∣ful, if they be received with thanksgiving, 1 Tim. 4.4. And the Devil hath no power over them, to contaminate or defile them by his Idols, if man himself do nt do it, by same sin, and particularly by that of Idolatry. And therefore if any Believer be invited to a Feast, in the private house of an Unbeliever, he de∣clares, Th Christian may eat without scruple, any meat that is set before him: But if the Master of the Feast, or any other there present, shall suggest to him, that some part of the meat had been offered to Idols; in that case, he wills him to forbear, lst he should encourage any man in idolatry. And the reason he gives is this, For the earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof, that is, there is
plenty of other meat to be had, which God the Creator of all things, the Lord of the whole Earth hath allowed us the free use of, so that we may well let the Idol-Sacrifices alone. In such a case, the Christian should abstain for the sake of the other man's Conscience, lest he should, by his Example, be encouraged in Ido∣latry. But in other cases, where there is no such danger, they may freely eat without scruple, and none will have cause to blame them for it. If any do, their liberty allowed them by Christ, is unjustly condemn'd by such a mans Conscience. For if they, through the grace and favour allowed them in the Gospel, do eat in∣differently of meats set before them (where they see no danger of hardning any thereby in Idolatry) why should they be reproached for eating that which God allowes them; they receiving it with thanksgiving, 1 Tim. 4 4. He concludes this whole discourse with these three excellent Rules, whereby they should govern themselves in the use of things indifferent. 1. They should always design the glory of God. 2. They should do nothing that may tend to the hurt or just of∣fence of Jews, Gentiles, or Christians. 3. They should imitate the Apostles Example, who in indifferent things accommodated himself to all men; so as to seek their eternal Salvation, and not his own temporal profit or advantage. And so they should be followers and imitators of him, as He was of Christ. From Ver. 23. to the end. And Ver. 1. of Chap. 11. Being now about to reprehend certain disorders in the Church of Corinth, he  begins with commendation of those among them who had written to him, and ask'd his advice in those particulars. He commends them that they had been so mindful of the instructions and pre∣cepts he had delivered to them, concerning the matters appertaining to the publick worship of God, and had so closely adhered to them: yet notwithstanding, it seems, there were many things reproveable in several others of them. And so be pro∣ceeds to answer their next Query, which concerned decent behaviour of men and women in Church-Assemblies. In order to which, he tells them, 'tis fit they should consider the subordination of persons in the Church, viz. that as Christ, in respect of his Mediatory Office, is inferior to God the Father; but above all men (being Head and Lord of all men, as their Creator and Redeemer); so the Man, being inferior to Christ, is yet above the Woman, being her Head. From which they may understand, that order in Church-Assemblies is to be obser∣ved. Now, it seems, the Corinthians did not sufficiently observe this order, because the Women in their publick Church-meetings laid aside their VeilVelamen, signum non solum sub∣jectionis sed pudefactionis, quòd Fae∣mina primùm peccatum introduxerit in mundum. Lightf., and the Men covered their Heads and Faces. He shews therefore, that every Man, that either makes the publick Prayer in the Church-Assemblies, or herth, or joineth therewith; or Prophesieth, that is, expoundeth the writings of the Prophets, and opens the mysteries of Salvation, or heareth such expositions, or instructions; or joins with the Congregation in singing Psalms or Hymnes, having any covering on his Head, that is, ha∣ving his Head and Face covered, he dishonoureth himself, and does an indecent thing against the liberty and dignity of his Sex, it being a sign of shame and infamy for a man to have his head cover'd, but was a sign of power and dominion (in that Country)As on the contrary now at this day among us, those that have power over others, keep their heads covered, and they that are inferior to others, keep their heads uncove∣red before them., to have his Head, and Face bare and uncovered. Next he shews, that eve∣ry Woman, that lays aside her Veil in the Church-Assem∣blies, dishonours her self, doing a thing unbecomming her Sex, and against the dignity of the Man, to whom she (by that action) seems to deny subjection. Now he says, 'tis as unseemly for the Woman to be unveiled, as to be shorn or shaven, which would be a great disgrace to her, yea, against the mo∣d sty of her Sex, to wear her hair short as men do, her hair being given her for an ornamental covering, and as it were a natural Veil. 2ly. The Image of God shineth most brightly in the Man (who is immediately his Image), viz. the Image of his Power and Majesty; and ought so to appear, by having his head un∣covered.
But the Image of God shines more obscurely in the Woman, who is the imagev. 7. , i e. , ox  quae apud  LXX vertitur ,  Psal. 17.15. of the man, to whom she ought to profess sub∣jection by cvring her Face. 3ly. Another Argument of the inferiority of the Woman, he shews, is this, namely, that original y the Man was not of the Woman, but the Woman of the Man, vz. made out of his Rib. 4ly. The Man was not created to serve the Woman, or to be sub∣ject to her, but the Woman was created to be, a meet help to the Man, and to be subject to him. And for this rea∣son also must the Wman have a coveringThe name of the thing signified is ascribed to the sign, a thing very frequent in the Sacraments; power, that is, a sign of power. v. 10.  hoc loco significat te∣re sive agnoscere. In capite vero est in vire.  propter hoc, ergo, let mulier potestatem agno cere in viro. For this cause ought a Woman to acknowledg the power in her Head, viz. her Huband; because of the An∣gels, or because of the Law of Subjecti∣on given her by the Ministry of the Angel, vid. 1 Cor. 14.34. Gen. 3.16. Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2. Knatchbull. p. 156. on her Head, as a sign of her subjection, and that she is under the power of her Husband, because the holy Angels are present in the Assemblies gathered together for the publick Worship of God, and therefore Women ought to do nthing indecent and uncmely in the presence of those pure and holy Spirits. Yet notwithstanding this inferirity of the Woman, the man ought not to despise her, for the man is not the cause of propagation without the Woman, nor the Wman without the Man; but both are con-causes there∣of, by the Law and Ordination, i. e. ex lege & ordi∣natione Dei. Freillib. of GodFor neither was the Man to b without the Woman, nor the Wo∣mn without the Man by Gods or∣dination.. And though the Wman in the Creation was made of the Man, yet according to the course of ordinary propagation, the Man is by the Woman, and both are equally the work of God. He further appeals to the common custom of those Countreys, and demands of them, whether it would not be uncmely for men to wear long and dishvelled hair, like WomenNatura ipsa dcet, quòd viro comatum esse dedecori est; ex hoc quod muliebre est. Nutritio emae in Naziraeatu, fuit humiliationis spe∣cimen, atque abnegationi sui (for∣san & pdeactionis) ut & erat ab∣stinentia vino, & uvis. Religiosum quendam squallorem (ut ita dicam) prae se tulit, & vilificationem sui. Falluntr ergo plurimùm qui Ab∣sol mum cmtum ex superbiâ in∣csse bntur, cum ita quidem inessit ob votum (sictum saltem) Nazi. Judaei, si non voto Naziraeatûs astricti, se tondebant frequentissime! atque utcunque aliis tempori∣bu c nunqum non ante Festum; idque in honorem adventantis Festi. Lightf., to whom Nature hath given long hair for an ornament, and a covering, and so to be a Token to them of their subjection. In Conclusion he says, that if any nt moved with these Arguments, shall further contend a∣bout this matter, they should consider that other Churches of Christ have no Custom, that Women should be unveiled in their publick Assemblies; and why should they vary from the practice of other Christians? From Ver. 2. to 17. He comes now to discourse concerning the right administration of the Lords Supr, and he blames the Corinthians that their coming together to celebrate that ordinance, was generally, not for the better, but for the worse. For he heard there were divisions and factions among them [1 Cor. 1.11.]; nay HeresiesSchism, is a difference about es or external Dscipline. Heresie is a difference about Doctrine and Faith.; which, considering the cor∣ruption of Man, and the malice of the Devil, he did not much wonder at, especially seeing God in his infinite wisdom permits it so to be, that the sincere among them might the r manifest their stedfastness. He tells them, that their behaviour when they met together on this occasion, was far different from what was becoming the cele∣bration of the Lords Supper, they not carrying themselves therein as if they were to celebrate a religious FeastThis is not at the Lords Sup∣per You do not do a legally and olemnly according to Christs insti∣tution.. For in those their Feasts of Charity (at the end of which the Lords Sup∣per was celebrated) they did not now observe the true Church-communion, but every one, that is, every fa∣ction or division, being come to the place of the Assem∣bly, did presently sit down to eat, what they had brought in the company of those of their own party, not minding or regarding others; whereupon this holy Feast, was
neither celebrated at the same time by all, nor in holy conord, cty to the true Ʋnion of Christians, signified thereby. And further, the por re were excluded, while the rich fted, and in their feastings, drank to liberally, even unto drunkenness. He tells them, he could not praise them fr this. If they had a mind to feast, they should do it at their own houses; and not dish n ur, and as it were, cast a contempt on the publick Assembly, by such irreligious carriage, nor so despise the Poor (which are part of Gds Church) and put them to shame, by excluding them out of their Company for their poverty sake. For sith God admits them into his Family, and bids them to his heavenly banuet, they ought not to exclude them from this holy Feast. That therefore he may correct thse misde∣meanours, he recites the primitive institution of the Sacrament, which he had formerly delivered to them, as he had recived it from Christ by special revela∣tion, either when he was rat up into the third Haven, or when Christ appeared to him at his first Conversion [Gal. 1.12.]; viz. That our blessed Saviour, in the night wherein he was betrayed, took Bread, and having, byThe prayer he u∣sed, consisted of two parts: compare Mat. 26.26. with this place. praising God for it, and imploring his blessing upon it, consecrated it to this holy use, he brake it, and bad them eat it, as that which should signifie and repre∣sent his bodyThis is my Body] Metonym. i. e. The sign or representation of my Body. As he is call'd the Rock. 1 Cor. 10.4. Because it represented him. The flesh of Christ on the Cross was broken; there was solutio continui, with the Nailes in his Hands and Feet., that should now speedily be broken for mankind. This he bad them do in remembranceDo this in remembrance] It must be a remembrance cum effectu, viz. a relying on his death with a lively Faith. of him. In like manner after Supper, he took the CupThis Cup] i. e. The Wine in this Cup, is the new Testament in my blood i. e. signifieth unto you the New Covenant of Grace, which is ratified and confirm'd in my blood, i. e. by my death. telling them, that the Wine contained in it, was a sign and seal of the new Testament or Covenant, that should be confirmed by his Blood, (which he was now presently to shed on the Cross), as the old Testament or Cove∣nant was confirmed by the Blood of Beasts sacrificed and sprinkled upon the people, Exod. 24.8. And as often as they do this, they would shew forthv. 26. Do shew forth the Lords death] Hence a Sacrament was termed by the Ancients a representative or commemorative though not a proper Sacrifice. his death; which representation of his death was to be continued in the Church, till he come to judg the quick and dead. From Ver. 17. to 27. Having declared the original institution of this Sacrament; he comes next, to instruct them in the right use of it. He tells them, that whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, that is, otherwise then is meet, and becoming so holy an ordinance, (particularly without such a disposition of mind, such a preparation of heart, such reverence and devotion as ought there∣in to be exercis'd) shall be guilty of prophaning this Sacrament, (which is the remembrance of Christs death), and of vilifying the signs and pledges of his body and blood. Therefore every man should duly examine himself, whether he be a fit guest for so holy, and heavenly a Table, whether he have a competent knowledg of the nature, signification, end, and use of this Feast, and dis∣cern how it represents the Lords Body; whether he truly repent him of his sins, have a lively Faith in Christ, and be in Charity with his Neighbours; such therefore as cannot examine themselves, are not to be admitted unto this ordi∣nance. And seeing the Apostle says, let him examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, we may observe from thence, that he calls it bread still, even after consecration. 'Tis bread still, though not ordi∣nary and common bread, whilst it is applied to this use. 2. We see from hence that the Sacrament must be received in both kinds because Christ so instituted it, and to receive it otherwise is a palpable violation of his order. The Apostle fur∣ther
dclares, that he that eates and drinks unworthily, that is, ignorantly, irreverently, prophanely, is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, that i, of prophaning that Ordinance, which he hath ordained for the representation f his death, (wherein his Body was broken, and his Blood shed for our sins) and so incurs the danger of temporal judgment and chastisement here, and without repen∣tance, of eternal hereafter, for hearing no greater respect to this holy action; nor discerning how this Bread and Wine represent the Lords Body, but coming to it as to an ordinary meal. And that this would be the Fruit of approaching unwor∣thily to this Table, he proves from the sad experience of the Corinthians them∣selves, upon some of whom God had inflicted diseases, and upon others death, for their prophaning of this Ordinance. Therefore this judgment ought to be prevented by their judging of themselves, and repenting and reforming. For when God in∣flicts those Chastisements on his own people, he inflicts them as ftherly Cor∣rections to bring them to repentance and reformation, that they may not perish with the World. In closing up this matter, he exhorts them, that they would partake of this holy Supper together, tarrying one for another, and seems to forbid their Agpe or Love-Feasts, that they used before the holy Communion, commanding that if need were, they should eat at home, to satisfie their hunger, and avoid the dan∣ger of prophaning this holy Supper, and so drawing down judgment on themselves. As for other things that concern'd the good order and government of their Church, he tells them he will take care himself when he comes to them. From Ver. 27. to the end. The next Case he handles, is concerning spiritual gifts, and the right use of them. It seems they, that excelled in them, were proud of them, and used them to vain-ostentation and discord, and not to their Brethrens edification. There∣fore he tlls them, that as touching spiritual gifts, he would not have them ig∣norant, from whence they come (viz. not from themselves, but all from one and the same Spirit of God), nor to what end they are given, and how they ought lo be used and imployed. He tells them, they may remember, they were once idolatrous Gentiles, serving dumbThough the Devils sometimes spke in and by the Idols, yet the Idls themselves had mouths and spake not. Idols, ac∣cording as they were led by their idolatrous Priests, and had nothing of this divine Spirit among them; but now they ought to be sensible, that their conversion from Gen∣tilism to Christianity, was the powerful work of this Spi∣rit of God. And this Spirit of God, he shews, does always glorifie Christ, and proclaim him to be God and Lord, and whosoever blasphemes Christ (as the un∣believing Jews did, and some vagabond Sorcerers) does not speak from this Spi∣rit. But he, that out of sincere affection, and true Faith, does profess that Christ is the Lord, he does it by the guidance and instinct of the Spirit of God. Ha∣ving premised this, he shews, there are diversities of gifts, such as prophesying, speaking with strange tongues, &c. (some more excellent than others) and diversly imparted, and in divers measures; but 'tis one and the same Spirit that distributes them all. There are also diversities of administrations, or offices, and functions in the Church, but one Lord Jesus who instituted them all, and who calleth one to this kind of Ministry, another to that. And further there are diversities of operations, or miraculous works, such as casting out Devils, &c. but 'tis the same God, namely, the Father, who by his Son, and holy Spirit worketh all these, in all them in whom they are wrought. But those divers spi∣ritual gifts (wherein the power of the Spirit is manifested) are given for one end, viz the edification of the Church, as he instances in nine kinds of them: 1. The word of Wisdomvid. Glas∣sius in loc., whereby he can seasonably apply sound Doctrine to his Hearers; which is the gift of a Pastor. 2. The word of Knowledg, whereby he can give the sense of the Scriptures; which is the gift of the Tea∣cher. 3. The gift of Faith, or of Confidence and Courage in God, in great dan∣gers. 4. The gift  Healing. 5. The gift of working Miracles and power∣fully
casting out Devils, and curbing the enemies of the Church, [See Act. 13.11.]. 6. The gift of Foretelling things to come, and revling Secrets. 7. The gift of Discerning Impostors, from those acted by the Spirit of God. 8. The gift of Speaking with divers kinds of Tongues. 9. The gift of Interpreting Tongues, though they had not the gift of speaking them: These two being diffe∣rent gifts. All these gifts worketh that one and same blessed Spirit; and the divers distributions of them, are according to the good will of God, Now that these spiritual gifts are to be used without discord, to the good of the whole Church, he proves, because the universal Christian Church, is but one spiritual body, wheref Christ is the Head. For all true Believers are by the power and effectual operation of the same Spirit ingrafted into Christ by Baptism, and so incorporated into one Body, of what state and condition soever they be, and are all made to drink one Cup in the Lords Supper, that they may be partakers more and more of the graces of one and the same sanctifyingvid. Piscat. Spirit, who viviies all the Members of that Body. So that all the faithful are joined together in the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and their union into one Church, and their partaking of one Spirit, is signified thereby. And the diver∣sity of gifts given to the particular Members ought not to occasion any dissention or disagreement in the Church. This he illustrates by a comparison taken from the natural Body; the very condition of which does necessarily require plurality and diversity of Members. One Member, though never so excellent, does not make a Body; and the meanest Members are of the Body, and so to be reckoned, as well as the more excellent. Nay the more excellent Members, such as the eye and ear, have need of the inferior. And as God hath set the Members of the Body, each one in his place, and each one for its special use and service for the good of the whole: So he hath given diversity of gifts and administratins to the Church, for the welfare of the whole. And as it would be repugnant to the nature of an or∣ganical Body, to be without divers MembersCorporis unitatem non tollit membrorum varietas, sed ponit magis., so the nature of the organical Church would be overthrown, did it not consist of many Offices, as of so many Members, u∣nited together in one Body. Therefore the superior Mem∣bers must not pride it over the inferior: for those Members of the Body that seem most feeble and weak, are necessary to the others. The Organs of nourishment, though they be not so noble, yet are they more absolutely necessary than those of the Senses, for without them, Man cannot subsist or live, as he may without Eyes, Ears, or Hands. And those Members of the Body, which seem to us less honourableMembra illa ab Apostolo ap∣pellntur inhonesta, & indecora non per se sed comparatè, ratione eorum quae eximiâ venustate sunt praedita. Fullerus., on them we put more abundant honour by decent clothing them, and on our uncomely parts we put more abundant adorning by a decent covering them. For our comel parts, such as the Face, have no need of covering or adorning, being comely enough of themselves; But God has so dis∣posed the several parts of the Body, that some shall have a natural comeliness, or beauty; others that want that, shall be supplied by Clothes, which are an artificial Beauty: By all which, he shews, they should be instructed, that the meanest Officers, and those that have the least gifts are as well of that spiritual Body the Church, as those that have more excellent Offices and gifts. And as the meaner must not envy the more excellent, and so, in a dis∣cntent, withdraw themselves from the Body, and forbear to imploy themselves for the common good of the whole; so the more excellent must not despise the meaner, but put a due respect and value upon them. And as the natural Body would come to ruin by Schism, if the Members should strive amng themselves, and should not regard the welfare of one another; so great mischiefs must needs arise to the Church by dissentions. But on the contrary, as in the natural Body, there is a sympathyUt cum talo Spina inhaeserit, universum corpus sentit delorem & curationem adhibet. among the superior and inferior Mem∣bers, a fellow-feeling with each other, both of joy and grief; so all the true Members of the Church, of what degree soever, ought to have the same common interests,
and concernments, and mutually to sympathize with each other, both in weal, and we. All this from v. 12. the Ap stle applies to the believing Corinthians, whom he acknowledges to be a part of this mystical Body of Christ, whereof each Believer in particular is a Member, who ought therefore so to carry himself to∣wards his fellow-members as is shewen in the former comparison, namely, as the MembersIn corpore naturali membra praecipua, decentissima, validissima pro¦caeteris solicita sunt, ut infirmitatem solentur, indecorum ornent, dolori condoleant: Ergo corporis Christi membra eandem pro se curam & sol∣licitudinem mutuam praestare de∣bent. of the natural body do towards one ano∣ther. And having spoken so much of the diversity of gifts and Ecclesiastical administrations (of which be had spken in the general, v. 5.) he now comes to reckon up the particular officers that God hath set in his Church. 1. Apostles, as those that were appointed to lay the foun∣dation of Churches. 2. Prophets, who interpreted the Prophetical parts of the Scripture, by a special and extra∣ordinary gift. 3. Teachers, namely, such who are ordinarily called to interpret the Scriptures for the edification of the Church. 4. Such as are endowed with power to work miracles of various kinds, and particularly of punishing enemies to the Gospel 5. Such as have this power restrained to the cure of Diseases. 6. Helps, that is, such as were to take care of the mainte∣nance of Ministers, and the poor, namely, Deacons. 7. Governments, that is, Ruling Elders (as some learned men understand it, according to Rom. 12.8. 1 Tim. 5.17.), who are to take care of the peoples manners, with the Pastors and Teachers. Lastly, Such as were inabled to speak strange Tongues, or to inter∣pret them. In conclusion, he shews, that seeing the Ministers of the Church have not all administrations of the same kind, nor of equal dignity; therefore those that have the highest, ought not to despise those who are of a lower degree; neither ought these to envy the other, and so contend one against another, but all of them ought to imploy their gifts for the common good of the Church. And in or∣der hereunto he advises them to lay aside all evil emulation, and to covet the m st excellent gifts, namely, such as are most useful and profitable to the Church. And he tells them, he will shew them a more excellent way than that they were in, which is this, to lay aside all contention, pride, and envying one another, and to order all their actions by the rule of Charity. Now for Charity, he proves it to be the most excellent gift, and for to surpss all other gifts by four Arguments. 1. He shews them, that the gifts they were so ambitious of, were nothing without Charity. This he proves by instancing in five sorts of them. 1. Suppose a man had the gift of Tongues in the highest de∣gree, so that he could speak all the Tongues that any men in the World were ever able to speak, or that the AngelsSuppositio nihil ponit in esse. themselves would speak, if they con∣versed with men, yet if he have not Charity, he makes only an unprofitable sound, and a vain ostentation. 2. Suppose he had the gift of Prophesie in the highest degree, so that he could understand the darkest mysteries of the Scripture. 3. Sup∣pose he had the highest degree of miraculous FaithThe Faith of working Mira∣cles may be severed from Charity; but justifying Faith cannot, which always worketh by Love. All Faith] i. e. All degrees of miraculous Faith., so that he could remove Mountains. 4. Suppose he had the greatest liberality towards the poor imaginable. 5. Sup∣pose he had the greatest courage for martyrdom that ever any had; yet all these without Charity will not profit him, or conduce to his Salvation. From Ver. 1. to 5. 2. He shews, the superlative excellency of Charity from the famous properties, and effects of it, which are fifteen in number. 1. It suffereth long. 2. Is kind. 3. Envieth not. 4. Vaunteth not it self, that is, carrieth not it self insolently, malpartly, and scornfully towards others. 5. It is not puffed up, that is, highly conceited of its self. 6. Doth not behave it self unseemly, that is, is not transported to a carriage unbefitting ones place, calling, or age. 7. Seeks not only her own but the good of others. 8. Is not easily provoked to Anger. 9. Think∣eth no evil, that is, is not rashly suspitious, or imputes no evil to any man un∣justly.
10. Rejoiceth not in iniquity, that is, rejoiceth not in other mens sins, but is sorry for them. 11. Rejoices in the truth, or with the truth, that is, rejoi∣ceth at the righteousnessThe Hebrews by truth some∣times understand righteousness and in∣tegrity. Amat integritatem & vias rectas. Vide Grot. of the righteous. 12. Cou∣ragiously bears labours and difficulties in discharging its duty, or covers and conceals. all the ill it knows of others, unless when 'tis greater Charity to reveal it. 13. Be∣lieveth all the good of others, which rationally it may, or hath any ground to believe. 14. Hopeth all things, that is, hopes all things of the amendment of others, that in prudence it can hope. 15. Endures all the infirmities of others; or endures all things which may with a good Conscience be endured, and which make for the honour of God, and the advantage of the truth, without meditating revenge. From Ver. 5. to ver. 8. 3ly. He shews, the excellency of Charity, from the permanency thereof. Cha∣rity never fails. This he illustrates by comparing it with other gifts. 1. With Prophesie, and Tongues, which shall cease, because we shall not have use of them in the other life, though here they are needful for the edification of the Church. 2. With Knowledg, viz. that imperfect knowledg which we here ob∣tain by the ministry of the Word. For our knowledg now is but imperfect, in comparison of the knowledg of divine things, which we shall have in the life to come. And so likewise that gift whereby God enableth us to instruct others, is but imperfect, and shall then cease, because we shall have no further use of it. But when the perfect knowledg of divine things shall come, then our imperfect gifts which served to promote knowledg in this life shall cease. He illustrates this, by a twofold similitude; 1. By comparing this life to childhood, and the fu∣ture to the manly state, wherein childish things are abolished. 2. By shewing there is as great a difference betwixt our present knowledg in this life, and that which we shall have hereafter, as between one that seeth the image of anothers face in a Glass, and one that beholdeth the face it self. Here we know God in his Word and Works as in a Glass, by reflection; but there we shall know him intuitively, and immediately. And as there is a great difference between propounding a thing darkly and as a riddle, and propounding the same thing in plain, proper, and express words. So here we see as by a Glass, or in a Riddle, but then shall we know God face to face, that is, clearly and perfectly. And as for himself, who was an Apostle, and had been rapt up into the third Heaven, he acknowledges he knew but in part for the present, but hereafter he assured himself, his mind shall be so inlightned by God, that he shall see him and know him immediately, as God now sees and knows him, though not so perfectly. In Conclusion, he tells them, that in this life, these three emi∣nent Graces do operate in the hearts of Believers Faith, Hope, and Charity; Without Faith we cannot be justified, without Hope Faith cannot stand, and by Love Faith must be operative. But of these three, the greatest is Charity. 1. In respect of its extent, reaching to God, good Angels, our Brethren, our Enemies. 2. In respect of its use, extending to the good of others; whereas Faith, and Hope are only private graces. 3. In respect of its duration, be∣cause Faith and Hope shall cease in the other life; Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision, and Hope in Fruition, but Charity shall abide for ever. From Ver. 8. to the end. And seeing Charity is so excellent a grace, he shews, they should very care∣fully  labour for it; yet spiritual gifts also they should earnestly and zealously desire, especially that of interpreting the Holy Scripture, as the most useful for the edification of the Church. It seems, some among them much affected the gift of Tongues, and despised Pastoral gifts in comparison thereof. He therefore proves the gift of Prophesie, or Exhortation, to be more excellent than the gift of Tongues, separated from the gift of Interpretation. For he that speaks in an unknown
TongueOpinamur, nec sine ratione linguam istam ignotam quâ usi sunt isti vel abusi potius in Ecclesiâ fuisse linguam Hebraeam, &c. Lightf. in loc., although by the gift of the Spirit, he speak the mysteries of God, yet he speaks without profit, because he is understood by God alone, and not by his HearersPrayer in the Church in an un∣known Tongue, crosseth, in a man∣ner, this whole Chapter.. But a Prophet, or a Pastor speaking in a known Tngue, teaches, exhorts, comforts his Hearers, and so speaks pro∣fitbly, and to their edification. He that speaks in an unknown Tongue, edifies none but himslf; but a Prophet speaking in a known Tongue, speaks to the edification of the whole Church, or Assembly. He wishes they all spake with Tongues, but prefers Prophesie as mre useful to the Church, except it be joined with Interpretation. This he amplifies, by instancing in his own person, who he says, should not profit them meerly by speaking to them in an unknown Tongue; but if he spake intelligibly to them, that is, either revealed things to come, or communicated his knowledg in the deep mysteries of Religion, and the sa∣cred Figures; or interpreted the prophetick part of the Scripture; or in a plain Catechistical way instructed them in things they were to believe and do, then indeed he should speak to their profit. This he further illustrates, by a similitude taken from Musical Instruments, the one used in peace, viz. the Harp; the other in war, viz. the Trumpet; tellig them, that as 'tis ordinarily seen in the world, if the Harp sound something nt understood, a man cannot apply himself to the dance; or if the Trumpet give not such a sound as is understood, a man cannot prepare himself to the Battle: so those that have the gift of a strange Tongue, if they do not utter words intelligible to the Auditors, they will nothing edifie them by what they say; their words will be only unprofi∣tably poured out into the air. There are, it may be, he tells them, as many Voices or Languages in the World, as there are Nations sub∣audi .; so that none of them are without some Language. which they understand, and ordinarily no other. Now, says he, if he that hath any of these Languages, speaks to me in any Language but that which I understand, and I speak to him also in a Language which he understands not, we shall be Barba∣rians one to another. Wherefore he exhorts them, that of all spiritual gifts, they would most earnestly desire the gift of Prophesie, for the good of the Church. And in order hereunto, he advises, that he that hath the gift of an unknown Tongue, should prayPrecetur vel ut ipse vel ut alius interpretetur, quod locutus est, ut alii discant. that he may be inabled so to interpret that Tongue, that others may profit thereby. For, says he, if I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit prayeth, that is, I make use of my gift which I my self understand, but that understanding of mine is no way use∣ful to others. I will tell you therefore what seems most desireable to me in this case, Namely, that if I pray by the gift of the Spirit in an unknwn Tongue, I may add an interpretation, and so pray with under∣standingI will pray with the Spirit, that is, with a strange Tongue mi∣nistred to me by the Spirit. To pray with the understanding is to pray so as others may understand. also, that is, so as others, which hear, may understand; and if I sing praises to God by the gift of the Spirit, in an unknown Tongue, I may add an in∣terpretation that the hearers may understand and pro∣fit thereby. For else when any man shall bless God in an unknown Tongue by the gift of the Spirit, how shall ordinary persons in the Congregation give their consent, by saying Amen to what he says. For the hea∣rers (that cannot understand) are not edified, nor can go along with the thanks∣giving, though that which is spoken be vry xcellent. He tlls them, he had the gift of Tongues in a larger measure than any of them (and he knew how to value that gift) yet he had rather speak a few words so as to express and in∣terpret his understanding and meaning to others, than many in a Tngue unknown to the people. In sum, he shews them, that a vain ostentation of things that tended not to profit, was but a childish thing. Indeed in innocency they should imitate little Children, but in understanding of things spiritual they should
approve themselves to be men. He farther shews, out of the Law, that is, the Scriptures of the Old Testament, (See Joh. 10.34.), and particularly out of Isa. 28.11. that because the people of Judah would not be instructed by the plain preaching of the Lords Prophets therefore he would cause them to be spo∣ken to in an unknown Language for a punishment of their unthankfulness and ob∣stinacy, that is, he would visit them with outlandish Enemies and Armies, whose Language they should not understand. So that strange Tongues, except they were interpreted, were not given for a sign of any good to Believers, but they were gi∣ven as a sign of Gods displeasure to unbelievers (f) in∣somuch that by the just judgment of God,Hinc vero Paulus rectè col∣ligit linguarum peregrinarum uum, ita ut eo utebantur Corinthii, signum esse destinatum non iis qui credunt sed infidelibus, i. e. maledictionis signum qua profanos Dominuus ulciscere∣tur non benedictionis quâ suos crudi∣ret. Non solent autem Apostoli anxiè syllabas numerare in citandis scri∣pturae testimoniis, &c. vid. Bezam in loc. their ignorance by this means wuld be the more increased. But the gift of Prophesie serveth not only for the conversion of un∣believers, but for the edification of Believers also. There∣fore Prophesie is t be preferr'd before Tongues. Moreover, when the Church meets together, if all that speak should speak in a strange Tongue, what will an ordinary man, or an unbeliever (coming into the Congregation) think or say? Will he not think them all mad? But if all that speak, do Prophesie and interpret the Scripture, and open the Doctrine of Christ to the edification of the Church; in such a case, if an un∣believer come in, he is convincd of sin, and condemned according to the sentence of the Law, by all those that Prophesie, and the secret sins of his heart are made manifest unto him, and so falling dwn he will adore God, and seriously give testi∣mony to Gds presence with the Prophets of the Church. Therefore Prophesie is more excellent than the gift of Tongues. From Ver. 1. to 26. He now comes to give several precepts concerning good order in the Church, and particularly to prescribe certain rules which they should observe as to the use of gifts. And first says he, when yu come together, hath any of you a Psalm or Hymn suggested to him by the Spirit, to the glory of God and the edification of the Church? or hath any one of you a Doctrine, a particular instruction, or matter of consolatin inspired into him by the spirit? or hath be a strange Tongue; or the gift of interpreting into the Greek Tongue, what another spake in a strange Tongue, (pssibly the Hebrew)? Let it be how it will, he exhorts, that all be dne so as may most tend to the benefit and edification of the Church. His scnd Precept is, that those that were inabled with the gift of Tongues should not speak in one and the sme Assembly, one hre and another there, to the confusion of the Company, that no more than three should speak at one time, and that nt together, but by course one after another, and that too, when there was an Interpreter present, (whō could explain in the vulgar Tongue, what they said) otherwise he that had the strange Tongue shuld be silent in the Church, and keep his Tongue to himself, and use it at home betwixt God and himself in private prayer. And accordingly he directs concerning those that prophesied, to wit, that only two or three of them shuld Prophesie at one meeting, and that the other Prphets should judg and examine their Doctrine by the rule of the Word. Yet if any Prophet who sate by, desired to be heard, (while the other was speak∣ing), in order to the opening sme difficulty then before them, the Apostle orders that they should permit him so to do, and that the other that was speaking should be silent. For all the Prophets that were extraordinarily inspired by the Spirit were to be heard, (provided order was duly observed therein), that so the knowledg and consolation of the whole Church might be therby promoted. And he tells them, the Spirits of the Prophets, that is, the Doctrines which the Prophets bring, are to be judged and examinedWe are com∣manded to try the Spirits, 1 Joh. 4.1. by the other Prophets, whether they be agree∣able to the word of God or no. And these rules be exhorts them diligently to ob∣serve, lest a tumult, and confusion should arise among them, which is hateful to God, who requires that peace should be kept, and maintained in all the Churches of his Saints. From Ver. 26. to 34.
And for the further carrying on of good order among them, he forbids that Women should speak publickly, or propound any Questions in the Church, because subjection is appointed by the word of God for that sex [Gen. 3.16.], of which silence is a token. And therefore they should learn privately at home of their own husbands, and seek instructions from them in the things they doubted of. He further shews, that if any of their high-crested Doctors, or others among them, will not submit to these Precepts, but take upon them to order otherwise, and to suffer Women to speak in the Congregation, contrary to all other Churches, they should consider that they are not the first Church, that was planted from which the Gospel came forth to other places, as it did from Jerusalem, nor were they the on∣ly persons to whom the Gspel was sent, that they should take upon them to Judge of order and decency, and therein to differ from all other Churches. He affirms that these Precepts he hath given them are from the Lord, and commands that those who esteem themselves Prophets, and persons that have any spiritual gift or afflation, should acknowledg them to be divine. And for others that affect to be ignorant, he leaves them to be ignorant at their own peril. In fine, he exhorts them, earnestly to endeavour after the gift of Prophesying; and for the gift of Tongues, that they that have it should be allowed the use of it, provided they observed the rules by him before given. And that in their publick Assemblies for religious worship, all things should be performed with gravity and decency, as may most conduce to the glory of God, and the edification of the Church. From Ver. 34. to the end. He comes now to assert the Doctrine of the Resurrection, there being some, it seems, in the Church of Corinth at that time that denied it. And first by way of Introduction, he recites the sum of the Gospel which he had preached to them, which they had embraced; and in the profession whereof, the greatest part of them had hitherto stood stedfast, and by which, he tells them, they shall be sa∣vedPraesens pro futuro., if they faithfully retain and observe it, as he deliveredi. e. Historiam cum suis cir∣cumstantiis, & dogmata cum suâ ex∣plicatione. it unto them: and this he assures himself they will do, except their former embracing the Gospel was rash, light, and inconsiderate. He tells them, that he delivered unto them what he had received of Ananias, and the Apostles, and by special revelation from Christ himself [Gal. 1.12. 1 Cor. 11.23.] namely, that Christ the true Messias died to make atonement for our sins, as Esay and Daniel had foretold in the Old Testament, [viz. Isa. 53.5. Dan 9.26.]. That he was buried and rose again, as was prefigured in Jonas. That he was seen of Cephas or Peter, Luk. 24 34. Then of the Twelve ga∣thered together, Luk. 24.36.Receptum erat ut coetus ille discipulorum Christi domesticorum nomine  intelligeretur, quae appellatio, etiam Juda sublato, permansit. Slater., (for so the Compa∣ny of Disciples, consisting formerly of Twelve, was still called, though Judas was gone to his own place, and Tho∣mas was now absent). Then of Five hundred Brethren at once in Galilee, [Mat. 28.7.16.], whereof some were yet alive, and able to testifie it. Besides, he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles [Joh. 20.26.], Thomas being with them, and pos∣sibly the greatest part of the Seventy Disciples present also. Last of all, he tells them, he was seen of himself, whom in great humility he calls an , an untimely birth, because he was not by leisureable institution brought to Christi∣anity, whereby he should be as a natural birth, but was as an untimely birth, by reason of his sudden and unexpected conversion, and which was not without some some violence, Act. 9. And as an untimely birthVerisimile est, hanc loquendi for∣mulam apud Hebraeos usitatam fuisse, cum de re vili, quae planè abjici so∣leat atque abscondi, loquuntur; prae∣sertim si spectes, Numb. 12.12. Die∣teric. Antiq. Bibl., is not fit to be called a birth, because Children that are so born, are very imperfect, being lesser, and weaker than those of full growth, so says Paul, I am a poor abor∣tive, one whose conversion was after the Lord was as∣cended into Heaven. And as an abortive Child is the
least of Children, so he reckon'd himself the leastNon ∣que adeò m∣tutus ad Apo∣stoli muneris functionem. of the Apostles, not wor∣thy to be called an Apostle because he had persecuted the Church of Christ. Hw∣ever, says he, by the grace and favour of God I am what I am, that is, a be∣lieving Christian, and an Apostle; and so my tstimony to be received as well as that of the other Apostles: And his grace which was bestowed on me was not in vain. For being by his special favour, constituted an Apostle, I have since la∣boured to walk worthy of it, and have been more labrious and industrious than any of the other Apostles; yet what I have done, I do not attribute to my self, but impute intirely to his gracious assistance, that inabled me, and went along with me. Therefore, whether you lok upon me, or upon them, (to whom he appered here on the Earth, and so were eye-witnesses of his Resurrection), you can ave no ground to doubt f this truth; for both they and I preach the same things, viz. that Christ died for our sins, and rose again, and that we shall rise again by his power; and this is the Doctrine that you Corin∣thians once believed and received. From Ver. 1. to 12. 2. Having promised these things, He comes now to refute the Error of those that denied the Resurrection, shewing the absurdity of it in six particulars. 1. If there be no Resurrction of the dead, then Christ the Head is not risen. For if the Head be risen, he will certainly raise up his Mmbers also. 2. If Christ e not risen, then the Apstles preaching, and so strongly asserting. His Resur∣rection as an ifallible argument of the divinity of his Doctrine was in vain: (for if it had not been divine, God would nt have so confirmed it, and as it were set his Sal to it, by raising him from the dead on the third day); and then their belief of it was in vain also. 3. Then Paul himself, and the other Apostles had given a false testimny of God (which they could not reasonably be suspected of) affirming, that he raised up Christ from the dead, which yet he did not, if there be no Resurrection of the dead. 4. If Christ be not raised, it will thence follow, not only that the Faith of these Corinthians was vain, but that they are yet in their sins, and subjct to condemnation for them; and that Christ hath not expiated them. For it would be an evidence he had not satisfied for them, if he still remained under death. 5. If Christ be not risen, then they which died in the Faith f Christ, are quite lost, seeing they were not delivered from their sins by him. 6. Then Christians are of all men mst miserable, who subject themselves, fr the cause of Christ, to many sufferings, and dangers, and afflictions here; and deprive themselves f many comforts and advantages which they might otherwise enjy, if they expected only from him the good things of this lifeIn hac tan∣tum vita spe∣rae in Chri∣stum est tan∣tum hujus vi∣tae bona ab eo expectare cum futuram vitam non credant. Fla., and had no hpes to be raised by him to a better, when this is ended. From Ver. 12. to 20. Having thus proved by these arguments, that Christ is risen, he shews, it will from hence follow, that the dead in Christ shall rise also. For as the first Fruitsv. 20. Primitiae dormienti∣um] 1. Christus primus dignitate. 2. Primus causalitate, per Christum enim omnes resurgemus. 3. Tempo∣re, primus inter resurgentes ad vi∣tam immortalem. Licet enim aliqui ante Christum suscitati ab Elia & li∣saeo surrexerint, tamen illi tantn reurrexerunt ad praesentem vitm mortalem, rursumque mortei sunt. Sic Christus dicitur primogenitus mor∣tuorum, i. e. ante omne resurgens & qsi renascens ex mortuis. Cornel. à Lapide. are pledges and an earnest of a future harvest; so the Resurrection of Christ is a pledg and assurance of the Resurrection of all the Saints. For as death came by Aam, so shall the Resurrection come by Christ. As by Adams sn, all that are partakers of his Na∣ture are concluded under the sentence of death; so all truly regnerate that are by Faith united to Christ, and are partakers of his divine Nature, shall be made alive again by him. For the righteous he will raise as their Head, and the wicked he will raise as their Judg. But here it will be objected, If Christ the Head be risen
Why are not those that are in Christ raised also? He answers, that the order which God hath appointed must be observed, viz. that Christ as the first Fruits should rise first, and afterwards all the Faithful, (the rest of the harvest) at his Second Coming; at which time, (when the end of the World will be) Christ having subdued and abolished all adverse powers and dominions that were contrary to him, will deliver up his Mediatory Kingdom into the hands of his Father, lay∣ing aside that manner of ruling, by those means, he now useth for the gathering, and governing of his Church. Not that he shall cease to reign with his Father, (for in that sense, Of his Kingdom there shall be no end), but he shall cease to reign as Mediator, and as deputed by his Father. Yet he must reign as Me∣diator till he have subdued all his Enemies, whereof death will he the last; and death being subdued, the resurrection must needs follow. Now that all enemies shall be subdued under him, the Apostle manifests, because God the Father hath promised that all things shall be subject unto him [Psal. 8.6. Eph. 1.22. Heb. 2.8.], yet we are always to suppose, that he hath not thereby devested him∣self of his Soveraign Empire, but under the word All, He himself is excepted, who hath subjected all things else to his Son. And when all things shall be thus subdued to Christ, and his Mediatory Kingdom delivered up to his Father, then the Son himself, as Mediator and Head of his Church, [See 1 Cor. 12.12. Eph. 1.12.], shall he subject unto him. And then shall God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, fill all the Saints with glory and bliss eternally and imme∣diately, whereas now He conveys himself to them by means. From Verse 20. to 29. He further proves, there will be a Resurrection of the dead. For else, what benefit will accrue to those who are baptized for the dead? that is, that suffer great persecutionBeza takes the word  in the middle Voice, and so renders it, Cur ablutione utuntur? Some take it passively, and render it, Why are they then washed with the washing men use over the dead. q. d. If the dead rise not, if the Corps shall for ever perish, to what end do you wash them? Do men give respect, where there is no hope? See Note (b) of Sect. 4. Chap. 2. for professing, asserting, and de∣fending the Resurrection of some that are dead, viz. of Christ, (whose Resurrection is past), and of the Saints (whose Resurrection is to come): For so the word to be baptized is taken, Mar. 10.38. and the Praeposition , signifies for, Act. 9.16. 'Tis absurd, therefore, he shews, that they who suffer martyrdom, for defending the Resur∣rection of the dead, and expecting of it, should be disap∣pointed of their hope. And why should he himself, and other Christians, run the hazzard of so many dangers, and death it self, if there were to be no Resurrection, wherein their patience and courage for Christ shall be rewarded? He protests by that, which he tok the most joy in of any thing in the World, viz. his fidelity to Christ, and the success of his ministry among them (they being thereby brought to believe and rejoice in Christ) that he died daily, (in preparation of mind) being daily exposed to the hazzards of death; which sure he should not do, if he had not an assured hope of a Resurrection to a better life after this. To what purpose was he expos'd to fight with beasts at EphesusId est, cum bestialibus homi∣nibus, , ho∣minibus ferarum more saevientibus. Scaliger in notis, Feros & praefracti ingenii viros, quibuscum illi nego∣tium & contentio fuit, vocat . Quidam haec verba intelligunt de dis∣putationibus quas per tres menses cum incredulis & pertinacibus Judaeis, Ephesi habuit. De mortuorum re∣surrectione loquens, frustranea esse ostendit varia illa , quae propter Christum sustinebant v. 30.31. & frustraneam omnem suam cum adversariis veritatis (tanquam besti∣is) de veritate religionis Chistianae concertationem, nisi soret reurre∣ctio, & potius (his omnibus supinè posthabitis) gulae, luxui, & volup∣tati indulgendum esse. Aliqui in∣telligunt Pauli verba propriè, ac si revera bestiis objectus suisset: sed si tale quid evenisset ei, non erat rem tam insignem praeteriturus Lucas; & certè in malorum catalogo, 2 Cor. 11.23. (ubi potiores, & omnium maximas suas calamitates Apostolus enumerat) hujus pugnae & periculi mentionem fe∣cisset. Deinde si Ephesii tale quid tentassent, Paulus ad jus civitatis provocâsset; quomodo fecit, & evasit, cum debebat flagellis caedi. Praeterea, non I cebat Civem Romanum bestiis objicere; sed mancipiorum illud erat supplicium. Digest. leg. 3. ad legem Corneliam de Sicariis.  quod attinet, si verbum  subaudiatur (uti illa ellipsis alibi occurrit ut 2 Cor. 9.6.) omnia recte se habent. Secundum hominem enim sen humanitùs loqui se dicit Paulus, quando similitudinibus utitur, Gal. 3.15. Rom. 6.19. qualis & hic sermo est, metaphoricè conceptus. Vide Glassius & Treid libius., and to run such a hazzard of his life as that was, if he had no hope of a better life after this, and of a glorious Resurrection? And further, If there were no Resurrection, then there was some sense in that wild saying of the Epicures among them, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; that is, Let us take our fill of pleasures, while we may; for shortly death comes, and will put an end to all, See Isa. 22.13. But he bids them take heed of attending to such rotten kind of speeches, which might corrupt them with false principles, and vicious manners. He advises there∣fore such among them, as were sleeping in their ignorance and sottish security, to rouze up themselves, and to awake
to righteousness, viz. to live righteously, and to avoid Epicurism, and the company of Epicures. For he tells them, there were some such among them, which had not the right knowledg of the true God, which he spake to their shame. From Ver. 29. to 35. He now comes to answer three Objections against this Doctrine. Object. 1. It seems impossible the dead should arise. For, How shall it be? Object. 2. Who can describe with what bodies they shall arise? Object. 3. What shall become of those that are alive at the Coming of Christ? For they are not capable of a Resurrection who never died. To the first he answers, that 'tis as possible for the Body to rise again, as for Corn sown to be quickned after it dies in the earth. To the second, he says, that our Bodies shall arise the same in substance, but not in qualities. They shall rise with far more excellent qualities, than those they were buried with. As a bare grain of Corn that is sown, is raised in substance and kind the same, but diverse in qualities, coming up with blade, and ear, and corn in it: It does not rise in the same figure in which it was sown. Seeds are sown and rot, yet notwithstanding they are so far from perishing there∣by, that they rise up far more beautiful; and whereas they are sown dry and hard, they spring up green and fresh: So why should it seem incredible, that our Bodies should arise from corruption, and yet with far more excellent qualities than they had before? And as there are several kinds of flesh, and one more excellent than another; and as celestial Bodies, are more glorious than terrestrial, and one celestial Body differs from another in glory; so it will be in the Resurrection. The Bodies that rise, will differ from those that dyed. That which was here a corruptible Body, when it rises, will be an incorruptible. The Body that was here obnoxious, and exposed to diseases, griefs, and death, will be raised glorious and strong, beautiful and shining, like unto the Stars, and the Sun in the Hea∣vens [Math. 13, 43. & 17 2.]. That which was sown a natural or an ani∣mal Body, which needed here to be supported, as other animals are, with meat, and drink, and such things as afforded nourishment to it, shall be raised a spi∣ritual Body, endued with spiritual qualities, not needing meat, or nourishment, but shall be supported immediately by the Spirit of God without means, as the Angels in Heaven are, Math. 22.30. So that there are Bodies of both these sorts, which much differ one from the other. And as from the first Adam, (according to Gen. 2.7.) we received a natural, or animal Body, which yet could not be continued in life without nourishment; so by the second Adam, name∣ly Christ, we shall obtain a spiritual Body in the Resurrection, which he will sustain without nourishment by his Spirit, He being a quickning Spirit And as since the Resurrection, Christ hath a spiritual Body, which is immortal and incorruptible; so shall he also give such Bodies to those that are his. Yet all things must be done in order; we must have a natural Body first, and a spiritual Body after, as that which is perfect follows upon that which is imperfect. The first Man is of the earth, earthly, and therefore could communicate nothing but a terrene life. But the second Man, is not only man, but God from Heaven also, and therefore could support his own Body, that it should not see corruption (though in its own nature terrene and resoluble into dust); and having raised it out of the grave he could make it glorious, immortal, and heavenly, not need∣ing
earthly supports. And so in like manner can he make our Bodies also. Such a Body as Adam himself had, such have all we, (who dscended from him in a natural way), as long as we are upon the earth. And such a Body as Christ now hath (namely, glorified, immortal, and incorruptible,) shall Believers have, after they shall be raised from the dead, and shall be taken up into Heaven. And as here we are confrmable to the first Adam, in mortality and corruptibility; so shall we hereafter be conformable to Christ in glory and immortality. Fr our Bodies, as now they are, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, unless they be first fitted f r that glorius state, by the mutation of their qualitis, and be chan∣ged, purified, and immortalized. From Ver. 35. to 51. He now answers the third Objectin, namely, What shall become of those who shall be found alive at Christs coming? As fr those, he tells them, they shall not dye, but shall be chnged, and of mortal shll become immortal, and that in a moment, when both all that are dead, and all that are alive shall be summoned by the last Trumpet to Christs Tribunal. And when this is done, then that triumphant speech of the Prophet Hosea shall be fulilled, chap. 13.14, O death, I will be thy plagues! O grave, I will be thy dstruction! that is, Death shall be destroyed for ever, and shall never recver strength again over any man. And that this Victory may appear the greater, he shews, that the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin, is the Law, that is, Ʋnless satisfaction be given to the Law, sin, wrath, and death remain in full force and power. But after satisfaction is made to the Law for us, sin and wrath are taken away, and death is disarmed of its sting. From the whle that he hath said, he infers two things; 1. That God should be highly praised, who hath through Christ given us Victory over Sin, Dath, and the Law. 2. That we shuld he stdfast and unmoveable in the prfssion of the Gspel, and in do∣ing and suffering the will of God, being assured there will be a Resurrection, at which our labour will be recompensed and graciously rewarded. From Ver. 51. to the end. He shuts up the whole Epistle, giving some directions concerning their colle∣ction fr the por Saints at Jerusalem, how and in what manner it should be made, and how sent. Particularly he orders, that on the Lords day every one should ly something by, as God had prosper'd him, that there might be a full sum c llcted, and so no further need of gatherings when he came. And he tells them, that when he cmes, they shall chuse the Messengers who shall carry their contribution, that they may be sure of the due disposing of it, according to their own intentions. And those whom they shall chuse, he will by his t∣ter recommend and send to Jerusalem; or if it be thought needful for himslf to go alng with them, on this occasion, (as he did sometimes, Act. 24.17. & Rom. 15.25.), he declares his willingness to do it. From Ver. 1. to 5. He tells them, he designed to come to them, assoon as he had spent some time in the several parts of Macedonia. For he intended to remove from Ephesus where he now was, and to go to Jerusalem, through that Region. And perhaps he would stay the whole Winter with them, which being done, he supposed some of them would go some part of the way with him. And therfore he would not now come to them, and only see them as it were in passing. For if he did s, he should not be able to stay; whereas his purpose was, (with the Lords leave) to spend some time with them, when he next came. At present he pur∣posed to stay at Ephesus, till Pentecost, because God had opened a great door, and opportunity to him for the gaining of many to Christ, and had abundantly blessed his labours. Yet there were many adversaries in that place, that oppos'd the truth, which made his presence requisite for some time longer; For Satan and his instruments in his absence did much harm. From Ver. 5. to 10.
He charges them that if Timothy come to them, they should take care of his safety among them, and that they would look upon him as they would on himsf, because of his faithfulness in the ministerial work, and that they would treat him him respectfully and bring him on in his journey, when he returned, that he might come safely to him; for he and the Brethren expected him. Ver. 10, 11. He acquaints them that Apollos was not willing at present for some reasons to come to them, possibly because he would not countenance a Faction there begun under his name [1 Cor. 1.12.]. Ver. 12. He exhorts them, to watchfulness, stedfastness in the Faith, Christian courage, and Fortitude, and that putting away Schisms and Division, they they would make Charity the Arbitrator of all things among them. Ver. 13, 14. He makes honourable mention of Stephanas and his Family, as those that re∣ceived the Gospel at the first preaching of it in Achaia, and first gave their Names to Christ, and have since addictd themselves to the ministry of the Saints, being very serviceable and bountiful to them on all occasions. He exhorts them to honour and respectv. 16.  hoc loco est revereri, honorem & obsequia deferre. Ut Eph. 5:21. 1 Pet. 5.5. Grot. such, and all others that join with them in the propaga∣tion of the Gospel and Faith of Christ. Ver. 15, 16. He tells them, he was glad of the coming of Stephanas, Fortunatus, and A∣chaicus unto him, who had acquainted him with the Schisms among them, and all other matters of importance, and so had done that which they themselves ought to have done. He tells them, they had much refreshed his Spirit, by acquainting him, that there were so many yet among them that adhered to the truth; and they had (he supposed) refreshed their Spirits, by sending them word of the conti∣nuance of his great affection towards them. He would have persons of such in∣tegrity as they were, much esteemed among them. Ver. 17, 18. He comes now to the Conclusion of his Epistle, wherein he sends several saluta∣tions unto them from the Churches of Asia; from Aquila and Priscilla, and all the Christians in their Family, who wish'd them all spiritual blessings from Christ. He wills them to salute one another with the kiss of Peace and Charity, with which Believers (according to the custom of those Countries and times) used to salute one another. He adds his own salutation with his own hand, the rest of the Epistle being written by some Scribe, See 2 Thes. 3.17. He adds also one remarkable sentence with his own hand, which he would have them especially to take notice of, and re∣member, (as Augustus used to d when he wrote to the Governours of Provinces) namely this, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, (that is, be a se∣cret or open opposer of him and his Gospel), let him be accursed: Maranatha, the Lord cometh. As if he should have said, Let him be reserved to the last judg∣ment of God, Jude v. 14, 15. Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment, &c. In which sentence he threatens ut∣ter destruction to wilfull opposers of Christ, and hypocrites (except they re∣pent): not out of any evil passion of mind, but out of an holy zeal, and an Apostolical Spirit. He concludes all with his wonted benediction, and the sig∣nification of his love to them. From Ver. 19. to the end.
SECT. VIII. APollos being unwilling for the present (as we have heard, Sect. 7.) to go to Corinth, but chusing rather, as it seems, to go to Crete, (now call'd Candia), Paul thought good by him and Zenas, (a Doctor of the Law) to write an Epistle to Titus, whom he had left in that Island, further to propagate the Gospel, to ordain Elders in every City where the Gospel was propagated, and to finish what was lacking, and conducing to the good of that people, which the Apostle himself had not time to do. And understanding that many in that Island ambiti∣ously aspir'd to the Pastoral charge; and that several false Teachers, erroneous in judgment, and scandalous in life, had already crept in, to the great hurt of the Church; he writes this Epistle to Titus (which is of like argument with the First and Second to Timothy) to direct him how to carry himself in reference to that people, and the work he was to do there. Epistle to Titus.In this Epistle there are three parts, 1. A Preface. 2. The Substance or matter of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface is contained in the four first Verses; wherein we may observe, 1. The Person writing this Epistle, who is described by his office, A Servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, for the propagating the Faithv. 1. ] Missus ad enunciandum eam fidem quam ha∣bent qui electi sunt à Deo. Vatabl. of Gods Elect, (namely, Faith in Christ), and the knowledg of the truth which tends to godliness, and this in hope of eternal life to be attained thereby, which the Righteous God promised long ago, ante tem∣pora secularia, h. e. ante multa se∣cula; jam inde à primis mundi tem∣poribus, in the First Ages of the World, [viz. Gen. 3.15.], but now hath more clearly manifested by the preaching of the Wordante  subaudi , q. d. Manifestavit autem proprio tempore per verbum suum in praedi∣catione quae mihi concredita est., which was committed to him, among others, by the command of God, who gives us Salvation by Jesus Christ, [See 1 Tim. 1.1.]. 2. The Person written to, viz. Titus, descri∣bed by his spiritual relation to Paul, who converted him to the Faith, which is the common means of Salvation, both to Jews and Gentiles. 3. The Salutation it self, wherein are the Blessings prayed for in Titus's behalf; viz. Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God. From Ver. 1. to 5. 2. He comes then to the Body of the Epistle; wherein, 1. He tells Titus, for what end he left him in Crete, namely, to set in order the things that were wanting in those new planted Churches, to ordain Elders in every City, as he had appointed him, v. 5. 2. That he might not err in the choice of fit men, he tells him, how they should be qualified. The Qualifications of an Elder, which he sets down, may be reduced to three Heads:
1. Oeconomical. 1. That he be blameless. 2. The Husband of one Wife, and not guilty of Polygamy. 3. That his Children be brought up in the Faith, and in good order, and obedi∣ence. 4. That he be a Lover of Hospitality, and be ready to receive and entertain Strangers, and the banished Servants of God. ver. 8. 2. Moral, set down 1. Negatively. 1. Not self-will'd. 2. Not soon angry. 3. Not given to Wine. 4. No striker. 5. Not given to filthy lucre, v. 7. 2. Affirmatively. 1. A lover of good men. 2. Sober. 3. Just. 4. Holy. 5. Temperate, v. 8. 3. Ecclesiastical. 1. That nothing be found in him unworthy of the Steward of God, who ought to be so much the more blameless, by how much his office is more holy. 2. That he be studious to know the truth, and tenacious of the truth, when known, and that for a double end: 1. That he may be able to feed the Flock with right knowledg, and vi∣gorously to exhort them to the perfor∣mance of their several duties. 2. To convince gain-sayers, and to stop their mouths. And he shews, that great care should be taken, that Persons so qualified should be chosen, and that both in respect of the false Teachers, that did at that time abound in their Island, as also in respect of the people of Crete themselves. The false Teachers he describes by their evil manners, declaring them to be unruly, vain-talkers, deceivers, especially those of the Circumcision, viz. the Jewish Doctors, who taught things they ought not; and subverted whole houses for fil∣thy lucre's sake. Ver. 10, 11. As for the people of Crete; he shews, that one of their own Poets, viz. Epimenides (held by them for a Prophet) hath set forth the disposition of that Nation, viz. that they are lyars, given to idleness, serving their own in∣temperance; which Character he acknowledges to be too true, (namely, as to the generality of them), and thence inferrs, that the false Teachers that were among them, (and others also who were misled by them) must not be handled too mildly, but reproved, and rebuked sharplyIta tra∣ctandi sunt Cretenses pro∣ut Cretenses tractari par est, adeòque liberè redar∣guendi., that they may submit themselves sound in the Faith, and to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and may not give heed to Jewish Fables, and the Commandments and Traditions of men, which turn many from the truth; of which sort he instances in one, viz. the distinction of meats, as clean and unclean; which he shews is against the liberty which Christ hath purchased, and allows to all that truly believe in him. For, unto
the pure all things are pure; that is, to true Believers, whose hearts are pu∣rified by Faith, all kinds of meats are lawful; but to the impure and unbe∣livers 'tis quite otherwise; nothing can be used purely by them, their minds and consciences being defiled with sin, and not purged from their guilt by Faith in Christ. And he further tells them, that though some of these false Teachers may seem to be religious, and profess to know God, yet in their works they plainly deny him: being abominable hypocrites, rebels against the truth of God, and un∣meet for the performance of any good work which he requires. From Ver. 5. to the end. 3ly. He proceeds to direct Titus, touching the faithful discharge of his Mi∣nisterial office: injoining him, 1. More generally, That he speak the things that become sound Doctrine. 2. More particularly, he directs him how to accommodate himself to several sorts of persons. 1. To teach old men to be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, charita∣ble and patient. 2. To teach ancient women to be in all their behaviour and deportment as be∣cometh persons that profess holiness; not false accusers, not given to drinking or tippling, but teachers of good things, and that they be exemplary to the younger wo∣men, and teach them their duties, viz. to be sober, to love their Husbands, to love their children; and to be discreet, chast, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own Husbands, that the Name of God be not blasphemed, nor the Christi∣an Religion be thought to infuse any thing into them contrary to moral vertue. 3. To teach young men to be sober-minded. And upon occasion of this dire∣ction, he gives Titus himself (who probably was now young as Timothy was) his lessons, exhorting him to be exemplary in his life and conversation, (in all things shewing himself a pattern of good works), and in his publick Doctrine or preaching, to shew incorruptness, gravity, sincerity; and in his private dis∣courses, sound speech, that cannot be condemned; to the shaming and silencing of opposers. Ver. 7, 8. 4. To teach Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, to please them wll in all lawful things, not answering again, nor murmuring or repining at their just commands, reproofs, or corrections; not purloining or stealing, but shewing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Saviour by a consci∣entious discharge of their duties. Ver. 9.10. And he adds a further reason, why all sorts of persons should labour to dis∣charge their respective duties faithfully, because the grace of God manifested in the Gospel, bringing and offering Salvation, hath now appeared to all sorts of persons, (which before was only manifested to the Jews) teaching them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world, expecting eternal Salvation and bliss, (the blessing which all good Christians hope for) and the glorious Coming of Jesus Christ to judgment, (who is here called the great God), who gave himself for us that he might re∣deem us from the guilt of all our iniquities, and so justifie us, and purifie us unto himself, and make us a peculiar people, zealous of good works, and so san∣ctifie us. These things he commands Titus to press with all authority, that none may have any just cause to despise him. From Ver. 11. to the end. 4ly. He directs him to exhort all sorts of Christians to these duties; 1. To be subject to civil Powers and MagistratesSpontè nempe non coactè.. 2. To be ready to every good work. 3. Not to revile any man. 4. To be no Brawlers. 5. To be gentle towards all, even the worst of men; and the reason he gives for it, is this, Be∣cause
Cum dicit Paulus , non tam se intelligit quam eos qui ex Genti∣bus vocati erant, per  satis ipsi familiarem, neque nimium ob∣tortam, cum Christiani omnes uni∣us corporis membra sunt. Grot. we (says he) before our conversion were such as others now are; in which carnal state whilst we lived, we were foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, and would not have thought our selves well dealt with, to have been imperiously and roughly handled: what therefore, we would not that men should have done to us, when we were such; let not us do to others, that now are, as we then were. But when the transcendent mercy and loving-kindness of God towards lost sinners, was effectually manifested to us by the preaching of the Gospel, then there was a blessed change wrought in us. Yet the cause of this change was not any thing in us, or any works of righteousness done by us, but meerly the free grace of God, which mov'd him to rescue us out of that wretched miserable estate, and to work a work of regeneration in us, whereof Baptism is the outward visible sign, and the Holy Ghost the inward invisible worker; whom Christ hath obtained of the Father, that he should be sent down and imparted unto us, and should dwell in us, (not essentially but energetically) abundantly illuminating, guiding, strengthning, and comforting of us. And the end of God herein is, that being justified by his grace, that is, by Faith in his Son, we should be made heirs of eternal life, according to the hope which the Promises of God have given us thereof. From Ver. 1. to 8. 5ly. He directs Titus to inculcate this into his Hearers, with firm and solid reasons, That true Believers ought especially to be careful to employ themselves in good works, and to gov. 8. , i. e. bonorum operum singularem cu∣ram gerere, ut facere tenentur qui negotio alicui praefecti sunt. Metaph. Pisc. before others in the practice of them; because these things are profitable not only to others, but especially to themselves, seeing God of his grace will reward them for them. 2. That they should avoid foolish questions and disputes about genealogies, and contentions about the various interpretations of certain places in the Law; because these things are unprofitable. 3. That they should reject, that is, avoid, shun, and refuse communion with an Heretick, who does pertinaciously persist in great and dangerous errors, and labours to draw Disciples after him, (see Act. 20.30.), after they have once and again admonished him; concluding that such an one is perverted, and sinneth grievouslyAdeò ut culpa non tam in intel∣lectu sita sit quam in vo∣luntate., inflicting that punish∣ment on himself, which the Church is wont to inflict on those that are guilty of great misdemeanours, that is, cutting himself off from the Church, of which he is a Member. Ver. 10, 11. 6ly. In the Conclusion of the Epistle, he speaks of private business; he orders Titus that when he shall send Artemas or Tychicus to supply his absence there, he should make haste to come to him to Nicopolis, where he did intend to winter. That he should bring Znas and Apollos on in their way (who were coming to him), and supply them with moneys and other necessaries for their journey. And he orders, that not only the faithful among the people, but that the Prea∣chersv. 14. Nostri, i. e. Nostri Or∣dinis homines, Ministerio, scil. fun∣gentes, ne sese immunes censento ab Eleemosynarum collatione. Beza. Alii per nostros intelligunt solum fi∣deles in Cretâ. themselves, and those of the Pastoral Order should look to it that their Faith be accompanied with Charity and good works, and that they excell therein upon all necessary occasions. Such (among others) are, friendly to entertain and dismiss strangers, especially those that labour in the Gospel; lest whilst they exhorts others to good works, and to bring forth the fruits of Faith, they themselves should be found un∣fruitful. Lastly, with salutation sent to Titus from the Brethren with him, and desiring him to salute all the Christians in Crete who loved him, and the Brethren with him, for the common Faiths sake, and with such a love as the Christian Faith requires. He concludes all with his Apostolical Benediction. From Ver. 8. to the end.
SECT. IX. THE Apostle by his Epistle had ordered Titus to meet him at Nicopolis, (a City in Thracia, not far from Philippi in Macedonia, where he intended to winter), but afterwards upon some reasons having altered his mind, he now sends for him to come to Ephesus; and from thence not long after sent him to Corinth, that he might by him know the state of the Corinthians, and what effect his first Epistle had had among them. SECT. X. IN the mean time Demetrius a Silversmith (who made silver Shrines for Diana, or little Models of the famous Temple there, with the Image of DianaDiana suit una ex sex Dea∣bus majoribus quas Ethnici colebant. Invocabatur à viatoribus & itineran∣tibus tanquam dux viarum; item à venatoribus tanquam tutrix sylva∣rum, item à praegnantibus & parturi∣entibus tanquam mater viventium & nascentium animalium, unde pinge∣batr  seu multimammia. Huic Dianae in urbe Ephesina ex∣tructum erat Templum tam magnifi∣cum ut ex omnibus partibus orbis ad hoc templum spectandum homines confinerent: & numerabatur inter septem mundi miracula; & bello Per∣sico propter pulchritudinem ejus, Barbari huic pepercerunt, cum om∣nia alia templa comburerent. Tota Asia in aedificando hoc templo suit occupata, idque per annos plus quam ducentos. Longitudo dicitur uisse pe um 425, latitudo 220: Columnas habuit 127 à totidem Regibus aedi∣sicatas, quarum singulae habuerunt al∣titudinem sexaginta pedum. Aedifi∣catum erat in loco palustri; & pro fun∣damento habuit carbones & vellera lanae. In hoc templo erat simulacrum Dianae, quod credebant coelo delap∣sum, & adorabant. Denique de hoc Templo illud memorabile, quod qui∣dam Herostratus illud accendit & com∣bussit, eo solum sine ut aeternum sibi nomen compararet in historiis; quasi inter felicitatem esset numerandum, Per maleficia inclarescere & in histo∣rias insei, sicut Pilatus in symbolum fidei, & Judas in historiam passionis. Succensum est ab Herostrato eodem die quo natus est Alexander Mag∣nus, sed postea restitutum, do∣nec novissimo fato periret ex incen∣dio Gothorum, quod refert Capitoli∣nus in Gallieno. in them, (which strangers which came thither, used to buy, and to imploy to a superstitious use) fearing that if Pauls Doctrine prevailed, he should lose his profit; he called together the workmen of the same craft, (whereof it seems, he had many that wrought under him), and shewing them the danger they were in, lest their trade should come into contempt; he greatly exasperated them against Paul, as one that taught the people, that those were not gods which were made with hands, and one that cried down the worship of Diana, whom all Asia, and other parts of the worldNon inde sequetur cultum Di∣anae esse veram religionem. Non est Catholica religio, quam totus orbis amplectitur. Nam major orbis pars semper adhaesit erroribus; sed est vera religio quam tota vera Ecclesia omnium temporum & locorum am∣plexa est. Hoc de nostra religione asserimus, de Pontificia negamus. Stres. had in so high veneration: A great hubbub was hereupon raised, and the enraged multitude cried down the Doctrine of Paul, and cried up the Goddess of the Ephesians; And in this hubbub they seized upon two of Pauls com∣panions, Gaius and Aristarchus [See Rom. 16.23. Col. 4.10.], and drew them into the Thea∣ter. Paul seeing nothing likely to ensue from this popular tumult, but the present destru∣ction of himself and his fellow Christians (See 2 Cor. 1.8.), if the providence of God did not wonderfully prevent it, thought he must attempt something (though with evident pe∣ril to himself), for the rescue of his Friends out of that danger (see 1 Joh. 3.16.). And therefore he was about to have adventur'd himself into the TheatreTheatrum est locus publicus & amplu, ludis spectandis idoneus, ubi sine dubio etiam curia suit, & ubi pub∣lica civium negotia tractari solebant., there to have made an Apology for himself and the Christian Religion to the people; but the Disciples ear∣nestly disswade him from it. And some of
the Asiarchae] Syr. Primores Asiae; licet aliqui existimant quod sic vocat, non qui Asiae praeerant ut principes▪ sed praecipuos sacerdotes, quorum munus erat, ludos theatrales in Deorum honorem edere. Some hereby understand certain pub∣lick persons, which were sent from the Greek Cities of the lesser Asia, as Pro∣curators in publick businesses to Ephe∣sus, which was the chief of them. sent to him, and gave him the same advice, who it seems privately fa∣voured his Doctrine, and were secretly his friends. The hubbub therefore continuing and the rude people being enraged (as it seems) against the Jews (as enemies to their heathenish worship), as well as against the Christians, the Jews caused one Alexander a Jew to come forth, and to speak to the peo∣ple in justification of their Nation and Religi∣on, and as 'tis probable, to cast the occasion of all this discontent on the Christians. But when the people understood he was a Jew, they would not hear him, but with a wild confused noise cried up their goddess Diana for two hours together. At length the Town-Clerk coming forth to the people, by his wisdom appeased the tumult, representing to them, that their Religion and the worship of Diana was so publickly known, and so generally approv'd in the world, that there needed no tumult or uproar to vindicate the same, as Demetrius suggested. And as for these men they were now so enraged against, he tells them, they had offered no violence to the Temple to demolish it, nor had defaced any of the Images in itSciebant Apostoli, hoc non suum sed magistratûs esse officium: Concionando ejiciebant imagines ex cordibus hominum, sed non per vio. lentiam ex templis., nor had spoken evil of the Goddess Diana, that he knew of. How∣ever, if Demetrius and the Artificers that de∣pend on him have any matter of accusation against any of them, he tells them, the Court-days are come, and the Proconsuls Officers or Deputies are ready to assemble, from whom they may seek for justice. And therefore they had best be quiet, and do nothing rashly; for they were in danger already to be call'd in question and fined by the Romans, for that days riot. And having thus appeased them, he perswaded them peaceably to return to their own homes. Act. 19. v. 23. And the same time there arose no small stir about that way. v. 24. For a certain man, named Demetrius, a Silver-smith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen: v. 25. Whom he called together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. v. 26. Moreover, ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost thorowout all Asia, this Paul hath perswaded and turned away much people, saying, That they be no gods which are made with hands. v. 27. So that not only our craft is in danger to be set at nought: but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth. v. 28. And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. v. 29. And the whole city was filled with confusion, and having caught
Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Pauls companions in travel, they rushed with one accord into the theatre. v. 30. And when Paul would have entred in unto the people, the disci∣ples suffered him not. v. 31. And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent un∣to him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the theater. v. 32. Some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was confused, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. v. 33. And they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander beckned with the hand, and would have made his defence unto the people. v. 34. But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the space of two hours, cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. v. 35. And when the town-clerk had appeased the people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of Ephesus is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image that fell down from Jupiter? v. 36. Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly. v. 37. For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of Churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess. v. 38. Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies; let them implead one another. v. 39. But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly. v. 40. For we are in danger to be called in question for this days uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this con∣course. v. 41. And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the Assembly. v. 22.  pro  quae mutatio frequens Hellenistis. v. 24. ] Exiguas aediculas argenteas & in iis simulacrum Dianae ad essigiem veri templi & simulacri, quae vulgo ab iis emebantur qui Dianam Ephesiam visebant. Tales aediculas Veneris Cnidiae meminit Plinius, 36.5. v. 27. , Illud quod nobis est peculiare. Beza. Id quod nos tan∣git (i. e. ars nostra). Grot. Euturumque ut etiam destruatur majestas Dianae] q. d. Parum est de nostro quaestu: tota Religio hic perielitatur: sub obtentu Dianae numinis velificasur lucro. uam orbis terrarum colit] Apuleius lib. 2. de eadem. Cujus numen unicum multiformi specie, ritu vario, nomine multijugo, totus veneratur orbis. v. 30. Non siverunt eum] i. e. precibus eum dimovebant. v. 33. Alexandrum] Aliqui Judaeorum (ut videtur) promoverunt eum extra turbam in eum locum unde ab omnibus exaudiri posset, & eum proponebant tanquam idoneum Pauli accusatorem, ut qui ipsius dogmata nosset omnia, & ab iis descivisset. Videtur enim hic esse Alexander faber aerarius de quo queritur, 1 Tim. 1.26. 2 Tim 4.14. Hoc autem modo Judaei volebant odium omne hoc à se amovere, cum scirent se quoque invisos esse tanquam inimicos Deorum. Grot. v. 35. ] Nempe . Erat id ex vite factum ut Muciano au∣ctore tradidit Plinius. Sed quia fabricatio ejus omnem memoriam excedebat, ideo facile facerdotes plebi persuasêre, esse de coelo delapsum, ut Suidas notat in voce . The like fictions had the Heathens concerning the Palladium of Troy, and the Ancile of Rome. v. 37. , &c.] Quia ne intraverant quidem templum, nec Dianam Ephesiam speciatim nominaverant. v. 38. ] Recte notat Suidas  dici diem, quo lites discep∣tantur. Ita omnino scribendum in Actis,  & subaudiendum  dies quibus lege agitur, quos fastos Romani vocant. vid. Causab. in Theophrasti Charact. v. 39. ] Legitimus coetus est qui à Magistratu civitatis convoca∣tur & regitur.
SECT. XI. PAul having thus by the wonderful providence of God es∣caped this danger (at which he seems to point, 2 Cor. 8, 9, 10.), not long after, calling the Brethren together, he took his leave, and departed from Ephesus, to go into Macedo∣nia, leaving Timothy there, (who was come again unto him from Macedonia), to carry on the work of the Gospel in that place. Act. 20. v. 1. And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the disciples, and imbraced them, and departed for to go into Mace∣donia, 1 Tim. 1. v. 3. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other doctrine; v. 4. Neither give heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which is in faith: so do. SECT. XII. ABout this time (as 'tis conceived) Aquila and Priscilla leave Ephesus, and return to Rome, having ventured their lives here to save Paul, as he himself gratefully acknowledges Rom. 16.3, 4. Many other Jews also from other quarters re∣turned to Rome, as is intimated Act. 28.21. the Edict of Clau∣dius the Emperor for their expulsion thence, now after his death wearing out of date. SECT. XIII. FRom Macedonia Paul first goes to Troas, where though there was a door opened to him of the Lord to preach the Gos∣pel, yet being troubled because he found not Titus there, (whom he had sent to the Corinthians, with another Brother, greatly desiring to know their state), he staid not long in that place; but because he neither heard from Titus, nor any other, how his first Epistle had took with the Corinthians, he thought it best to go directly into Macedonia (2 Cor. 2.12, 13.); which he tra∣velled over, from place to place, exhorting the Brethren with much exhortation, Act. 20.2. And when his afflictions there were nothing abated, but without were fightings and contentions from false Brethren, or open Enemies; within were fears, lest all did not go well at Corinth; at last the coming of Titus, and the joyful message he brought concerning the Liberality and Charity of the Corinthians did much comfort and revive him, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6. by whose example he provokes and stirs up the Macedonians to provide Collections to be sent to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 9.2. And the Macedonians being moved
by this example, though labouring under many pressures and afflictions, beyond their power shewed themselves liberal. 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4. SECT. XIV. Anno Christi Neronis 58 2. THE Apostle having understood from Titus the present state and condition of the Corinthians, sends him to them again; and with him, the Brother whose praise is in the Gospel thorowout all the Churches, 2 Cor. 8.18. (supposed to be Luke), and ano∣ther whom he commends for his great diligence, 2 Cor. 8.22. And by them he sends his second Epistle to them. For though his first failed not of a good effect among many of them, yet some vain-glorious Teachers persisted in their contumacy, and not only vilified the Apostles authority, but presumed to com∣pare themselves with him, yea, to prefer themselves before him, to the no small detriment and prejudice of the Gospel. And out of their ill will towards him, they interpreted all his sayings and doings to the worst sense. He had promised in the latter end of his former Epistle to come to them shortly. But for certain reasons he did yet forbear to come. This they in∣terpreted as an argument of levity in him. He had in his fifth Chapter commanded the incestuous person to be delivered over to Satan. This they interpreted as an argument of his over-great rigorousness and severity; and other things they ill interpreted, as particularly, that he carried himself towards them, as if he affected domination over them: That he overthew the Law, and made men carnal and dissolute; that he was imperious in writing, though his person was abject and contemptible. These and such like Calumnies of theirs, the Apostle sets himself to refute in this Epistle: yet notwithstanding all this, he professes his sincere love to them; but being forced to it by his Adversaries, he resolves to vindicate himself and his Apostolick authority from their contempt.
In which Epistle we may observe these three parts.The Second Epi to the Corinthia 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. THE Preface contains the Direction of the Epistle to the Church at Corinth, and to all the Saints, and Churches in Achaia, and his Apostolical saluta∣tion and benediction. Ver. 1, 2. The Body of the Epistle consists of three parts. In the 1st. He apologizes for himself in the five first Chapters. In the 2d. He exhorts the Corinthians to sundry duties. Chap. 6, 7, 8, 9. In the 3d, He vindicates his own Authority and Doctrine. Chap. 10, 11, 12, and to the 11th. ver. of Chap. 13. In the first part, we may observe these particulars. 1st. Lest any of them should be offended at his many afflictions and troubles,The first part of the Epistle. and be tempted to think (as worldlings use to be), that if he were a faithful Servant of God, he would not suffer him to be so extremely afflicted. He there∣upon begins his Epistle with solemn thanksgiving to God, for the comforts he afford∣ed him in those his trials, that so he might by his own experience be able to com∣fort others that were in the like condition. For though his sufferings for Christ were many, yet his consolations from Christ were many also. And he tells them, that whe∣ther he was afflictd, it tended to their consolation and salvation, which is to be wrought out by a patient and christian enduring such kind of afflictions as he endured, when they are called to it: or whether he was comforted, it tended also to their consolation and salvation; who by his example, might learn willingly to undergo afflicti∣ons for Christ, that they might also partake of his consolations. And he had a stedfast and firm hope concerning several of them, that they did sympathize with him in his suf∣ferings, and accordingly should partake with him in his comforts. From Ver. 1. to 8. 2. He clears himself of some aspersions cast on him by false Teachers. As first of levity in not coming to them according to his promise made, 1 Cor. 4.19. & 1 Cor. 16. from 2. to 8. And secondly of too much rigor towards the ince∣stuous person. To the first, he answers, that he was hindred by that affliction he met with in Asia, viz. at Ephesus, that was so great, that he even despaired of life. The history of which, (as sme conceive), we have Act. 19.Videntur indicari illa pericula de quibus Act. 20.19. Grot. Cajeta∣nus putat hujus tribulationis nusquam alibi in Scripturâ fieri mentionem., where 'tis intimated in what extreme danger his life was, so that he had no humane means to escape it. Yet out of this danger God (who can deliver from imminent death those, that are ready to dye, and can, and will raise up those that are dead at the last day) delivered him, and he trusts will still deliver him out of all such dangers; they affording him the help of their prayers (which he earnestly desires) that so the mercy of such deliverances being bestowed through the prayers and intercessions of many, God may be glorified and praised by many for them. From Ver. 8. to 12. 2ly. He shews that the fairness and uprightness of his conversation, and espe∣cially among the Corinthians (among whom he had conversed a year and half, Act. 18.11.) might testifie for him, that he was not acted by fleshly wisdom or
dissimulation, but by the grace of God. Neither did he writev. 13. Veram lectionem esse arbitror quam secutus est Syrus, . Non alia vobis scribimu, (quam quae vera sunt scilicet) sed quae hic legi∣tis, ea sic gesta agnoscitis. Grot. in loc. And I write no other things to you concerning my uprightness and sin∣cerity than what ye read of me in the Epistles I have sent to you and other Churches, and which ye know of me, and I hope shall acknowledg the same unto the end. any thing to them that was disagreeable to his professed sincerity, but those things they here read, they cannot but acknowledg to be really so, and he hopes to the end they shall always acknowledg him to be the same. And as it was matter of rejoicing to them, that they were converted by him; so it was to him that he had gained them to Christ, and so he hoped to glory in them at the last day. And with this affection to them, and perswasion of their kindness to him, he designd to come unto them, that they might have a second benefit by him; and be con∣firmed at his second coming, as they were converted at his first, and that he might receive offices of kindness and friendship from them. And therefore he did not make promiss lightly and rshly after the manner of car∣nal men, (promising wht they intend not t perform), so that there should beEtiam justorum, est Etiam, & eorum Non, est Non. yea and nay with him, that is, saying and not do∣ing concerning the same things. For Christ Jesus whom he had preached among them, and whom he and they ought to imitate, was not inconstant and changeable in his Promiss; but whatsoever is promised by him or of him, is certain and inva∣riable. For all the Promises of God, made in the Covenant of Grace, have their foundation, firm establishment, and unalterable ratification in the death of Jesus Christ, the Mediator and Surety thereof [Gal. 3.17. Heb. 9.15, 16, 17. & Chap. 7.22.], and in and through him, are firm and stedfast, sure and certain; and he, and the other Apostles ought to declare the same in their ministry, to the glory of God. And he shews, that he that establishes and confirms both him and them in their Faith in Christ, is God alone, who hath anoint∣ed and consecrated them his Apostles to this high office of the Apostleship, by plentifully pouring forth upon them the gifts and graces of his Spirit, and there∣by fitting them for it; and by the Miracles he hath enabled them to work, hath set his Seal to their Doctrine; and by the inffable, and glorious joys of his Spi∣rit, wrought in their hearts, hath given them, as it were, an earnest and taste of their future happiness: And therefore surely such persons as they, are not to be accused of leightness and vanity. From Ver. 12. to 23. Further he solemnly professes, that his end in delaying to come to them, was to give some among them time to repent and reform, and that the disorders in their Church might be rectified by themselves, lest when he came, he should be compell'd to use more severity among them, than they could well bear. And this he spake, not as one that arrogated to himself a dominion over their Faith, (and designed to impose upon them in the matters that concern'd their souls, what he pleased), but as a minister and co-worker with Christ, to bring them to a right and due sense of their faults, and consequently to that true joy and comfort which follows upon true repentance and amendment; and so he should be a means to strengthen their Faith in Christ, by which alone they stand in the favour of God, and obtain a right and title to the Kingdom of Heaven. From Ver. 23, to the end. He comes now in the second place, to vindicate himself from the aspersions of  too much rigor towards the incestuous person. In order to which, he tells them, that he had no mind to come to them in such a manner, that his coming should bring sadness, and heaviness to them, by reason of the severity he should be neces∣sitated to use towards the reforming of the evil manners among them. For if he was forc'd upon such an occasion to grieve them, nothing could comfort him so much, as the amendment of the person against whom he was forc'd to use severity. And concerning this thing, viz. the amending of the faults among them, he had written to them in his former Epistle [chap. 5.], lest if he should
come to them, and find any scandalous unreform'd persons among them, besides his sorrow for their sin, he should be forced to a new sorrow, which necessary severity would create both to them and himself: And he was confide that they rather desired he should find matter of joy among them, by the removal of such offences, than matter of sorrow, by continuing of them. He professes, that what he wrote in his former Epistle concerning the incestuous person, was not written with any inten∣tion to grieve them, but out of his great and abundant love to them, which could not endure that they should make themselves guilty of such faults. He tells them, that the incestuous person's sin, had not so wholly grieved him, as if they were all offenders with him; for since he had proof of their obedience in their excommuni∣cating of him, he did sorrow but in part, only for his sake who was guilty, not for them all, they having cleared themselves, that they were no upholders or main∣tainers of him in his sin. And that it might appear that his former severity pro∣ceded not from any other principle then love, and a desire of good to the Church of Corinth, he declares, that the censure and chastizement inflicted on this in∣cestuous person by the authority of many (that is, the Governours of the Church, the Church it self consenting) seeing he had manifested his repentance, was sufficient. And sherefore he adviseth, that he be received into favour again, be∣cause they were bound to frgive and comfort him now, as well as they were bound to excommunicate him before; and this they ought the rather to do, lest if they should not, he shuld be swallowed up of over-much sorrow. Where∣fore he exhorts them, to confirm their love towards him, by shewing, that by excommunicating him they did not intend to destroy him, but to save him, by bringing him to repentance. And for this end he had now written to them, to see whether they would be as obedient to his directions and appointments, in ab∣solving of penitents, as in afflicting Church-censures on offendors. He tells them, that whom they were willing to forgive and restore from excommunication (being satisfied of their repentance), he was willing also to forgive, as one present in spirit with them, see 1 Cor. 5. And if in the beginning of the Church, before the orderly go∣vernment of it was setled, he alone had received some repenting sinners to mercy; he d d it, not out f ambition, but with regard to them, to give them an exam∣ple of shewing lenity as well as severity; and with respect to the person of Christ, that he might keep people stedfast in the Faith of Christ; and that Stan might not get an advantage against any of them; who sometimes by too great slackness of Ecclesiastical discipline seks to lull sinners asleep, and sometimes by too great seve∣rity endeavours to drive them to despair. From Ver. 1. to 12. 3dly. He shews, he was so far from wanting any true affection to them, that when he came to TroasSee Act. 20.6. 1 Tim. 4.13., though a doorSee 1 Cor. 16.9. was opened to him by the Lord for the preaching of the Gospel in that place, yet he had no rest in his spirit because he found not Titus there, to inform him of their state; and in pursuit of him he left that City, and went into Macedonia, in hope that he might find him there, and having met with him he understood by him the happy success of his former Epistle, and that caused him to bless God exceedingly, who had hitherto so graciously prospered him in his ministry, and had given him and his fellow-Apo∣stles such a victory and conquest in every place, (where they came to preach the word) by the conversion of so many, and had spread the sweet odour or savour of the Gospel by their preaching up and down in the world. And (says he) we spread this sweet savour of Christ, (to the honour and glory of God), both among such as are thereby brought to repent and believe, and among such as re∣main impenitent and unbelievers. To the one, the Gospel is the most comfortable vital savour that ever came to them, and a ministry of lifeSee 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8., and the power of God unto their Salvation; but to the other, by accident, 'tis a savour of deathOdor mortis in mortem, i. e. odor mortifer, mortem afferens: O∣dor vitae in vitam, i. e. Odor vitalis, vitam afferens. and aggravates their condemnation. And the preaching of this glorious Gospel, he shews, is a weighty imployment, and no man is sufficient of himself for it. Lastly, he declares, that he was no corrupter of the Word, as many false Teachers were, who mixed their own
passins of pride or covetousness with the true Doctrine they preached; but he preach∣ed it out of uprightness and sincerity, as one taught of God, and who eyed God in what he did, and was acted by the power, and guided by the Spirit of Christ. From Ver. 12. to the end. 4ly. He shews it was not requisite he should go about to commend the fidelity of his ministry, especially to them, considering they had been converted by it; and therefore he needed not Letters commendatory to them (or from them to others) such as the false Teachers possibly strove to commend themselves by; for they themselves were hisEgo Evangelium vestris in∣scripsi animis. Grot. Epistle of commendation, given as it were by God to him, affording him a clear Testimony of the soundness of his Doctrine, and the efficaciousness of his Ministry, by their conversion; which Testimony being written in their heartsLegendum puto  cordibus vestris, collatione versiculi tertii & ex re ipsâ. Pisc., and openly appearing in their Christian conversation, was legible to other Churches, and accordingly acknowledged by them: yet he would not say, they were so much his Epistle, as the Epistle of Christ, Christ himself having writ∣ten his Will and Law on their hearts, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, after a more excellent manner than any thing was wont to be written with Ink upon Paper; and he and Timothy were only the Pen or Instruments of the Spirit in this writingTheir Faith was the work of the Spirit, though, wrought by his Ministry.. And they had still a great confidence of being further instrumental in this way, and of the acceptance of their endeavours with God, through Christ enabling of them. Not that they were able by any natural wisdom of their own, to think or contrive any thing that was fit to convert the hearts of men; but their sufficiency was Gods assistance, who had made them fit or meet to be Ministers of the New Testament, which is ac∣companied with the efficacious operation of the Spirit, and not of the Old Testa∣ment which literally declared what was to be done, but gave no spiritual ability for the doing and performing of it. For the Old Testament, or old dispensa∣tion of the Covenant of Grace (call'd here the Letter), though it shaddow'd out the way to life, yet conferred not on faln man any power to perform what is required thereunto, but convinced him of sin, and consequently that he was wor∣thy of deathv. 6. Litera occîdit, i. e. convincit hominem quod sit aeter∣nae morti obnoxius. Rom. 7.10., which is threatned to transgressors. But the New Testament, or Gspel, doth not only clearly shew the way to life and salvation by Faith in Christ Je∣sus, but is also accompanied with the power of the Holy Ghost, whereby that Faith is wrought, and whereby the Soul is raised up, and quickened from the death of sin. Now if the Old Testament which was a ministration of death, and was written in Letters, and engraven in Stones, (as to some part of it, to wit, the Ten Commandments), was so glo∣rious, as was signified by the splendor of Moses's face, which the Children of Israel could not stedfastly behold when he came down from the MountSee Exod. 34:40.; which Ministration was yet to be done away, (as far forth as it was opposite to the Gospel-dispensationAbolitionem legis, cujus hic fit mentio, interpretor de toto Veteri Testamento, quatenus Evangelio op∣ponitur. Calv.): How much more glorious is the Ministration of the New Testament, which is accompanied with the quickning Spirit of God? If the Ministration of Condemnation were glorious, how much shall the Ministra∣tion of Righteousness and Justification excell in glory? So that the former, though in it self glorious, yet when compared with the latter, hath, as it were, no glory; it is so far out-shin'd by it: and if that Admini∣stration which was to be abolished was glorious, surely that which is to continue is much more glorious. From hence he infers, that seeing himself and the other Apostles had such hope that their Ministry should be accepted and owned by God, they used the greater boldness in publishing the Gospel; and did not imitate Mo∣ses, who veiled his face, which was a sign of the obscurity of the Legal Admi∣nistration, and of the blindness of the Jews, who could not see the end and
scope of that which was to be abolished, but generally rested in the outward letterVolunt vitam aeternam per legem, quae nullibi in lege promissa est. Gro., and apprehended not the mysteries hid under those shaddows, and to this day, the veil remained upon their hearts untaken away, in the reading of the Old Testament. But in the New Testament, by the clear Doctrine of Christ, this covring or vil is done away. Nevertheless, when their hearts shall be turned to the Lord, and shall own Christ, then the veil shall be done away as to them also, and they shall clearly see and understand what is now hid from them. For Christ is that quickning Spirit who takes away the veil and pow∣erfully changes the heart; and where his Spirit powerfully works, there is liberty and freedom from the yoke of the legal Administration, and from slavery to sin. And as Moses when he went to appear before the Lord put away the covering from his face, and by his converse with God his face became more and more shining and glorious, so (says he) all we who have received the Spirit of the Lord, do with open face, without any veil or covering, clearly behold the glorious Attributes of God, and the glorious manifestations of his grace, mercy, and wisdom shining in the face of Jesus Christ, (as in a mirror or glass), and thereby are trans∣formed into his Image, and are made like to him in the glory of holiness and grace, growing from one glorious measure and degree of it to another, through the operation of his Holy Spirit. From Ver. 1. to the end. 5ly. He professes diligence and faithfulness in preaching this glorious Gospel,  (which was a ministry not of the letter and of death, but of the spirit and life); and that, notwithstanding all his troubles, he fainted not, nor was dis∣couraged. He declares that he had renounced ambition and covetousness (which some secretly allowed themselves in), and that he did not was walk craftily, nor handle the word of GodDolo tractant verbum Dei qui hominibus placent, aut partem veri tacent, aut falsa admiscent. Grot. deceitfully, so as to accommodate it to the corrupt humors and dispositions of men; but he preached the truth sincerely, and endeavour'd to approve himself to the Consciences of all those, who would judg understandingly and uprightly. He tells them, If the Gospel so clearly preached, be not understood by many worldly wise men, that is no argument of the obscurity of it; but of the incredulity of the hearers, who are blinded by the Devil, whom the world generally serves, and who (by the just judgment of God) hath got such a dominion over multitudes, that they serve him as their GodSic vocatus tum à suberbiâ quae sibi arrogat honorem Dei, & vult a∣dorari ut Deus; tum à potentiâ quia haec obtinet in reprobis, qui sunt ma∣jor pars seculi, Zanch. Vide Joh. 12.31. Eph. 2.2. & 6.12.; and by him it is that they are so blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ cannot shine into their hearts, wherein is manifested the Majesty of Christs person, and the soveraign Excellency of his benefits, and that he is the Image of God, the Eter∣nal Word and Wisdom of the Father, by whom the Glory, Wisdom, Righteousness, Grace, and Power of the Father is revealed to us, and presented before us. He further manifests his fidelity, by shewing them, he sought to advance the glory of Christ in his preach∣ing, and not himself, acknowledging himself a servant to Christ, and to his people for the promoting of Christs interest in them. For he humbly acknowledges, that God, who at first by his omnipotent word produced light out of darkness, by no less efficacy and power brought him (a lost sinner) out of the darkness of Pha∣risaism and sin, and shined into his heart with his glorious light, to the intent that he should communicate and impart this divine light of the knowledg of God, which shineth in the face or person of Jesus Christ, unto others. 'Tis true, the glory of God shon once in the face of Moses, but that was covered and veiled: But it shines much more gloriously now in the face of Christ, and is not covered to us. As a man sees the Fathers countenance in the face of his Son; so God represents himself most lively, sweetly, and savingly in Jesus Christ, But he tells them, that himself and his fellow-Apostles, (who were intrusted with this rich treasure of the Gospel) were but earthen Vessels, frail and contemptible, and exposed to
many sufferings, that the success of the Gospel preached by them, might be impu∣ted to Christ alone, and not to them. From Ver. 1. to 8. 6ly. He shews, they had no reason to be offended at his sufferings, nor to object, that if he had preachd the Gospel sincerely, God would not have permitted him to be so persecuted and afflicted. He tells them, all his afflictions were so moderated, and himself so upheld by God, that he sunk not under the burden of them. We are trou∣bled (says he) on every side, but are not brought into such streights as to be overwhelmed; perplexedHaesitamus, sed non prorsus haeremus. Beza. sometimes, and doubtful what to do in great dangers, but not brought so low as utterly to despair of help; persecuted by men, but not forsaken of God; cast down indeed, but not utterly de∣stroyed; so that in our sufferings we represent the death and passion of Christ Jesus; and are in continual danger of death for Christs sake, that it may appear we are supported by the quickning power of the Spirit f Christ under all these afflictions; so that death is wrought hîc sumitur pas∣sivè. Grot. in us, that is, the preaching of the Gospel exposeth us to the dangers of death, and yet our ministry bringeth eternal life to you: we dye, that is, are exposd to death, that you may live eternally in happiness. And we having the same spirit of Faith which was in holy David when he wrote the 116 Psalm, where at v. 10, he saith, Because I believed therefore I spake, I was sore afflicted, &c. As he (I say) be∣ing in many troubles believed, and testified his confidence in God for deliverance, so likewise do we, being assured that heDeo Patri tribuitur excitatio Christi è mortuis, Act. 3.15. that raised Christ from the dead, will raise us up also by Christ, and will present us glorious together with you, if ye believe. All these things, says he, viz. the dangers we have been in, and the deliverances God hath afforded to us, they all tend to your advantage, and to the confirming of your Faith, and the encreasing of your thankfulness, that so the benefit having abounded, and the mercy of God having extended it self to ma∣ny persons, by the thanksgiving of many for it, more glory may redund to God. And for this cause (says the Apostle) we faint not, nor are slack and sluggish in our work. For though these Bodies of ours be attenuated and weak∣ned by so many afflictions, yet our inward man, our minds and Souls grow more strong and vigorous. For our transitory light afflictions (to speak of them com∣paratively), are so accepted by God, that they workOperari dicuntur nobis glo∣riam, non meriti modo Rom. 8.18. sed ratione misericordiae promittentis Dei. Slat. for us, (not for any merit in them, but through Gods free grace and mercy, and Christs merits), a most excellent eternal weight of glory, we having our minds intent by Faith, not on things visible and temporal, but on things invisible and eternal. From Ver. 8. to the end. 7ly. Having mentioned this eternal glory, he proceeds to describe it, testifying his assurance that after this mortal body of his, which is but an earthly taber∣nacle shall be broken down, his Soul shall] Praesens pro futuro. Grot. have a build∣ing made by God, that is, an immortal glorious body (see 1 Cor. 15.44, 46.) divinely made and fitted for Hea∣ven, and the fruitions and employments of that glorious place. He shews, that while he is in this mortal body he groans by reason of his daily troubles, desiring earnestly to be clothed with that glorious BodyApostolus duas hic metapho∣ras conjungit; una petitur à Domo, secunda à Veste. Solent enim He∣braei,  quos hic imitatur), multas metaphoras simul implicare, & con∣volvere. Id videre est, tum in Pro∣phetis, tum in Psalmis, tum in Pa∣rabolis Christi. Nolumus exspoliari], scil. corpore, ut anima nuda, solaque beatur; sed supervestiti gloriâ coe∣lesti.. This he speaks upon suppositionSi non dies iste deprehendat cum corpore, non exutos corpore; si erimus inter mutandos, non inter mortuos. Grot. Si tamen , i. e, Si vestiti carne & corpore, non ea nudati per mortem inveniamur. Apostolus enim ita loqui solet de resurrectione, & die judicii, quasi ea instet, & quasi eam ipse cum aliis tunc viventibus sit visurus. Vide 1 Thes. 4. ult. that he be found cloathed with his mortal body, that is, alive at Christs Second Coming, and not naked, that is, unclothed of it by death. For he tells them, that himself and many other Saints, being burdened with sin and many other evils in this life, desire (if it so pleased God) that they might put on this blessed immortality
without a dissolutionDomum] i. e. Corpus glori∣osum. Optaremus superindui gloriâ, non spoliari vitâ. Paulus, & mori desi∣derat, & tamen carne exspoliari for∣midat., as it will happen to the Chil∣dren of God that are found alive at Christs Second Coming, that so this mortal life may be exchanged, yea swallowed up by that which is life indeed. And that he might give them further assurance of this future happinss, he tells them, Gd had prepared them to be capable of this hea∣venly glory in their Souls, and of this blissful immorta∣lity in their Bodies, by working a work of grace in their hearts, and by giving them his Holy SpiritEt, Quia hanc gloriam, & vitam aeternam quasi haereditatem spera∣mus, ejusque pignus Spiritum San∣ctum accepimus; ideo audemus quae∣vis ardua, & agere, & pati. as an earnest and pledg to assure them thereof. Therefore they bre up with courage under all afflictions, and could look death it self cheerfully in the face, as knwing that that will bring them home to God, from whom thse earthly Bodies keep them as strangers at a distanceDum sumus in hoc corpore, peregrinamur à Domino] i. e. absen∣tes sumus à Domino (de quo v. 9.) festinamus ergò, & peroptamus Illi praesentes esse.. For here (says he) we live by Faith only, and cannot attain to sight and fruition till we come to Heaven. And hence it is, that we bear up with so much courage against the fear of death, being willing rather to go out of this Bo∣dy, and dye, that by this means we may come to our home, to enjoy the blissfull presence of God in Heaven, than to continue in the Body and be deprived of that happiness. So that all our ambition and design is this, that whether we continue in this mortal Body, or go out of it; whether we live or dye, we may be accepted of God, and may come at last to enjoy his blessed presence in Heaven. For we with full assurance expect a day of Judgment, at which all must appear, and at which every one shall receive according to their works] ea quae corpori ipsius, i. e. ipsi, debentur. Grot.. And knowing the terribleness of that judgment, we do the more earnestly perswade men to come in to Christ, and to live as those that must be thus judged. But whether they would be perswaded or no, he tells them, the sincerity of his intention was manifested to God, and he hoped to their Consciences also. He shews, he speaks not these things to commend himself to them, but to furnish them how to answer the Ca∣lumnies that false Teachers brought against him, who gloried much outwardly, ut knew in their hearts and Consciences they had little reason so to do. And if I seem mad, says he, in thus commnding my ministry and sincerity unto you, I aim at Gds glory therein, (that the Gospel may not be undervalued), and not to arrogate to my self any thing. And on the other side, if I write and speak only that which you must needs account sober, it is for your good and edification. For the love of Christ constrains me to be faithful to him, and to refer all to his honour and praise, seeing he so loved us, as to lay down his life for us, when we were all dead in respect of the desert of our sins, and the claim of divine justice: And he hath done it, that all that are deliver'd from deserved perdition; through faith in his blood, should not live to themselves, but to the honour and praise of their Redeemer. And for his own part, he professes, he was so highly affected with this great redemption wrought by Christ, that he could not value any man, or esteem him happy, meerly for the outward advantages of this world, viz. for his wisdom, riches, learning, &c. except he had a share in this Redemption. And if he himself formerly hath had carnal and earthly thoughts and hopes of Christ (as mny of the other Jews had) expecting that he should begin an earthly temporal Kingdom among them, wherein they should enjoy all outward prosperity, yet now he should know him so no more, but put off all such carnal imaginations of his Kingdom. For his Kingdom (he tells them) was of another nature, and whosoever is in him, (not externally only, by outward profes∣sion, but is really inserted and implanted into him by Faith, and made a member of that mystical body whereof he is the head), is renewed by his Spirit, and receives life, influence, and direction from him, and is thereby effectually chang'd, and made
a new creature, as to his principles, affections, and practises. And he shews, that all these things that concern the new creature, or the renovation of man, depend on G d as the Author of them, who of his free grace reconciles sinners to himself, by the death of his Son, and hath committed to them, his Apostles, the ministry of reconciliation, giving them commission to declare, that God was in and through the merits and intercession of his Son, ready to be reconciled to all those, both among Jews and Gentiles, that truly believe in him; and upon their Faith in him, he did actually pardon them, not imputing their trespasses to them. And he had intrusted them, his Apostles, to publish the same in his name. And ac∣cordingly, as Ambassadors for Christ, and as sent from God on this great Message, they most affectionately besought sinners to accept of the reconciliation offered by God in and through Christ Jesus; who being an innocent, pure, and sinless person, God sent into the world to offer up himself a Sacrifice for our sins [Lev. 7.2.], that we by Faith resting on him, might be made fully righteous, with such a righteousness as God approves, and accepts, and for which he is pleased to justifie us. From Ver. 1. to the end. The Second part of the Epistle.Having dispatched the Apologetical, or Excusatory part of his Epistle, he comes now to the Hortatory part of it; wherein we may take notice of these particulars. 1. He exhorts the Corinthians, not to receive in vain the Doctrine of Grace and Reconciliation, which was offered to them by him, as an Ambassador of Christ, and a co-worker with him, this being the very season and time wherein God did open the treasures of his mercy and bounty to poor sinners. So that he might ac∣commodate that which was promised to the Prophet Isaiah, ch. 49. v. 8. to this present time, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of sal∣vation have I helped thee,Propheticè ponitur praeteritum pro futuro. Exaudivi, i. e. Exaudiam.: Which words, though in the first sense they were a Promise to Isaiah, that God would bless his ministry to that people, (which he had prayed for); yet in a more sublime sense, they may intimate, that in the times of the Gspel, God would, upon the intercession of his Son, work effectually upon the hearts of sinners by the preaching of his word. And that this exhortation may be the more effectual, he shews, how he and his fellow-Apostles had laboured to avoid all occasions of giving any just offence, approving themselves faithful Ministers of Christ (so that their ministry could not justly be blamed), by a patient suffering of several sorts of evils, by the exercise of purity, and the studyAnselmus per scientiam intel∣ligit cognitionem sacrae Scripturae. of the holy Scriptures, by long∣suffering, and kindness, and love unfeigned, by the exer∣cise of the gifts of the Spirit, and clearly preaching the truth of God, being accompanied therein with the power of God enabling them to work miracles, and to convince the obstinate, and having on the armour of Righteousness for the rightA dextris & sinistris] Quasi di∣cat, Undique armati adversus omnia. Armis justitiae dextris & sinistris] i. e. offensivis & defensivis. Capellus. hand, and for the left; that is, being furnished with weapons offensive, and defensive, against all assaults and temp∣tations, either of a prosprous or adverse condition. And this, whether they were honour'd or despised, well report∣ed of or reproached, though counted deceivers when they were most faithful, and while by some doubted of, whether they were the sincere Servants of Christ, or no, though by others owned and acknowledged; while by reason of the greatness and multitude of their afflictions they seem daily dying, yet by the special favour and protection of God are still preserved. They seemed sad indeed sometimes under the evils that oppressed them, but yet rejoiced in spirit, and had the inward testimony of their Conscience, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost to support them: They were poor in respect of worldly things, yet enriched many with spiritual riches. They had in a manner nothing, yet were so well provided for by the special pro∣vidence
of God, that they wanted nothing needful or necessary for them, and were as well contented as if they were Masters of all things. From Ver. 1. to 11. 2. He declares his great love towards them, and exhorts them, to shew the like again towards him. He tells them, he used freedom and largeness in speak∣ing to them, his mouth was opened, and his heart enlarged towards them, and they had a large place in his affections; but he doubted whether he had so large a place in theirs: he feared they were straitned in love and affection towards him: and yet in way of recompence, it was no more than just and fit, they should, like good Children, answer the affections of their spiritual Father. From Ver. 11. to 14. 3ly. He exhorts them to avoid all intimate fellowshipv. 14.  Est alteram partem jugi trahere, i. e idem ju∣gum subire. Ne sitis filii unius jugi cum iis qui non credunt. Jugum ducere] commercium inire, jugari, & copulari; metaphora à bo∣bus jugo colligatis. in marriages, or otherwise, with infidels and ido∣laters, whereby they might he brought into communion with their idolatry, or other sins, there being no more agree∣ment between a Believer and an Infidel, than between light and darkness, between Christ and Belial. For they that believe in Christ are the Temple of the living God, as he proves, partly out of Lev. 26.11, 12. partly out of Ezek. 37.26, 27. There∣fore with the words of the Prophet Isaiah, ch. 52. v. 11. he exhorts them to abstain, as much as they could, from the Society of Idolaters, and not to touch the unclean thing, that is, not to join with them in their sinful actions; and then God promises to receive them, and own them for his Sons, and Daughters as it is Jer. 31.1, 9. From Ver. 14. to the end. And having such precious promises, he exhorts them to abstain not only from  idolatry, but from all pollution both of flesh and Spirit, and to endeavour to per∣fect holiness in the fear of God. Ver. 1. 4ly. He exhorts them to receive him, their Apostle, into the bosm of their love, seeing he had not given them any cause of distaste, either by wronging any of them in their reputation, or corrupting any of them in their judgments, or defrauding any of them in their estates. And these things he spake for his own vindication, not to reproach them: for he had such an affection for them, that he could be content (if God saw it good) even to live and dye with them. And though he spake freely of their faults to themselves, yet he gloried of them to others, and was exceedingly comforted in the midst of all his afflictions, by the report he heard of their repentance. He shews, that when he was come from Ephesus into Macedonia, [Act. 20.1.See Sect. 13 of Ch. 6.], though he met with great opposi∣tions from some there, yet the fears he had concerning them were very trouble∣som to him. But he was exceedingly comforted by the coming of Titus; and it was not his bare presence that was so much a comfort to him, as the news that he brought, (with which he himself was also much comforted), viz. the news of their earnest desire to see him, their mourning for the sins he had in his former Epistle charged them with, and their zeal to defend him against his Calum∣niators, the false Teachers. And though in his former Epistle he had writ∣ten something sharply to them, by reason of their many enormities, yet he did not now repent of it, though 'tis true he was once sorry he had done it, lest such as were innocent among them should think themselves struck-at, in those his repre∣hensions. But though that Epistle did for a while grieve them, yet now he was glad he had written it, not meerly because he had grieved them, but because it had brought them to a Godly sorrow, for the evils that were among them, so that they received no damage at all, but much advantage thereby. For a right sense and sorrow for sin, wrought by the Spirit of God, worketh true repentance and reformation never to be repented of; whereas worldly sorrows, occasion'd only by
disgraces, or worldly losses or crosses, usually encreases sin and misery, and work∣eth diseases and death. Now that their sorrow was from God, he assures him∣self by the excellent fruits and effects of it. 1. Their carefulness to amend what was amiss. 2. Their clearing themselves, that they did not approve the fact of the incestuous person. 3. Their indignation against that sin, and their own neg∣lect of censuring of him. 4. Their fear of divine vengeance if they persisted in that neglect. 5. Their dsire of taking away the scandal, and satisfying all good men by proceeding against him. 6. Their zeal to execute what the Apostle had commanded for the removing this scandal, and this evil from among them. 7. The revenge which they exercised upon the incestuous person by excommunicating him; by all which, they declared their repentance to be sincere, and that they did not at all approve of that miscarriage, but were clear from it. Wherefore he tells them, that he wrote nt to them▪ only, or chiefly, that the incestuous person might be punished, and satisfaction made to his Father, whose Wife he had ta∣ken unto himselfSee Gen. 49 4., but that the singular care he had of the welfare of their Church, to remove sin and scandal, might be manifested unto them. Further, he shews them, that he was much comforted for the comfort they had received in the course they had taken with the incestuous person, and the more also for their kind reception of Titus, whose spirit was much revived and refreshed by them. And as all things that he himself had spoken to them they found to be true, so all the good he had spoken of them to Titus, he by experience found to be true also. He tells them, that Titus's affection was much towards them, remembring with what ready obedience and humility they received him, as an Evangelist, and a more than ordinary Servant of God sent unto them. Lastly, he acquaints them that he much rejoiced, that from his own experience of them, he might confi∣dently promise himself, and others, all good from them. From Ver. 2. to the end. 5. He exhorts them now, to a liberal contribution to the poor Saints of  Judea, using several arguments to perswade to it. 1. From the example of the Macedonians, into whose hearts God had put that excellent gift and grace of Charity; of whom he boasts, as those who had great joy and peacev. 2. In priore membro sub∣audendum est suit. Magnum fuit eo∣rum gaudium, (nempe ex pace con∣scientiae, ut supra 6. 10.) etiam tum cum per adversa maxima exploraren∣tur. Grot. in their Consciences, even then when they were exercised with great outward afflictions, and who gave liberaly and bountifully, even in their deep pover∣tyIpsorum summa paupertas, i. e. Ipsi Macedones valde pauperes exun∣dârunt in egregiam liberalitatem.; yea, gave beyond their ability. He shews, how instead of being intreated by him, they earnestly desired him to receive their Charity and Collection, and that he with others would take upon him to dispense their alms; so that they did more than he could hope or expectv. 5. Non hoc tantùm fecêre quod sperabamus, subaudite ., giving them∣selves first to God, and afterwards committing themselves to him, and his Apostolical care, to be guided and gvern∣ed by him according to the will of God▪ 2. Because he had desir'd Titus to go to them, and as he had begun to stir them up to this duty, and to exercise this grace at his first coming to them; so he would further pro∣mote and finish it. 3. Because they abounded in other graces and gifts, viz. in faith, in ability to instruct others, in knowledg, in care of the salvation of their Brethren, and in love towards himself, their Apostle; therefore they ought to a∣bound in this grace also. 4. Because hereby they would testifie the sincerity of their love to the Saints; which he mentioned not to them, as commanding them, but as moving them thereto, even by the example of the Macedonians. 5. Be∣cause Christ (who was Lord of all) emptied himself (Phil. 2.5.), that they, and all others that believe in him, might be enriched with his spiritual and hea∣venly blessings; therefore for his sake it was fit they should be ready to distribute. 6. It was expedient for them, in respect of their reputation and the future reward they might expect, that this good work which they had begun a year agov. 10. Ge∣nus loquendi inversum. Gr. (and that with great forwardness and readiness of mind) should be carried on; yet according to their ability, and the proportion of their estates: for God values
not so much the quantity of the gift, as the good will and cheerful mind of the giver. He tells them, it was not his intent to overburden or impoverish them, to ease others, but that things equal and just should be done; that you (says he) supplying the present poverty of the Christians in Judea out of your fulness; if you should hereafter want, and they be full, they should by a just retribution sup∣ply your wants. As in the collection of Manna [Exod. 16.], God commanded that they which gathered more, than the prescribed measure, (which was an Omer for every single person) should give to him, who had gathered less; so God would have it, that they that have great riches should impart of their abundance, to them who are in want. 7. He further excites them to this duty because several faithful Brethren were stirred up by God, and sent by him, not only to promote this collection, but also to carry it to the poor Saints in Judea; and he hopes they will not frustrate the expectation of such worthy persons; the first of whom was Titus, who took upon him to exhort and move them hereunto, and being very diligent, willingly travelled unto them. The other is supposed to be Barnabas, who was highly prais'd in all the Churches, for his excellent gift in preaching the Gos∣pel; and was by the Churches suffrage made Pauls Companion, and sent with the same diaconary charge, which was administred by Paul, for the glory of God, and their encouragement (c). And he shews, Vide Knatchbull. in loc. why he joined to himself persons of so great integrity in this charge and ministry, lest evil-minded men should suspect him of dishonesty, if he alone should manage that business of receiving and distri∣buting so great contributions as were mde by the Churches. And he tells them, he must provide for a good reputation before men, as well as labour for a good Conscience before God. He mentions a third whom he sent with Titus and Bar∣nabas (whether Luke, or Apollos, or another is uncertain) whom he often had found faithful, and now very ready to come unto them, upon the special confidenceHe hath toward you, . he hath of their goodness and liberality. And as for the persons that are intrusted in this business, he shews, they are such as they may have confidence in. As for Titus, he was his Companion and fellow labourer in strengthning and con∣firming them in the Faith, and correcting things amiss among them. And for the other Brethren, he tells them, they are the Messengers of the Churches, sent to gather this contribution, and persons in whm the grace of Christ eminently shines, and such by whom the honour of Christ is singularly promoted. Wherefore he desires them to shew unto them, and so consequently to all the Churches whose Messengers they were, a proof of their love; and so they would manifest that his boasting of them hath not been without reason. From Ver. 1. to the end. Having thus assured them concerning the integrity of the Messengers, he pro∣ceeds  to speak of the Contribution, for the promoting of which, he says he need not write further unto them; for he knew their forwardness therein, and had boasted to the Macedonians, that the Christians of Achaia (of which Corinth was the chief City) had made a preparation to supply the poor Saints of Judea, a year ago; and their zeal therein, had provoked many to the like forwardness. However he had sent these Brethren that they might find true what he had boasted of them; and tht (as he said before) they might be ready at his coming, and not surprized, having this warning given them before hand. For otherwise when he came with some of Macedonia accompanying him, if they should not have their supplies ready, it would tend to his and their disgrace. Therefore he sent these Brethren to them before hand, to exhort them to get their collections ready before he came, that so their beneficence may appear to be their own free bounty, and not a collection difficultly extorted from themUt extor∣tum aliquid▪ . Metonym. efficientis.  significat plus habendi cupiditatem. Pisc., as from covetous men, who give grudgingly and unwillingly. From Ver. 1. to 6. In the next place he exhorts them, to give liberally and freely, because the re∣ward will be proportion'd to their freeness therein; and to give chearfully, and
willingly (every one as he is prompted by his own heart, for God loveth a chear∣ful giver. And lest they should fear their Charity might bring themselves to wants and straights, he shews, that God is able (and having promised it, thy may expect it) to make them the richer for their liberality, so that what they give shall return to them with usury and increasev. 8. ] Gratiam, i. e. omne donum, quicquid do∣naveritis. Vatab.. As 'tis said of the liberal Almsgiver, Psal. 112.9. that, He shall evermore continue to shew himself righteousv. 9. , hîc est Mise∣cordia. Vide Hos. 10.12., that is, bountiful, and shall have enough all the days of his life wherewith to exercise his liberality: so far shall he be from wanting. And as God blesseth the increase of the Earth so largely, that it sufficeth for the nourishment of men, and for seed to sow again; so he prays, that Gd would supply all their prsent wants, and also grant them such plnty and ability, that they may be liberal still towards others, and that he would increse and multiply to them the rewards and fruits of their righteousness and mercy. That being thus inriched by the good∣ness of God, and abounding unto all buntifulness, hîc est candida libera∣litas., many prayers may be rendred to God by those, to whom he and his Collegues should distribute their Alms. For he tells them, what he and they had undertaken, (viz. the distribution of their collectin) would not only supply the necessities of the Saints, but occasion abundant thanksgivings unto God; and so be, not only an act of charity in the Givers, but an occasion of piety also in the Receivers. And this their liberality would be a prof that they did truly subject themselves to the Gospel of Christ (which injoins Charity and Almsgiving) and would occasion many to glorifie God for it, and for their readiness in communicating unto them, and unto others that are in want, as occasion required. And lastly, they will en∣devur to be thankful to them as they are able, by their hearty prayers to God for them, and by their longing after and earnestly desiring their welfare, rejoicing exceedingly for that great measure of grace God had bestowed on them. He con∣concludes this whole matter with thanksgiving unto God for that great gift of Charity he had bestowed on them, which inclined their hearts, in so liberal a manner, to relieve the necessities of the Saints (which gift he cannot sufficiently commend) whereby much glory redounds to God, and much honour to the Christian profession. From Ver. 6. to the end. The third part of the Epistle.He comes now to the third part of his Epistle; wherein, 1. He vindicates his authority from the contempt cast upon it by false Teachers, his speech contemptible, but when absent, bold and severe. He therefore be∣seeches them by the gentleness and meekness of Christ (whom he was not asham'd to imitate) not to interpret this his behaviour among them otherwise than they ought. He tells them, he desires and wishes that when he comes he may not be forced to use his power with that boldness, which he thought to use against some of them, who accused him of a weak carriage and behaviour in his Apostleship, as either fearing or flattering men, and so walking carnally, and being too mild on one of those grounds. For though he was not free from humane infirmities and weaknesses, yet he did not exercise his Apostleship in a weak manner, or by weak weapons. For the weapons he used were spiritual, viz. Christian fortitude, zeal, freedom in speaking the truth of God, and courage in administring the censures of the Church, which had a divine force upon the Conscience, to throw down the strong holds of carnal wisdom, and the corrupt reasonings and proud conceits, by which corrupt mn think to defend themselves, either in their errors or vices, against the Gospel, having in readiness that which servs to re∣venge all disobedience upon the refractory, (viz. excommunication), which he was resolved to make use of against such persons, when the Corinthians, (to wit,
the greater part of them) shall have made good their obedience, and reduced them∣selves to good order again *, having been seduced by these false Teachers. He tells them, they ought not to judg of him, or of the power of his Apostleship and Ministry, by his external humble and mild behaviour among them, which seemed to some of them so vile. He shews, that he may (and that justly) be compa∣red with any of those that emulate him. For by all those arguments, by which any of them can prove he is a Disciple of Christs, he may conclude the same of him also. Nay if he should pretend to some more authority from Christ (being an Apostle) than hath been given to others, (and that for the advantage and not the hurt of any), he might make it good. And that his Epistles may not seem only Bug-bears (as his Calumniators affirm'd, saying, that his Letters were indeed severe and authoritative, but his personal presence weak, and his speech contemptible), he tells them, that such as his Letters and Words are when he is absent, such shall his performances be when he shall be present among them. From Ver. 1. to 12. 2ly. In the next place, he refells the vain brags of the false Apostles; who ar∣rogated to themselves the things they never did. He tells them, (Ironically), he will not compare himself with those Boastrs, that so highly magnified them∣selves, and took so much upon them; yet he suggests, how foolish they were in judging of themselves by their own slf-conceit, and the opinion that such as were like them had of them, without looking upon others, to whom the Lord had im∣parted greater gifts and power, such as were the Apostles. But whatever they did, he sys, he will not bast of things without the bounds which God hath mea∣sured to him, as if he had converted those whom he did not convert; or as if he had authority over those, that are not within those bounds; but would contain him∣self within the measure, line, and bounds assigned him by God, which certainly reached unto the Corinthians. For though the Apostles had commission to preach unto all Nations, yet they betook themselves unto several parts, and were care∣ful not to interrupt or hinder one another, nor to enter upon one anothers labours; but the false Apostles ranged where they listed, and arrogated to themselves the conversion of those, where the true Apostles had before planted the Faith. He shews, by extending his inspection and authority to them, he did not over-extend it, or go beyond his line, as they do, who intrude into, and boast of other mns labours; for he had advanced as far as to them in the preaching of the Gospel, and had first planted the Faith among them. He tells them, he would not pretend any Title to those whom others have converted, (as was the manner of his Emu∣ltrs), but yet he hoped, that when the Corinthians shall be more strengthned in the Faith, they will deal with their Neighbours to entertain the Gospel, and to be willing to hear him preach it to them, and so the borders of his ministry (through them) shall be more abundantly inlarged, and that according to the rule of his calling, to whom the Apostleship of the Gentiles was committed. And so he shall preach the Gospel beyond Achaia, without entring on those parts where the Gospel had been formerly preached by others, or arrogating to himself what they had done. But that he may not seem to glory in himself, or in the gifts of God as his own, he shews, that no man ought to attribute or refer any thing he hth to himself, but to acknowledg all his Talents to come from God, and to ascribe the success of all his gifts and endeavours entirely unto Him. For no mn is approved because he conceits well of himself, or commends himself; but he that approves his heart and ways to God, and seeks his glory, He is accepted, accounted of, and approved by Him. From Ver. 12. to the end. 3ly. That he may further vindicate himself and his Apostleship from the con∣tempt  of those who preferred the false Apostles before him; he desires the Co∣rinthians to bear with him a little in his just and necessary self-commendation, which he acknowledges had a shew of folly in it. He tells them, the reason that mov'd him to it, was his holy jealousie for them. For he had by the preaching of the
Gospel brought them to believe in Christ, and so betrothed them to him. And the Contract being made in this life, and the Marriage to be celebrated at the last day, [Rv. 19 7.], he desir'd he might as a faithful Paranymph present them then a pure and chast Virgin, a spotless Church to Christ. But he feared lest as Eve ws seduced by the subtilty of the Devil, so their minds should be cor∣rupted by false Apostles, and seduced from the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, and drawn to admit of human mixtures, and Jewish antiquated observances. He tells them, that if any of thse false Teachers could acquaint them with another Saviour then he had preached, or bestow on them more excellent gifts of the Spi∣rit, than they (by his ministry) had received, or could preach another Gospel, (which was of God), they might well bar with them in their boasting. But that being impssible, they might well bear with him in his modest glrying, by whose preaching they had been brought to the knwledg of Christ. And he tells them, he wuld not only compare himself with those Dceivrs, but he thought he might justly compare himself with the most eminent of the true Apostles, [ven Pter, Jm s, and John, Gal. 2 6.]. And thuh he was held to be rude in speech, by those proud Boasters of their Eloquence; yet nne could imgine him to be so in knowledg or skill in the mysteries of Salvation, which was sufficiently known to the Corinthians themselves, as were also his other gifts. From Ver. 1. to 7. 4ly. He shews them, that it ought not to be esteemed a fault in him, that he so much tendred their advantage, and so little his own, as to preach the Gospel gratis and freely to them; and that he humbled himself so low, as to work with his own hands to get his maintenance, (whilst he preach'd unto them), tht they might be exalted to the high dignity of knowing and believing in Christ. 'Tis true, when he was among them he was sometimes in want, but he troubled none of them, but sometimes wrought with his own hands to get his Bread, [1 Cor. 4.12. & 9.6.], and somtimes was supplied by the Macedonian Phi∣lippians, [Phil. 4.15.]. And as he had not been burthensome to them hither∣to, so neither did he intend to be; and he solemnly profsss that no man shall deprive him of this matter, of boasting in thse parts. Yet he dsires them not to think it was want of love to them that made him thus resolve, (for he could appel to God as to the sincerity of his love to them), but he did it to cut off occasion from flse Apostles, who sought to traduce him; and to demonstrate, that if they gloried that they preached freely and gratis, (as possibly they might, now and then out of cunning do), yet therein they should be found to do no more, nay not so much as he. For these men (he tells them) are deceitful workers, seeming to do the same things that the true Apostles of Christ did as Satan him∣self will pretend sometimes to be like a good Angel, and thrfre 'tis no won∣der if his Ministers imitate him, whose end shall be according to their works From Ver. 7. to 16. He deprecates again the censure of folly in this his necessitated boasting, and de∣sires them to bearv. 16.  for∣te, tolerate. with him, and to suffer him a little further to expatiate himself in this matter. He confesses he speaks this, as it were, and in appearance not after the Lord; for the Spirit of God in the Scripture, no where adviseth us to commend our selves, or glory of our gifts, but rather the contrary. He ac∣knowleges, it was unbeseeming him thus to boast, and therefore he did as it were, foolishly to go on in this confident boasting, if they look'd upon the outward thing only, and did not mark the scope and end of it, which was to vindicate him∣self and his ministry from the aspersions of these false Apostles. But seing thy did glory in outward things, he would assume that liberty to himself also And he hoped they would bear with him in it, seeing wise mn, (so h Ironically calls those among them, who were apt to be puft up with a conceit of their own wisdom), do often with pleasure bear with fools; and they, as wise as they were, did bear with far greater faults in his adversaries. For they suffered
themselves to be impos'd upon by these false Teachers, to be tyranniz'd over, to be exhausted, to be contumliously used, and smitten as it were on the face, that is, upbraided to their very faces, because they had subjected themselves to so mean and weak a person as Paul, an Handicrafts-man. But whatever they thought of him, he assures them, that in whatsoever any of those false Apostles had cause to boast or speak boldly of themselves, he had much more. He was not only equal to them in outward priviledges, (as nobility of Race, &c.), but superior in office, (being more than an ordinary Apostle of Christ), having undergone both from Jews and Gntiles, mre sufferings, labours, and dangers of imminent death, than any of the very Twelve Apostles, as he proves by sundry particularsv. 25. The three Shipwracks of the Apostle are not mentioned in the history of the Acts, for that of Act. 27.42. can be none of the e, see∣ing it happened long after. It seems he was a day and a night upon some parcel of the wreck., [See ch. 6. v. 5. & ch. 1. v. 9, 10. & ch. 4. v. 11, 12. & 1 Cor. 15.30, 31.]. And besides thse outward sufferings, a pressing inward care and sol∣licitude for all the Churches lay upon him. If any were wek and wvering in Faith, he trembld for them, ap∣prehending their danger. If any, through the folly or sin of others, were scandaliz'd, and in danger of falling, he was iflam'd with a holy zeal to have them set right again. And seeing he was constrain'd b his adversaries to glory, he would glory in his sufferings] Sic vo∣cat in hac disputatione tota, molesti∣as sivè extrinsécas, sivè intrinsecas: vel quod, cum iis premimur, aliis in∣firmi videmur & contemptibiles; vel quod tum potissimum imbecillitatem humanam prodimus per impatienti∣am, murmurationes, & similia. Slat. in loc. and afflctions for the Gospel, Gods strength having been so eminently manifested in his weakness and infirmities; and that he spake true, God was his Wit∣ness. Among other of his afflictions, he would not omit that trouble which he met with at Dmascus in the be∣ginning of his ministry, whre he wonderfully escaped the hands of the Jews, being let down in a Basket over the walls of the City, [see Act. 9.24.]. From Ver. 16. to the end. He comes now to another kind of holy glorying, wherein yet he acknowledges  it was not expedint for him (in reference t himself) to go on, but only in reference to them, namely, for the prserving his authrity among them, which the flse Apstls sought by all means to diminish. And upon that account, he would declare unto them, the extraordinary visions and revelations which he had from G d; one of which was this; About fourteen years ago, Hev. 2. A man in Christ, that is, a Christian. was rapt up into the Third Heaven, Act. 22.17. (which thing he had kept to himself for so many years, and had not now dclard it, had not the importunity of his adversaries forc'd him to it), and it was doubtful to himself, whether in this visin his Soul were abstracted from his body, or whether he were bodily transported and carried to the Third Heaven. But however it was, there he had such rv lations made to him, as were very wonderful, but he had no commissin to declare them to othersQuamvis quaenam fuerint haec arema explicari non possit, verisi∣mile tmen est fuisse illa quae ad sta∣tum vitae aeternae, & ad conditionem beatorum pertinent. Freidlib Sicut Moses intellexit omnem illam dis∣pensationem, quâ Deus populum Is∣raeliticum tuebatur ac regebat, sic Paulus illam per quam Christus Ec∣clesiam suam gubernat. Unde factum est ut ad danda consilia aptior fuerit ipso Petro, sed haec quae intellexerat vetitus est nunciare. Grot. Some understand those unspeakable words, of such words only as con∣cern'd Pauls particular confirmation, and preparation for those conflicts he was to undergo. Otherwise he revealed the whole Counsel of God the Churches, Act. 20.27.. And though he might justly boast of himslf, [as thus exalted], in refrence to th glory of God, yet of himself, [barely con∣sidered]▪ he would not boast nor glory in any thing, but only in his sufferings for Christ. Yet if he had a mind to glory of this revelation, he might do it without va∣nity, it being most certinly true; but he would forbear lst he shuld thereby give occasion to any to overvalue him, and to think mre highly of him, than his common beha∣viur, (viz. his ordinry actions and words), gave them reason to do. Yet he would nt conceal this from them, that after he had ths high revelations, that he might not be too much exlted with them, there was given to him a thornMotio scil. concupiscentiae a∣liqua ad porro peccandum tendens. Dickson. See Rom. 7. Miserable man that I am, who shalll deliver me, &c. Others, Angelus Satan, that is, Sa∣tan himself did furiously set upon him to shke his Faith and sincerity: with which buffeting the Apostle was much d sheartned for the present, and hindred in his business, as by a thorn in the foot, with which a man can go but lamely, and with pain. Ego Conscientae terrentis stimulos fuisse reor. Slat. Dolorem auriculae vel capitis sig∣nificari ait Tertulianas de pudicitiâ. Carnis & Corporis multa ac gravia tormenta, Cyprianus. A Satanâ autem morbos etiam piis immiti, Deo id sinente, ex Jobi historia discimus. Vid. & Luc. 13, 16. in the flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him; for deliverance from which, he earnestly besought
the Lord, and receiv'd this gracious answer, that though God would not suddenly remove this temptation from him, yet he would support him by his grace against it and would manifest his own strengthv. 9. ] h. e. per sectiùs agnoscitur. in the Apstles weakness; and the more he was assaulted, he would con∣fer on him the more power and strength to overcome. He tells them therefore, that he rather chose to glory in his afflictions and crosses, than in his revelations, as by which he had experience of the power and presence of Christ, co∣vering and sheltring of him, and being his safety and pro∣tection. And he was perfectly pleased with his suffer∣ings for Christs sake; for then the strength of Christ did more manifest it self in him; and the heavier his pres∣sures were, the greater were his supports. And when he was weak in himself, he was strong in Christ. From Ver. 1. to 11. He comes now to excuse his boasting, and to shew, that they compell'd him to it, and might have saved him this labour, by defending him themselves, if they had done as they ought. For he had done and suffered as much as any of the eminentest Apostles, (through the grace of God that assisted him, 1 Cor. 15.10.) though of himself he was nothing, [1 Cor. 3.7.]. He shews, they had vident arguments, and plain demonstrations, that he was indeed an Apostle of Christ, both by his patient suffering of afflictions, as also by the mighty deeds and miraculous works he had done among them. And they had as great and illustri∣ous gifts of the Spirit bestowed on them by his ministry, as any other Church whatsoever, either founded by him or any other Apostle. Only they differed from from others in this, that all was done for them gratisv. 13. ] Non fui piger vestri damno. Non sumpsi à vobis quae me à manuum labore liberarent. Vid. supra 11.8, 9. Grot.. From Ver. 11. to 14. He tells them, he now prepared himself a third time to come to them, having been twice crossed in this his design before, [see 1 Cor. 16.5. 2 Cor. 1.15, 16.]; and he intended to do it without putting them to charge; for he coveted not their possessions, but their salvation. And as natural Parents usually lay up for, and give to their Children, and do not take from them; so he desired, as their spiritual Father, to inrich them with spiritual good things, and not to take from them any of their temporals. Nay, he was willing to spend and to be spent for them, though they no way answered his love; and received the false Apostles, his Emula∣tors, and made more of them, than of him their spiritual Father. But (says he) it will be objected by some, that though I was not burthensome to you my self, yet I have cunningly and underhand gotten a great deal from you by my Emissaries. To that he answers, that neither Titus, (whom he desi∣red to go to them), nor any otherv. 18. ] Qui putatur Lucas. he had sent among them, did make any kind of gain of them, but behaved themselves just after the same manner he had done, being guided by the same Spirit, and walking in the same steps. From Ver. 14. to 19.
He shews, he did not speak all this, meerly to purge himself  fend his own innocency, but to maintain his Apostolck authority, tha  proofs and exhortations might be of more force and effect among them, and so for their good, which he heartily desired, as he solemnly protestsv 19. I speak as a Christian, or man in Christ, in the presence of God.. For he fears, when he comes among them, he shall not find them such as he would, but guilty of many sins, and that will force him to be severe in his censures. He fears he shall find some among them fallen into enormous crimes, and continuing in them without repentance, and that will occasion great-heart grief to him, much humiliation and dejection of mind, and necessitate him to exercise his Apo∣stolick authority among them in censuring of them, From Ver. 19. to the end. He tells them again, how he was now a third time preparing to come to  them [see ch. 12. 14.], and if the things amiss among them were not amend∣ed, he would punish the committers of them; and such as were convicted of their crimes by the testimony of two or three witnesses [as the Law injoins, Deut. 19.15] shall be excludd from Church-communion. As he told them before, so he tells them now, (as if he were present with them), that in case there be no amendment among them, he will make use of his Apostolick power, (which was very great and extraordinary), by which he inflicted not only spi∣ritual censures, but sometimes also corporal punishments, as appears by the in∣stance of Bar Jesus, whom he smote with blindness, Act. 13.11. And they did tempt him thereunto, in that they required a proof from him, whether Christs power did concur with his ministry and jurisdiction, and whether Christ would ratifie his censures, by his judgments following them. He shews, that Christ had owned him, and manifested his power in his ministry among them, by converting many of them, and bestowing the gifts of his Spirit upon them, and by many signs and miracles, which he enabled him to do in the midst of them and by his exercise of spiritual discipline among them. And as Christ appeared to be a weak and a frail man by being crucified, but was evidenced to be God omnipotent by his rising from the dead; so he tells them, if they look upon him, as in himself, and in respect of the afflictions he hath been exercised with, he may appear a meer weak and ordinary man, and to be weak with Christ, and therein like and conformable to him; but yet they should find, that he would shew a resem∣blance of Christs life and strength [2 Cor. 10.3.], and that the power of Christ liveth in him, and doth manifest it self in him, against impenitent and contuma∣cious sinners. And since they seek a proof of Christs speaking in him, (who first preached the Gospel among them); he bids them look to it, and to examine themselves, whether they be in the Faith, (that is, have a true Faith in them), and whether they be in the state of true Believers, and whether Christ live in them by his Spirit; which they will find to be so, except for the present they are only meer counterfeit unapproved Professors of Christianity. But what∣ever they were, he hoped he should not be found such an one himself, but a faithful Servant of Christ, and a true Apostle. From Ver. 1. to 7. Drawing now towards a Conclusion, he tells them, that he earnestly prays and de∣sires they may do that which is good and right, and may abstain from all evil. And he prayed thus for them, because he had rather have them good, than having oc∣casion, by punishing their evil manners, to testifie himself an approved and faith∣ful Apostle. For he passeth not for his own credit or reputation, how he be esteemed, so their salvation may be promoted. And if they be innocent, and walk in the truth, they had no reason to fear his authority; for the end of it was to uphold innocency, truth, and righteousness, and only to suppress the con∣trary; and in this sense, the stronger they were, and more vigorous in the acti∣ons
of the spiritual life, and the more they disarm'd him by their innocency and harmless walking, of his Apostolick power to censure the obstinate, the more it pleased him. For he desired nothing more, than that all things might be brought into good order among them, and the members of the Church which had been put out by Church cnsures might be restored, and st right a∣gainv. 9.  est in recta constitutio, reconcinnatio.. Therefore he used the more severity in his Letters, that when he came he might not be forced to ex∣ercise his authority with sharpness; for the end of it was principally edification, and not destruction, but only by accident, and in case of willful and final impenitency. From Ver. 7. to 11. He concludes his Epistle, seriously exhorting them to union, Be knit toge∣ther. among them∣selves, to be of good comfort in their sufferings for Christ, and to live in peace, praying, that God who is the Au∣thor and Injoiner of love and peace may be with them, and dwell among them with his favourable presence. He exhorts them, according to the custom of those Eastern Churches; to salute one another with a holy kiss, as a token of unity, sincere love, and honour; and so with his accustomed Salutation, he bids them Farewell. From Ver. 11. to the end.
SECT. XV. THE Apostle (as it seems) shortly after this, from Mace∣donia comes into Greece, and there stays three months, Act. 20.2, 3. And about this time he seems to have written his first Epistle to Timothy, then at Ephesus, whom he had be∣sought to abide there, for the better ordering, instructing, and establishing of that Church. Timothy signifies an Honourer of God; and so he proved, both in Doctrine and Conversation, according to the happy omen and presage of his Name. He is supposed to be of Lystra, (a City of Lycaonia in AsiaAct. 16 1, 2. compa∣red with Act. 14.6.), for there the Brethren reported well of him. His Father was a Greek, and a Proselyte; his Mother a Jewess, Daughter of Lois, both sincere Believers. They train∣ed him up from a Child in the Holy Scriptures2 Tim. 1.5. & 3.14, 15., so that Paul was perswaded that the like unfeigned Faith dwelt in him as did in his pious Mother and Grandmother. His Father being a Greek, a Gentile-Proselyte, and uncircumcised, Timothy was not circumci∣sed in his infancy after the custom of the Jews, but being come to maturity Paul circumcis'd himAct. 16.3., for the gaining of the Jews, by his ministry. The Apostle made him his Companion in his travels throughout the Churches far and near, whom he most diligently and faithfully served in the work of the Lord, some∣times being left with the Churches newly planted, further to instruct them, sometimes being sent as a Messenger to comfort and establish them. Though he had many bodily infirmities upon him, yet he abounded with many eminent graces and gifts, and in process of time being ordain'd a Minister, with imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, he so approved himself in that office, that he became most affectionately dear to Paul, insomuch that he makes frequent and honourable mention of him, espe∣cially to the Philippians, ch. 2.19, 20. I have no man like mind∣ed, who will naturally care for your state; for all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christs. But ye know the proof of him, that as a Son with the Father he hath served with me in the Gospel. And elswhere he dignifies him with excellent titles, calling him his Brother, his beloved Son, and faithful in the Lord, his natural Son in the Faith, his fellow-labourer in the Gospel of Christ, yea he joins Timothy with himself in the inscriptions of divers Epistles to the Churches, that so he might both com∣mend Timothy's worth and authority to the Churches; and also propound him as an exemplary pattern to all faithful Ministers. From Corinth he accompanied Paul into Asia, and when they came to Ephesus, the Apostle besought him to abide. there to instruct that Church; touching which imployment the Apo∣stle now gives him sundry Precepts and Directions through∣out this whole Epistle.
In which Epistle there are three parts. he First Epistle to Timothy.1. The Preface. 2. The Matter or Substance of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. IN the Preface he asserts his Apostolical authority from the command of God, (whom he stiles our Saviour, because he gives us Salvation by ChristSee Luk. 1.47. Tit. 1.3.), and from the cmmand of Jesus Christ, who is the ground and object of our hope. He directs his Epistle to Timothy, whom he calls his own Son in the Faith, either because he had gained him to the Faith of Christ; or else, because he was his Disciple, and resembled him in Faith, and Doctrine, and holy Conversation, as a Son resembles his Father in face and manners. From Ver. 1, 2. After the Preface he comes to the Body of the Epistle; wherein, 1. He tells him, that he left him at Ephesusv. 3. Sicut te monui manere Ephesi] Supple ita & nunc moneo., to take care that no strange heterodx Doctrines be broached in that Church, and that FablesQuia inanes ilae speculationes otiosae sunt & inerminatae, quarum nec usus est, nec sinis. Vid. cap. 4. v. 7. & 6.4. 2 Tim. 2.23. Tit. 1.14. & 3 9. v. 4. Genelogia vocat infinitas, i. e nunquam terminandas aut satis liquido explicandas Illas quaestiones negat praebere aedificationem Dei, i. e. profectum in solidà ve∣râque pietate, qui fit propriè per fidem; quae aedificatio à Deo venit eique probatur, ac ab eo exigitur, eóque Illius dicitur., and Jewish Genealogies, and praeterscriptural Traditions be not heeded or regarded, which rather occasion perplex disputes, than edifying in true piety towards God, and in the Faith of Christ. Ver. 3, 4. 2ly. Because some false Teachers seem'd to be carried with a perverse zeal to the Law, and mingled Faith and Works in the point of Justification; he shews, that the true end of the Law, and the main scope and drift of it was Love, (viz. to God and our Neighbour), springing from a pure heart, and a d Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, which some not rightly understanding have been carried aside to vain discourses. And while they affect to be thought learned Tea∣chers, and Expounders of the Law, they betray their own ignorance, not un∣derstanding either what they say, or what they affirm. But here some of his Ad∣versaries might object, that by saying thus, he shewed himself not very well affect∣ed towards the Law. He answers, he did not at all detract from the Law (in reproving those that abused it), but rather commended and taught the right use of it. For he acknowledges, that the Law rightly understood and preached, was very good, and given for, and serves to excellent purposes, if we make use of it as we ought, not seeking to be justified by the observation of it, but to be directed by it in our obedience, as a perfect rule of life; and to be brought by it unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. But yet notwithstanding, they were to know that in respect of its damnatory and terrifying use, (viz. to constrain to obedience for fear of punishment), so it was not given to the righteousLex lata est, non ut fideles justificati jam per fidem in Christum, justificarentur per legem (sicut per∣versi legis doctores intendebant) sed ut injusti & infideles (quales sunt omnes flagitiosi & profani) per le∣gem condemnati, suam injustitiam, & meritam condemnationem ag∣noscerent, resipiscerent, & ad Chri∣stum consugerent. Lex justo non est posita] i. e. Non est lata ad justos coercendos. Justi enim sponte suâ, se conformant legi, amore justitiae & obedientiae, non timore poenae, quam lex transgressoribus minatur, sed lata est ut minis suis, & poenis coerceat impios. Corn. a Lap. Chrysostomus hosce duos usus in diversis personis commoda similitudine explicat, quod, Sicut fraenum domat, & cohibet ferocem equum; domitum autem, & obedientem tantum regit in viâ recta; si Lex praefractos securosque peccatores domat, pios verò tantum regit, eisque rectam vitae normam monsat. Lex justo non est posita] h. e. Maledictio legis incumbit tantum petulantibus legi transgressoribu, non autem justis, &c., but to the unrighteous and wicked, to lawless and dis∣orderly persons. It was given to condemn all sins that are against the sound Dctrine, which is according to, and taught in the Gospel, (wherein the glorious mercy of God is displayed), and to restrain disorderly persons from such crimes: so that the Gospel agrees with the Law, as to the right regulating of mens lives and manners: for the sins forbidden in the Law, are contrary also
to the Gospel. From Vers. 1. to Vers. 12. 3ly Having mntion'd the G spel, which was committed to him by Jesus Christ, he takes occasion from thence to assert the Authority of his Apostlship against thse that dnied it, or by reason of his former course of life, did endeavour to lssen it. And, 1. He gives solemn thanks to Christ who committed that grat trut of preaching the Gospel to him, and enabled him to preach it with sucss, and esteemed him faithful, (giving him grace to be so), and honour'd him with the office of an Apostle, who was before a Blasphemer and a Persecutor, yet nt∣withstanding mercy was shewed him, because he did it ignorantly through a false zeal, not rightly informed; and the goodness of God (he acknowledges) abound∣ed towards him, in drawing him to believe in Christ, and removing his former unbelief, working in him l ve to Christ and his Gospel, notwithstanding his former opposition against it; which graces of Faith and Love Christ requireth and frameth in the hearts of all his Members by his Spirit, [see 2 Tim. 1.13.], giving them a right knowledg of himself, and the benefits that are obtainable by him. He further declares, that it need not seem incredible that so wonderful mercy and favour was shewed to him, seeing this is most certain and true, that Christ came into the world to manifest his mercy to sinners, yea great sinners, of which number he had reason to reckon himself to be one, because of his persecuting the Church of God [see 1 Cor. 15.9.]. He further shews, that the Lord had set him frth for an example and pattern of his long-suffering, mercy, and admirable grace, that sinners to the end of the World, (who shall hear of his wonderful conversion, and the bounty of Christ towards him), may be assured of his readi∣ness to receive sinners, and may, upon their repentance and believing in him, expect the like goodness and kindness from him twards themselves. And thus the Ap stle being ravished with a sweet sense of the greatness of Gods mercy to him, concludes this whole matter with a pathetick doxology or thanksgiving. From Ver. 12. to 18. 4ly. He charges Timothy to carry himself couragiously in the excutin of his ministry against all discouragements and oppositions whatsoever, encouraging himself by the Prophesies of holy men, that were uttered before of him, nmely, that he would war a good warfare, (in defence of the Gospel) joining sound Doctrine with a good Conscience, and a good holy life; and so should escape the dread∣ful ruin of those, who falling first into impure courses of life, afterwards fall into foul errors, and depart from the sound Doctrine they before embraced: Such were Alexander and Hymenaeus, [who, it seems, denied the Resurrection, 2 Tim. 2.14. & 18.], whom he had by excommunication delivered up to Satan, to chasten and afflict them, that so they might repent and come to an acknowledgment of their errors, and might take heed for the future of blaspheming or speaking evil of wholsom Doctrine and the truths of God. From Ver. 18. to the end. 5ly. He instructs Timothy concerning publick prayer, shewing him first for  whom it is to be made. In general, for all sorts of men; particularly, for Kings, and all in authority, that Christians may lead a peaceable and quiet life under them in all godliness and honesty. And the reasons he gives for it are these; 1. Because this is pleasing to Gd, whose will it is, that some of all
sorts of men should come to the knowledg of the truth, and be saved, and there∣fore some among Kings and Magistrates as well as others. And, 2ly. Because there is but one God, who is the Creator of all Nations, and one Mediater be∣tween God and man, Christ Jesus, who died for all sorts, and gave himself a ransom (or price of redemption) for all kinds, orders, and degrees of men what∣soever; and this great truth God design'd in his due time to reveal and manifest, and therefore it was now to be declared and publish'd in Christian assemblies by their making prayers and intercessions for all sorts of men. And particularly, he shews, that the publishing this Doctrine was in an especial manner c mmitted to him, and he was sent of God to instruct the Gentiles therein, (who where account∣ed the worst of men), and to teach them Faith in Christ, and all other necessary Truths. And this he solemnly protests to be true, that name of the Jews might be scandaliz'd at his preaching to the Gentiles. 2ly. He shews, where publick prayer is to be made, viz. every where, in any place without exception, where the Church-assembly meets, (all ceremonial dstinction of places being now re∣mov'd), and that men be enjoin'd, when they come to pray, to lift up holy hands free from injustice and oppression, and to pray with hearts free from hatred and maliceMaimonides in regulis orandi, Si quis senserit animum sibi commotum, & cor turgens, ne oret; sed quiescat dum mens sit sedata., or doubting of the truth of Gods Promises. He requires also, that Women, when they come into the Church-assemblies to join in prayer and other duties, should be very modestly attir'd; and that they should study rather to exceed others in good works, than brave Clothes. And that they set themselves quietly to learn and receive instruction in the Church-assemblies, and not presume or take upon them to teach; for that were to usurp authority over the man, which he utterly forbids, for two reasons; 1. Because the man was first formed, and the woman out of him; and that may serve to denote, her subordination to, and dependance on him. 2ly. The woman was first deceived and seduced, and became Satan's instrument to seduce her Husband to transgress Gods Commandment; whence God impos'd upon her, subjection to her Husband, and sorrow in Child-bearing, Gen. 3.16. But lest women should be too much discourag'd at this, he c mfortably levisies what he had said, by assuring them, that notwithstanding this their sorrow and danger in Child bear∣ing, they may be saved as well as men, if they persevere in faith, love, sanctity, sobriety, and modesty. From Ver. 8. to the end. 6ly. He comes now to instruct him concerning Church officers, viz. Bishops and Deacons, shewing him, how they, and how their wives ought to be quali∣fied. And first he premises, that the Pastoral office is an honourable Function, and commends those who being fitly qualified, and duely called, do out of sincere ends undertake it, viz. that by labouring in the Gospel they may bring men to eternal Salvation. Then he sets down Sixteen requisites to a good Bishop. He must be blameless, that is, free from scandal; the husband of one wife, no Polygamist; vigilant over his Flock, to preserve them from seduction; sober and temperate; of good behaviour, gravely weighing and considering his words and actions, and carrying himself so as not to expose himself to contempt; given to hospitality, ready to entertain and refresh those that are in need, according to his ability, especially strangers and banished Christians; apt to teach, well in∣structed in the Doctrine of Christianity, and skilful to divide the word aright, and to accommodate his teaching to the edification of his auditors; not given to wine, no striker; not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient; not a brawler; nor covetous; one that governs his own Family well, else he cannot in reason be thought fit to take care of the Church of God; not a novice, that is, one nwly instructed in the Faith, and planted in the Church, and not sufficiently experienced in the mysteries of the Gospel, lest being lifted up with pride and vanity, he fall into condemnation with the Devil, who for his pride was cast out of Heaven into the torments of Hell, 2 Pet. 2 4. likewise that he be of an unstained reputation, even among those that have not yet embraced the Faith, lest being upbraided by them
for his former wickedness, he be tempted to seek occasions to revenge himself, which is a great snare of the Devil; or lest the Devil make use of those reproaches to insnare others, and give them aversions to the Doctrine of such a man, who is under so much scandal for his former life. He shews also, how Deacons must be qualified, prescribing, that they should be proved and tried concerning their suffi∣ciency, piety, and good behaviour. He shews, they must be sober and grave per∣sons; not cunning and deceitful, not given to excess in drinking, not greedy of filthy lucre; but such as being orthodox in point of Faith, live pure and Christian lives, according to the Doctrine and directions of the Gospel. He declares, that they must be no Polygamists, as too many in that age (it seems) were, but the Husbands of one Wife at once; and such as govern their Children and their Families well. And lest any should despise the Deaconship as a mean office, he shews, that those who faithfully discharge this officeQui Diaco∣ni munere bene suncti sunt, si Pres∣byteri fiant, liberius & cum majori fiduciâ aliis Evangelium praedicabunt., purchase to themselves a good degree of respect, and also lay a foundation of rising to a higher degree in the Church, and if they come to be Presbyters, they preach the Gospel, or the Do∣ctrine f Faith, hîc ponitur pro Doctrinâ ipsâ, ut Gal. 3.23. & alibi saepe, Grot. in Christ with greater boldness and confidence. From Ver. 1. to 14. 7ly. He shews him, why he gave him these Directions, namely, that he might knw hw to behave himself in the Church, which is the House or Family of God, in which he dwells by his Spirit, and wherein he is truly worshipped; which Church is the Pillar or Basis of Evangelical truth, holding it forth, and pub∣lishing it to the world; sustaining it and keeping it from sinking. Now of this Evangelical truth he sets down six principal heads and mysteries 1. That Christ the Eternal Son of God, took on him our nature, and did visibly appear among men in an humane shape. 2ly. That he was justified by the Spirit, by or by his Divine Nature, by which he rais'd himself from the dead, and consequently de∣monstrated himself to be the Eternal Son of God, and proved himself to be just and innocent, although he was condemned as a Malefactor by the Jews and Gen∣tiles, [Rom. 1.4. 1 Pet. 3.18.]. 3. That he was seen and attended, ac∣knowledged, and adored by Angels at his birth [Luk. 2.14.], at his tempta∣tion [Math. 4.11.], at his passion [Luk. 22.43.], at his resurrection [Luk. 24 4.], of which things they were glorious witnesses, [Math. 28.2. 1 Pet. 1.12.]. 4ly. That he was preached by his Apostles among the Gen∣tiles as well as the Jews. 5. That he was believ'd on by many in the several Nations of the World; the sound of his Gospel going out into all the Earth, [Rom. 10.18. Col. 1.5, 6.]. 6ly. He was visibly and with a glorious ap∣pearance of Angels receiv'd up into Heaven, from whence sending down the Holy Ghost, and giving gifts unto men, to this very day he manifests the glory of his Deity. These are the Doctrines which he orders the Church should hold fast, from whence all the rest derive their original and establishment. From Ver. 14. to the end. 8ly. He now prophetically warns Timothy, (that he may forewarn the  Church), of the Apostasie and defection of some from the Christian Faith, and sound Doctrine of the Gospel in the latterSo the times of the New Te∣stament are call'd from the spreading abroad of the Gospel to the end of the World. Appellatione  intel∣ligitur totum illud tmpor s spacium quod inter primum & secundum Cori∣sti adventm intercedit  Tm. 3. 2 Pet. 3 3 1 Joh. 2.18. Gth in loc. times, [or in the following times]; which defection was expresly re∣veal'd to him by the Holy Ghost. The cause of which de∣fection he shews, would be the arising of seducing Spirits, who being hypocrites, and men of feared Consciences, would preach and propagate Doctrines of DevilsSee Medes Apostacy of the lat∣ter times., that is, whereof the Devil is the Author and Fomentor, forbid∣ding marriage, (to some me), which God allows, and ertain meats, (at some times), whereas God allows a
free use of his good Creatures to Believers, and permits those who know and be∣lieve the Gospel freely to partake of them, with thanksgiving; all difference of meats, being taken away under the New Testament, and every CreatureSanctificatur, i. e. fit mundum Act. 10.15. sanctified, (that is, made holy and lawful for us to use, 1 Cor. 7.14. Tit. 1.15.), by the word of God certifying us, and warranting us, that we may lawfully use it; and by prayer, which must be put up to God that it may be made wholsom and blessed to us. From Ver. 1. to 6. 9ly. He gives Timothy several Exhortations, in reference to his ministerial office. As first, To suggest thse things, which the Apostle had taught him, fre∣quently to the Brethren, whereby he would approve himself a good Minister of Christ, and one nourishedEnutritus] Potest etiam activè accipi enutriens illos: est enim par∣ticipium medium apud Graecos l'a∣tablus. Vel innutritus sermonibus fidei bonaeque doctrinae, i. e. Verbo Christi vero, & sincero, ceu spirituali cibo, nutritus & educatus. up with the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, which he had attained to by the Apostles preaching. And 2ly. That he should avoid Jewish Fa∣bles, and human Traditions, (which are no more to be valued than old Wives Fables), and exercise himself un∣to real Godliness. For bodily exercise, such as outward austerities, abstinences from meats, and such like volun∣tary afflictings of themselves, prescribed by men, are not the things wherein mans true holiness before God consists. For though these things may be of some use in some cases, yet they are but of little value in comparison of true Godliness, seeing they do only tame the body, not sanctifie and change the heart, as a lively faith and love, and the fear of God, do. And then these may be abus'd and degenerate into superstition, (as the Apostle testifies, Col. 2.23.), but true Godliness is always acceptable unto God, and profitable unto men, having promises of happiness both in this life and that which is to come, annexed to it. This, he shews, was a true saying, and very worthy to be re∣ceived. And for rejecting the inventions of men, and defending and maintaining true Godliness, (which consists in Faith and Obedience); he shews, he laboured and suffered reproach, having confidence in Gods promise made to true piety, and in his salvation, who as he is (in respect of outward preservations) the Preserver of Men and Beasts, Psal. 36.6, 7. so he affords more especial preserva∣tions to Believers in this life, when he sees it conducing to his glory and their good), but assuredly and certainly, he will preserve them from eternal misery in the other world. These things he charges Timothy to teach and inculcate. 3ly. He exhorts him, to give no occasion that his Youth be despised, but to sup∣ply what was wanting to him in age, with gravity of manners; and to be an example to Believers in speech and conversation, in charity, in spiritual zeal, and holy affections, in faithfulness and fidelity in his office, and lastly, in all purity. 4ly. He exhorts him, to be diligent in reading the Scriptures, and in the preach∣ing the Word, while he had an opportunity to stay there; for when the Apostle came thither, he must go along with him, and accompany him in his travels. He ex∣horts him, not to neglect the gift or office that was given him at his Ordinati∣onPaul laid hands on him in the Name of the Presbytery, and toge∣ther with other Presbyters, among whom for the time he was President, by which imposition of hands they signified, that the man was consecra∣ted and dedicated to God., because this office was committed to him by a special prophetick revelation given to some Prophet, that he should be taken into the ministry, and should prove an emi∣nent instrument therein, [see ch. 1.18. 2 Tim. 16.7.]. He exhorts him, to meditate on the things that concern'd his Function, and to give himself up wholly unto them, that his improvements in all the parts of his ministry may be manifested to all. And lastly, that he should take heed to himself and his DoctrineAttende tibi, ut recte vivas: attende doctrinae, ut recte alios insti∣tuas., and continue so doing, which would conduce to his own and his hearers eternal salvation. From Ver. 6. to the end.
10ly. In the next place, he directs him, how to order and temper his reproofs,  to elder and younger men and women. The elder sort, he shews, must not be dealt with roughly and rigidly, but with due respect to their age, according to the fifth Commandment. The younger sort must be treated with all kindness and friendliness; and he must look that he behave himself with all purity in the discharge of this duty. Ver. 1, 2. 11ly. He gives Precepts concerning poor widows, who were to be Servants of the Church, as Deaconesses, and to be kept by the publick charge of the Church, which he calls honouring of themHe speaks of widdows who were to be Servants of the Church, Rom. 16.1. and to live upon the Churches contribution, which he calls an ho∣nouring of them, because the Church testifi'd thereby the virtues of those so sustain'd, and that they were wor∣thy persons.; for so their repu∣tion would be preserved, whereas if they should be redu∣ced to extream poverty they would be contemptible. He shews, what kind of widows are thus to be maintained. 1. Such as have neither Children nor Grandchildren to per∣form this duty duty of piety, quandoque signi∣ficat, pietatis officio fungi erga Paren∣tes, ut apud Virgil. Tum pius Aeneas. to them, (which is so acceptable to God), and to take care of them, as part of their Family; this being due by way of gratitude to Pa∣rents who have done so much for their Children; and therefore Children should imitate the Stork. herein, which Bird is famous for nourishing and cherishing its aged Parents, and as it were, endeavouring to requite them. 2. Such as being destitute of friends, have none to trust in and rely upon, but God alone, (who is the Father of the widdows and the fatherless, Psal. 68.6.), and such as dailyTam assiduè quam fieri potest. Grot. vide 1 Thes. 2.9. & 3.10. 2 Thes. 3.8. 2 Tim. 1.3. give themselves to the exercises of piety and devotion, as Anna did, Luk. 2.36. 3. Such as are not of the number of wanton widows, who indulge themselves in idleness and pleasure, being as it were dead while they live, both in respect of God whom they do not serve, and in respect of humane society which they do not benefit. These Precepts he gives, that none but blameless persons may be taken into the Church's allowance, and those that are really necessitous. And that the Church may not be unnecessarily burdened, he declares, that if any man or woman provide not for those of their own family, (if they be able), they do that which is utterly incompatible with the Christian Faith, of which they make profession, and are worse than infidels, who even by the light of Nature use to do this. 4ly. He orders, that no widdows be admitted into the number of those that are to be maintained by the Church, but such an one as is not under sixty years of ageAgit Apostolus de illis Viduis quarum operâ in curâ aegrotorum, & pauperum, utebantur. Rom. 16.1., and that hath been the wife ofh.e. Quae suâ culpâ non tran∣sivit ad secundas aut tertias nuptias, puta per divortium aut repudium ali∣quod illegitimum. Vorstius. Secun∣das nuptias mortuo conjuge non dam∣nat sed concedit. Rom. 7.2, 3. one husband, that is, hath not had two husbands at once, or if her husband hath sent her a Bill of divorce, upon his repudiation of her, hath married no other. 5ly. That she be such an one as hath been well reported of for good works, and bath, by acts of duty and charity, approved her self to those among whom she hath lived, in all things of which her condition hath been capa∣ble; such as are, careful edification of Children, hospitali∣ty, friendliness, and humilityWashing of the Saints feet was an office of courtesie perform∣ed to Strangers in those hotter Coun∣ties, Gen. 43.24., and exercising her self in all sorts of good works. He comes now to shew, what widdows are not to be received into the Churches service, or to the office of Deaconesses, nor to live upon the Chur∣ches maintenance, viz. the younger women. 1. Because there was danger, left being pampired with the Churches bread, they should wax wanton against Christ, that is, not regard the service which they have promised to Christ, and his Church, as some younger widdows (whom possibly he points at) had already done: who despairing of marriage in the Church had revolted from the Faith, that they might marry some infidel out of the Church; whose condition he shews, to be damnable and miserable, because they had renounced that Faith in Christ, which they at first made profession of in Baptism; and further he shews, that such widows are
commonly idle, and wander about from house to house, curiously prying into, and tatling of other folks matters, and medling with things thy ought not. He ad∣viseth therefore, that the younger widows, (if they have not the gift of Conti∣nence) should betake themselves to a married life, and serve God in that, bear∣ing and bringing up Children, guiding their own houses and families, that they give no occasion of reproach to these that are strangers to the Faith, and are apt enough t seek occasion to accuse and find fault with Christians. And he tells them, there were some such, who having foraken the Christian Faith, had beta∣ken themselves to the territories of Satan, and being bitter enemies to Christians, would be glad to have somewhat to say against them. Concluding therefore this matter, he adviseth, that if any Christian have any helpless widw of his own family, that he undertake the care and charge of her, (if he be able), and not cast her upon the Church, lest there be not in the stock of the Church sufficient to provide for all that are truly helpless. From whence it appears, that if there were no poor and honest widows in the Church, of sixty years of age, there was no necessity to make provision for them, or emply them in the Churches service, and by cnsequence, that the ministry of women in the Deaconship was not need∣ful, unless by accident, when they were maintained by the publick charge, that they might not be altogether useless. From Ver. 3. to 17. 12ly. He gives directions concerning Presbyters or Elders in office, that are imployed in the government of the Church, as well as in preaching the word. And he ijius, 1. That they be accounted worthy of double honour, and be liberally maintained, especially those that labour in Word and DoctrineFrom whence it appeareth, that there were two sorts of Elders in the Church, namely, some th t laboured in the word, and others who were imployed only in the govern∣vernment of the Church, who are called Overseers, or Rulers, Rom. 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28.; which Precept he confirms, partly from the analogy of the Law of Moses, forbidding the muzling the Oxe that tread∣eth out the Corn, [Deut. 25.4.], but allowing him to feed all the time he doth the work, and so to have a certain reward for his labour; and partly from the rule of our Saviour, that the labourer is worthy of his reward, Luk. 18 7. Mat. 10.10. 2ly. He injoins, that an ac∣cusation be not received against an Elder under two or three witnesses. 3ly. If Elders, or any others, sin openly, he orders, that they should be publickly reproved, that others may fear to offend after their example. 4ly. He solemnly charges Timothy, that Ecclesiastical administrations and cen∣sures be performed without partiality, or respect of persons. 5ly. That he do not rashly ordain or receive persons into the sacred ministry, lst if they prove wick∣ed and unworthy afterwards, their miscarriages he imputed to him; and if other Presbyters will rashly ordain such, he adviseth him not to consent to them therein. He advises him, to keep himself pure from these and other sins, which were then so rise among them. Yet he spake not this, to prohibit him from drinking a little Winev. 23. Versus iste videtur ir∣repsisse in hunc locum praeter men∣tem Apostoli: quo fcto incertum. Fortê appositu, erat in margine, & incuriâ Apographi, non suo loco in∣sertus. Vicessis m secundus & quartu inviem cohaerent. Knatchbul. vide ibi plu. mderately for his health. And as to that Precept, of not partaking of other mens sins, he shews, he spake not of open sins, which were manifest; for the sins of some Candidates for the ministry are manifest be∣fore they are chosen, and go beforePraecedentia ad judicium] de quibus ideo judicare potest qui impo∣nit manum. Quosdam vero subsequuntur pec∣cata] i. e. manifesta siunt post ju∣dicium & impositionem manuum, tum demum incipientia s exerere, unde & de iis certò judicare is non potest; idcirco nec eorum siet par∣ticeps qui manus imponit. to condemn them, as utterly unfit for that office; but some mens sins follow after judgment hath pass'd upon them, that is, appear not, and are not known till after their ordination, and then their hypocrisie breaks out. In like manner the virtues and good works of some are manifestly known, that 'tis easie for the Church to judg them fit to be admitted into the ministry; and the evil works of those that are otherwise (which upon inquisition made, cannot for the present be discovered) notwithstanding will not long be hid, but in their own time be brought to light; so that if the Church cannot prevent sometimes, but that some hypocrites will be
admitted into the Ministry, yet when their faults are manifest, they may deal with them according to the discipline of the Church. From Ver. 17. to the end. 13ly. He now directs him, to instruct Christian Servants to be obedient to  their own Masters, whether they were Infidels or Believers. If their Ma∣sters were Infidels, they should notwithstanding carry themselves dutifully and re∣spectfully towards them, seeing by the providence of God they were placed under them, that so the Gospel be not evil-spoken of among Infidels, through the mis∣carriages of Christian Servants. If their Masters were Believers, they should serve them the more readily, because they were Believers, and Brethren, beloved of God, and partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, and of the grace of Adoption. Or, (as some translate the words), because believing Masters are such as will be careful to recompence the well doing of their Servants, Qui beneficentiam suscipiunt, & vicissim bonis beneaciunt. , est, curam alicujus gerere. Sic , Isa. 26.2. q. d. Domini diligendi eo nomine quod curam gerant, ut vobis benefaciant, i. e. ut vos vestiant, pascant, ab injuriis protegant.. These things he enjoins Timothy to teach and to exhort other Pastors to teach the same likewise. Ver. 1, 2. 14ly. He exhorts him, not to have fellowship with new-fangled Teachers, who depart from the Apostolical verity and simplicity in the matter and manner of their teaching; and being proud, and knowing nothing solidly in the mystery of the Gospel, are contentious about words, and verbal controversies, (from which springs nothing but uncharitableness), being men of a corrupt and perverse mind dis∣covering themselves more studious of gain than godliness, and designing by their preaching, to serve and promote their worldly profit. Ver. 3, 4, 5. 15ly. He exhorts him and other Pastors, to pursue after real piety, out of which springs true contentmentEst mercatura magna picta s cum animo contento, qui non pro∣perat ditescere., (and so is the great∣est gain); and to take heed of covetousness, and the in∣ordinate love of money, which is the root of so many evils, and betrays men to so many temptations and snares, to so many hurtful and ruining lusts, to defection from the faith, to vexation and an∣guish of mind here, and eternal perdition hereafter: And instead of following af∣ter that, to fllow after spiritual riches, namely, those excellent graces of righ∣teousness, godliness, perseverance in the Faith, love, meekness, patience, with which the Pastors of the Church ought more especially to be inriched. From Ver. 6. to 12. 16ly. He excites and stirs him up to Christian fortitude, in maintaining the true faith of the Gospel [Jude v. 3.], against all the persecutions of the world, and oppositions and contradictions of Heretical Teachers [2 Tim. 4.7.], and so to strive in this course, that he may secure a rightNotandum, vitae aeternae nomine hic & alibi significari jus ad vitam aeternam. Sensus idem, Phil. 3.14. Grot. and title unto, and at last attain the Crown of Eternal Life, unto which God had graciously called him; remembring, how he had, either at his Baptism or Ordination, made a famous profession before many witnesses, that he would faithfully serve Christ. He solemnly charges and adjures him and others, to whom the Pastoral charge should be committed, before God who giveth life to all that have life, and will raise all dead men to life again; and before Jesus Christ who bore his Testimony to the truth before Pontius Pilate [Joh. 18.37.], and therein gave him an example of confessing the truth, which be should imitate, that he and they faithfully observe this command, which is contained in ver. 11.12. of this Chapter; labouring to be without spot and blemish in their several
times and ages to the coming of Christ to judgmentHic apparet, loqui Paulum ad Timotheum tanquam qui vivere possit ad tempus quo Christus ad Judicium erat venturus. Sic 1 Cor. 15.12. Id evenit quia de die ultimo, quando is futurus esset, nihil Christus suis revelaverat ut semper expectaretur, vid. 1 Thes. 5.15. Grot. v. 14. Usque ad adventum Domi∣ni nostri Jesu Christi, i. e. Ita serva hoc mandatum ut quotidie Christum expectes, atque ita, ut si tibi ad id usque tempus esset vivendum tamen nihil remittas de studio. Camer. See Paraphrase on 1 Thes. 5.23., whose appearing the All-glorious God will in his due time manifest, who is omnipotent and immortal in himself, and dwells in light inaccessible, whom none can see with mortal eyes, who ought by all men to be praised and magnified for ever. From Ver. 12. to 17. 17ly. He directs him, what duties to charge upon the rich, viz. that they be humble, that they trust in God and not in their riches, (who giveth us all things liberally, to make use of with moderation and thankfulness); that they be charitable, laying per allusionem de omni re dicitur, quae clam deponi∣tur, ut Eleemosynae apud paupe∣res. up for themselves, as a treasure against the time to come, a good foundation, or a well-grounded hope of attaining eternal life, setled on the promise of God, made to all those who in Faith ap∣ply themselves to the practise of good works, Mat. 10.42. Gal. 6.8, 9. Heb. 13.16. 1 Pet. 2.5. From Ver. 17. to 20. 18ly. Lastly, He solemnly exhorts Timothy, to maintain the purity of Evangelical Doctrine, which was committed to his trust, as a pledg to keep safe∣ly, and transmit to posterity; and that he restrain the prophane wranglings and disputingsOppositiones, falso nominatae scientiae, sunt Sophisticae oppositiones quibus omnia fiunt dubia, dum hinc inde disputantur. Significat curiosa & inutilia dog∣mata: Vera scientia est quae ad salu∣tem aeternam proficit. of Sophisters about divine matters, fram'd out of erroneous grounds, and principles of Sciences, so termed, but falsely; which some professing and glorying in, have miserably erred concerning the Faith; and de∣serted Christianity; by which words, he seems to point at the Gnosticks, who have their name from Science, and profound knowledg, which they vainly arrogated to them∣selves. And so he concludes with his Apostolical Vale∣diction. From Ver. 20. to the end.
SECT. XVI. PAul in the time of his three Months stay in Greece, visits Athens and Corinth; and being almost ready to sail into Syria, (to carry the Alms and Collections made in Macedonia and Achaia for the poor Saints in Judea); he writes from Co∣rinth that eminent Epistle to the Romans, as may be gathered from Rom. 15.25, 26. and sent it by Phoebe a Servant of the Church of Cenchrea, near Corinth, as appears from Rom. 16.1. The Apostle Paul had a great desire and real intention to vi∣sit the Romans, that he might personally, and vivâ voce, con∣firm them in the Faith; but seeing himself still hindred by one thing after another, at last (being stirred up by the Spirit of God) he resolves to write unto them, and accordingly sent them this Epistle. In which we may observe these three parts.The Eipstle t Romans. 1. The Preface, wherein he testifies his great affection to them, and pre∣pares their minds to receive his subsequent instructions. Chap. 1. from Ver. 1. to 17. 2. The Body of the Epistle, which is partly doctrinal, asserting the main point of the Christian Religion, viz. Justification by Faith in Christ; from ver. 17. of chap. 1. to chap. 12. And partly practical, treating of Moral duties, and a Christian Conversation, required of all justified persons. From ch. 12. to ver. 14. of ch. 15. 3. The Conclusion. From ver. 14. of ch. 19. to the end. The occasion of this Epistle seems to be this: The Apostle had heard of some disagreements, both in judgment and affection, among the Christians at Rome, who were partly believing Jews, and partly believing Gentiles. The Jewish Christians, it seems, mingled Law and Gospel together in the point of Justification; and so zealously upheld the Jewish Law, and the Mosaical Rites, that they opposed the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, except they would become Proselytes, and submit to Circumcision: On the other side, the Gentile-Christians understanding themselves exempted from the observation of the Mosaical Rites, used their Christian Liberty with offence. Now to reconcile these controversies, and to settle them, both in the truth, and in unity of judgment and affection, and to remove all emulation be∣tween them, the Apostle writes this Epistle. In which we have, 1. THE Preface or Introduction: wherein, to gain the more credit and be∣lief to his following Instructions, he shews, That he was one who had re∣ceived  that singular mercy from Christ, to be called to the high dignity of an Apostle, and was authoriz'd, and set apart to the office of preaching the Gospel, which God had promised long before by his Prophets in the Old Testament, that it should be revealed, and that to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. The subject matter of which Gospel, he shews, concerns Jesus Christ, his Son, who ac∣cording to the flesh was born of the Seed of David; but according to the Spirit of Holiness, or that other Divine Nature in him, (call'd his Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. see also 1 Tim. 3.16. & 1 Pet. 3.18.), he is most fully and powerfully demonstrated, and declared to be the Son of Gd; as by many other signs, so especially by his Resurrection from the dead. From this Saviour,
he tells them, he had received the favour of this glorious office of the Apostle∣shipGrace and Apostleship] . See ch. 12.3. & 15.1. 1 Cor. 15, 10. Gal. 2.9. Eph. 3.2, 8. Glas., to preach the Gospel in his Name, and by his authority, and for his glory; among all Nations, to bring them to the obedience of the Doctrine of Faith, and to confirm them therein. And though he had not plantedBy whom the Church of the Romans was planted, or when, the Scripture is silent. Papists say by Peter, but learned men demonstrate, that Peter never was at Rome; much less planted the Church there. See Dav. Paraus in Rom. 16. dub. 11. Barnabas is supposed to have first preached Christ at Rome, and to have converted the Romans in the reign of iberius. See Clem. Recogn. l. 1. The reason why this Epistle stands first of all the Apostolical Epistles in our Bibles, is not because it was first written, but because of the dignity of the City to which it was addressed, viz. Rome, the Imperial Seat. the Gospel among them at Rome, yet he held himself bound to contribute to the advancement of the Faith of those of them, who were effectually called by Christ, and had obedientially subjected themselves to the Gospel. And accordingly he heartily wished the abounding and increase of all grace, and the sweet sense of the favour and love of God to all real Christians at Rome, whether Jews or Gentiles. And in the first place, that he may testifie his great affection to them, he declares, how heartily he gives thanks to God through Jesus Christ, (in whose Name all prayers and thanksgiving ought to be presented, Eph. 5.20. Col. 3.17.), that their Faith and sub∣mission to the Gospel, was so famous, and the report of it spread far and near, and made known in all the Churches of the whole World, and spoken of to their great advantage and commendation. Insomuch that he solemnly professes in the presence of God, (whom he heartily and sincerely served in the Gospel of his Son), he did not forget them in his daily prayers; but earnestly requested of the Lord, that what he had so long desired and designed, might happily, (if it seem'd good in his eyes), at last be accomplished, namely, that he might come personally unto them. For he had an extream great desire to see them, not for any other reason, so much as that he might impart unto them some of those spi∣ritual gifts which God had endued him with, and might communicate to them a further knowledg of the mysteries of the Gospel, that they might be more established and confirmed in the Faith, against all temptations whatsoever. Yea he desired to see them, that they might be mutually comforted, by a mutual communication of the Faith, that both he and they had in Christ Jesus. For it could not but greatly comfort and strengthen them, to hear him discourse of his Faith in Christ, and it would also revive him to hear them declare their Faith in the same Je∣sus also; and so they might be mutual comforts each to other. He desires they should know that he had often purposed to come unto them, but still by one obsta∣cle or other was hindred; and he desired to come to them, that he might be a means of converting some there to the Faith, and of confirming others already converted, as among other Gentiles he had been a means of converting several, and gaining them to Christ. For by the nature of his office, and by the special com∣mand of Christ, he was a debter to all sorts of men, being obliged to preach the Gos∣pel to them, whether they were Greeks, those of the most polite Nations; or Barbarians, and those of the ruder. And as far as concerned himself, he was most ready to take a journey to Rome, to preach the Gospel there also. For he was far from being asham'd of the Gospel of Christ, which is a powerful means (in the hand of God) of bringing all those to Salvation, that effectually embrace it, whether they be Jews (who had the priviledg to have it first preached to them) or Gentiles. From Ver. 1. to 17. 2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle: And having mention∣ed the Gospel, he shews, that by it the Righteousness of God, that is, the Righteousness whereby we stand just and righteous in the sight of God, (which God imputes to sinners, and accepts for their righteousness, and pardons them for it, see ch. 3.22.), is revealed and taught, and clearly made known to be of Faith, [or by Faith], unto Faith; that is, 'tis revealed to be by such a
Faith as groweth and increaseth from one degreei. e Ex fide promovente, a∣subinde angescente, ut sit Hebraismus, qualis in Psal. 84.7. vid 2 Cor. 3.18. Sic Theophyl, Occum. Paraeus, cum aliis. and measure to another. As Faith increaseth, and is more and more capable of discerning Gods righteousness, so more of his righteousness is still manifested unto it. Or from one kind of Faith to another, viz. from the Faith of the Old Testament, to the Faith of the New; so that never any was, or shall be justified otherwise than by FaithEx fide veteris Testamenti ob∣scurâ in clarm fidem novi Testa∣menti: ad quam vetus illa nos du∣cit quasi paedagogus. Sic Chrysost. Theodoret. cum aliis.. Or by Faith, unto Faith; that is, the righteousness of God is revealed to be by Faith to encourage people unto Faith, and to believe in Christ, that by believing they may obtain Salvation. And this is the main proposition, which he explains and confirms by many arguments, from ver, 17. of ch. 1. to ch. 12. namely, that we are justified by Faith in Christ, and not by Works, or our internal Righteousness. This he proves, 1. By a citation out of the Prophet Habuccuc, ch. 2. v. 4.A famous Text, thrice alledg∣ed in the New Testament, Heb. 10.38. To perswade to patience. Gal. 3.2. to prove no justification by the Law. And Rom. 1.17. to prove justifica∣tion by Faith The Hebrew is, The just shall live by his Faith. The Apo¦stle still omits the particle His. The LXX have my for his. Richardson.., where the Prophet speaking of the calamities that was coming upon the Jews by the Caldeans, shews, how different the car∣riage and behaviour of the wicked would then be, from that of the righteous in such a danger. The heart of the wicked would be high, and proud, and lift up in a foolish conceit of their own wisdom, and power to secure themselves. But the righteous, (such as were in a state of reconciliation with God), should live, and find comfort in that trouble, by their Faith in God. So the Apostle shews, that he that is evangelically righteous, or just, shall live, not only a life of grace here, but attain to a life of glory hereafter; by Faith in Christ, and resting on his righteousness and merits. 2ly. He shews, that men have need of this imputed righteousness of Christ; because of themselves, they are all unrighteous; and God hath revealed his wrath from Heaven against such. This he proves by instancing first in the Gentiles, secondly in the Jews. 1. For the Gentiles, he shews, they were guilty of detaining the truth of God, (that is, the true notions they had of God, and their duty to him, and their Neighbour by the light of Nature), in unrighteousness; so that they would not walk according to that light, but suppressed it, and resisted it. For that which may be naturally known of God, (viz. his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness), is manifest in them, that is, in their minds and consciences, (though they followed not the light shining in them): or is manifest among them, viz. by the writings and discourses of their learned men. For God hath made it known unto them, partly by imprinting those Notions of Himself, and of good and evil in their hearts; and partly by the Book of the Creatures, in which his glorious Attributes are written in great Characters. For his invisible and in∣comprehensible Nature, and Almighty Power, are (even ever since the Creation of the World) clearly to be understood by his works which are seen, viz. his works of Creation and Providence, so far as to render those, which do not discern them, nor take notice of them, inexcusable. And seeing they glorified not God according to that knowledg, which the light of Nature gave them of him, nor were thankfull for his benefits; they became vain in their imaginations and reasonings concerning God, and his worship, and feigned many fabulous and vain Gods unto themselves, whereby their foolish heart was more and more dark∣ned concerning the true God; and those among them that seemed to be most wise and learned, were in those matters as blind and foolish as others. Insomuch, that they horribly dishonoured the All-glorious God, by framing the vile Images of men and beasts to represent him, [Isa. 40.18. Psal. 106.20.]; whereas they should have conceived God to be so infinitely glorious, that nothing could set forth his glory sufficiently. Ʋpon which provocation of theirs, God gave them up judi∣cially to the lusts of their own hearts; so that being left to themselves, (and not restrained from the pursuit of their filthy desires), they brake out into pol∣lutions
and uncleannesses, of the most odious kinds; which God permitted them to fall into, as a punisment upon them for their horrible Idolatry, they having changed the truth of God, that is, the true Notions they had of God, into an Idol1 Cor. 8.4. Not for the mat∣ter or form, but in respect of the opi∣nion men have of them, thinking they can help when they cannot. (call'd here a lye, because it seems to be, what it is not, and deceives men as a lye doth), and worship∣ped and served the Creature, forsaking the Creator, who is blessed for evermore, and whose glory and blessedness will abide for ever, notwithstanding all the impiety of Ido∣laters. Yea upon this provocation it was, that God so far left them to them∣selves, that they fell into the most unnatural lusts, such as are not found even among brute Beasts. And so they receiv'd a just recompence and reward for their Idolatry, (which is call'd spiritual whoredom), in being left by God to the vilest of all corporal uncleanness. And 'tis no wonder, that they should not keep the Order of Nature, who forsook the Author of Nature, as Anselm speaks. Fur∣thermore, He shews, that they regarding not to know God, so far as by the light of Nature and the works of Creation they might have done, nor to acknow∣ledg and reverence him accordigly, God as a just Judg, gave them to a reprobate or injudicious mind, whereby they approv'd of nothing that was right and good, but fell into most gross abominations and enormities; and that against the second Table as well as against the first. Of which sins, reigning among the Heathen Ro∣mans, he gives a large CatalogueAmong which he reckons ha∣ters of God, that is, quar∣rellers at his providence, when any adverse thing happens unto them.. And in conclusion, as an aggravation of their guilt and unrighteousness, he adds, that though they had a sense im∣planted upon their hearts of the righteous] Intelligitur hic jus partim per rationem, partim per traditionem inscriptum humani, mentibus, recte puniri qui gravia delinquunt. Grot. judgment of God, and the pu∣nishment that he will inflict upon such transgressors, yet they not only committed those sins themselves, but also took pleasure and delight in those that committed them. From Ver. 17. to the end. Having thus shewed the Gentiles, generally, to be most grievous sinners, and so condemned, and not justified by their own works; He now comes to answer an objection which some of them might make against what he had said. They might possibly say, What shall our Lawgivers and Magistrates (who condemn vice, and commend virtue) be so deeply censured? For answer to this, the Apostle (by an elegant Apostrophe, wherein he speaketh as it were face to face to this Gentile who thus objecteth) acknowledges, that 'twas true, they had some among them that declared against wickedness and punished it. But those were the most inexcusable of all others, because they themselves did the like, or as ill things (though more secretly) as those which they condemned in others. And they might assure themselves that the wrath and judgment of God (which is just and according to the merit of the deed) is against them that do such things, whether secretly or openly. For tell me (says he) thou Magistrate, who judgest ano∣ther for crimes that thou thy self committest; canst thou in reason think to escape the righteous judgment of God? Or canst thou think, because God hath hitherto spared thee, that thou shalt finally escape? Dost not thou consider that Gods long suffering and forbearance invites thee to repentance, and not to go on in thy sins. Dost not thou consider, that by thy impenitence and persisting in thy sins, thou treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his works, either the rewards of his grace, or the punishments of his justice; namely, eternal life to them that persevere in obedience to the truth, hoping for, and expecting such a reward; but to the Adversaries of the truth, and servants of unrighteousness, besides the manifestations of his wrath in this life, eternal death and misery at the end of it. And God will have no respect to any Nation (however priviledged) in this matter, but in every Nation they that fear him,
and work righteousness shall be rewarded with glory, honour, and eternal peace; and they that go on in their sins and impenitency, shall be punished with eternal death and misery; and that, whether they be Jews or Gentiles. For God measures not men by their outward conditions and circumstances, so as upon that account, to accept or reject any man. And therefore the Gentiles, who had not the Law written in Tables, but had it written upon their Hearts, shall be judged by that innate Law which they have violated, and not by the other. And the Jews, who sin against the Law given them by Moses, shall be judged according to the threatnings of that Law. Nor is it possible that the Jews, because they know the Law, and hear it often read in their Synagogues, should be accounted righteous before God, except they perform perfect obedience to it, which because they cannot do, it follows that they cannot be exempted from de∣served condemnation; and so they have need to seek for righteousness by Christ, as well as others. And as for the Gentiles, who have not the written Law as delivered by Moses, yet have it imprinted in their hearts, and do by the light of Nature, some things which God hath commanded in his Law; to these, that Law within them, is a Law, as their own Consciences do witness, their thoughts, or reflections,v. 15. ] Legis opus est declarare, quae rectè, quaeve ini∣què facta sunt. by turnsv. 15. , h. e. Vicissim, sivè alternante sententiâ. Grot. accu∣sing them when they do ill, and excusing them when they do well. Therefore they have nothing to pretend, why they should not undergo deserved condemnation for their sins; much less have the Jews. And this he tells them, will appear to be most just at the day of judgment, when God shall judg the secret and hidden things of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Doctrine which he, his Apostle, (having learn't it of him), had every where preachedSee 2 Tim. 2.8. Act. 10.42. Act. 17 31. 2 Tim 4.8.. For by the light of Nature it did not appear, by whom God would judg the world, but it was declar'd and manifested in the Gos∣pelFrom this Text, the Ancients call'd the writings of Paul, his Gos∣pel, as particularly Clemens in his E∣pistle to the Corinthians. Take (says he) blessed Pauls Epistles into your hands; mark what he writeth in the beginning of his Gospel. ], whereof Paul was a Minister. From Ver. 1. to 17. 2. Having thus handled the case of the Gentiles, he comes in the next place to speak of the Jews, who would possibly alledg for themselves, that some∣thing surely must be allowed to their priviledges, and that they are not to be brought into the same condemnation with the Gentiles. That he might there∣fore speak more particularly to this case, he brings in (as it were) some prin∣cipal Teacher of the Law, and Patron of righteousness by Works, producing seven props of his vain confidence; all which the Apostle (by way of concession) allows; and yet proves, that the Jews are not to expect to be justified by these before God, any more than the Gentiles may, by that obedience which they perform to the Law of Nature. And in the first place, says he, thou sayest, Thou art a Jew, which was a name, not of a Nation only, but of a Professor of the true Religion, and of a Worshipper of the true God. 2. Thou dependest on thy outward performances of Law, on thy Circumcision, &c. as if justification were to be had thereby, and could not be had without it. 3. Thou makest thy boast of God, viz. that thou art of that People that were chosen above all other Na∣tions, and are in covenant with God. 4. Thou knowest his will, not from the meer collection of reason, but from the books of Moses and the Prophets. 5. Thou triest things that differ, (being instructed therein out of the Law)v 15. ., that is, canst distinguish betwixt lawful and unlawful, between what is commanded and what is forbidden. 6. Thou hast such abundant knowledg that thou canst teach others. 7. Thou hast a model, or scheme, or system in thy head of that know∣ledg, which is here and there scattered up and dwn, and contained in the Law. The Apostle answers, that all these things being granted, yet they are insuffici∣ent
to make any man righteous before God, or to free him from condemnation; for it could not but be granted, that many, if not most of their Rabbies and Teachers did not practise the duties they taught others, but lived in those or the like sins and vicesCum haec scriberet Paulus, re∣cens erat memoria Asinaei, & Asilaei, in Babyloniâ Judaeorum, ad quos in∣gens multitudo confluxerat; qui om∣nes non nisi ex rapto vivebant, Joseph. Antiq. 18. 12. Non multò post, sa∣cerdotalium familiarum Principes, fraudatis minoribus sacerdotibus, decimas sibi totas abstulêre, Josh. 20.6. Josephus etiam inter cri∣mina quae popularibus suis, dicto loco, exprobat, ponit & . Hi fructus fuêre siduciae in solis ceremoniis collocatae. v. 22. ] Non multum distat, falsos Deos colere, & verum spoliare, quod faciebant sa∣cerdotes non offerendo ex proventibus ea quae Lex Dei ipsis praecipiebat, ant certè non qualia opor∣tebat, Mal. 1.8, 12, 13, 14. & 3.10. Grot., which they condemned in others, and so caused the Name of God to be blasphemed among the Gentiles through their impieties; as the Prophet Ezekiel complains [ch. 36.22, 23.] the hypocrites of his time did, who boasted in the same priviledges that these present Jews boasted of. From Ver. 17. to 25. But the Jews might here possibly urge and plead their Circumcision as a Seal of the Covenant between God and them, and thence inferr, that they were not in such danger of condemnation as the Gentiles. The Apostle answers, that for men that so liv'd as they did, 'twas madness to think that Circumcision will stand them in such stead, as to exempt them from condemnation. For Circum∣cision will not profit nor avail to justification, except it be joined with perfect obedience to the whole Law; but if transgression of the Law be found in him that is circumcised, he is in the same condition with an uncircumcis'd Heathen. Yea, if the uncircumcised could do that which the Law requires to justification, that is, perform perfect obedience to the moral Law, they should be accepted of God, as well as if they had been circumcised So that if a Gentile, who is by Na∣ture without Circumcision could fulfil the moral Law perfectly, he would condemn a Jew, who is only outwardly (and according to the Let∣ter of the LawLegem facere, non est verba legis exteriùs sequi, sed mentem, & intentionem legis obedienter imple∣re. Cassiodorus.) circumcised, but hath not that purity of heart and life, which that Ceremony was ap∣pointed to signifie and engage all that are circumcised unto. For he tells them, that he is not a Child of Abraham, (such to whom the promise of life appertains), who is only born of Abrahams race, and no more: neither is that the available Cir∣cumcision, which is only outward: viz. the mark imprinted in the flesh: But he is a Jew indeed, a true Son of Abraham, (who shall be accepted with God, although he be not so by birth), who is so inwardly, and by a true con∣version of his heart to God. For the renovation of the mind and heart by the Holy Ghost, is the true Circumcision, and not that which is outwardly visible in the body, perform'd according to the Letter of the Law; and such renewed persons shall have praise and commendation, if not among men, (who see the outside only, and among whom 'tis a great dignity to be a circumcised Jew); yet with God, who looks into the heart. From Ver. 25. to the end. He comes now to answer some other Objections, which the Jews would be apt to make against what he had said. 1. If the case be so, then it will be said, that the Jew hath no advantage or priviledg above the Gentile, neither is there any profit of Circumcision. He answers, that the Jews have a great advantage above any other Nation, and that, 1. Because unto them were committed th oracles of God, that is, all the revelations of his will, the Law, the Sa∣cramnts and Seals of the Covenant, the Prophecies and Promises of the Messiah, by which they might more easily come to know the true God, and the way of Salvation by the expected Mssias, than any others. And if any shall say, that this advantage was lost, by the unbelief of a great part of them, He answers, that the faithfulness of God in his Promises and Covenant, is not made void by the unbelief of men. For it ought ever to be acknowledged and confessed, that God cannot be otherwise than true and faithful in performing what
he hath promised, though all mankind should be false and deceitful, and should fail to perform their duty: And for the proof of this, he cites a passage out of Psal. 51.4. (according to the version of the Septuagint) where David hum∣bly confesseth his hainous sin against God, that by his penitent confession God might be justified, and acquitted from all injustice in reproving him by Nathan and denouncing those heavy Judgments that he intended to bring upon him, and that he might be clear and unreproveable for so judging him for his sin, and might clearly overcome and win the victory when he should be judged or questioned, or impleaded by any man, for his dealing so severely with David. So that the Apostle applies these words from the hypothesis (in Davids singular case) to the thesis, viz. to Gods general faithfulness, truth, and righteousness in all his Promises, Covenants, and Proceedings. And thus the unrighteousness of men is so far from making void, that it more commends, and sets off, and il∣lustrates the righteousness of God. But 2ly. It will be said, If this be so, then God seems to be unrighteous in punishing those sins, which do so illustrate, and set off his righteousness. This Objection the Apostle makes in the person of a carnal man., ignorant of God, and replies, that the Objection is blasphemous; for 'tis impossible, that he that shall judg the world should be unjust. But 3ly, This man will further object, that, If the truth and faithfulness of God be made more abundantly manifest, by the falseness, lying, and unfaithfulness of man; then he is so far from deserving condemnation for it, that he may securely go on in it, (according to the Apostles DoctrineVidentur hi vecordes hujus ca∣lumniae occasionem sumpsisse ex eo quod saepè doceret Apostolus, Superabundâsse gratiam Dei, ubi super∣abundavit hominum iniquitas, & eam cessisse in laudem gratiae, & justitiae Dei. A Lap.), that the glory of God may be more advanced thereby. The Apostle answers, that they were malicious slanderers that charged him or the other Apostles that they held such a wretched position as this, viz. that they might do evil, that good might come of it, which he was so far from owning or approving, that he declares their condemnation to be just who bold and practise such Doctrines, and vent such Calumnies. 5ly, But the Jews will further say, What are not they better, and more righteous, and in a better estate, as to justification by their works, than the Gentiles? He answers, Not at all; for he had hitherto proved, (viz. in his two first Chap∣ters), that both Jews and Gentiles are naturally under sin, and therefore the Gospel-righteousness is no less necessary for the one, than for the other. This he further proves, by many clear testimonies out of the Old Testament, as out of Psal. 14.1, 2, 3. & Psal. 53 1, 2, 3. where the Prophet speaking of the unre∣generate in his time, and of all others in their natural estate, out of Christ, pronounceth, 1. That no man is righteous. 2. That all are naturally blind and ignorant of the things that concern their Salvation. 3. That none seek∣eth after God, to know and worship him as they ought. 4. That they are all gone aside from God, and from the way wherein God appointed them to walk; and being so corrupt by Nature they are unfit to bring forth any good fruits, or to do any good. He goes on further to demonstrate this, from Psal. 5.9. where from what was spoken of Davids enemies in particular, he proves the corruption of all mankind in general; and that because (naturally) there is the same fountain of corruption in all. Their throat, says he, is like a Se∣pulcher newly opened, out of which comes nothing but stench and filthiness, viz. murderous pestilential threatnings; they have a false and deceitful tongue; their slanders are no less hurtful than the poison of Asps, Psal. 140.3. their mouth is full of cursing and bitter speeches, Psal. 10.7. they are ready to commit all manner of cruelty, and violence, and know not how to live quietly themselves, nor to suffer others to be quiet, Psal. 59.7, 8. There is no fear of God be∣fore their eyes; and so there is nothing to restrain them from running into all sorts of wickedness, Psal. 36.21. And, lest the Jews should think to elude and evade the force of these Testimonies, as not belonging to them, he tells them, that what the Law, that is, the books of the Old Testament, the Psalms and Prophets thus say, they say to and of the Jews; and by complaining so
much of their universal defection and wickedness, they include them, and otn only the Gentiles, to be obnoxious to the wrath of God, and justly punishable by him, without being able to say any thing for themselvs. From all these fore∣cited Testimonies, he concludes, that by the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, because man, since the fall, is disabled by his innate corruption and sin, to fulfil the Law, either natural or written; so that all the efficacy it hath, is only to discover to him his sin, and (without Gods mercy in Christ) to seal up to him his condemnation, [Gal. 2.16.]. From Ver. 1. to 21. Having thus shewed negatively, that by the works of the Law, righteous∣ness and justification is not to be had, he comes now to prove the affirmative part of his position, viz. that God hath manifested another way of justi∣fication in his word, viz. by Faith in Jesus Christv. 22. By Faith of Jesus Christ,] Faith is to be taken here passively to signifie the Faith whereby Christ is be∣lieved on.. For he tells them, that now, since the coming of Christ, the righteousness of God (that is, which avails be∣fore God, and which he freely allows to man for his justi∣fication) is manifested to be the righteousness of Christ, imputed to all such, as by a lively Faith receive it, and not to be that which men pretend to, by the performance of the works of the Law, either natu∣ral or written. And he tells them, that both the Law and the Prophets bear witness unto this righteousness. As for example, In the Law, (or one of the books of Moses, viz. Genesis, ch. 22.18.), God promised Abra∣ham, that in his seed (viz. in the Messias that was to come of him) all nations of the earth shall be blessed. And this Doctrine was taught by the ProphetsSee Act. 26.22. also, as we may see, Isa. 53. Dan. 9.24. This is the righeousness which God hath appointed for mans justification, even the righteousnes which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, and this blessedness belongs to all, and rests upon all that be∣lieve [see ch. 4. v. 9.], whether they be Jews or Gentiles, there being no diffe∣rence between them in this matter. And he assures them, there is no other way of justification but this. For all mankind are sinners, infected and polluted with sin, and so will fallv. 23. Et destituuntur gloriâ Dei] h. e. Quae à Deo collata est in primâ creatione, & quae conferetur in vitâ aeternâ. Glass. short of obtaining the glory of God,See ch. 5. v. 2. and eternal life, if they seek it not in this way: All therefore that are justified, that is, absl'd and acquitted from the guilt of their sins, and accuted righteous before God, cannot otherwise be so, than by the free grace and goodness of God, and the redemption and ransom of Jesus Christ; whom God from the beginning purposed to set forth unto men, as the only means for the expiation of their sins, and as the only way by which he would be propitiated] Sicut Deus promise∣rat se praesentem fore in propitiatorio, ita in Christo solo quaeri, agnosci, & invocari vult. Ut Propitiatorium, sivè operculum arcae foederis, tabulas legis in arcâ obtegebat; sic Christus pec∣catorum nostrorum contra legem com∣missorum, multitudinem ac magnitu∣dinem, itemque maledictionem legis suâ obedientiâ, & merito, operit, atque tegit, ne in conspectum Dei peccata ea veniant, Psal. 32.1, 3. Glass., viz. through Faith in his blood. And he intended hereby, that his righteousness, that is, his goodness, faithfulness, and truth, should be clearly demonstrated, by his forgiving propter, sivè per, remissionem. Freidlib. to Believers their past transgressions, through his infinite mercy and forbearance, whereas he might justly and imme∣diately have destroyed them for their transgressions. And he intended the rather at this present season, (viz. be∣fore he brought destruction on the Jews for their incorri∣bleness), to make his righteousness and goodness appear to all the world, in that he had sent the promised Messias, for whose sake he was freely ready to pardon sin, and to justifie those that believe in him. And seeing these things are so, he asks what man had any cause of boasting in himself? Indeed if he were justified by his own works, or inherent righteousness, he might boast that the meritorious cause of his justification was in himself; but seeing that cannot be, all boasting is excluded, and that not by the Doctrine of Works, but by
the Doctrine of FaithThe Prescript or Doctrine of Faith is by a Hebraism call'd a Law.. Therefore he concludes, that a man is justified by Faith, and not by the works of the Law, done either before conversion or after. He shuts up this discourse, by shewing, 1. That this way of justification is common both to Jews and Gentiles. For as God is one and the same, so is his way of justifying sinners one and the same to all Nations, both to circumcised Jews and uncircumcised Gentiles, namely, by Faith in his Son. 2. He shews, that the Doctrine of justification by Faith, and not by the works of the Law, doth not make void the Law, but rather establishes it. For the Gospel shews, how firm and irrevocable the Law is, seeing Christ was made under the Law, and was, by his fulfilling the Law, to purchase for man a right to the life it promis'd; and by be∣lieving in Christ (who obeyed the Law, and satisfied the breach of it), we acknowledg, that without exact obedience to the Law there can be no salvation; which exact obedience we being not able to perform, our Saviour hath perform'd it for us. And lastly, he tells them, this Doctrine of Faith establisheth the Law still as a rule, though not as a Covenant. From Ver. 21. to the end. The Apstle proceeds to confirm his principal position, viz. that a man is  justified by Faith, without the works of the Law. And, in order hereunto, he instances in Abraham; touching whom he argues in this manner; What shall we say then? shall we say that Abraham our father found, or ob∣tained righteousnessJustitiam, scil.] quae vox jam praecesserat. Grot. by, or according to the flesh, that is, by being circumcised in his flesh, or by his own righteousness and works, which are seen outwardly, and by men esteemed praise-worthy? No, in no wise. For if he were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory, (the cause of his justifi∣cation being in himself); but he hath not any thing whereof to glory, at least before God; though possibly in the sight of men, (who can see no further than the outside) he might have whereof to gloryQui ad civilem modum, i. e. externâ aliquâ specie, est innocens, laudem potest ab hominibus sperare temporariam, non illam aeternam à Deo. Grot.. Therefore the Scripture affirms that Abrahams Faith, or firm believing the Promise of God, [viz that he would be his shield, and great reward, and give him a Son in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed, Gen. 15.6.] was counted to him for Righte∣ousness; that is, by means of his Faith he was esteemed or reckonedPhineas's executing judgment, Psal. 106.3. was counted to him for righteousness to all generations, that is, by means thereof he was reckoned or esteemed a righteous man in all ages. righteous before God, and not by means of his works. For he that worketh, in order to his re∣ward with God, and hath or brings works before God, which are Gods-justice-proof; upon his perfect innocence, or blamelesness, God will, according to the Law of justice, reward and crown his innocence, paying it him as a due debt, and not giving it him by way of favour or grace. But he that works not, as hoping to be justified thereby, (though otherwise he makes conscience of good works, Jam. 2.26.), nor pretends to have any such works as he dares confide in, or bring before God for his justification, but trusts in the gracious promise of God, who justifies, or absolves those who have been ungodly, but now repent and believe in his Son; such a mans Faith is counted to him for righteousness; that is, by means of his Faith he is accounted, or adjudged righeousFaith is accepted to justifica∣tion, neither in respect of the worth of it to procure it, nor yet as being the form of righteousness; but instru∣mentally only, because it apprehends that for which we are justified, name∣ly, the Merit and Righteousness of Christ. Slater in loc. in Law, and absolv'd and acquitted in judgment. And agreeable to this is that description of blessedness given by David, Psal. 32. who being sorely oppressed with the guilt of his sins, and the fear of Gods wrath, pronounces the man blessed, to whom God im∣puteth righteousness, (viz. the righteousness of the Messiah, he having no works to bring before God to be justifiedIndeed that Faith which is without works is dead, no true Faith. But Faith only acteth in the point of our justification before God, ap∣plying Christ, and the promises of the Covenant of Grace to our selves, whereby Christ doth become ours, his righteousness our justification, and all the benefits of his redemption do redound to our Salva∣tion. Idem. by, and whose transgression is forgiven, and his sin coveredSin in respect of the offence, is remitted: in respect of the filth or turpitude of it, is co∣vered: in repect of the punishment, not imputed. This heap of words serves only to amplifie the grace of God in this business. Remittere, & tegere, & non imputare, unius significationis sunt verba, quia cum tegit remittit, & cum remittit non imputat., (viz. from the sight of God so that the Lord looks upon him as no more lying under
the guilt thereof) and to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquityGod is said to impute sins to a man when he will have him make satisfaction for the same, by punishment; and not to impute them, when he forgives them, and acquits a man from punish∣ment. Likewise he accounts Faith for Righteousness, when he ascribes or imputes to Believers the Righteousness of Christ, by them apprehended by Faith, and by this gracious imputation accounts them righteous thereupon. Not to have sins imputed, is, not to have them laid to ones charge [Act 7.60.]. nor come into reckoning against us before God, to be punished for them. Davids words expresly mention not the imputation of Righteousness, but run only upon Gods forgiving, covering, and not imputing sin; and yet Paul saith, David describes the blessedness of the man to whom God imputeth Righteousness. Here therefore a Synecdoche must needs be acknowledged, and that remission of sins, (here expressed by forgiving, covering, and not imputing of sin) doth plainly import and imply also an imputation of Righteousness.. From Ver. 1. to 9. He now moves a Question, Whether this blessedness of justification by Faith alone, belongs to the Circumcision, that is, the Jews only, or to the Uncir∣cumcision, that is, the Gentiles also? And seeing he had before asserted, that Abrahams Faith was reckoned to him for righteousness, he now inquires, when it was reckoned to him, and in what state Abraham was when he was pro∣nounced righteous? He answers, it was fourteen years, at least, before he was circumcised [Gen. 15.2.], therefore this way of being Righteous does not be∣long only to the Circumcision, or the Jews, but to the uncircumcised Gen∣tiles also, who believing in Christ become sharers with Abraham in that blessed∣ness. But then it may be objected, If Abraham was justified whilst he was un∣circumcised, to what purpose was he circumcised? He answers, that Abraham received Circumcision as a Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace, made to him and his Seed [Gen. 17.2.4.10.], and as an obsignation that the righ∣teousness of FaithSigillum justitiae] quo scil. te∣stificabatur Deus, Abrahae justitiam certam esse, & legitimam, justitiam; adeptam, inquam, ante per fidem cum adhuc esset praeputiatus. A Lapide., was the true way for a sinner to become righteous; which righteousness Abraham had obtained whilst he was uncircumcised, to the end, that he might be the Father (in a spiritual sense) of Belie∣vers among the Gentiles (that were uncircumcised), and the Father of those that believe among the Jews (who were circumcised), namely, to as many of them, as (besides their Cir∣cumcision) imitated his Faith. Therefore the righteousness of Faith is common to Believers, both circumcis'd and uncircumcis'd, and reckoned, or imputed to all that follow the example of the Faith of Abraham, which he had when he was uncircumcised; and therein they are all his Seed, if not by generation, yet by imitation. And marvel not, saith he, that I interpose the condition, if they walk in the steps of Abrahams Faith; for the great Promise made to Abra∣ham and his Seed that they should possess that rich, and fertile, and pleasant part of the worldMundus, pro parte mundi pri∣mariâ. & à Deo singulariter in pecu∣lium populi sui selectâ, terrâ nimi∣rum Canaan, accipitur. Glass., to wit, Canaan, with the Coun∣tries adjacent, (under which Heaven it self was also ty∣pically promised and comprehended, Heb. 11.14, 16.), was not made upon Condition of their performing perfect obedience to the Law, either of nature, or that after∣wards given at Sinai; but they were to obtain it, by the righteousness of Faith, and their trusting and depending on the gracious Promise of God. Now (says he) if they that are of the Law, that is, that seek to be justified by the works of the Law, be heirs of this promised inheritance, then the way of Faith prescribed by God, is to no purpose. And if it could be sup∣posed, that God had promised to conveigh the inheritance to them who performed
perfect obedience to the Law, that Promise would not avail them, seeing no man is able to perform perfect legal righteousness. And 'tis evident, that the Law is so far from justifying, and so giving a title to the Inheritance, that it work∣eth wrath, that is, it reveals and pronounces condemnation, and death, upon the guilty for their transgressions: not that of it self, it was originally destin'd to subject men to punishment, but by accident and occasionally in respect of mans disobedience, it doth inevitably adjudg him thereunto. Whereas were there no Law written in nature, or given by God, there would be no transgression, and so no Condemnation. The Law therefore is so far from justifying, that it condemns. Seeing then, that neither Justification, nor the promised Inheritance, (which typified Heaven), is obtained by the works of the Law, it follows, that it must needs be obtain'd by Faith. And God hath appointed it to be ob∣tainable by Faith, that it might be of free and undeserved grace and favour; and to be of grace, that His promise might stand firm and sure to all the be∣lieving Seed of Abraham, (whereas it would be unsure and uncertain, if it depended on the condition of performing perfect obedience to the Law), and not to them only, who are his Seed according to the flesh, (to whom the Law was given), but to them also which imitate his Faith, (though they be Gentiles); for he is the Father of all that believe, whether Jews or Gentiles. From Ver. 9. to 16. Lastly, He goes on highly to commend the Faith of Abraham, setting it out as a pattern to be imitated and followed. He shews, that it was promised to Abraham by reason of his Faith, that he should be the Father of many Na∣tions, that is, of all Believers in the several Nations of the World, answer∣able] Ad instar Dei. So far hath God honoured Abrahams Faith, that in respect thereof, He hath made him like himself, a Father, not of this or tht Nation only, but universally of all Believers, among all Nations, believing after his Example., or like unto God himself, (in whom he be∣lieved), who is the Father of the Gentile as well as of the Jewish Believers. This God, Abrahams Faith rested upon, who by his omnipotent power is able to quicken the dead, and raise them to life again, and will certain∣ly do it, (and so likewise is able to quicken the Gen∣tiles, who are dead in sins and trespasses, as well as he quickened Sarahs dead womb), and calleth those things which be not, as though they were, that is, causeth those things by his word and power, to appear and subsist, which had no being before, as he did in the creation of all things; and therefore 'tis not so much to be wondred at, if he makes the Gentiles (by conversion) what they were not before, viz. the children of Abraham. He further declares, that this Patriarch Abraham believed, and had a strong hope and trust in the promise and power of God against all natural grounds of hope, namely, that he should have a Son, and so be a stock from whence many Nations should spring, according to what was said, Gen. 15.5. So shall thy seed be, viz. as the stars of heaven for multitude. He further adds, that Abraham regarded not the great difficulties objected to his Faith, from his own and his wifes age. He admitted no doubts, or questions touching the promise of God (through unbeliefDominus Saram reprehendit ridentem [Gen. 18.12] non Abra∣hamum [Gen. 17.17.]: Quia illius ri∣sus admirationis & laetitiae fuit, Sarae autem dubitationis. August. de Civ. Dei. lib. 16. c. 31.), but without all dispute, or arguing to the contrary, de∣pended fully on God for the performance of it, and so gave to God the glory of his faithfulness, and power, assuring himself, that he who is omnipotent, could and would per∣form what he had promised. Which stedfast Faith of his was imputed to him for righteousness, because he looked by Faith to the Messias promised, who was to come of his Seed. Nw this, that his Faith was imputed to him for righteousness, was not written, (says the Apostle) for Abrahams sake alone, but for ours also, that is, for our pro∣fit and comfort; to shew us, that Faith shall be imputed to all others also for Righteousness, who shall firmly trust in God through the merit and mediation of Christ Jesus for that blessing. This Jesus, he tells them, God sent into the
world to be our Redeemer, and he was delivered to death for the expiation of our sins and offences, and God hath raised him again to life, to assure us, that our Surety hath paid our debts, and that we shall certainly be justified, if we truly believe in him. From Ver. 16, to the end. He proceeds to another argument, to confirm the Doctrine of justification by Faith in Christ alone, and that is, from the blessed fruits it produces, namely, peace, and reconciliation with God, and an introduction of us into his favour again, and a confirmationStare in gratiâ, est de gratiâ certum & securum esse; hoc alterum est beneficium mortis Christi ex justi∣ficatione fluens, certitudo immota gratiae praesentis, & futurae. Par. in loc. of us in it; also rejoicing in tribulation, as the means God will sanctifie to accustom us more to patience, and so to increase that grace in us, and in the exercise whereof he will give us more experi∣ence of his faithfulness, and care of us, and so strengthen a well-grounded hope in us, (which will not deceive us), that he will never forsake us. And that which further strengthens this hope, is, that his Holy Spirit (which cannot lye) doth usually in time of tribulation more abundantly testifie his love to the hearts of true Be∣lievers. From Ver. 1, to 6. Ʋnder this head he also proves, that they that are justified by Faith shall certainly be saved from the wrath to come; and this he demonstrates, 1. From the greatness of Christs love to such, before their justification, when they lay wel∣tring in sin and misery, unable to help themselves. He shews, that for such un∣godly persons as these, Christ in the fulness of time came to dye. And what a degree of love this was, he tells them, they may judg by considering how things usually are carried among men. Among whom, though for a very merciful and benign person, some one man would perhaps venture his life, yet for any man else, (though he were a righteous and just man), they would scarcely find any body that would be willing to do it. But God expresses a mercy and kindness infinitely above this; for He, when he had nothing in the Object to move him to it, when we were profane ungodly sinners, yet even then He was plea∣sed to send his Son to dye for us. And if the love of Christ was so strong and efficacious towards us, as to mve him to dye for us before we believed; surely his love will be much more towards us now, and his complacency greater in us, when we are actually justified by Faith in his blood; so that there is no cause to fear but that we shall be saved from wrath through him. 2. He shews, that if, when we were enemies, Christ dyed to work our reconciliation and peace with God (through Faith in his blood); certainly, being now actually justified and reconciled to God, by our believing in him, we need not doubt but we shall be saved by him, seeing he now liveth and sitteth at the right hand of God, and there intercedes for us, and hath all things subjected unto him. 3. See∣ing Christ by his death, sufferings, and intercession hath procured God to be our God and Father (which is more than meerly to save us from wrath), we need not doubt, but that he will do that also for us. From 6, to 12. He further pursues this Argument, by shewing, that the righteousness of Christ is not less effectual to save those that by Faith are united to him, than Adams sin was to destroy those who naturally descend from him. This he proves by comparing Christ and Adam together, and shewing their similitude and dissi∣militude; 1. As by Adam sin entred into the world, and death by sin, upon all that are his Children by nature; so by Christ righteousness came into the world, and by righteousness life, unto all that are spiritually born of him. For, before the giving of the Law by Moses, sin was in the world, and was imputed, as may appear by this, that Death (which is the wages of sin) reigned over In∣fants, that had not sinned actually as Adam had done. Therefore, besides the Law of Nature which Infants could not transgress, there was another Law which God had given to the first man, the transgression whereof was imputed to
all his posterity, yea even unto Infants. And this first man (he shews) was a type or figure of him that was to come, viz. of Christ Jesus. For as the first Adam was the fountain, head, or root of sin and misery, so Christ is the fountain and head of righteousness and life. And having thus shewed, wherein they agreed, he comes now to shew, wherein they differ: And that he mani∣fests by these positions. 1. The sin of Adam is not so pernicious, as the righ∣teousness of Christ (which is freely given) is beneficial. For if the offence of the first Adam brought forth death to all that are naturally propagated of him, much more shall the free grace of God convey life to all those who are in Christ by Faith, and born of him after the Spirit. 2. Though from Adams sinning, the guilt of his one offence redounds to the condemnation of many, yet the free gift of God, viz. the righteousness of Christ, redounds to the justification of many, not only from the guilt of that first sin, but of all other actual sins also. 3. As by one offence death reigned over all mankind, much more shall they, who by Faith are united to Christ, and so participate of his abundant grace, and the free gift of his righteousness, be made partakers of everlasting life, wherein they shall reign with Him in glory. As therefore by one offencev. 18. ] supple  res processit . &c. vide Grot. guilt came upon all naturally descended of Adam to their condemnation, so by the righteousness and perfect obe∣dience of one, viz. of Jesus Christ, (the meritorious cause of pardon), grace and absolution come upon all that believe in him, and are born again by his Spirit to their justification. From Ver. 12, to 20. But here then it may be objected. If we are made righteous only by the righteousness of Christ, To what end was the Law given to the Israelites by Moses? He answers, It was not given that we should seek to be justified by it; But 1. That sin might aboundPer legem magis innotuit pec∣catum., that is, be more clearly manifested to us, to be sin, and exceeding odious. 2. That grace might super-abound, that is, might ap∣pear much more conspicuous and glorious in pardoning sin, and subduing of it. That as the power of sin appear'd in making us liable both to temporal and eternal death, so might the power of grace appear, in beginning in us a spiritual life here, and bringing us to an eternal life in glory hereafter, through the righteousness of Christ held forth in the Gospel. From Ver. 20, to the end. He comes now to shew, that this Doctrine of justification by Faith in  Christ, tends exceedingly to promote holiness. And that he may the more clearly prove it, he first answers an Objection, which some (its like) in those times were ready to make against this Doctrine. They would be apt to say, If we be justifid freely by the grace of God, through Faith in Christ; Why may we not then freely indulge our selves in sin, that we may more inhaunce the grace of God, and make it appear more abundant and glorious in the par∣doning of us? This Objecti n the Apostle answers with detestation, shewing that this Doctrine allows no such wicked inferences, but tends altogether to promote holiness. And this be plainly proves by this argument. True Believers are deadMori peccato] Est ei non esse subjectum, seu non servire ei. Flac. Glass. Mori peccato] Est renunciare pec∣cato, & abdicare illud. è contra vi∣vere peccato est fraenum laxare & in∣dulgere peccato ut in carne domini∣um acquirat. to sin, (that is, being partakers of the Spi∣rit of Christ they renounce it, and labour to mortifie it) therefore they cannot live in it. And this he shews is signified by their Baptism, whereby they are incorpo∣rated into Christ, and testifie their communion with him; 1. In his death; so that they are to imitate his death by dying unto sin, and by mortifying their cor∣ruptions. 2. In his burial, being buried with him in Baptism unto a similitude of his death and burial, by the immersion of the whole body into the water, (a custom much us'd in hot Countries); and there∣fore
they are obliged to endeavour the burial of the old man, and to labour to abolish the body of sin. 3. In his resurrection, therefore they are to imitate him by rising to newness of life. And as plants ingrafted, receive juice and moisture from the stock, so Believers being by Baptism implanted into Christ, do by virtue of their union with him, obtain power to kill sin, and to dye to it, in conformity to his death; and to rise from death in sin to newness of life, in conformity to his resurrection. And so the the old manVeterem hominem apellat non naturam sed pravam mentem. Theod. is crucified with Christ, he having by his merits obtained not only remission of sins, but also the spirit of regeneration for Believers, that theviz. Habitual corruption com∣pacted as it were into one monstrous body prepared with all its members to commit actual sins. body of sin may be destroyed, and they freed and delivered from its power, as those that are dead are no longer subject to the power of any man. And if they be conformed to Christ in his death, there is no doubt but they shall have a spiritual life here, and enjoy with him a celestial and ever∣lasting life hereafter. And as Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more, so likewise it shall be with his members. For he died once to make atonement for sinChristus mortuus est peccato, illud expiando: nos morimur peccato, illud destruendo. Illyr., and to ablish it. But being now alive, he lives to the glory of God his FatherVivit Deo] i. e. apud Deum, & similem Deo vivit vitam coelestem, divinam, beatam, immorta∣lem. Vel vivit Deo] i. e. Ad Dei gloriam, ut Deum perpetuò laudet, & celebret. Corn. à Lap. Vivit Deo] Nempe ut eum glorificet, colligendo Ecclesiam, & suo Sacerdotio fungendo, 8. & ab eo vicissim glorificatur. Flac. Illyr., by whose power he was raised to life again: And so they likewise ought to look upon themselves as those that are dead to sin, and therefore must not live in it, but unto God, though grace received from Jesus Christ. From Ver. 1. to 12. Having shewed how this Doctrine tends to promote holiness, he comes now to exhort those who are justified by Faith, to endeavour to be holy, and to take care that sin get not any dominion over them, and that they obey it not by yeilding to the sinful lusts, inclinations, and motions of the flesh, nor employ the faculties and powers of their souls, or the members of their bodies in the service of sin and the Devil, but in the service of God, who hath so graciously rais'd them by the power of his grace from the death of sin, and endowed them with the life of righteousness through Faith in Christ Jesus. And he tells them, that if they did contend and strive duly against sin, it should not have dominion over them, because they are not under the Law as a Covenant of works, exacting perfect obedience, and ministring no strength to perform it; but under a Covenant of grace in Christ, which ministers strength to resist sin, and to overcome it. Yet none ought to infer from hence, that because they are not under the Law as a Covenant, therefore they are not under it as a rule; or that because they are under the Covenant of grace, therefore they may indulge themselves in sin, seeing the con∣trary plainly follows thereupon. For standing in the relation of servants to God, they must not serve sin; for they must of necessity be the servants to him whom they obey, and must receive a reward proportionable to the work they do. If they be the servants of sinServi estis cui obeditis, sive peccati (quod ducit) ad mortem sive obedientiae (quae ducit) ad ju∣stitiam:, it will bring upon them eternal death; if they be the servants of obedience, that is, obe∣dient servants to God, it will bring them the reward of righteousness, which is eternal life. Indeed before their conversion, he acknowledges, they did serve sin, but (through the grace of God) the time of that bondage was past, and now they had begun sincerely to obey that form of sound Doctrine, into which they were led by them, that first preached the Gospel unto themIn quam traducti estis ab iis qui Evangelium vobis annunciarunt. Vatablus. vide etiam Pisc. in loc. vide 2 Tim. 1.13.. Therefore being made free from the slavery of sin, they were now become servants to righteousness. He tells them, he speaks plainly to them in an earthly similitude (because of the weakness of their understandings in spi∣ritual
matters, Joh. 3.12.), and accordingly declares unto them, that is was but equal, that as before they had obeyed sin, and yeilded up their members to be servants to uncleanness and iniquity, even to the acting of all unrighteousness; so now they should yeild their members to be servants to righteousness, that they may attain to a high degree of sanctification. As therefore when they served sin they were void of righteousness, (that had no whit of their service), so now it is but equal, that seeing they are servants of righteousness, they should be free from sin, and not servants at all unto it. Lastly, he minds them of the sad na∣ture of the service of sin, it being for the time past unprofitable, for the time present shameful, and for the time to come deadly. But they that have gain'd liberty from the bondage of sin, and are become servants unto God, he shews, have great benefit thereby. For they will daily grow more and more in grace and holiness, and at last shall obtain eternal life. So that the wages, due reward, and end of sin, is death; but life eternal is the end of righteousness; not as its wages, but as a gift freely given by God, upon the account of the merit and intercession of Christ. From Ver. 12. to the end. He comes now to answer another Objection which the Jews would be apt to  make against this Doctrine. They might say, How can eternal life belong to you Christians, seeing you do not observe the Law of Moses, and so sin contemptuously against God. Nay not only the Gentiles who are converted to Christianity, are by you permitted to neglect Circumcision, &c. [Act. 15.], but the converted Jews are taught by you also, that they need not observe the Law of Moses, [see Act. 21.21.]? To this the Apostle answers, that they who believe in Christ are now no longer under the Mosaical Paedagogy, or tied to observe the Ceremonial Rites; which he proves by this general position, that the Law hath power over a man as long as it] Quam∣diu lex vivit, i. e. Quamdin extincta non est. Lex enim abrogata, mortua est, i. e. vim obligandi non habet. Grot. lives, and abides in force, and no longer; as he instances in the case of marriage. The Law of marriage binds a married wo∣man to her husband, as long as he liveth; but if he die, she is free from the obligation of that Law; that Law ceases as to her, and she is at liberty to marry to another. So for those of the Jews that believe in Christ, the Lawv. 4.  pro,  hypallage, figura quae frequenter occurrit in No∣vo Testamento. (through the offering up of Christs Body on the CrossNam Christi crux, & mors, inter caetera & hoc à Patre impetra∣vit, ut legis illius imperium tollere∣tur, Eph. 2.15, 16. Col. 2.14.) is dead to them, and they are freed from the obligation of it, and are now rightfully joined and espoused to another, viz. to Christ, (whose resurrection from the dead shews he is alive); that so living in conjugal affection and obe∣dience to him, they may be made fruitful by his Spirit, and may bring forth such holy actions as are agreeable to the will of God, and tend to his glory. This he shews was not done whilst they liv'd under the paedagogy of the Law, and those external carnal ordinances, (call'd here the fleshPauci sub statu legis erant , & qui tales erant, non erant tales ex sola vi legis. Plerique erant .); for though all sinful practices were forbidden by the Law, yet sinful affections were not thereby mortified, or subdued, but rather more irritated and stirred up; insomuch that they were obeyed, and yeilded to, and executed by their members, and so they brought forth that sad fruit, to wit, obligation to eternal punishment. But now they were freed from the Law, and those carnal external observances, (that obligationv. 6. ] Alii codices habent . Cujus lectionis & Origines meminit. Quomodo & Chrysosto∣mum legisse, apparet ex ejus inter∣pretatione . Christus moriens in∣tersecit legem Mosis, quae Judaeos si∣bi alligatos habebat, sicut lex conjugii soeminam. Grot. being cancell'd by which they were due), that for time to come they might serve God in newness of life, and with Evangelical obedience; begun and carried on, by the Spirit of Christ, and not accord∣ing to the directions of the Law; written for their use of old, by Gods appointment, and call'd here the oldness of the letterLegem Mosis vocat literam vetustam. Literae vetustae solent eva∣nescere, Heb. 8.13.. From Ver. 1. to 7.
Yet lest what he had said might be ill understood, he comes now to Apologize for the holiness of the Law, and to answer an Objection which he foresaw some might be apt to make against this discourse. Some might say, If vicious motions be stirred up by the Law, then the Law may seem to be the cause of sin. He answers, That the Law manifests and discovers sin, and therefore cannot work it. For as for his own particular, he should not so exactly have known the very desires of the heart to be sin, had not he by a more attentive consideration of the Tenth Commandment found that they were so. But when he knew this ori∣ginal corruption, or the inward depravation of his nature, taking occasion by the Law, that is, being stirred up, and more irritated by the prohibition of it, brought forth all the vicious motions of ConcupiscenceThe Schoolmen distinguish between the first motions of concu∣piscence which have not the consent of the Will, which they call Concu¦piscentiam informem; and those mo∣tions of concupiscence whereunto the Will consenteth, which they call Con∣cupiscentiam formatam. in him. Indeed whilst he knew not the Law, (that is, the exact holiness and purity it required), this kind of sin lay as it were dead in him, that is, was not known to him to be sin, neither did it terrifie his Conscience: But after the Law came to be better known by him, he found, by the prohibition of the Law, his appetite to sin was more increased and enraged. Formerly, when he liv'd a Pha∣risee, and had the Law, but did not sufficiently consider it, nor the exactness and perfection it required, he seem'd to himself to be aliveConcedimus Apostolum, à v. 7. ad 14. agere de homine non re∣nato. At à v. 14. usque ad finem agit de homine renato. Quod pro∣bamus, quia Apostolus, v. 9, 10, 11. perpetuò loquitur in praeterito. A versu autem 14 incipit loqui in prae∣senti tempore. Ego, inquit, Carnalis siem, non eram, &c. Secundo, quia descriptio subjecti ita se habet, à v. 14. ut nemini nisi renato competat. Etenim pugna inter carnem, & spi∣ritum, non est nisi in regenitis. Con∣sule v. 15. 17. 22. Ipsa delectatio boni non nisi gratiae deputanda. Augustin. Vide super hac re Freidlib. Lauren∣tium, Willetum. Ego putabam verba ista Apostolica dici non posse nisi de iis quos ita ha∣beret Carnis concupiscentia subju∣gatos ut facerent quicquid illa com∣pelleret, quod de Apostolo, demen∣tis est credere; sed posteà melioribus & intelligentioribus cessi, vel potius ipsi (quod fatendum est) veritati; ut viderem in illis Apostoli verbis gemitum esse Sanctorum contra car∣nales Concupiscentias dimicantium. Augustin. Tom. 7. Col. 1135. & 1136. Et libro Retractat. cap. 23. dicit. Potest quisque Sanstus sub gratiâ posi∣tus, dicere ista omnia. Et lib. 6 con∣tra Pelag. c. 11. Non ego solus aut primus hunc locum Pauli ita intellexi sed sic quoque intellexit Hilarius, Gre∣gorius, Ambrosius, & caeteri, Ecclesiae Sancti, notique Doctores, qui & ipsum Apostolum adversus carnales concupiscentias, quas habere nolebat, & tamen habebat, strenuè conflixisse, cundemque conflictum suum illis suis verbis contestatum fuisse, senserunt., that is, to be righteous, and so not liable or obnoxious to death: but when the grace of God had opened his eyes, and shewed him the true sense and spiritual meaning, and extent of the Law, and how that even inward desires contrary to the Law are sins, then he began to see his manifold sins and guiltiness, and that he was in the state of death. Then he understood these two things, which he knew not before: 1. The proper end and use of the Law, which was ordain'd to give life to them that should perfectly keep it. 2. The accidental effect of it, viz. that through the corruption of man, it became a cause of death to him, by irritating his inward corruption. He further shews, that sin, or the depraved nature in him, excited him to disobey the Law by suggesting to him, it was more pleasant to indulge himself in sin, and so seducing him, made him liable to the punishment of it, which is death. However the Law, he acknowledges, is in its self holy, just, and good. But some might then object, How can that which is in it self good, be a cause of death to any man? He an∣swers, 'Tis so only accidentally, not of it self, but through the corruption of mans nature, which therein manifests it self to be more superlatively evil and vile, by being irritated by so holy a Law, and so being the cause of actual sins, and of death. From Ver. 7. to 14. In the next place, he shews, how he himself was grieved with the remainders of corruption, which he found in himself, even after he was delivered from the dominion thereof, and how much he strove against them, and how he got the victory over them, only by Christ. He complains, he consisted of a regenerate and an unregenerate part; the one was irritated by the Law of God, the other sweetly complied with it; from which two principles, arose a spiritual combate in him, (see Gal. 5.17), which he comes now to describe. And first he acknowledges, that the Law was spiritual, but when he look'd upon himself, and compar'd the
imperfection of his obedience with the spiritualness of the Law, he was compell'd to acknowledg, that he was still in part carnalThe regenerate are in part carnal, because they have inchoatam, non ple∣nam liberationem., (namely, in respect of the remainders of corruption that were in him), and sold under sin, not as if he were willingly obedient to it, but as one that against his desire and will, was of∣ten instigated by it, and sometimes over-power'd by the tyranny of it, and car∣ried away whither he would not, and from which he was not yet able wholly to free himself. For that (says he) which sometimes I do, being over-power'd by the force of corruption, and violence of temptation; I do not allow, or approve in my renewed judgment, but utterly condemn, before those corrupt passions are stir∣red in me; and the good which I will and approve, that I do not, in such per∣fection as I gladly would. For I would perform perfect obedience to the Law, but I find that in many things I fall short and offend, yea sometimes am hurried into the evil, which I am utterly averse from, when I am not thus assaulted. So that therein I shew and manifest, that I approve and own the Law to be good, and a perfect rule of righteousness. From Ver. 14. to 17. He further shews he stood not in fear of being rejected of God, for those remain∣ders of corruption in him, so long as he heartily strove against them, and endeavoured to subdue them. For God judgeth of his Children, that are thus exercis'd be∣tween flesh and spirit, according to the better and sounder part in them, unto which they do willingly cleave and adhere, and not according to the other (the flesh) which they do resist and combate againstDicit se se∣cundum re∣pugnantia principia, repugnantia habere studia. Tolet.. Ver. 17. He acknowledges, that in his nature, so far as it is yet corrupt and unrenewed, there dwells no spiritual good, by which he can please God; and consequently not so much as power to will any good. Indeed he found his renewed will somewhat inclining to good, but the corruption yet remaining in him, often hindred the exe∣cution of those good motions and inclinations, insomuch that he could not but ac∣cuse himself of manifold omissions of good, and commissions of evil, which he was heartily sorry and displeased with himself for: so that it was not he as renew∣ed, but as over-power'd by this in-dwelling corruption, that did this evil. And further he declares, that when he was ready to do good, he found the pravity of nature present with him, as a Law over-swaying, and forcing, and inclining him to evil; yet, according to his renew'd nature, (called the inward man be∣cause hidden, and concealed from the eyes of man), he delighted in the Law of God. From Ver. 17. to 22. But he tells them, he had sad experience of another Law, viz. the power of sin, yet exerting it self in him, and warring and fighting against the Law of God, by which his inward and renewed man was guided, (and with the purity and spirituality whereof it was delighted), and endeavouring to captivate him unto evil. Ver. 23. Ʋnder a feeling of this misery, he cries out, O that I were delivered from these carnal lusts, that are a death to me! O that I were out of this ani∣mal and terrestrial life! O that I were delivered from this body subject to death! for till then I cannot expect to be delivered from the remainders of sin, and the old man, (which he here calls the body of death, see Rom. 6.6.), Yet for all this he does not faint and despond, but blesses God who in and through his Son, delivers him from the curse of the Law, and the dominion of sin, and will perfect his deliverance from all the power of it in his due time. At last he concludes, that in this his present regenerate condition; though with his mind, that is, with that part that is renewed in him, he serves the Law of God, yet by reason of the corruption that remains in him, (against which he did strive),
he is sometimes tempted and seduced to the commitment of sin. From Ver. 23 to the end. He comes now to shew, that this Doctrine of justification by Faith in Christ affords Believers strong ground of comfort against all fear of evil or punishment, to be endured after this life; which a sense of the imperfection of their sanctification, and of sin dwelling in them, might strike them with. And under this Head, (from v. 1. to 9.), he shews, 1. That this consolation, viz. security to be freed from Condem∣nation, is proper and peculiar to justified persons, only; who being implanted into Christ by Faith, endeavour to be more and more holy, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, but follow the guidance of the Spirit of God. For the power of the quick∣ning Spirit of Christ, (which rules in the hearts of Believers as a Law, dicta∣ting to them what they ought to do), frees them and himself in particular, from the reigning power of sin, the wages whereof is death: From neither of which the Law of Moses was able to rescue any man. For the Law cannot justi∣fie any man now, since mans transgression of it, but it only condemns and works wrath; it shews sin, it cannot abolish it. What therefore the Law cannot do by reason of mans first transgression thereof, and his present pravity of nature, God was pleas'd to do, by sending his Son (who took on him our true human nature, yet not a sinful nature, though he had the likeness of it, in being subject to our infirmities), to be made a Sacrifice for us on the Cross, and there he condemn∣ed sin in the flesh of his Son, and did exact of him the punshment due to it, that we believing in him might be justified, and reckoned as those, that have performed perfect obedience to the Law; and that, by the inchoation of sincere E∣vangelical obedience to the Law in us, we might be enabled to walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh. For those that are in their corrupt and natural estate do savour only fleshly things, which lead and bring a man to death, but they that are regenerate do savour spiritual things, which lead to everlasting life and peace. For the wisdom of the flesh, or the carnal mind, is enmity against God, there being a natural repugnancy in it to submit it self to his will. There∣fore they that are in their carnal and corrupt estate, and follow the lust and con∣cupiscence of the flesh, cannot please God till they be converted and changed. From Ver. 1. to 9. 2ly. He addresses himself to the Believing Romans, applying this consolation of immunity from condemnation unto them, who being united to Christ by Faith, have the Spirit of Christ, by his gracious operations dwel∣lingNon tanquam hospes sed indi∣gena perpetuus [Joh. 14.16.] qui in domo imperat. in them. And if Christ be in them by his Spirit, though their body be mortal and subject to death, (by reason of sin, which still dwells in them), yet their spirits or souls are made partakers of eternal life initial, by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and a work of sanctification begun in them, which Christ, who hath begun it will carry on. And if the Spirit of Christ dwell in them, he will never leave his habitation, but will raise their bo∣dies to life again at the last day, as his own body was raised from the dead by the power of God. From Ver. 9. to 12. 3ly. He shews from ver. 12. to 17. what use they are to make of this Doctrine, (which affords so great consolation), namely, to engage themselves with all serious∣ness to subdue the flesh, and to be more and more holy. For if they live after the flesh they shall dye, not only a temporal but an eternal death; but if they through the grace and assistance of the Spirit, do subdue and mortifie the sinful lusts of the flesh, they shall live, not only a spiritual life here, but an eternal life in glory here∣after. And he further tells them, that all that follow the guidance of the Spi∣rit of God do evidence themselves to be the Children of God. For after that they have received Christ by Faith, a servile fear of condemnation is no more wrought
in them (as was before wrought by the SpiritSpiritus servitutis] Sic vo∣catur Spiritus Sanctus ab effecto, quod ille efficere solet per praedica∣tionem legis. in the preaching of the Law, in order to bring them home to Christ), but the Spirit of adoptionSpiritus adoptionis] i. e. Spi∣ritus Sanctus qui credentibus adop∣tionem ipsorum testatur, nimirum, eos esse filios Dei., which testifies to them, that they are the Children of God, and so encou∣rages them with an humble confidence to call on God as their reconciled FatherPer  notantur ar∣dentes illi gemitus, quos Spiritus Sanctus in piis excitat, quoties opus est, etsi illi ne verbum quidem lo∣quantur. Abba pater; ista condu∣plicatio facit ad . Hîc personam mutat Apostolus, ut sortem communem omnium Sancto∣rum exprimeret. Calv.. So that they shall not need to fear condemnation any more, sicut olim Israelitae quum iis Lex promulgaretur., being freed from it by Christ. And this Spirit of Adoption witnesseth in∣wardly unto their Spirits and Consciences that they are the Children of God. From Ver. 12. to 17. He comes now to shew, how this Doctrine of justification affords grounds of comfort to justified persons against the afflictions they may meet with in this life From Ver. 17. to 31. And, 1. He shews, that they are Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint-Heirs with ChristChrist only is the Natural Heir, being the only begotten Son of God, but we are Heirs by Adoption and Grace, and so are admitted to be Heirs with Christ., their Elder Brother; and if they be willing to suffer with him, (when called to it), and to have communion with him in afflictionsOur Sufferings are for Christ when we suffer for righteousness sake, as He did, and bear the like rebukes for the truth, that he did., they shall also be glorified with him. And he tells them, that the sufferings of this lifeQuae sunt parvae, paucae, bre∣ves, & mixtae gaudio., let them be what they will, are no way to be compar'd to the glory that shall be revealed hereafter, and conferred on those that suffer for Christ. He shews them, that the whole frame of the Ʋniverse, and all the visible Creatures in it, being now (contrary to the first institution of God) made subject to vanity, and in a great part to destruction, long est ipsa , more Hebraico. as it were, for the manifestation of the glory of the Sons of God at the day of judgment, that they may be redeemed and delivered from their corruption, and the abuse of men. For the Creature against its natural propension and inclination, (which inclines it to self-preservation), was made subject to vanity and a frail condition, and that by reason of the sin of man, for which God subjected it to this curse and male∣diction. And if the CreatureHaec omnia de creaturis ir∣rationalibus atque inanimatis quo∣que, enunciantur non propirè sed fi∣guratè & per Prosopopaeiam. being made thus subject to vanity and misery, (not for its own, but our fault), doth patiently bear it, in expectation of deliverance from this bondage of corruption, and to be restored into that excellent and primitive state of its creationExpectatur post  multò melior puriorque machina. 2 Pet. 3.13., (name∣ly, at that time when the Children of God shall attain unto their glorious Estate), how much more should we patiently bear afflictions, in expectation of a glorious de∣liverance? For the whole CreationPeter Martyr sheweth the va∣nity of the Creature in these respects, 1. They are in continual labour to serve mans necessities. 2. They are often punished together with man, as in the destruction of the old world and Sodom. 3. They are con∣strained to serve the lusts of wicked men. (after the manner of a travelling woman) doth groan and sigh with us, to be delivered of this burden of vanity and misery, unto which it is subjected. And we also (says the Apostle), who have received the first fruits of the Spirit, (viz. peace and joy, which are the pledges and beginnings of Eternal life), do breathe after the compleating and per∣fecting of our Adoption, in the glorious resurrection of our bodies, and redemp∣tion of them from all evil and misery. And the hope of this should comfort us under all afflictions. For we have not at present actual possession of the glory we expect, but have it as yet only in hope; but hopeSo Faith, Gal. 3.25. signifies the thing believed,, (that is, the thing hoped for), when it comes once to be seen with our eyes, and possessed, is no longer hoped for,
but enjoyed. So that it is the property of hope, to wait for, and expect a fu∣ture good, and of Christian hope to expect the glorious manifestation of the com∣pleat Adoption, and glory of the Sons of God, and to wait patiently for it. From Ver. 17, to 26. 2. He shews, that justified persons are not left to themselves in those afflictions that come upon them, but the Spirit of God supports them in their distresses and anxieties of mind, and teaches them how to pray, (which is the surest refuge in trouble), helping their infirmities, and directing them to ask things agreeable to the will of God, and in a due manner. He also intercedes for them, that is, causeth and exciteth them to intercede, and cry, and pray for themselvesSo Gal. 4.6. The Spirit is said to cry, Abba Father. Christ maketh intercession for us, vigore meriti. The Spirit, nos interpellare faciendo, by causing and stirring us up to make request., and that with lively feelings, groan∣ings, and pangs of affection, such as cannot be expressed or uttered by words. And God who is omniscient, knows what is the mind and intention of those groans, which his Spirit excites in his own Children. For the Spirit teaches and guides the Saints to pray in such a manner as is best pleasing and acceptable to God. Therefore, being sure to be heard, they may comfort themselves in their afflictions. From Ver. 26, to 28. 3. He further declares how He and other Believers did know by daily expe∣rience, that all things (even afflictions) do work toge∣therEtiam ea quae nocitura viden∣tur. Sed iis qui Deum non amant, quae profutura videntur damna sunt. for good to the Saints, they being effectually called to believe in Christ, according to the eternal counsel and purpose of God; according to which he hath purposed in himself, to save mankind only by grace through Christ. For whom he did fore∣know, chose and mark, for his own, from all eternity; he did predestinate, fore-appoint, and design to make conformable to his Son, not only in holiness and happi∣ness, but in the Cross and sufferings, as the means conducing thereunto; intend∣ing, that his own Son should have many adopted Brethren, of whom he should be the Head and Captain, (as the first-born was wont to be in all families), in couragious bearing of afflictions, and passing thorow them to eternal glory. And those whom he did thus fore-ordainSee 1 Pet. 1.2. 1 Tim. 1.9. Eph. 1.5. to eternal happiness, he effectually calls in time to believe in his Son; and whom be thus calls he justifies; and whom he ju∣stifies them he decrees to glorifie; first, by sanctifying of them, (which is glory begun), and hereafter by giving them a full possession of glory in Heaven. Therefore justified persons have a solid ground of Consolation, though they be afflict∣ed in this life. From Ver. 28, to 31. 4. He concludes this Argument of his, for justification by Faith, with a holy insultation, and triumphing in Christ against all accusations and tribulations which the Devil or the World might be able to bring upon justified persons; arguing in this manner: If God declare himself to be so much for us, as that he hath chosen, called, justified, sanctified, and intends to glorifie us hereafter, who shall be able to hurt us? If God spared not his only begotten Son, but gave him over to death for all us who believe in him, we have no cause to fear but he will give us whatsoever else is good for us, and may tend to promote our Sal∣vation. And to pursue this Argument further, he asks, Who can implead any of Gods Elect, as Satan and their own Consciences (sometimes) are apt to do? If they do, he replies, It is God that justifiesHere the importance of the word justification is shewn, that it signifies nothing else but a judicial absolution, or declaring one to be free from guilt., ac∣quits and absolves them from condemnation for the sake of Christ. And he demands, Who can condemn those who are freed by Christ, who dyed, rose againChrists death would not have profited us, if he had been swallowed up by it, and still detained under the power of it., now sits at Gods right hand, and intercedes for them? He asks, What can separate them from that love wherewith Christ hath loved them, and manifested toward them, in doing all this for them? Shall tribulation, or persecution, or
any afflictions, which are only trials of Faith? No, none of them can hinder them from enjoying the full effect and sweet sense of Christs love, though such trials have been the lot of Gods people, both under the Old and New Testament. So that they may apply the words of David in Psal. 44, 22. unto themselves, saying, For thy sake, O Lord, we are persecuted continually, and are in daily expectation of death, and are used as if we were sheep destinated to the slaughter; nevertheless in all these conflicts we do more then overcome, through Christ helping of us; our graces being strengthned thereby, and our reward in∣creased. He concludes that he is perswaded, that neither the pleasures of life, nor the terrors of death, nor evil Angels, nor any of the powers and principalities of this world, nor evils present, nor any that can happen to us hereafter, nor heighth of prosperity, nor depth of adversity, nor any thing else, can separate us from the love of God, wherewith he loves us; being by Faith united to Christ. For his love is founded on an immutable foundation, viz. the infinite merit of his Son. From Ver. 31. to the end. He further confirms the assertion, that justification is by Faith in Christ,  and not by the works of the Law, from the experience of the Israelites, who seeking justification by works, and not by Faith in Christ, found it not, and were therefore cast off; and from the experience of the believing Gentiles, who not trusting in their own works, fled by Faith to Christ for justification, and so obtain'd it. And he answers four Objections, which he foresaw would be made against what he should say touching the rejection of the Jews. 1. Some would perhaps say, that what he spake upon this Argument, savour'd of ill will and disaffection to his own Nation. For answer to that, he solemn∣ly protests in the presence of Christ, his Conscience also bearing him witness (which was guided by the holy Ghost), that he was greatly afflicted, and grieved at the very heart, for the rejection of the Jews, who would not be brought to look af∣ter Christ, but depended on the Law, and confided in their own righteousness. For he had such an affection for them, that if it were possible, (and might consist with the will of God), that retaining his communion with Christ in ho∣liness and love, he might be separated from him in bliss and happiness, he could even be willing to suffer it'Tis true, happiness and holiness cannot be separated, neither could Paul be separated from Christ, in either Conditionalitèr hoc intelligendum, & hoc moderamine, si id salvâ pie∣tate liceat. Amor Extaticus procedit etiam ad impossibilia. Lutherus. It is not to be understood of a separation from the Spirit and grace of Christ, but from the glory and comforts of Christ. If he had desired the first, he had sinned. For we should not desire to be in a sin∣ful condition to save all the world., to redeem his Kinsmen and Nation from that judicial rejection. And besides his natural affection to them, he tells them, he had other reasons to inflame him to this Charity, and to oblige him to have a high respect and esteem for them, they being the people whom God had extraordinarily dignified with many great and glorious priviledges. Particularly, they were Israelites descended from Jacob, who wrestled with God for the blessing, and had thereupon the honourable name of Israel princeps Dei fortis, principatalem potentiam à Deo con∣sequutus. Deducunt à  domi∣nari, praevalere, &  Deo, ut י sit formativum proprii nominis. י Est una ex literis tetragrammati addita Jaacob, Israel, &c. ut ad umbraret, ex illo eum proditurum, qui verus De∣us & Salvator esset. given him, Gen. 32.28. 2ly. God assum'd and adopted them for his peculiar people, before all other Nations of the world, [Exod. 4.22. Deut. 14.1. Jer. 31.9.] 3ly. They had the high priviledg to have the presence of God in a more eminent and glorious manner manifesting it self among them, from between the Cherubins on the Ark, [2 Chron. 6.41 Psal. 63.2. Psal. 78.61. 1 Sam. 4.21, 22.]. 4ly, With them the Covenants were made, viz. that Covenant first made with Abraham, and of∣ten repeated; and the Sacraments of the Covenant were also given to them, viz. Circumcision and sprinkling of blood, [G n. 17.10. Exod. 24.8.]. 5ly. To them God give his Laws, moral, judicial, and ceremo∣nial, prescribing his own worship and service. 6y, To them the promises of the Messias were made. 7ly, They are descended of those honourable Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Lastly, They are they, of whose stock Christ took
his humane Nature, who in the unity of his person, is true man, and true God, blessed for evermoreThis was the title by which the one supreme God was known and expressed among the Jews. See Dr. Hammond in loc.. From Ver. 1, to 6. 2. Objection: If the Jews be rejected, then some will be apt to say, That the Word of God, and the Promises of Grace made to the Israelites is void, where∣in God promis'd to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. He answers, that all that are born of Israel the Patriarch, according to the flesh, are not true Israelites, that is, such to whom the Promise appertains. Neither are all that are begotten of Abraham according to the flesh, the true Children, and Heirs of the Promise, but only his spiritual Seed, namely, true Believers, begotten after the Image of his Faith. For Abraham had two Sons, Ishmael, and Isaac: Ishmael was a type of those that are born, only according to the flesh, and were to be cast out; and Isaac, of those that are born, not meerly by the power of Nature, but by vertue of the Promise and free grace of God, and these are to be reckoned for the true SeedIn Isaaco, i. e. per Isaacum vocabitur, h. e. existet tibi semen, nempe illud numerosissimum quod ti∣bi promisi, & praecipue Christus. Pisc., that shall inherit, [see Gal. 4.24, &c.]. So that the carnal Seed of Abraham, born according to the course of Nature, are the Children of God, to whom the Promise was made; but the ChildrenFilii promissionis, h. e. fidei, quae promissionem in Christo gratuitam complectitur. Descriptio credentium. Filii dicuntur per Metaphoram, re∣spiciendo ad Abrahamum, qui pater credentium, à Spiritu Sancto statui∣tur, Rom. 4.16. q. d. qui vestigiis Abrahae insistunt, & fide ipsi fiunt similes, Gal. 3.7. & 29. represent∣ed by IsaacThe birth of Isaac was a speci∣al effect of Gods promise, he being miraculously born, of a naturally-barren woman, and according to the ordinary course of nature past Child∣bearing, had she been never so fruit∣ful; and his Father being a very old man., born of the supernatural power of the Spirit of God, (who by Faith lay hold on the Promise of Salvation made in Christ), they are to be accounted for that Seed mentioned in the Covenant, I will be thy God and the God of thy Seed. This also, he shews, was typified in the twins Rebecca had by Isaac, viz. Esau and Jacob, who though they had not only one Father, but one Mother, (which Ishmael and Isaac had not), and were born at one time, yet their condition was very different, neither had they equal favours and priviledges vouchsaf'd to them by God. If therefore any shall won∣der that the Gentiles should become Heirs to the Promise, by Faith in Christ, and that the carnal Jews should be cast off, for their infidelity, and adhering to their own righ∣teousness, let them consider this instance of Esau and Jacob, of whom when Rebecca was with Child, and found the Babes strugling in her womb, (in a manner not usual to other women, Gen. 25.22, 23.), she enquired of the Lord by prayer, or by some Prophet, what the meaning of it should be, and received this answer, that two Nations (that is, the heads of two Nations, viz. Edomites and Israelites) were in her womb, and that God had determined before either of them had done good or evil, to prefer the younger before the elder, and declared, that the elder should serve the youngerEsau in his own person did never serve Jacob; but the people descend∣ed of Esau, did serve those descend∣ed of Jacob., [which was fulfilled, when the Israelites subdued the Edomites, 2 Sam. 8.14. 1 King. 22.47. Obad. v. 17, 18.]. And in the Prophet Malachi, ch. 1. v. 2, 3. 'tis expressed in higher terms,Some, by hating in this Chap∣ter of Malachi understand severely pu∣nishing; and alledg, that the Apostle doth only allude to the words of the Prophet: and that he doth not say, that before the Children had done either good or evil, God said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated: but only, The elder shall serve the younger: But as for that saying, Esau have I hated, it was after their wicked and unnatural behaviour to∣wards their Brethren the Israelites, and also upon that account, as you will see, if you compare this place with the prophesie of Obadiah, v. 10. it is said, For thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever And in the next verses we see what the vio∣lence they are charged with was. Verbum odisse aliquando significat alium alii praeferre, unumque prae alio negligere, praeterire, ac minus di∣ligere. vid. Gen. 29.30.31. Odisse idem est, quod minus dilexisse. Vas∣quez. Et hoc impletum est historicè & literaliter. 1. In ipsis personi Esaui & Jacobi; Nam jus primogeniturae Deus ab Esau transtu∣lit in Jacob, Gen. 27.27, &c. 2. In posteris utriusque. Nam Idumaei in servitutem redacti sunt ab Israelitis, 2 Sam. 8.14. Terram item fertilem, & amaenam, scil. Canaan, dedit Deus Israelitis; Idumaeis verò regionem montosam & desertam, Mal. 1.2, 3. Ex Jacob quoque & non ex Esau voluit Deus nasci promissum Messiam. Esavus & Jacobus hic non in sese sed, ut typi, considerandi; itaque quae istis tribuuntur, antitypis, seu potius rebus significatis, sunt accommodanda. Non est autem necesse ut typus antitypo suo respondeat semper in omnibus; sed sussicit ut conveniant in proprio scopo quem intendit is qui eis utitur. Non ergò sequitur, si Esau in re certâ, & externâ typicè adumbret reprobationem gentis Judaicae, ut propterea ipse quoque damnatus sit. Non est necesse, ut is qui repraesentat filios carnis (aut reprobos), sit ipse filius carnis (aut reprobus), e∣jusdem definitionis modo. Oecolampadius in Mal. 1. Non ausim ipsum Esau (propter hoc dictum) di∣cere reprobum. Item Mollerus in eundem locum, Ex Genesi verisimiles conjecturae sumi possunt Esavum non ita rejectum esse à Deo, ut sit damnatus. Et propendere in hanc partem mitiorem videtur Dr. Prideaux in lectionibus suis, viz. lect. 8. addens, Etiamsi Canaan typus suit coelestis patriae, non in∣de tamen concludendum, Omnes illos è coelo fuisse exclusos, quibus Deus in istam typicam requiem negavit introitum. Affirmamus Paulum, ea quae partim ex Genesi partim ex Malachiâ profert, sub rati∣one figurae, & typi, accommodare ad illustrandum negotium illud reprobationis Judaeorum, de quo ex professo hic agit. Ita videlicèt, ut, quemadmodum Esau, licet natu prior, & major, à jure pri∣mogeniturae annexâque promissione possidendae terrae Canaan rejicitur; sic ab aeternae vitae posses∣sione reprobantur Judaei, qui promissionem foederis divini ab externâ praerogativâ aestimant. Hun∣nius. Sunt autem alii viri docti qui hoc testimonium de Jacob & Esau, Gen. 25. & Mal. 1. ex∣ponunt, & applicant doctrinae de praedestinatione Dei circa singulorum hominum, tum electio∣nem & salutem, tum reprobationem & interitum. Sed de hac re penes pios & doctos judicium esto. viz. Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: where, by Esau his posterity, the Edomites are to be understood, and by that word hated, seems to be meant, that God less loved them, than the Israelites; or was not so kind to them, as to these; in that, whereas he gave to Jacob or the Israelites, a Land flow∣ing with milk and honey; the portion of Esau, or the Edomites, was the stony and barren Mountains of Seir. For the word hate in Scripture many times signifies no more than less to love: As Gen. 29.31. Luk. 14.26. Joh. 12.25. And this was spoken, that by this type
the eternal purpose, h. e. Propositum Dei electivum, vel propositum Dei, quod in merâ Dei electione positum est. of God, founded in his own free choice, might be manifested and declared, fixed and firm, to save sinners, not for the works that they should do, but by Faith in his Son, which is wrought in them by the free and effectual vocationNon ex operibus sed ex vocante] Vocatio fidem praecedit. Ex vocante, h. e. ex gratiâ Dei vocantis. of his Spirit, illumi∣nating their minds, and changing their hearts; that so they may acknowledg their justification and salvation to his free grace in Christ only, and not to their own me∣rits and works, which the carnal Israelites so much de∣pended on. From Ver. 6, to 14. 3. Objection: But if God deal thus unequally with men, and do not dispense his favour according to mens merits and works, Does he not seem to be un∣just? Answ. Far be it from us to think, that God can be in the least unrighteous. For he is debter to no manNemini quippiam debeo; gra∣tis do mea; Posset Deus sine injuriâ omnes qui gravia peccarunt, morbo suo relinquere, nec ullam adhibere medicinam. Grot., and therefore he is free to dispense his favours where he pleases, and to deny them where he pleases, without giving account thereof to any one. And this is agreeable to what he himself says to Moses, Exod. 33.19. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, &c. Therefore no man is injur'd that is not effectually call'd by his grace, seeing it is of his free grace and mercy that any one is call'd. 'Tis not therefore to be ascrib'd to mans free will or endeavour that any obtain Salvation, but to the free grace and mercy of God. And as God is free in shewing mercy to whom he pleaseth, so he may justly cast off and reject obstinate contemners of Christ and his Gospel, for their own contumacy; as he proves by the instance of Pharaoh, who having often hard∣ned his own heart against the judgments of God, [Exod. 8.15, 19. & 9.34.], at last God was provoked judicially to leave him to him∣self, and to give him up to his own obstinacy and obdu∣ration, [Exod. 9.12.] Insomuch that God tells him, [Exod. 9.16.], for this have I raised thee up feci ut restares Jun. & Trem. & L. sustentavi te. LXX . servatus es., [or made thee to continue]; and have preserv'd thee a∣midst
all these plagues, that (thou abusing my patience by thy desperate obsti∣nacy), I may shew forth my divine power, and make it appear more illustrious before all the world, in the tremendous and exemplary punishment I shall inflict upon thee. Ʋpon the whole, the Apostle concludes, that as God is free to shew mercy where he pleases, and is not bound to render any reason thereof, beyond his own will, and divine pleasure; so when he delivers up any obdurate sinner to the obdurationDeus dici∣tur indurare, quando per∣mittit hominem in suâ malitiâ perseverare, & secundum eam agere. Tolet. August. Tom. 2. 464. Non obdurat Deus impertiendo malitiam, sed non impertiendo miserecordiam. Et alibi: Deus dicitur eum indurare, quem mollire noluerit. Sic excaecare dicitur eum, quem illuminare noluerit; Sic repellere eum, quem vocare noluerit. Ita Carthusianus in Comment. Indurat Deus non influendo malitiam, sed non conferendo subsidium. Et hoc convenit Deo per accidens, scil. qui non re∣movet prohibens, nec impertit gratiam, cordis duritiem mollificantem. Origines, Hieronymus, Theophyl. exponunt de patientiâ & lonanimitate Dei, quâ abutentes impii, indies siunt deterio∣res. Nec tamen accusanda est Dei patientia, sed eorum duritia, &c. vid. Hieron. Tom. 30. Pha∣raoh semet obduravit voluntariâ obstinatione; Deus Pharaonem: i. e. sivit duriorem fieri, ac qulis esset, ostendit, servando vivum, molliusque eum tractando, quàm merebatur, ut postea tarditatem supplicii, gravitate compensaret. and hardness of his own heart, this he may justly do, without any impeachment of his righteousness. From Ver. 14, to 19. 4. Objection. If the case be thus, that God doth sometimes (and that just∣ly) leave obdurate sinners to harden themselves, why is he so offended at it, why does he so complain of it by his Prophets, why does he severely punish it? For who can resist his will? Answ. 'Tis not fitNegat decere hominem jacen∣te pccatis, & exrema comme∣tium, Pem in jus trahere, si mi∣nei grtiam impertitur suam: Si∣cut em sigulo licet ex luto, re vi∣lissima, pro arbitrio, vas aliud ad ho∣nestum usum, aliud ad minus hone∣stes usu singere; sic Deo pro arbi∣trio licet ex h minibus peccatoribus alios (ut in ii ostendat divitias mi∣serecordia sae) sanctâ vocatione ad gltim prap rare, aliòs verò quo∣tamen patienter sert) sibi permittere, suà culpâ cmpratos ad intentum. Quod discrimen Apostolos prudenter notavit, v. 22, 23. Nam quam de iis quos Deus vocat sermonem instituit  inquit, nempe ut designet hîc efficacem Dei actio∣nem; at ubi agit de illis quos non vocat, codicit vasa, non quidem  sed , iuxta ild, Perditio tua ex te Israel, &c. Deinde id ipum confirmat Prophetarum testimoniis, v. 24, 25, 26. quibus aperte non de justifica∣tione, sed de vocatione agitur. Ca∣mero that Man, who is a guilty Creature, and obnoxious to God, should presume to ob∣ject any thing against Gods proceedings, which are always just and holy. 'Tis not fit the Creature should dispute with his Creator; or question him, why he hath dealt thus or thus with him. Hath not the Potter power and liberty, out of the same lump of Clay to make one Vessel fr an honourable use, and another for a vile and more abject, [see Isa. 29.16, & 45.9.]. Are not all mankind in the hand of God, as Clay in the hand of the Potter, Jer. 18.6? What if God, after he hath expressed patience, and brn with the vessels of wrathA late Author hath these words, Observe, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, are such as the Apostle saith God endured with much long-suffering and therefore they were not made so by any absolute decree of hi, but made themselves so by their wilful and free sinning: For what long-suffering can it be, to bear with the sins of those, that could never possibly have been avoided., a great while, who by their sins fit themselves for destructin, do at last give them up to it, and to the judgment they have deserved? is there any thing that can reasonably be ob∣jected against this? And thus the case stands with the incredulous Jews, whom God rejected not, till they had shewed themselves obstinate refusers and contemners of Christ and his Gospel. And what if God willing to ren∣der the riches of his free grace more illustrious towards the vessels of mercy, do effectually call them to believe in his Son, and by justifying and sanctifying of them, prepare them for glory. And thus the case stands with those that are brought to believe in Christ, not only a∣mong the Jews, but among the Gentiles also. And what is there in this that any can blame, there being so much righteousness, wisdom, and goodness manifested there∣in? From Ver. 19, to 25. And lest the Jews should yet stumble at this Doctrine, he comes now to prove that the calling of the Gentiles was foretold by the Prophet Hosea, ch. 2. v. 22.
where God declares, that he will call them his people which were not his people, and will have mercy on them which have not obtained mercy. And Hosea 1.10. he says, it shall come to pass instead of that which was said unto them, ye are not my people, it shall be said to them, ye are the sons of the living God; which notes his receiving the Gentiles into the Church, which was an act of Gods free and undeserved mercy; at which the Jew∣ish Believers were much astonished, as we may see, Act. 10.45. He shews also, the rejection of the Jews to be fretold by the Prophet Isaiah, ch. 10.22. whose words he accommodates to this matter, in which place the Prophet proclaims on this wise, Though the number of the people of Israel, according to the flesh, shall be very great, that they may be compared with the sand on the sea∣shoreIntelligit Isaias ingentem va∣stitiem quam terrae Judaeae (quae per excellentiam vocatur ) intulerat Sennacharibus. Pauci qui Hierosolyma se recepêre relicti erant, tanquam ex clade superstites, quos Graeci interpretes  &  vocant. Deus enim secerat quod in rationibus pu∣tandis fieri solet, ubi post expuncta ea, quibus expensa acceptis aequan∣tur, exigua aliqua summa restat, quae debeatur. Quod tunc ccerat Deu, non mirum si rursus faciat, & de multis paucos ad veram salutem per∣ducat. Grot, yet a very few only of them shall be sa∣ved. This the Prophet speaks of thse Jews that escaped the hands of Sennacherib (which were only those few that fled to Jerusalem); and the Apostle considers the deliverance of those few as a type of those that shall be∣lieve in Christ to their salvation. The Prophet further adds, that God would make a quick dispatch, and deal in justice with that land, and that people of the Jews; and though there were never so many of them, only a few should be left, the far greater part should be involv'd in that destruction. And this the Apostle consders as a type of the rejection of the greater part of the Jews, for their incredulity and contemptuous refusal of Christ. And to this also he accommodates what the same Prophet had be∣fore said, ch. 1. v. 9.Erat receptum inter Hebraeos, omnem liberationem Veterum fi∣guram gessisse eju liberationis, quae expectand esset tempo ibus Messiae. Cui  multa pssim superstru∣unt Apostoli. Idem. concerning those shut up in Jerusalem, when Rhezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel besieged it, but could not prevail against it, 2 King. 16.5. namely, that if the Lord of Hosts had not by that means preserved a small remnant, viz. a small seed to them, out of which that people might after∣wards spring up again, they had been as utterly destroyed as Sodom and Gomorrah were. And in the like manner God would now in these times only bring some fewCur non plures, & cur hos, non alios, causa penes ipsum. Grot. of the Jews to believe in Christ, and would reject the greater part of them for their obstinate refusing of him. From Ver. 25, to 30. In sine: he shews, that the experience of the believing Gentiles might con∣firm this Doctrine of justification by Faith. For they not following after the righteousness of works, nor seeking to be righteous that way, had attained to true righteousness, viz. that which is by Faith in Christ; and the unbelieving Jews, seeking to be justified by the Law, and following after that wayv. 31.  hic viam significat. of righteousness, came short of that righteousness which they sought after and no wonder seeing they sought it, not by Faith in Christ, but despised him to their own destructin, stumbling at his humility and mean condition in this world. And thus it was predicted in those two places, Isa. 8.14. & 28.16.See my Harmony on the four E∣vangelists, ch. 5. p. 144. Behold I lay in Sion (that is, in the Church of God among the Jews) a foundation stone, viz. the true Messias Jesus Christ, who to the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, but whosoever be∣lieveth in him shall not be frustrated of his hope, or ashamedIn Isa. 28.16. He that believeth shall not make haste, the Septuagint renders it shall not be asham'd, and so put the consequent for the antecedent, and the effect for the cause, because he which is rash and maketh haste, is asham'd in the end, and confounded., whether he be Jew or Gentile. From Ver. 30. to the end.
He further prosecutes this Argument of the Jews temporary rejection; shew∣ing this to be the cause thereof, that they foolishly and stubbornly rejected the righteousness which God presents in the Gospel. And being first to convince them of their folly therein, lest they should think he spake out of disaffection to his own Nation, he professes he was so far from it, that he heartily prayed to God for their conversion and salvation. For he could not but bear them record, that very many of them had a zeal, in their way, to please God, but for want of true knowledg they were greatly mistaken. For being unsatisfied of Gods way of ju∣stifying sinners, by the righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith, and de∣siring and endeavouring to establish a way of righteousness by their own works and obedience to the Law, they have refused to submit to Gods way of justifica∣tion, which is by Faith in Christ. He tells them, they should have considered, that Christ is the end of the Law, that is, that all the Ceremonies of the Law prefigured him, and had reference unto him as their scope and end; and that the moral Law convincing men of their sins, and condemning them for them, did plainly shew, that the expiation of sin could no where he found but in the sacrifice of Christ, and therefore righteousness must be sought by Faith in him, and not by the Law. For Moses when he commended the Law to the people, Deut. 30.11, &c. spake in this wise; This is the commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldst say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it down unto us, that we may hear it and do it. Neither is it be∣yond the sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may know it and obey it: but the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, (that is, thou canst not plead ignorance, for this word is fully declar'd to thee, and thou hast it daily in thy mouth) and in thy heart, (thou understandest sufficiently what the Lord requires of thee), that thou mayest do it. It remains therefore, that thou take care fully and ex∣actly to perform it. For the man that doth all things prescribed in the Law ex∣actly and perfectly, without ever failing in any one particular, shall live there∣by: And on these, and no other terms doth the Law promise eternal life, which now are not possible to be perform'd by any meer man since Adams fall. But as for the Gospel which presents justification by Faith, he tells them, that if he may bring it in speaking, in allusion to Moses, they should find it would speak in this wise: Say not in thine heart, (nor give way to any such vile thoughts), Who shall ascend into heaven to bring the Messias down from thence, that we may believe in him and obey him? For he is already come from heaven, and actu∣ally exhibited and offered to thee, and if thou wilt be saved, 'tis necessary thou believe that this Jesus is the true Messias, sent of God; and not only so, but that being crucified here by wicked men, and put to death, and laid in the grave, he rose again the third day, and ascended to the right hand of his Father, there to intercede for us. And say not thou in thy heart, Who shall descend into the deep, (that is, into the grave), to bring Christ again from the dead? For as he died for the sins of men, so he is assuredly risen again for their justi∣fication. And further, he shews, 'tis agreeable to the righteousness which is by Faith, in allusion to what Moses said, to speak thus. The Gospel (which holds forth all these things concerning Christ, and by which men are exhorted, and brought to believe), is openly proclaim'd and preached by the Apostles, and other Ministers of Christ (so that none of you can reasonably pretend ignorance) this word, I say, is come near unto you, and so plainly declar'd that you may apprehend it in your understandings, believe it in your hearts, and confess it with your mouthsVerbum hoc in ore tuo] scil. ut ore confitearis. Et in corde tuo] scil. ut corde credas. Piscat.. And he that shall sincerely confess with his mouth, and own Jesus Christ for his Lord and Saviour, [see Gal. 2.20. 1 Tim. 1.15.], and with his heart believe in him, and depend on the merits of his death ond passion, and believe also his resurrection, shall certainly be saved. For Faith is the means whereby the righteousness of Christ is received and made ours; and a sincere
confession of Christ is an effect and fruit of that Faith, and so a wayConfessio est via quâ pervenitur ad vitam ae∣ternam. Beza. un∣to eternal salvation. And that there is a real connexion between true Faith in Christ, and eternal salvation, (so that he that hath the one, shall not fail of the other), he proves from Isa. 28.16. where the Prophet saith, he that be∣lieveth, [viz. in Christ the precious Corner-stone laid in Sion] shall not be ashamed, nor frustrated of his hope and expectation. And there is no difference between Jew and Gentile in this matter. For he that is Lord over all, is rich in his mercy to all, that truly worship him, and call upon him, with a true Faith and Contrition, as he proves from the testimony of the Prophet Joel, ch. 2.32. which promise belongs to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, as may appear from Act. 2.21. From Ver. 1. to 14. Having thus shewed, that the Promise is universal, that whosoever call upon the Lord in a due manner shall be saved, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, hence he inferreth, that the Gospel must be preached to the Gentiles, and that himself and his fellow Apostles did nothing but what was agreeable to the will of God in so doing. This he proves by an heap of arguments clapt together after this manner. Those thatSorites. Nemo invocatur in quem non creditur; Fides autem ex auditu. Nemo autem audiet verbum à nullo annunciatum. Nemo praedi∣cabit verbum Dei nisi missus. Le gatis igitur opus est qui non à seipsis sed à Deo veniunt, & bona ab illo nova an∣nunciant. call on the name of the Lord and worship him in a right manner shall be saved: but none can call on him, except they first believe in him; nor believe in him, except they have been first instructed, and taught to know him; nor can they ordinarily be taught to know him without a Preacher, nor can any lawfully preach them, except they be authoriz'd of God, and sent; and to such the words of the Prophet Isaiah, ch. 52.7. may be ad∣apted (which were first spoken on occasion of the joyfull tydings brought by the messengers who brought the news of the Jews deliverance out of the hands of the Babylonians), How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad Tidings of good things. For if the news of that corporal deliverance by Cyrus was so welcom, how should the Gospel-tidings of spiritual deliverance from the slavery of sin and Satan by Christ be much more welcom? From Ver. 14, to 16. But here he supposes the Jews (who could not abide to hear the Gospel should be preached to the Gentiles) might object, If the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles be of God, how comes it to pass, that so few of them obey it? To this he answers, that the Jews were not to be offended hereat. For as the sending of the Apostles to preach the Gospel was foretold in the Scripture as he had proved, so the incredulity of the greatest part of the Jews and Gentiles, and the small fruit and effect of the Apostles labours was foretold also, in those words of Isa. 53.1. Lord who hath believed our report? that is, how few have been perswa∣ded, and wrought upon by our preaching. It follows therefore, that the Faith of the Gentiles could not in an ordinary way be otherwise wrought, than by hear∣ing the Gospel preachedv. 17. Per verbum Dei] h. e. ex mandato Dei qui Apostolos ad praedicandum misit. Pisc., and the Gospel could not be lawfully preached unto them but by the command of God. But then here it might be objected again; If God intend∣ed that the Gospel should be made known, and preached to the Gentiles, as well as to the Gentiles; how comes it to pass, that the Apo∣stles have preached it to so few of them? He answers, that not a few only of the Gentiles have heard it; for what was said by David, Psal. 19.4. concern∣ing the preaching of the heavens, may well be said concerning the preaching of the Apostles; their soundThe He∣brew Text hath  their line, the Septuagint  their sound. They seem to have read  instead of . See Col. 1.5, 6. The Apostles had preached the Gospel to some of all Nations, Act. 2.5. and planted the Gospel in the remotest parts of the world. went into all the earth, and their words into all the world. From Ver. 16. to 19.
v. 19. Per non Gentem] Puta per Gentiles qui hactenus non fuerunt Gens mea. Per Gentem insipientem] Puta per Gentiles qui hactenus insipienter vixerunt & stultè adorarunt idola. A Lap.But the Jews might here further object, That they did not know that the Gos∣pel was to be preached to the Gentiles, and that they should be called to a par∣ticipation of the grace thereof. He answers, that Moses and Isaiah do both plainly affirm it: As first, Mo∣ses, Deut. 32.21. where he foretells, that because the Jews violated the con∣jugal Covenant between God and them, He would cast them off for their wick∣edness, and bestow their priviledges on the Gentiles. As if God should have said, You have chosen another God, even your idols; and I will chuse another people, even the Gentiles; you have angred me by giving my honour to Idols, and I will anger you, by giving your prerogatives to the Gentiles. 2ly. Isaiah affirms the same, who in ch. 65.12. predicts the conversion and coming in of the Gentiles, by the ministry of the Gospel; and also the rejection of the Jews, declaring bold∣ly and plainly, that God would be soughtv. 20. In∣ventus sum] i. e. inveniar. Propheticè e∣nim ponitur praeteritum pro futuro. unto, and call'd upon, by those that have not in former times asked any thing of him; that he would manifest him∣self to them who before inquired not after him, and prevent their seeking of him by sending unto the seeking of them, [see 2 Cor. 5.20. Eph. 2.17]. And, that the Jewish Nation, whom he had long laboured with, from time to time, to reduce and reclaim them, spreading forth his hands all the long day of their vi∣sitation, to invite them, and call them by the preaching of his Prophets, and af∣terwards of his Apostles, (but in vain). He was resolv'd, for their wilfull ob∣stinacy, to reject them, and to receive the Gentiles in their room. From Ver. 19, to the end. Having thus spoken of the rejection of the Jews for their refusing Christ, in the 9th and 10th Chapters, and of the calling of the Gentiles; he comes now to shew, That the Gentiles ought not thereupon to insult over the Jews. For their rejection is neither total, nor final. The former he proves from ver. 1, to 11. The latter, from ver. 11, to 33. 1. The first he proves, viz. That God hath not totally rejected all, and every one of the Jews, by these Arguments. For, 1. He himself being a Jew was not rejected. 2ly, God hath not cast away those of the Jews which he fore∣sawScriptura hanc  ad fidem expressè re∣sert, 1 Pet. 1.2. Freidlib. would (through the operation of his grace) embrace Christ, and believe in him. 3ly, He proves this, by instancing in Elias, in whose days the ten Tribes having generally revolted from God, and followed Jeroboams Idols, the Prophet comes to God, and complains of the wickedness of the people of that time, that they had killed the Lords Prophets, and thrown down his AltarsAltaria scil. in excelsis locis, & collibus Deo vero erecta. Unde haec altaria vocantur Excelsa in Scrip∣tura. Quae licèt Lege Deut. 16.2. vetita essent, ac proinde piè ab He∣zekiâ, & Josiâ eversa sint, tamen im∣pium erat evertere ea, ex odio cul∣tus divini, verique Dei, uti fecerunt Achab & Jezebel., (built by pious men of the ten Tribes to serve God with, when they were not permitted to go to JerusalemIn which case the prohibiti∣on of building private altars is by the learned Jews said to have ceased.), and that himself was now the only pious man left in the Land, (thinking possibly that all that Obadiah had hid were destroyed by Jezebel), and that was the reason they now attempted to kill him also. God answers him, that he had reserved Seven thousand to himself, that continued in his true worship, who had not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal. As therefore there were many true wor∣shippers in Israel in that time of general defection besides Elias, 1 King. 19.14. so he tells them at this time, though the generality of the Jews for their refusing of Christ be rejected, yet God had reserved to himself a remnant, according to his free and gratuitous election, whom he will draw to believe in his Son. Hence he infers two Conclusions. 1. If a remnant be reserved, meerly by the free and gracious election of God, then 'tis not upon the foresight and consideration of the merit of their own works;
for that which is of grace is not of works. Grace and works (as causes) mutually destroy each other. Grace is free andGratia non est gratia ullo mo∣do, nisi sit gratuita omni modo. Au∣gustin. gratui∣tous, and gives a favour which is not due; but whatso∣ever is given for the merit of works, is not freely given, and consequently is not grace. Works challenge a reward as a due debt, else they would lose the nature of works done to merit by. The nature of grace is to be free; but the nature of works is to make indebted. If therefore the Election be meerly of grace, God ought to have all the glory; If it be upon the merit of works foreseen, then corrupt flesh will boast. 2ly. His second Inference is this, that though the generality of the Israelites, (who are so after the flesh), seeking justification and salvation by their own righ∣teousness, and observance of the Law, (and not in a right manner), have not obtain'd it, (see ch. 9.31.); yet the elect among them, seeking it in a Gos∣pel-way, by Faith in Christ have obtain'd it; and the rest (being left to themselves and the power of the Devil) by the just judgment of God, are blinded and hardned even unto this dayCohaerent haec verba cum ver∣bo  in fine, v. 7.; so that in them is accomplished what the Prophet Isaiah [ch. 29 10. & 6.9.] long ago prophesied of those Israelites, who having first hardned their own hearts against God, should be after given up by God to a further obduration; insomuch that the spirit of slum∣berSpiritum soporis] i. e. animum somnolentum & quasi veterno op∣pressum adeoque omni sensu priva∣tum. should fall upon them, and they should have eyes and ears, wherewith (as the case stood with them) they could neither see nor hear; that is, such a mind where∣with they could not understand the things that concern'd their peace. And what David said propheticallyPaul ties not himself to the very words of the Psalm, but being guided by the same Spirit by which David wrote, adds, and alters some words without diminishing the sense. of some in his time, Psal. 69.22. (by way of retribution to their wickedness), that the things that were appointed for their good, (viz. their necessary food and refreshment), should turn to their mischief, saying, Let their tablei. e. Omnes illorum deliciae vertantur iis in perniciem. be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling blockMetaphorae tres continuatae: prima ab avibus, altera à feris, tertia à saxis, aliisve obstaculis in quae im∣pingimus. and tend to their hurt; and bow down their backv. 10. Praedicit eis obscurati∣onem intellectûs, & servilem quen∣dam terrenumque animum, ut nun∣quam sese erigere, & assurgere possint in altum, ad spirituales verasque sen∣tentias, sed semper incurvati, & ve∣luti humi repentes, terrena cogitent, ut sunt terrenum regnum Messiae, &c. Alii intelligunt de onere legis servili, & malae conscientiae, quo essent premendi, expertes liberta∣tis Christi. Atque haec caecitas, justo Dei judicio ita permittente, ob incredulitatem eis infligitur. Flac. Illyr. always, that is, let them savour nothing but earthly things, having their minds and hearts intent upon them; who being often warn'd of God, would not mind heavenly things. All this the Apostle applies, and adapts to the incredulous Jews of his time, to whom the very preaching of the Gos∣pel was an occasion of obduration, they growing worse, and not better, by it, and being blinded, discerning nothing of heavenly things. From Ver. 1, to 11. 2. Having thus shewed, that the rejection of the Jews is not total, he comes now to shew, it is not final, and that they shall be generally called before the end of the world, that both Jews and Gentiles may make one sheepfold, and one flock under Christ Jesus the great Shepherd. To prove this point, he brings divers Arguments for the comfort of the poor Jews, and inserts an Admonition to the Gentiles, not to insult over them. From Ver. 17, to 23. 1. He shews them, that the Jews have not so stumbled, that they should fall and never rise again; but God in his righteous judgment hath permitted them to fall, that they having obstinately refused the Gospel, it might be preached to the Gentiles; and the calling of the Gentiles, and their receiving of the Gospel, he will in his infinite wisdom make use of, to make the Jews jealous, and emulous,
and troubled to see themselves so far out-stripp'd by those whom they so contemn∣ed. And so make that emulation a means to bring them to embrace Christ also. So that his Argument lies thus; If the rejection of the Jews occasioned the Cal∣ling of the Gentiles, whom they shall one day be provokedSee ch. 10. v. 19. to emulate and follow, then the Jews shall be called. But the first is true, in the Text, there∣fore the last. 2. If their casting off were so profitable to the World, much more will their calling home be. If their rejection did further the salvation of the Gentiles, insomuch that the paucity. of Believers among them, proved the riches of the World, that is, occasion'd a numerous and copious conversion of the Gen∣tiles, and spread a rich and an abundant knowledg of Christ in the World; how much more shall a general calling and c nversion of them confirm the Faith of the believing Gentiles, and be a means to convert those of them that do not believe all over the World. 3. He shews, that he himself is an Apostle of the Gentiles, and did earnestly desire to make his ministry glorious, in converting as many of them as he could, and the rather, that he might provoke his own Nation, not to suffer the Gen∣tiles alone to enjoy the priviledges of the Sons of God, but that they would join themselves unto them, that so they also might be saved. Therefore he inti∣mates, that the case of the Jews is not desperate, nor ought to be look'd upon with contempt by the Gentiles. 4. That he might further urge his Argument which he had made use of at v. 12. he shews, That if the casting off of the contumacious Jews be a means of sending the Gospel to the Gentiles, and so of bringing them to Faith in Christ, (whereby they obtain pardon of their sins, and reconciliation with God), What a miracle of mercy will the re-assuming of them again into Gods favour be, (upon their embracing of Christ), even as great, and as fit to work upon the Gentiles, and make them rejoice, as if they should see their dear friends (whom they entirely loved) raised from the dead againPerinde erit ac si mor∣tuus quis ad vitam revocetur. ] summum gaudium.. 5. He uses another Argument, taken from the relation of the Jews to the Covenant made with their Fathers, arguing after his manner: The holy Nation; that is, the Nation which is Gods peculiar people, and federally holy, cannot be cast off for ever; but the Jews are an holy Nation, which he proveth, because they are descended of holy Parents; and if any doubt of that, he proves it by two similitudes, viz. of the first-fruits, and root, which being holy make the lump, and the branches holy. Concerning the first fruits, the Law is set down Lev. 23. by which the people were not permitted to put sickle into their corn till they had offered a sheaf to the Lord, and then it was lawful for them to reap it; and when they had inn'd their Corn, they might not eat of it, till they had offered two loaves to the Lord, and then was their whole lump sanctified, and made lawfull for them to eat. Now he shews, that the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were as the first-fruits, and the people of the Jews were as the lump. The Jews therefore being descended from those holy Patriarchs, to whom and their seed the Covenant is made, [I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed], have still a relation to that Covenant made with their Fathers; and so their case is not desperate. And the same is the sense of the other similitude. As the branches follow the nature of the root, so do the Jews the condition of those holy Patriarchs, in regard of the outward priviledges of the Covenant; that is, not in respect of personal and inherent, but faederal and external holiness, so as they may expect to be owned by God as his visible Church. From Ver. 11, to 17. But here some Gentile might object, We acknowledg the root of the Jewish
Nation to be holy, but what good doth the holiness of the root to these incredulous branches, that are now broken off, and rejected of God? The Apostle answers, That some of the branches are indeed broken off from the sweet Olive-tree, (that is, from the Church of the holy Patriarchs); and the Gentiles, that are as a wild Olive, and not sprung from that holy root, are by Faith grafted in among the branches that remain in the sweet Olive, and so imitating the Faith of the holy Patriarchs, are made one Church with them, and thereby partake of the root and fatness of the sweet Olive, that is, of the Doctrine and grace of Christ, and all the spi∣ritual benefits and priviledges which he conferreth on his Church. But yet seeing the Gentiles are, of meer grace, grafted in, (being before in a forlorn condi∣tion), they should not disdainfully boast, or insult over the branches that are broken off, viz. the incredulous Jews; for they are natural branches of that body and root, which bears the believing Gentiles, and have an outward fellowship with the Olive; that is, they are the natural Children of Abraham, who in some degree is despised, when his Children are despised; so that if they insult over these branches, they do in a manner lift up themselves against the root, which bore these branches, even against Abraham himself, who is call'd the root of this Olive-tree, in respect, that he is the Parent from which the Jews naturally de∣scend, and in respect of the Covenant that God made with him. And further, they should consider, that this root doth bear the believing Gentiles, and not they the root. The Church of the Jews is our Mother-Church; Salvation is of the Jews, as our Saviour speaks, Joh. 4.22. The Gentiles are not called to make a several Church by themselves; neither do they so: For there is but one Church; but they are called to be members of the Church of the Jews, as Christ saith, Joh. 10.16. I have other sheep which are not yet of this fold, (that is, the Elect among the Gentiles), them I must bring into this fold, that there may be one fold, (or Church), and one shepherd. But the Christian Gentile might here again object, that though the Jew be the natu∣ral Olive, and the Gentile the wild Olive; yet the Jews are broken off, that the Gentiles might be grafted in. He answers, The proper cause of the breaking off of the Jews, was their infidelity, and not the coming in of the Gentiles; for they came in by accident; and the proper cause of the coming in, and the present standing of the Gentiles, is their Faith: Therefore they should not be high-minded, but fear, and accordingly look to their standing. And as a man that is on the top of a tree brags not of his height, but looks to his hold, so ought they. For if God spared not the natural branches, but proceeded with so much severity against his own people the Jews, the Gentiles have no reason to expect less severity, if they take not heed to themselves. Two things therefore he inti∣mates in this matter, are especially to be considered by them. 1. The severity of God against the incredulous Jews, to whom Christ was a stone of stumbling. 2. His infinite mercy and grace, in effectually calling the Gentiles to Faith in Christ, in which they are to continueSi permanseris in benignitate] i. e. in eo statu in quo te Deus con∣stituit per benignitatem suam, nem∣pe in fide. Meton. efficientis pro ef∣fecto, vide v. 31. Paul here speaks to the whole Church of the Gentiles, among whom there were many hypocrites. He speaks to the Elect, to make them carefully look to their standing, not intimating thereby, that they should finally fall away. v. 24. Wild by Nature] Understand Nature, not as it was first made, but as it was corrupted in Adam, and so derived from him to his posterity. and abide; o∣therwise they also shall be cut off from the Olive, that is, the true Church. So likewise the Jews, if they con∣tinue not in their unbelief, shall be grafted in again; for God is able to do it. Yea he shews, the thing is not only possible, but very probable, because God hath grafted in the Gentiles, that are branches of the wild Olive; and 'tis contrary to nature, to graft a wild Olive branch into a right Olive; but natural, to graft into it one of its own kind. If therefore he hath grafted in the Gentiles, 'tis much more likely he will re-ingraft the Jews, that are the natural branches, (naturally descended of Abra∣ham and the holy Patriarchs, with whom he made his Covenant), into their own Olive tree, from which they were cut off for their unbelief. From Ver. 17, to 25.
Having thus shewed the possibility and probability of the Calling of the Jews, he now comes to shew, the certainty of it; and takes his argument from the revelation of this mystery or secret made to himself by the Spirit of God, which he was to impart to the Gentiles. And accordingly tells them, he would not have them ignorant of it, Lest they should be tempted, proudly to despise the Jews as utter cast-aways. For he acquaints them, that blindness and obduration is not come upon the Jews universally, but on some of them only, and that for a certain time; namely, till a greater number of the Gentiles, than ever before, shall be brought to believe in Christ, and so enter into the true Church; with the coming in of which great multitude, the Jews shall be provoked to turn to Christ; and so all Israel; that is, the generality of the Israelites shall be brought to embrace Christ, and thereby be put into a way of salvation. When therefore the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, there shall be a famous and universal calling of the Jews. And this he shews, is agreeable to the Prophesie, Isa. 59.20, 21. where the Pro∣phet, respecting the time of the coming of the Messiah, saith, The deliverer (viz. the Messias, who was typified by Cyrus) shall come to Sion; but the Apostle looking further, even to those things that were to follow the coming of Christ, by way of accommodation, saith, The Redeemer shall come out of Sion, that is, out of the midst of his Church, where he dwelleth and abideth by his Spirit, and shall effectually call the Jews. The Prophet indeed says, He shall come to them, that return from iniquity in Jacob. But the Apostle (following the Septuagint, which was understood by the Gentiles) saith, he shall turn iniquity from Jacob; and so instead of mentioning Christs coming, he speaketh of a benefit that should follow his Coming, which is, the re∣mission of sin. Now where God forgives sin, he first gives the grace of true con∣version, and therefore the Jews shall be converted. And he further shews, that this is Gods Covenant, which he will fulfill unto them, namely, to pardon their sins, and they that shall have their sins pardoned, shall be first effectually called, and so the Jews shall reap the benefit of the Covenant, when they shall feel the efficacy of it, turning their hearts to God, and perswading them to embrace Jesus Christ by Faith. From Ver. 25, to 28. But some might here object, What! shall the Jews be called and pardoned, that are Gods enemies, whom he hates for rejecting the Gospel? He answers, They are enemies, and yet beloved in divers respects. If we respect the Gos∣pel, they are Gods enemies, and hated by him; namely, because they refuse and persecute it, spurn and kick against it; and do the more persecute and hate it for the Gentiles sake, because they see them love and embrace it, and that thereupon they are admitted into the Church. But if we respect Gods election of this people, above all other Nations, to be his peculiar people, and how they are descended of those holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (with whom the Lord entred into Covenant, and promised to be their God, and the God of their seed after them); in this regard they are beloved of God. For Gods special favours to the Jews, and his calling them to be his people, are such things as he will never change, or repent of. From Ver. 28, to 30. His last argument for the general calling of the Jews, is this; God after a long time of disobedience received the Gentiles to mercy; therefore there is reason to think, that he will at last receive the Jews also. For (according to the rule), Of like things there is the same judgment to be made. Now the Gentiles, who were formerly disobedient, have obtained mercy, by occasion of the Jews infidelity and obstinacy; God sending the Gospel to them which the Jews rejected. And as the Gentiles were disobedient, so are the Jews now: as the Gentiles have obtained mercy, so shall the Jews: yet with this diffe∣rence, The Gentiles obtained mercy by the unbelief of the Jews; but the Jews shall obtain mercy, by the mercy shewed to the Gentiles, being provo∣ked
Ut miserecordiae Gentibus factae exemplo provocati, misere∣cordiam & ipsi Judaei consequan∣tur. to emulation by the multitude of converted Gentiles; and shall themselves also be brought to believe in Christ; and shall count it a shame for them, [a people so highly favoured of God), to be out stripp'd by the Gentiles. So that the argument is from the less to the greater. If the infidelity of the Jews was an occasion of mercy to the Gen∣tiles, much more shall the mercy shewed to the Gentiles, be an occasion of mercy to the Jews. And all this serves to illustrate the grace and mercy of God, both to Jews and Gentiles, that both may obtain salvation, not by their own works, but by his grace, without which neither of them can be saved. For God, as a just Judg, hath sufferedConclusit] i e. Concludi per∣misit. Sivit esse sub imperio, & po∣testate incredulitatis. both Jews and Gentiles, successively (for some time) to remain under the pow∣er of their unbelief and disobedience, that he might in his own time, fulfill the great counsel of his good∣ness, in shewing undeserv'd mercy upon them allƲt omnium misereatur] scil. non hominum, sed nationum, i. e. tam Gentilium quàm Judaeorum. Intelli∣gitur de Generibus singulorum, non de Singulis generum. A L p., namely, both Jews and Gentiles. From Ver. 30. to 33. In the Conclusion of this discourse, he falls into an admiration of the depth of the abundant goodness of God, in bearing with the disobedience and contu∣macy of the Gentiles first, and then of the Jews; and of his wisdom in ma∣king the rejection of the Jews, a means of calling the Gentiles; and of his knowledg in knowing how to work upon the obstinate Jews, by his mercy shew∣ed unto the Gentiles. He shews, his judgments and works are unsearchable, and the ways and methods of his providence past finding out. For no Creature can pierce into the mind of God, nor was ever called to be of his Counsel; see Isa. 40.13, 14. 1 Cor. 2.16. In fine, he shews, That if any shall yet complain of these dispensations of God, which he hath been speaking of, and shall think that God deals hardly with the Jews in rejecting them, and calling the Gen∣tiles; let him remember, No man can challenge God, as if he were indebted to him, or owed him any thing. He asks, Who ever gave any thing to God, that he did not first receive from him? or who can merit any thing at his hands? see Job 41.2. He owes us nothing, but what he is pleased of his own meer good∣ness, freely to promise us? And if so, who hath cause to complain, if he deal more bountifully with some, than with othersBeneficii sui quemque opor∣tet esse arbitrum. Liberalitas à li∣bertate nomen habet Nuli Deus ul∣lo jure aut titulo obstringitur, quia nihil ab ullo accepit, quod prius non illi dederit. Nulli ergo Deus est de∣bitor, ac proinde non est injustus si Gentes illuminet, Judaeos vero in suâ caecitate relinquat.. For all things are of him, as the first Author: all things are upheld by him, as the Preserver: all things are dis∣posed of by him as the supream Director: all things tend to him, as the ultimate End: therefore all things ought to be subservient to his glory, to whom all praise, honour and glory ought for ever to be ascribed. Amen. From Ver. 33, to the end. The Apostle having now done with the First part of his Epistle, viz. the doctri∣nal:  He comes to the Second, which is practical; wherein he gives divers precepts of Christian life. From Chap. 12. to Ver. 14, of Chap. 15. 1. He intreats them by those great mercies which God hath vouchsafed to them, to present their bodiesBy a Synec∣doche of a part for the whole., (that is, their whole man both Soul and Body), a living sacrifice, (enlivened and quickned by the Spirit of Christ), holy, (in respect both of inward affections, and outward actions), acceptable to God, (through Christ) which is a reasonable service; and far more valuable in his sight, than the offering or sacrificing of unreasonable beasts. He intreats them also, not to conform themselves to the carnal conversation of the world, that lies in wickedness, but to endeavour to be transformed, and changed by the renewing of
their minds and wills, that so they may discern what is the good and perfect will of God, revealed in his word, and may heartily approve it, and willingly conform themselves to it. Ver. 1, 2. 2. By virtue of his Apostolick Office, which he had of grace received, he injoins those among them, who had any special gifts, or publick office in the Church, that they should not be proud of them, nor pretend to be wise above their capacity and calling, but carrying themselves soberly and modestly, (according to the measure of the gifts and graces of the Spirit conferred on them, upon their be∣lievingQuisque se coutineat intra mensura doni, gratiae, talenti, offi∣cii sibi commissi, quod, per fidem, credendo accepit, nec alia attentet: v. 9. cui datum est ministerium, ille ministret, non doceat; vicissim cui data est doctrina, ille doceat nec se ingerat ministerio alteri tradito. A Lap. in Christ, Eph. 4.7.), should imploy them to the best advantage of the Church. For as in the natu∣ral body, several members are deputed to several offices; so it is in the Church, where all the faithful are one body under Christ the Head, and members one of ano∣ther, and on that account, ought mutually to serve one another. Therefore every one should demean himself so∣berly in the use of the gift given him; as particularly, if any one have the gift of Prophesie, or interpreting the Scripture, he should prophesie according to the analogy or rule of Faith, that is, conform his interpretations to the rule of the Holy Scriptures, and teach nothing disagreeable thereunto. He likewise that hath any office or ministry in the Church should attend on that; as for instance, He that teacheth, or is imployed in lay∣ing down sound doctrine, and confuting error (as Professors in the Schools, and Catechists in parochial Congregations now do) should diligently attend on that work. He that hath the office of a Pastor, to exhort the people, and apply the word, he should attend to that. He that hath the office of distributing the Churches stock, should labour to do it with simplicity and good fidelity. He that hath the office of a Ruler in the Church, [1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Tim. 5.17.], and is to look to the manners of people, should do it with diligence. Lastly, He that sheweth mercy, viz. that has the particular care of strangers, or the sick, or impotent persons, and Orphans, should do it chearfully, and with a willing mind. From Ver. 3, to 9. 3. He exhorts to several Christian duties necessary in our conversation. Such as are, 1. Sincere love. 2. Abhorring evil, and embracing that which is good. 3. Brotherly kindness. 4. Giving to others the honour due to them. 5. Sedu∣lity and industry in their particular Callings. 6. Fervency of Spirit in the Lords service. 7. Encouraging themselves under afflictions with hope of deliverance, be∣ing patient in tribulation, and continuing instant in prayer. 8. Beneficence and communicating to the poor Saints, hospitality to distressed strangers that come to them. 9. Blessing their persecutors. 10. Sympathizing with one another in prosperity and adversity. 11. Ʋnanimity and mutual concord, [Phil. 2.2.4.], wishing the like good unto others as unto themselves. 12. Not minding or pre∣tending to high mysterious things, but following the examples of lowly, modest, and meek Christians; not conceiting themselves wiser than others. 13. Not recompencing injuries with injuries. 14. Taking care by honesty and innocency of life to cut off all occasion from any, of reviling them, 2 Cor. 8.21. 15. Peace∣ableness with all men as far as they can. 16. Forbearing private revenge, and to suffer their own, and their adversaries anger to cool, remembring that it be∣longs to God either immediately by himself, or else by the Magistrate to revenge injuries. Therefore they should do good to their enemies instead of evil, which is the way to heap Coals of fire on their heads, and to melt them and soften them, if there be any ingenuity in them. And, Lastly, Not to suffer themselves to be so far transported or overcome with injuries as to be prompted to revenge them. For to conquer the malice of their enemies with kindness, is the best kind of victory. From Ver. 9, to the end.
5. In the next place, he exhorts them, To yeild due obedience and subjecti∣on  to Magistrates. For every lawful power, ruling according to righteousness, is Gods ordination; and he that resists and opposes such a power, sets himself against Gods ordinance, and so brings upon himself punishment, poenam fe∣rent. Grot., as well from God as the Magistrate. For the office of the Magistrate is ordained by God, (and to such he enjoins this conscientious obedience), to restrain and punish wicked∣edness, and to encourage what is good and praise-worthy. The Magistrate is the Minister of God for the good of men, and ordain'd for this end, to keep up good order in the world, being arm'd with the sword of power to punish those that are wicked and exorbitant. Therefore, he shews, it is necessary they should be subject, not only that they may avoid the anger of the Magistrate, but in re∣spect of Gods command, who injoins this subjection. And for this cause, (viz. the avoiding wrath, and to perform their duty towards God), he tells them, they ought to pay tribute to Magistrates, as to the Ministers of God, who are continually employed in the defence of the publick peace and tranquillity, and in maintaining justice, righteousness, and good order among men. And seeing justice requires us to give every one their due, they ought to pay to Magistrates, (whether supream or subordinate), tribute, custom, fear, reverence, and honour, ac∣cording as their respective places and degrees require. From Ver. 1, to 8. 6. Having exhorted them, to pay every man what they owe him, whether mo∣ney, service, or respect; he tells them, there is one debt they can never be quit of, but must be always paying, and that is, to loveCharitas reddendo multiplica∣tur; cum redditur ab homine, cres∣cit in homine. one another; which duty if any man perform ab∣solutely, and in all respects as he ought, he may be said not to have perform'd obedience only to one or two Com∣mandments of the Second Table, but to have fulfilled them all. For all of them (many whereof he enumerates, though not in order) are branches, and parts of that great duty of Charity, and loving our Neighbour; so that he that truly loves his Neighbour as he ought, will not injure him in any thing, whether in his life, wife, goods, good name; and so fulfills the Law. From Ver. 8, to 11. 7. This duty of loving one another, he shews, they should the rather per∣form, seeing they were not unbelievers now, and in the dark night of ignorance as formerly, but the Gospel-light had arisen unto them, and therefore it was high time for them to rousev. 11. , Con∣siderantes quale jam sit tempus. up, and awaken themselves to a performance of those duties, which that glorious revelation call'd them to; and the rather, because now they were come nearer salvation, (which is the end of their race, 1 Pet. 1.9.), than when they first believed. As therefore they that run a race, the nearer they come to the stand, the faster they run; so should they increase more and more in holiness, the nearer they come to their end. They should remember that the night of Heathenish ignorance and gross darkness is in great measure past, and the Gospel-light hath dawn'd upon them; therefore they should renounce the works of darkness, and put on the armour of light, that is, all manner of Chri∣stian virtues, (which become those that walk in the light, and are both the ha∣bit and armour of a Christian), whereby they may be arm'd to combat Satan, and all their spiritual enemies, [1 Thess. 5.8.]; and they should labour to walk piously before God, and honestly and fairly before men, as becomes those to whom the glorious light of the Gospel hath appeared, abstaining from all intemperance, and filthiness, from all strife and envy, and should put on Christ and his righte∣ousness, by Faith, deriving vertue from him to enable them to all holy walking, and should adorn themselves with an holy imitation of his virtues, not making provision to satisfie or please the inordinate lusts of the flesh. From Ver. 11, to the end.
8. He comes now to give some directions concerning the right use of Christi∣an liberty. It seems, some of the Jews at Rome, (who had given their Names to Christ), thought the observation of the Ceremonial Law, (as to meats and days), was yet to be continued; for the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. left them to a free use of those Ceremonies, till the Gospel shining forth more clearly to them, should convince them that they were to be laid aside. But the believing Gentiles being fully perswaded of their freedom from this yoke, and of the liberty given them by Christ, refused communion with those Jews that lived after that manner. Among these therefore there arose a dissentionAcerbis altercationibus veri∣as, saepe; Charitas, certò amittitur. which hindred the work of the Gospel; the weak censuring the strong, as prophane, for using such a liberty; and the strong despising the weak, as over-scrupulous in not using it. Hereupon the Apostle, that he might obviate this evil, goes in a mid∣dle way, admonishing the believing Jews, that they should so follow their own opinion as not to condemn the believing Gentiles, who were otherwise perswaded; and he admonishes the believing Gentiles, that they should not refuse commu∣nion with the believing Jews, who still adhered to some of those Ceremonial ob∣servances; but though they were weak, as to the knowledg of some points of the Christian Faith, yet they should receive them into their fellowship, and not take upon them, to judg their thoughtsNon sumentes vobis dijudican∣das ipsorum cogitationes, nempe an legalia ut necessaria usurpent an ut utilia. Grot., whether they u∣sed those things as necessary, or as things only profita∣ble for the time. He tells them, he understood, that the strong among them, and such as were well-grounded in the liberty Christ hath given under the Gospel, thought they might freely eat any thing: Others that were weak, rather than eat any meats forbidden by the Law, [see Lev. 11.8.], contented themselves only with herbs. The case being thus between them, he forbids them both from censuring each other, and that for divers reasons. 1. Because God hath not rejected either of them, but called the one as well as the other to the knowledg and belief of his Son, and so receiv'd them into his Family. 2. They are both Servants of Christ; he is Lord of all. And therefore (says he) consider, O man, whether thy Brother stand, and continue firm in the FaithSolius Domini judicio relin∣quendum est, benè an male agat ser∣vus. Ad Dominum pertinet judicare, stetne an cadat. Unus est omnium Dominus Christus Jesus: Illi stat, si firmus est fide; illi cadit si quid, pec∣cat, ut tu suspicaris. Ille judicandi potestatem in ipsum habet, non tu., or whether he fall, and sin against God, he standeth or falleth not to thee, but to his own Master. Thou hast no authority to judg him, look thou to thy own standing. Neither do thou, O Jew, who seest the Gentile use his Christian liberty as to meats and days, judg him as pro∣phane, and suspect his Apostacy from the Faith; for God (who is able) will preserve him from such a fall. 3. As to that other matter, [viz. the observation of days] he advises, that every one should be well satisfied in his own mind, as to the grounds of his doing or omitting those things, that so he may not knowingly offend God. And in this case, they ought not to censure one another, because the Jew by observing these days, intendeth to do honour and service to God thereby. And the Gentile by not observing them, intendeth to do that which he thinketh is agreeable to the mind and will of God in that matter; so that both aiming at the same end, they ought not to condemn one another. And the case also stand∣eth thus, as to that other matter of meats; the strong giveth God thanks for his liberty, and for the meat which he alloweth him freely to eat of; and the weak, though he abstain from meats that were by the Law once forbidden, yet he giveth God thanks, because he hath meat enough that is not forbidden. And if it be the general intention, and design of every faithful Christian, (as certainly it is), so to live, that he may live to Christ; and so to dye, as he may be for ever his; surely he ought so to direct all his particular actions, (and consequent∣ly his use of days and meats), as may tend to his glory. And there is great reason he should do so; for Christ both dyed and rose again for this end, that he might be Lord over his redeemed ones, both living and dying; and having
redeemed us with his precious blood, we ought to conform our selves to his will, and not rashly to judg one another, but to leave judging to him before whose tribunal we shall all be judged, and where all (will they, nill they) shall ac∣knowledg subjection to him; as he proves from Isa. 45.23. where the Prophet saith, God hath sworn; but the Apostle setteth down the form of Gods Oath, who because he hath not a greater to swear by, sweareth by Himself. And whereas the Prophet saith, every tongue shall swearCultus omnis Dei per unam speciem, i. e. per juramentum ex∣primi solet. Grot. by me; the Apostle (following the Sep∣tuagint) saith, every tongue shall confess, which is a consequent of the other; for he that sweareth, con∣fesseth God, and calleth him to be a Witness and a Judg; and what is there in the general spoken of God, is here particularly applied to Christ, to whom every one of us must give an account of our selves. From Ver. 1, to 13. 9. He advises the strong, to take heed of giving offence to the weak, and to judg it best, and most becoming them, to take heed, that by the unseasonable use of their liberty, they do not lay a stumbling block in their way, [Lev. 19.14.], which may cause them to fall, that is, either to do a thing doubtingly, or else to take offence, and fall off from Christianity. But some Christian Gentile might here object and say, I am perswaded in my Conscience, that no meat is impure, or prohibited under the Gospel. He answers, that meat that is in it self clean and allowed, is made unclean to him, that thinks it unlawful. And on the o∣ther side, if any one fully satisfied of his liberty, do eat it to the hurt of his weak Brother, in that case he does amiss; for these reasons. 1. 'Tis against Charity to act so in things indifferent, as to induce a weak Brother, to do such things as may afterwards be a great grief and perplexity to himv. 15. If thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, thou walkest not cha∣ritably] that is, Seeing thee eat, he by thy example is induc'd to do the like, and afterwards is grieved at it.. 2. 'Tis the way to occasion him to sin, and so to do what lies in us to bring destruction upon him, who, (professing Faith in Christ), is in the judgmentOmnes, fidem Christi profi∣tentes, pro redemptis habet charitas Christiana. Pareus. of Charity to be esteemed such an one for whom Christ dyed, [1 Cor. 8.11.]. 3. Eating with offence, causeth Chri∣stian liberty, purchased by Christ, to be evil spoken of. 4. The spiritual kingdom of Christ consisteth not in such things as meats and drinks, but in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, [1 Cor. 8.8.]; therefore we may well abstain from an undue use of them, and of other indifferent things, when our Brother is like to be hurt thereby. So that upon the whole matter, he tells them, That they that use these things wisely to the honour of Christ, (taking them with his leave when they may, and abstaining from them at other times, when his work and service may be thereby promoted, and not hindred), do please God, and are acceptable to men. Lastly, he tells them, they ought to follow after peace, and the things whereby they may edifie one another. There∣fore the workv. 20. Noli propter escam de∣struere opus Dei] i. e. aedificium Dei, scil. religionem Christianam in prox∣imo. Vel opus Dei, i. e. proximum ipsum quem, Deus fecit Christia∣num. of God, viz. the Christianity of a weak Brother ought not to be endangered for such a small matter, as to eat this or that meat is; lest he should thereby be offended, provoked, and fall off from his Chri∣stian profession. But here some might urge, that all meats are pure and lawful. He answers, 'Tis true, they are so in themselves, but 'tis evil notwithstanding for us to eat them with offence. Therefore when our Brother is like to be offended, and made more weak or in∣firm in his Faith by our using such or such meats and drinks, 'tis best for us to abstain. But some will urge again, I have FaithIntelligitur fides de rebus mediis, & non quae ad dogmata pertinet.  hîc est persuasio ea, per quam quis credit licitum esse id quod fa∣cit., (that is, I am fully perswaded, 'tis lawful for me to eat), and 'tis necessary that I profess it, and own it, and assert this my liberty. He answers, Thou maist en∣joy thy perswasion to thy self, but maist not use it, or profess it to the hurt of thy Brother; yea thou must so
use it, as one that must give an account of thy self and thy actions to God. And he tells them, that he is a happy manFelix, qui quod facit non ju∣dicat apud se non esse faciendum. Peccatum enim est quicquid fit, con∣scientiâ non adstipulante., that when he knows a thing to be lawful, doth so use his liberty a∣bout it, as to have no reason to accuse, or condemn him∣self; and who judgeth not in himself, that that ought not to be done, which he doth. Therefore he adviseth those that are doubtful concerning the lawfulness of using such or such meats, to ab∣stain; because he that doubts whether he should eat, and yet eats, he is con∣demn'd of himself, because he doth it without being satisfied of its lawfulness. For whatsoever is not done of Faith, that is, with a perswasion that it is lawful, is to him that does it, sinful. From Ver. 13, to the end. 10. He further shews, that those that are strong, and have attain'd to a greater measure of knowledg, should bear with the infirmities of the weak, and labour to keep them from falling, not seeking only to please themselves, but their neighbour, in things tending to his good and edification. This he urges from the example of Christ, who did not seek to pleaseNon quaesi∣vit sibi dulcia. Grot. himself, or the inclination of Nature, (which abhorreth pain and suffering); but he so carried himself, that that may truly be applied to him, which is written Pal. 69.9. The reproaches of them that reproach thee are fallen upon me, that is, The sins of men, which in their own nature are injuries against God, and cast reproach upon him, I have taken them upon me, or they are laid upon me to expiate them, [Isa. 53.4.]. And seeing Christ sought not his own ease, but our benefit, we ought in like manner to seek the good of our Neighbour, and to do that which may tend to the promoting his salvation. And lest any should object, that such passages as those of the Psalmist belonged not to them, he tells them, that those things that were before written, were written for our instruction, that we exercising such pa∣tience as the Scripture prescribes, especially in bearing with the infirmities of our weak Christian Brethren, might have the comforts the Scripture promiseth, and particularly be confirm'd in hope of obtaining eternal Salvation by Christ Jesus. He prays, that God who worketh patience and comfort in the hearts of his people by the holy Scriptures, would give them the grace of Unity and Charity, such as Christ commands and expects from them; that all strife and discord being laid aside, they might with one heart and mouth glorifie God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore after the example of Christ, (who came from Heaven, and laid down his life to redeem both Jew and Gentile, and receives both into the arms of his mercy, intending to make them both, upon their Faith in him, to be partakers of the glory of God), he exhorts them, with all love and kindness, to receive one another into their communion, not disdaining, or rejecting, or judging one another. And that the Christian Gentile might not despise the Jewish Believers, he tells them, that Christ was appointed a Minister to the circumcisedv. 8. Christ a Minister of the Cir∣cumcision] Metonymia adjuncti pro subjecto. Christus dignatus est mi∣nistrare Judaeis, ergo non decet ut à Gentibus spernantur. Rursum, Christus assumsit ex misericordiâ Gen∣tes; ergo Judaei non debent eas ut extraneas despicere. Jews, that God might appear to be true in his promises made to the Fathers, of sending the Mes∣sias to them. And accordingly Christ preached to the Jews in his own person, but to the Gentiles by his A∣postles. And on the other side, that the Jewish Christi∣an might not reject the Gentile believer, (who makes use of his lawful liberty), he tells them, that God hath been most wonderfully merciful to the Gentiles, and hath received them according to his promises made in the Old Testament, and they have great cause to glorifie God for his mercy, which they would have no reason to do, if they had not been received to mercy. And this he proves by a fourfold testimony. First, from Psal. 18.49. I will praise thee, and sing unto thee among the Gentiles. Where David who was a Type of Christ, promiseth that he will pub∣lishDicit David se etiam vicinis alienigenis narraturum Dei in se be∣neficia. Optimè autem haec ad my∣sticum Davidem, Christum, aptantur. Grot. the name of God among the GentilesDavid hoc facturus erat per Messiam. Gejerus..
2ly. From Deut. 32.43. Where the Gentiles are commanded to rejoice and praise God with the Jews. 3y. From Psal. 117.1. The Gentiles are commanded to praise God, and that plainly intimates, they shall obtain mercy. Lastly, From Isa. 11.10. Where the Prophet prophesying of Christ, who was to come of Da∣vids Family, (under the type of Hezekiah lineally descended from David), saith, that he shall be for a standardQuod in Hebraeo est  in vex∣illum LXX verterunt  quia Vexillum signum imperii. Locus prophetae de Hezechiâ agit, sed qui & ipse non obscura suit Christi Imago. Orietur, inquit, ex Jessae domo soboles quae erigetur Gentibus pro vexillo, nempe in id ut Gentes ei se committant cum bonâ siduciâ. Haec pertinent non tantum ad ostendendum Gen∣tibus quid Deo debeant, verum etiam ad retundendam Judaeorum ferociam, q. d. Quid est? Vul∣tis vos aegrè ferre, si Deus promissa praestet? to the Gentiles, to whom they shall come and resort, by the preaching of the Gospel, and over whom he shall reign as King, and that they shall trust and rely on him, and believe in him. He concludes this discourse concerning their abstaining from the unseasonable use of their Christian liberty with a most ardent prayer, that God, in whom all true Believers repose all their trust, and from whom they expect all good things, would fill them with all joy, and peace in believing, that through the working of the Holy Ghost in them, they may abound in hope of having and enjoying eternal life. From Ver. 1, to 14. He begins now to conclude his Epistle,The Con∣clusion. excusing himself that he had written somewhat boldly unto them. For though he was perswaded that the RomansPer hanc laudem pro∣vocat ad me∣liora. abounded in grace, and the knowledg of all things pertaining to Salvation, and were able to instruct one another, yet he thought fit to write unto them, and to stir them up to the practice of that which they knew already; this being a branch of his Apostolical Office, (conferred on him by the grace of God), as well as that of making known the Gospel. And so by real effects he should provev. 16. ] Esse pro conspici, q. d. ut factis probem me esse ministrum Christi ad Gentes mis∣sum. that he was a Minister of Christ, sent to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, that they being converted by his ministry, might be offer'd to God as a Sacrifice, sancti∣fyed by the Spirit, and so acceptable to God. And seeing he had brought so many Gentiles to the Faith by his ministry, he had great matter of rejoi∣cing, not in himself, but that through the assistance of Christ, he had been enabled to be faithful in the matters that concern'd the glory and service of God. Neither durst he speak more than Christ had really effected by him, (in the conversion of the Gentiles), namely, by his preaching, and ministry, and the signs, and won∣ders which the Holy Ghost had enabled him to do, that the Gentiles might be convinc'd thereby, of the truth of his Doctrine. So that from Jerusalem and the Countries round about unto Illyricum, (now called Sclavonia lying on the Adriatick Sea), he had spread the Gospel, his design being to preach Christ in those places where he had not been preached before, that he might not build on ano∣ther mans foundation. So that in his ministry that Prophesie, Isa. 52.15. was fulfilled, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, (that is, believeVerba ipsa LXX apud Esai∣am, cap. 52. sic se habent. Videbunt res non ante nunciatas, & intelligent non an∣tea audita. Quod primo sensu dictum de iis qui vidêre eventum Vaticini∣orum Jeremiae, mystico sensu optimè ad Evangelium refertur. Grot. in him), and they that have not heard, shall understand. And he tells them, that thse his great employments elsewhere in planting the Gospel, had hindred him from coming to them hitherto. But now finding no place in these parts where the foun∣dation was yet to be laid, and having no more occasion to de∣tain him here, (that he foresaw), he gives them hopes of his coming, and tarrying a while with them in his journey, which he intend∣ed for Spin, after h had satisfied himself with the pleasure of being among them, and been something refreshed with their company. He tells them, he was now going to Jerusalem, to carry thither the charitable contributions of the Greek Churche, for the rlif f the poor Saints in Judea, which office of love, he inti∣mates,
those Churches were in some sort obliged to perform unto thm, bcause the Gospel came from the Jews to the Gentiles. And seeing the Gntiles had been made partakers of their spiritual things, it was but just they should minister to them in carnal things. When therefore he had finished this journey and service, and had sealed, that is, delivered to them at Jerusalem, safely without dimi∣nution, (as a treasure under Seal), this fruit of the Faith, and Lve of the aforesaid Churches, he intended to visit them. In the mean time he suggests to them hopes of great spiritual blssingsVeniam cum uberrimis Chri∣sti donis, ad vos confirmandos, scil. veniam cum abundanti benedictione, i. e. plenè vobis Evangelium annun∣ciabo ut si quid desit vobis ad abso∣lutam Evangelii cognitionem id to∣tum à me accipiatis. Vatab. to be conferred by his ministry upon them at his coming, that so they might more earnestly desire it. Lastly, He beseechs them for Christs sake, and the love of God wrought in their hearts by the Spirit, that they would be importunate in their prayers to God for him, that he may be delivered from the snares of the unbliving Jews in Judea, who vehement∣ly thirsted after his blood: And that the relief he brought to the poor Saints in Judea might be kindly accepted by them, though it came from the Gentile Churches. And lastly, That he might come to them with joy, (if it be the will of God), and might rejoice together with them, and be re∣freshed with their company and converse. And so giving them his Apostolical be∣nediction, he dsires the God of peace, unity, and concord, and Author of all bles∣sings to be with them, to bless and preserve them. From Ver. 14, to the end. Chap. 16.In the close of his Epistle, He commends to them Phoebe, who served the Church at Cenchrea, (an Haven of Corinth), in receiving and harbouring poor Chri∣stians that were driven out of their own Country, and particularly had been a succourer of the Apostle himself. He exhorts them, to receive her in the Lord, (that is, with Christian affection for the Lords sake): And to assit her in her outward affairs, and businesses at Rome as far as they were able. Then he sa∣lutes Aquila and Priscilla, who, though private persons, yet keeping themselves within their calling, had vigorously laboured in propagating the Gospel according to their knowledg, with singular zeal, (as appears, Act. 18.), and it seems, they stood up in defence of the Apostle in some dangerous persecution or tumult, and preserved his life with the hazzard of their ownThis might happen while Paul sojourned with Aquila and Priscilla in their house, Act. 18.6, 7. when he had such an hot bout with the Jews that he was constrain'd to leave them, and go unto the house of one Ju∣stus. It seems they with hazzard of their lives protected him while he was in their house. Otherwise it were not probable that Priscilla being a woman should adventure her life for Paul.; upon which account, he tells them, that not only himself was bound to thank them, but all the Churches of the Gentiles about Corinth, because the preservation of his life redound∣ed to the profit of them all. He salutes also the Church in their house, that is, all the Christians in their family. He sa∣lutes Epinetus, who was converted to the Faith among the first in Achaia, [see 1 Cor. 16.15]. He salutes Mary, who had done many good offices for the faithful, especially the Teachers of the Gospel. He salutes Andronicus, and Junius his Kinsmen, who were highly accounted of among the Apo∣postles, and were converted to the Faith before the Apo∣stle himself, being pssibly among those who were at first converted by Peter; and they had also been imprisoned for the sake of the Gospel as well as He, [see Col. 4.10.]. He greets Amphias whom he dearly loved for the grace of God that appeared in him, and for his holy profession. He slutes Urbanus who seems to be one of the Pastors of the Church at Rome, and so a fellow-laburer with the Apostle in the Gospel. He salutes Apelles, who shewed himself a faithful and sincere Christian. He salutes the Christians that were in Aristobulus and Nar∣cissus's house; but the Masters he passes by, they (as it seems) not being Chri∣stians. He salutes those approved Matrons Tryphena, and Tryphosa, and Per∣sis, who contributed their labours zealously for the promoting of the Gspel, and did many good offices in the Church. He salutes Rufus a choiceSo John writeth to the Elect Lady. per∣son for godliness and vertue, whse Mther very much respected Paul, and was as a Mother to him in love and affection. He salutes some more in particular,
and others in general, under the Titles of Brethren and Saints. He bids them salute one another with a holy kiss, which was among them, (as shaking of hands among us), a sign of mutual love, affection, and concord. He tells them, The Churches among whom he was conversant, who understood his purpose of wri∣ting to them, aluted them. From Ver. 1, to 17. He warns to avoid those who by false Doctrine caused divisions, and by scan∣dalous Living, ffences among them. For these, he tells them, serve not the Lord, but themselvs, and the more simple are easily deceived by their cunning words. And as fr them, though he had already good experience of their obedience to the Gspel, (which was manifest to the world and in which he greatly rejoiced), yet he thought good to admonish them to continue constant, and prudently to resist con∣trary Doctrines. For as it is not sufficient for a Matron, to have been once chast, except she so continue, so 'tis not sufficient for them to have been once a pure Church, except they keep themselves from false Doctrine and false Worship. It sems, he fresaw, that if the Roman Church were once infected with er∣ror, it would be dangerous to other Churches. Therefore he would have them wise in discerning true Doctrine from false, and in sticking to it, neither being cunningVelim vos ita prudentes ut non fallamini, ita bonos ut non fallatis. Velim vos esse simplices, i. e. since∣ros, puros ab omni malo. to sophisticate the truth, nor to propagate error. And though Satan and his instruments will seek to seduce them, and disturb their Church; yet he tells them, that Gd who is both the Lover and Author of peace, will through Christ, give them victory, when they have a while combated against the Devil and his Emissaries. Whereby he seems, either to prophesie of the conversion of the Roman Empire to the Faith, or that the dissentions raised among them by the subtilty and malice of the Devil and his Instruments shall be quenched; which possibly was partly effected by this Epistle, and partly by the Apostles after-labours among them. He subjoins the saluta∣tions of other Saints with him, to the Christian Romans, particularly of Ti∣mothy the Evangelist, Tertius who wrote this Epistle from his mouth, Gaius, (f whom Act. 20.4.), Erastus, [see 2 Tim. 4.20.], and of Quartus. He concludes this excellent Epistle, with a solemn doxology, or thanksgiving to God, who is able to establish them in the Faith, according to the Gospel which he had preached, (the great subject whereof is Christ), and according to the Revlation of his secret Counsel concerning the Salvation of mankind, which though it wre in some sort made known in the Old Testament, yet not plainly and fully until this present time; but now by the Commandment of God, and the Spirits clearing the meaning of ancient prophesies, is made known to all Nations, to bring them to submit thmselves to the Doctrine and Directions of the Gospel: To this only wise Gd he desires all glory and honour should, in and through the media∣tion of Christ Jesus, be for ever ascribed. Amen. From Ver. 17, to the end.
SECT. XVII. THE Apostle intending to go directly from Corinth into Syria, to carry the Alms of the Macedonian and Achaian Christians to Judea; he was advertised, that the Jews (who hated his Doctrine and person, and knew of his purpose) laid wait for him, to intercept the moneys he carried, and possibly to take away his life. Whereupon he thought it best, to re∣turn into Macedonia, (from whence he came), and from thence to pass into Asia. Sopater of Beroea went along with him as far as Asia, never parting from him; but Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius, Tychicus, Trophimus, and Timothy, (who it seems upon some occasion or other was come unto him from Ephesus), went with him through Macedonia, and then leaving him, went be∣fore to Asia, and expected him and his company at Troas; who accordingly came thither, with Luke and Sopater, not long af∣ter from Philippi, and stayed there seven days. On the eighth day, which was the first dayEx hoc loco, item ex 1 Cor. 16.2, demonstratur quod translatio Sabbathi, quarto legis moralis prae∣cepto sanciti, ex ultimo in primum diem hebdomadis, non solum funda∣ta sit in consuetudine Christianae Ec∣clesiae, sed etiam in expressà ordina∣tione Apostolicâ; unde & ille dies vo∣catur  Apoc. 1.10. i. e. in honorem Domini celebratus. Quar∣tum praeceptun legis Moralis non est abrogatum, sed etiam Christianos ad bservandum Sabbthum hebdoma∣darium obligat. Authore hujus muta∣tionis uisse ipsos Apostolo Christi (qui Spiritum infallibilitatis habuerunt) pter ex hc loco, & locis mox, al∣legtis▪ Habuit Sabbathum, & etiam∣num habet, duplices fines. 1. Mora∣les, ut esset tempus Deo sacrum, quod negotiis mundanis substractum, im∣penderetur Deo laudando, cognoscen∣do, invocando, &c. 2. Ceremoniales; sic Sabbathum Judaicum fuit reme∣moratio istius quietis divinae, qu ab operibus Cretionis cessavit; sic fuit signum foederis quod cum Israelitis pepigit, Exod. 31.13. Ezek. 20.12, 20. Item signum quietae possessionis térrae Canaan, post liberationem ex servili labore Aegypti, Deut. 5.15. sic etiam typus aeternae quietis in coelo, Isa. 66.22, 23. ut explicatur, Heb. 4.9. Sic etiam monitorium quiescendi & cessandi à peccatis, Isa 56.2 & 8.13. Praesertim autem erat typus istius quietis, quà Christus septimo die hebdomadis quievit in sepulchro à laboribus Passio∣nis. Quoam autem istae ceremoniales praefigurations per adventum Christi aliquâ ex parte impletae sunt, post adventum Christi Sabbathum caret sinibus Sacramentalibus, quos in Veteri Te∣stmento habuit, & praecipuè non est Typus Christi & mortis ipsiu, & propter hanc causm à septimo die hebdomadis in primum transltum est, ut sciremus Christum non exspectari, sed ve∣nisse, non amplius moriturum, sed mortuum esse, & ex morte resurrexisse. Etsi ergo Sabbatum non ampliu est figura, & Typus quietis Christi in sepulchro, vel quietis in terrâ Canaan post ex∣itum ex Aegypto, nec amplius est jugum legis ad acuendum Spiritum servitutis, tamen etiamnum est tempus honori Dei, curandae ac nutriendae animae, resiciendo corpori, exercendae miserecor∣diae s cratum. Vide plura super hac re apud Stresionem in loc. of the week the Disciples being gathered together to break bread, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Paul preached unto them, and being to go away next day continued his exhorta∣tion till midnight. Eutichus, a young who sate in a window, being surprized with sleep, fell down from the third loft, and was ta∣ken up deadSic Christus, Mat 9.24. Filiola non est mortua sed dormit, i. e. ad tempus tantum recessit ani∣ma, & mox reibit. At ubierat anim? In manu Dei vel Angelorum qui morientium animas dicuntur portare, Luk. 16.22. etsi non fuit in coelum asportata, tamen fuit in manu Angeli cu∣stodita. Vid. Act. 37. historiam de Tabiha.; Paul falling on him, (in imi∣tation of the Prophets, Elijah and Elisha, 1 Kings 17.21. & 2 Kings 4.34.), quickly perceived his Soul (which was departed) through the power of God (on which he believed) restored to him again, and there∣fore bad them not trouble themselves. The Disciples seeing this Miracle, were not a lit∣tle comforted; because not only life was restored to the Youth again, but the Doctrine of the Gospel which Paul preached, was ex∣ceedingly confirmed thereby.
Act. 20.3. And there abode three months: and when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return tho∣row Macedonia. v. 4. And there accompanied him into Asia, Sopater of Berea: and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus, and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and Ti∣motheus: and of Asia, Tychicus, and Trophimus. v. 5. These going before, tarried for us at Troas: v. 6. And we sailed away from Philippi, after the days of unleavened bread, and came unto them to Troas in five days, where we abode se∣ven days. v. 7. And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came toge∣ther to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight. v. 8. And there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were gathered together. v. 9. And there sat in a window a certain young man, named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead. v. 10. And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him, said, Trouble not your selves, for his life is in him. v. 11. When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed. v. 12. And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little com∣forted. v. 6. Post dies Azymorum] Paulus vocatorum ex Gentibus libertatem tuebatur; ipse tamen, dies Judaeorum festos observabant. Vide Act. 18.21. 1 Cor. 16.8. v. 7.  pro▪ , & Sabbatorum pro Sabbati. Enal∣lage numeri. Ʋnus Sabbatorum, est primus hebdomadae dies à Sabbato proximus, qui nobis Dominicus dicitur. Is dies conventûs, Christianis proprius, 1 Cor. 16.2. dies , Apoc. 1.10. Justinus de eadem die Apolog. 2. . SECT. XVIII. FRom Troas Paul went on foot to Assos, a Sea-port-Town in Asia, sending his companions by ship thither before him, who when he came thither took him in. Thence they all sail∣ed together to Mitylene, and the next day arrived at Samos, and having tarried a little at Trogyllium, the day following they came to Miletus, passing by, and not touching at Ephesus. For the Apostle being desirous to be at Jerusalem, at the Feast of Pentecost, (that he might in that concourse have a larger oppor∣tunity of spreading the Gospel), would not now call at Ephe∣us, lest he should be detained too long by the Brethren there. Wherefore he sent for the Elders of that Church to come to him to Miletus. They being come, He in a very grave and serious discourse sets before them, in the first place, The up∣rightness of his Conversation, and the faithfulness of his Mini∣stry among them, and how he had behaved himself with all hu∣mility of mind, and had express'd much tenderness of affection to them, and that amidst many hazzards and dangers from the
Jews, who conspired against his life; that he kept nothing back from them, that he thought useful for them to know; but had both publickly and privately preached, both to Jews and Gentiles the necessity of Repentance, and Conversion to God, and of Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. He tells them, he was now going to Jerusalem, not undertaking that Journey rashly or inconside∣rately, but being incited to it by the strong impulse of the Spirit of GodVinctus Spiritu] i. e. Ductu, & impulsu Spiritûs Sancti ad hoc iter tam efficaciter impulsus, ac si vincu∣lis istuc traheretur. Vid. Act. 16.6, 7, &c. 19.21, &c. 13.4. Mat. 4.1.. Neither knew he what particu∣lar sufferings the Lord would there call him to undergo, or what would be the issue of them, whether life or death. Only this he found, that in every City (through which he passed), those that had the gift of Prophesie, (as many in the Churches had at that time), foretold him, that bonds and afflictions did wait for him, and attend him. But none of these things moved him, no not loss of life it self, if he might serve Christ faithfully in the office which he had intrusted him with, and publish his Gospel, wherein the free grace of God is so eminent∣ly manifested. And as for them, his dear friends, (among whom he had so long convers'd, and to whom he had preached the Gospel, by which the Kingdom of God is set up in the hearts of men), he tells them, they were never like to see his face again. And seeing he had faithfully shewed to them the way to salvation, the fault was not in him if any of them perished, see Act. 18.6. Ezek. 3.18. He then exhorts them, to have a great regard to their Pastoral charge, and to take heed to themselves, (that their life and conversation be holy and un∣blameable), and to the whole flock over which the Holy GhostSpiritus Sanctus est vicarius Christi in terris, qui Christi nomine Ecclesiam docet, & regit, Joh. 16.13, 14. Et ex hac potestate vicaria∣tûs Ecclesiae ministros vocat, dotat, mittit, praeficit. Ergo Christus est Rex Ecclesiae, Spiritus Sanctus vica∣rius hujus Regis, Pastores, servi, vi∣sibilia ac audibilia instrumenta hujus vicarii. Est argumentum quo & per∣sonalitas, & divinitas Spiritus Sancti lucidè demonstratur. Streso., (from whom all faith∣ful Ministers have principally their call and authoritySee Act. 13.2, 3.), had made them Overseers, that they feed the Church of God with sound Doctrine, and give them a good example. Which exhortation he inforceth by two ar∣guments. 1. Because of the inestimable price with which this flock was bought; Christ, God-man having purchased it with his own blood. 2. Because of the danger that the flock was like to be in, after his departure, partly from Wolves (that is, false Teachers, or professed persecuting enemies), part∣ly from subtil crafty Hereticks, who should arise from among themselves. He exhorts them therefore, to be careful, remem∣bring, how for the space of three years he had taken much pains in preaching the Gospel among them, and had with tears, night and day, (as occasion offered it selfSee 2 Tim. 1.3. 1 Thess. 1.9. 2 Thess. 3.9.), warned them to take heed of such seducers, and to cleave to the truth. Lastly, He takes his solemn leave of them, commending them to the pro∣tection and guidance of God, and to the directions delivered in his Gospel, which if they adhered to, he tells them, will be able to instruct and build them up, and bring them to that
glorious inheritance which God hath provided for all his Saints; the promises whereof may abundantly encourage them in their work In conclusion, he professeth his innocency from that sordid sin of Covetousness, and appeals to them, whether by his own manual labour he had not maintained himself, and those that were with him, (see Act. 18.3.). And thereby he had taught them, that by so labouring as he did, (when the case required it), they should be so far from being chargeable or burdensom to others, that they should support, and relieve the poor and weak in estate; and this much rather, than by exact∣ing wages drive any, that were tenacious, from embracing the Gospel. For according to that saying of our Saviour, (not recorded in the Gospels, though possibly it may be gathered from Luk. 6.38. & 16.9.), It is more blessed to give than to receive. When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them, and when he had so done, they with great expressions of sor∣row accompanied him to the ship, being more especially grie∣ved at those words of his, That they should see his face no more. From Ver. 13, to the end. Act. 20. v. 13. And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there intending to take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot. v. 14. And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene. v. 15. And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios, and the next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium: and the next day we came to Miletus. v. 16. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost. v. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church. v. 18. And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons. v. 19. Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations, which befel me by the lying in wait of the Jews: v. 20. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you publikely, and from house to house. v. 21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance to∣wards God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. v. 22. And now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: v. 23. Save that the holy Ghost witnesseth in every City, saying, That bonds and afflictions abide me. v. 24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the mi∣nistry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testifie the Gospel of the grace of God. v. 25. And now behold, I know that ye all among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.
v. 26. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. v. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. v. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over the which the holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. v. 29. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves en∣ter in among you, not sparing the flock. v. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. v. 31. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. v. 32. And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. v. 33. I have covered no man silver, or gold, or apparel. v. 34. Yea, you your selves know, that these hands have ministred unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. v. 35. I have shewed you all things, how that so labouring, ye ought to sup∣port the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give, than to receive. v. 36. And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them all. v. 37. And they all wept sore, and fell on Pauls neck, and kissed him, v. 38. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship. v. 14. Assos Urbs Troadis. Mitylene, Lesbi insulae urbs praecipua. v 15. Chios insula inter Lesbum & Samum. Samus, insulae Joniae. Trogyllium est Joniae promontorium non longe à Samo. Miletus, Joniae urbs. 21. Graecorum nomine Scriptores Novi Testamenti intelligunt quasvis Ethnicorum nationes, quomodo Onkelos, & Syrus interpres, omnes Gentiles vocant Aramaeos aut Syras. v. 30. Ex vobis ipsis exsurgent viri loquentes perversa] h. e. Nicolaitae, Apoc 2.6. docentes ea quae à recto deflectunt. Nam docebant, Matrimonium institutum esse mere humanum, & tale quod conscientias non obligaret, Immolatitiis sine distincti∣one licere vesci. Vide Irenaeum. 1.27. Ideò docent carni placentia, ut eos quos Ecclesiae disciplina offendit, ab Ecclesia abductos sibi faciant sectatores. Grot. v. 33. Praeclarior de se praedicatio quam illa Samuelis, 1 Sam. 12.5. Samuel te∣stificabatur nihil se judicandi causa accepisse. Paulus nec laboris in docendo assidu repensationem ullam accipere voluerat. Gracchus apud Gellium Provinciâ disces∣surus, Ita versatus sum in Provinciû ut nemo posset verè dicere, assem, aut eo plus in mu∣neribus me accepisse. Pricaeus. v. 35. ] Descriptio comparativi per particu∣lam  Hoc est inter illa quae Paulus didicerat non ex scipto sed relatu eo∣rum, qui Dominum noverant. SECT. XIX. FRom Miletus they came to Coos, and the day following to Rhodes, and from thence to Patara, a Port Town, and the chief City of Lycia, and from thence in a ship bound for Phoenicia, passing by Cyprus, they came to Tyre, where finding some Disciples, they tarried with them seven days. Here Paul was warned by some of the Christians in this place, (who had the Spirit of Prophecy), of the great dangers and perils that
attended him, if he went up to Jerusalem. Wherefore through humane affection, and zeal for his temporal preservation, (see a like example in Peter, Mat. 16.22.), they disswaded him from going thither. But their counsel nothing prevailing with him, and they seeing he was resolv'd to go on, they all of them, with their Wives and ChildrenNon tantum ipsi deducunt Paulum, sed & ipsos liberos tempesti∣vè adsuefaciunt honorandis Evangelii ministris. Probè hinc discamus liberis nostris ingenerare aestimium Evange∣lii & S. ministerii, ne contemptores e∣jus evadant., (to testifie their great respect and affection to him), ac∣company him out of the City; and he at his departure from them, kneeled down on the shore and prayed with them, Then ta∣king ship from Tyre, they came to Ptolemais, (a Sea Town of Palestine in the Tribe of Aser, formerly called Acco, Judg 1.31. but now thus named from a King in Egypt), where having saluted the Brethren, the next day they came to Cesarea-Stratonis, (on foot as 'tis pro∣bable), where they stayed many days with Philip the EvangelistThat is, one of them who were sent forth here and there by the A∣postles to preach the Gospel, and to confirm the Churches, Eph. 4.11. 2 Tim. 4.5. Munus Evangelistae inter Apostolos & Pastores erat medium. Evangelium praedicabant nulli certae Ecclesiae affixi., who was one of the Seven Deacons, [Act. 6.5.], and had four Virgin Daughters who had the gift of foretellingHoc donum non tantum viris sed & foeminis dabatur, ut patet in exemplis Deborae & Huldae, Jud. 5.2 Reg. 22.14. Et Mariae matris Do∣mini, Luc. 1.46. Et Annae, Luc. 2.36. Adeóque & his filiabus potuit esse datum. things to come. During their stay here, a certain Prophet call'd Agabus, (the same probably who, chap. 11.27, 28. foretold the famine that happened in the time of Claudius), came hither from Judea; and after the manner of the old Prophets, (who often prophesied by SymbolsSee Isa. 20.2, 3. Jer. 13.1. & 27.2. Ezek. 12.5. Imitati hoc & falsi Prophetae. Ut apparet, Jer. 38. Mos Dei est, non tantum per verba au∣dibilia sed etiam per signa visibilia homines docere suam voluntatem, quia homo habet duos disciplinares sensus, & quia quod non tantum auditur sed etiam videtur efficacius movet. Sic etiam doctrinam foederis per Sacramenta quasi visibilem facit, ut Christus quasi ante oculos nobis crucifigatur, Gal. 3.1., and sig∣nificant expressions, that they might the bet∣ter imprint their predictions on the hearts of men), took Pauls girdle; and bound his own hands and feet with it, declaring, that after that manner the Jews would bind Paul at Jerusalem, and deliver him to the Gentiles; viz. first to the Roman Governour of Judea, and afterwards to Nero the Roman Emperor. Hereupon both Pauls Companions, and the Christians of that place; out of their great affection to him, importun'd him with tears not to go to Jerusalem. But the Apostle resolving, come life or come death, to be obedient to the Call of Gods Spirit, would not be diverted from his intended journey. When they per∣ceived his resolution to be fixed, they desisted from importu∣ning him any further, and submitted to the will of God. Then lading Mules with the goods they had with them, they began their journey from Ca sarea towards Jerusalem. And some of the Disciples also of Caesarea accompanied them, who brought them to one Mnason of Cyprus an old Disciple, (who had long ago received the Faith and now lived as it seems at Jerusalem), with whom they should lodg.
Act. 21. v. 1. And it came to pass that after we were gotten from them, and had lanched, we came with a straight course unto Choos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara. v. 2. And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth. v. 3. Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre: for there the ship was to unlade her burden. v. 4. And finding disciples, we tarried there seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. v. 5. And when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our way; and they all brought us on our way, with wives, and chil∣dren, till we were out of the City: and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed. v. 6. And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship, and they returned home again. v. 7. And when we had finished our course from Tyre, we came to Pto∣lemais, and saluted the Brethren, and abode with them one day. v. 8. And the next day, we that were of Pauls company departed, and came unto Cesarea, and we went into the house of Philip the Evange∣list, (which was one of the Seven), and abode with him. v. 9. And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did pro∣phesie. v. 10. And as we tarried there many days, there came down from Judea, a certain Prophet named Agabus. v. 11. And when he was come unto us, he took Pauls girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus saith the holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that oweth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. v. 12. And when we heard these things, both we and they of that place besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. v. 13. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jeru∣salem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. v. 14. And when he would not be perswaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done. v. 15. And after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to Jerusalem. v. 16. There went up with us also certain of the disciples of Cesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should lodg. v. 1. Cous, insula est inter Cycladas celeberrima, tum Esculapii cultu, tum Juno∣nis aede. Rhodus, solis cultu, & Colosso nobilis. v· 13. ] Paratè habeo, i. e. paratum me habeo: eadem locutio, 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Pet. 4.5. v. 16. ] Brevis locutio pro , ducentes, (i. e. ducturi, praesens pro futuro), nos ad eum apud quem diverteremur. Nam Mnason ille ex Cypro videtur habitatum ivisse Hieroso∣lyma. Antiquum discipulum] ex eo tempore quo Paulus & Barnabas in Cypro fuerant. Vid. cap. 13.4.
SECT. XX. VVHen they were come to Jerusalem, they were very kindly received by the Church there. And the next day, the Elders being met together in the house of James the Apostle, the Son of Alpheus, (See Mat. 15.40. Gal. 1.19. Act. 15.13.), Paul relates to them, what great things the Lord had wrought by his ministry among the Gentiles. When they heard that, they glorified God for the great suc∣cess of the Gospel. But then they acquainted him, that seve∣ral of the converted Jews, (of whom there were many thou∣sands, who, though they had received the Gospel, yet thought the Ceremonial Law must still be observed), were informed concerning him, that he not only permitted the Gentile-converts to remain uncircumcised, but perswaded the Jews living among the Gentiles, (whom he had converted to the Faith), to leave off Circumcision, and the other Ceremonies of Moses's Law. This therefore they tell him, in all probability, will be the event of this business. The Jewish Christians will hear of his being come thither, and so will come in multitudes, to see how he behaves himself in that matter, and will expect some satisfacti∣on from him therein. Therefore they advised him, that seeing there were four men there present, who having had a Naza∣rites Vow upon them, which being now accomplish'd, (see Act. 18.18.), were to perform the Ceremonies prescribed, Numb. 6.13, to 22. that he on this occasion would join himself to them, and perform those Ceremonies and Rites with them, and make provision of such Sacrifices for them as the Law injoins, that so being now freed from their Vow, they may shave their heads; and by this means the believing Jews will be perswaded that they had heard false reports of him, and that he did still ob∣serve the Mosaical Rites. As for the believing GentilesƲtrumque consilium fuit ex Spiritu Sancto, ut Gentiles conversi non cogerentur observare Ceremoni∣as, & ut Judaei conversi ad tempus sinerentur uti Ceremoniis impletis, donec inutilitatem, & non-necessita∣tem earum cum tempore comprehen∣derent. Vid. cap. 14. ad Rom. Etsi enim Ceremoniae legis Mosaicae, isto tempore, non amplius erant necessa∣riae, tamen erant licitae Judaeis, si quando usus earum conduceret ad a∣lios Judaeos lucrandos. Synagoga debuit cum honore sepeliri, nec tur∣piter, & praecipitanter ex Ecclesiâ e∣jici, sicut superstitiones Ethnicae, sed sensim in desuetudinem venire. Ante Christum Ceremoniae erant mortales, post Christi ascensionem mortuae, post confirmatum Evangelium mortiferae., (they tell him), they had made a decree, (which they had sent to Antioch by him and Barnabas, Act. 15.), by which they de∣clared that they are not required to observe any such Rites, or any more than those four Precepts, viz. To abstain from things offered to Idols, from Blood, from things strangled, and from Fornication. Paul hearing this, took their advice, and thought fit thus far to com∣ply with the Judaizing Christians; and ac∣cordingly performing all things belonging to the purifying of the Nazarites. He went into the TempleDisputant hîc viri docti utrum Paulus ipse Naziraeatûs votum vel antea in se habuerit, Act. 18.18. vel nunc susceperit, & cum his viris deposuerit; an vero tantum inter∣fuerit, & praeuerit tanquam Patro∣nus, & Adjutor horum quatuor vi∣rorum sacris, ut ita aliquam modò communionem haberet cum Judaicis Ceremoniis, quod ad scopum suffici∣ebat. Nos litem hanc non decidi∣mus. Stres. with those four men, and declared unto the Priests, that the time of their Vow was expired, and therefore according to the Law, they were to offer an offering for each person, as in that case is
prescribed. And when the seven days wherein those Sacrifices were to be offer∣ed, were almost at an end, divers unbe∣lieving Jews, that dwelt in Asia, being now come to Jerusalem; as soon as they saw Paul in the Temple, they brought in the multitude tumultuously upon him, and ap∣prehended him, crying out of him, as a person that taught Doctrines derogatory to the prerogative of the Jewish Nation, namely, in that he taught, that the partition-wall between Jew and Gentile was broken down; also, that the Ceremonial Law must be abolished, and that a sinner is not justified by the works of the Law; and that the typical Ceremonies which pre-figured Christ were not to be continued now Christ was come in the flesh; and further, that he did inculcate the predictions of Christ concerning the destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem, according to Mat. 23.37, 38. & Luk. 19.43, 44. And because they saw Trophimus with him in the City, who was a Gentile-Christian), they confidently, but untruly aver∣red, that he carried him into the Temple: which they held a pollution and profanation of it. The people being hereupon exasperated, they laid hands on him, and haled him violently out of the Court of the Temple; and the Priests seeing this, presently shut the doors of the Temple, lest possibly he should run into it again, and lay hold on the Horns of the Altar, and so take Sanctuary, (from which they could not take him, as we read Adonijah and Joab once did, 1 King. 1.50. & 2.28. Then they fell a beating of him, and had like to have killed him, had he not been rescued by the chief Officer of the Ro∣man Souldiers, (who kept Garrison there to prevent Tu∣mults), who taking him out of their hands, and supposing him to be some great Malefactor, commanded him to be bound with two Chains, possibly putting one on his hands, the other on his feet, as Agabus had foretold, v. 11,Judaei praedicuntur vincturi, v. 11, quia ipsi Paulo manus injece runt, eum comprehenderunt, & sic occasionem dederunt quod ab Ethni∣cis militibus vinctus est.. And not being able to understand from the confused multitude, what his particular crime was, (some saying one thing, some another), he commanded he should be brought into the Fort or Castle, call'd Arx Antonia, which was their Garri∣son. And as they were going up the stairs to the Castle, the rage of the multitude was so great, that the Souldiers were fain to carry Paul in their arms, to secure him from violence. When he was come to the Castle gate, he desired the Colonel that he would please to permit him to speak unto him. The Colonel wondred he spak Greek, and thereupon thought he had been that Egyptian false Prophet, that had raised a Sedition in Judea about Three years before, under the government of Faelix, and had gotten to him about four thousand followers in the wilder∣ness, vid. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. ch. 6, 7. Paul tells him, he was a Jew, born at Tarsus, the Metroplis of Cilicia, and therefore
desired liberty to speak to the people; which the Colonel per∣mitting, Paul standing on the stairs, near the gate of the Ca∣stle, made a sign to the people to hold their peace, and give audience; and then began to make his Apology to them in the HebrewThe Jews after the Ba∣bylonish Cap∣tivity by their converse with the Syrians and Assyrians, had very much mingled the purity of the Hebrew with those Tongues, so that the Syriack having so great an agreement with the Hebrew was rec∣koned for one Tongue. tongue, which procured him the more ready attention from them. Act. 21. v. 17. And when we were come to Jerusalem, the Brethren re∣ceived us gladly. v. 18. And the day following Paul went in with us unto James, and all the elders were present. v. 19. And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministery. v. 20. And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the Law. v. 21. And they are informed of thee, that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, That they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the cu∣stoms. v. 22. What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art come. v. 23. Do therefore this that we say unto thee: We have four men which have a vow on them; v. 24. Them take, and purifie thy self with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads; and all may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning him thee, are nothing, but that thou thy self walkest orderly, and keepest the Law. v. 25. As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and con∣cluded, that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep them∣selves from things offered to Idols, and from blood, and from strang∣led, and from fornication. v. 26. Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them, entred into the Temple, to signifie the accomplishment of the days of purification, untill that an offering should be offered for every one of them. v. 27. And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia, when they saw him in the Temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him, v. 28. Crying out, Men of Israel, help: this is the man that teacheth all men every where against the people, and the Law, and this place: and farther brought Greeks also into the Temple, and hath polluted this holy place. v. 29. (For they had seen before with him in the City, Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the Tem∣ple.) v. 30. And all the City was moved, and the people ran together: and they took Paul, and drew him out of the Temple: and forthwith the doors were shut. v▪ 31. And as they went about to kill him, tidings came to the chief Cap∣tain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar. v. 32. Who immediately took Souldiers, and Centurions, and ran down
unto them: and when they saw the chief Captain and the Souldiers, they left beating of Paul. v. 33. Then the chief Captain came neer, and took him, and command∣ed him to be bound with two chains, and demanded who he was, and what he had done. v. 34. And some cryed one thing, some another, among the multitude: and when he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he command∣ed him to be carried into the Castle. v. 35. And when he came upon the stairs, so it was that he was born of the Souldiers for the violence of the people. v. 36. For the multitude of the people followed after, crying, Away with him. v. 37. And as Paul was to be led into the Castle, he said unto the chief Captain, May I speak unto thee? who said, Canst thou speak Greek? v. 38. Art not thou that Egyptian which before those days madest an up∣roar, and leddest in the wilderness four thousand men that were mur∣derers? v. 39. But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew, of Tarsus, a City in Cilicia, a Citizen of no mean City: and I beseech thee suffer me to speak unto the people. v. 40. And when he had given him licence, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckned with his hand unto the people: and when there was made a great silence, he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue, saying. v. 20. Vides quot sint millia Judaeorum] Vide Quomodo auctum fuit granum illud Sinapis intra annos 25. Grot. Accensi zelo legis] Intra Judaeam qui erant Judaei , hi ante dispersi∣onem illam, quae per Adrianum evenit, libertatem ab legis onere non percepêre. Et ad tales scripta est Epistola ad Hebraeos. v. 23. Votum habentes] non perpetuum, sed temporarium; & tales Nazaraei dierum vocantur, de quibus Numb. 26. Joseph. lib. 2. de bello Judaico, c. 15. Erant alii Nazaraei qui faciebant votum perpetuum, ut Samuel, & Samson, hi dicebantur Nazaraei seculi, i. e. perpetui. Vid. Drus. annot. in Num. v. 24. Idem valet , ac esto Nazaraeus cum illis, & abstine à vino rebusque aliis, quae interdictae sunt Nazaraeis. Sane Nazaraeatus  voca∣tur, Num. 6.21. ] Sumptus facito propter illos. Non Paulus Nazaraeatûs votum concepit, sed quatuor alii viri, comam, quam aluerant è Nazaraeatûs voto, deposuerant. Paulus verò sumtus fecit in hanc rem, scil. ad victimas à Nazaraeis offerendas (peractis voti diebus) quas offerre Deo debebant quatuor isti viri, scil. agnum, vel agnam, arietem, placentas, & lagana An verò Paulus integros sumptus fecerit, necne, dicere non possumus: & hinc dicitur , quia quasi in partem Nazaraeatûs venerat, sumptus hos faciendo. Petitus. Vult autem hoc Paulum facere Jacobus quò plebi abundantiùs satisfaciat, & ut illi quatuor raderent caput, h. e. voti liberentur eo facilius. Est Metonym. signi pro signato. Nam sicut obligatio votiva exprimebatur demisso capillo, ita liberatio comâ abrasà, Num. 6.18. quae coma supponebatur urenda ollis in quibus coqueban∣tur carnes de sacro Eucharistico. v. 25. ] Infinitivus pro Gerundio, nihil tale servandum illis, nempe eorum quae Moses praescripsit. v. 26. Denuncians expletionem dierum, &c.] Hoc est, omnibus edicens se casti∣monium suscipere in dies septem, ita ut dies ipsius pariter exirent cum diebus alio∣rum qui aliquanto ante ac in majus tempus se obligaverant. Licebat enim cuique, eum quem vellet votivae obligationi praestituere terminum, Num. 6.5. sic Paulus in dierum hebdomada se obligavit (illi alii in duas, tres aut quatuor hebdomadas) us∣que dum offerenda esset pro unoquoque (scil. eorum qui se obligaverant) oblatio. Ita tempus sumpsit ut pariter cum illorum tempore desineret. Aoristus hic significat rem quae fieri debebat. v. 28. Qui adversus populum & legem, &c.] eadem accusatio quae in Stephanum intenta supra, cap. 6.14. Graecos introduxit] Quod planè non licebat, nempe in∣tra septum illud lapideum quod in tres cubitos attollebatur, & inscriptum columnis habebat,  Joseph. belli Jud. 5.14. Si quis alienigena, etiam Romanus, id septum transgrederetur, is occidi poterat, teste eo∣dem Joseph. belli Jud. 6.
v. 31. ] Praefecto ejus cohortis, quae temporibus festis, ac proinde etiam in Pentecoste praesidium habebat in porticibus Templi ad prohibendos tumul∣tus si qui orerentur: quam cohortem etiam  Johannes dixit, c. 18.3. v. 35. Evenit ut portaretur à militibus] Levabatur à militibus ne vim ei multi∣tudo inferret, cui expositioni favent quae infra c. 23.10. extant. v. 37. Graecè nosti] Graeca lingua post Macedonum imperium facta erat quasi communis populorum Asiae & Aegypti. v. 39. Loquutus est linguâ Hebraea] i. e. Hierosolymitanâ, magna ex parte Sy∣riaca, qua tum Judaei utebantur. SECT. XXI. THE Apostle now beginning to make his defence to the people, He first sets before them what manner of per∣son he was before his conversion. He was a Jew by extraction, born in the noble City of Tarsus, educated at Jerusalem, under that famous Doctor of the Law Gamaliel, (a man of great esteem among them; see Act. 5.34.), being perfectly instructed by him in the Law of the FathersPer patriam legem non intelli∣gitur lex quam Patres à Deo per Mo∣sen acceperant, sed  quam ipsi à patribus acceperant. Pharisaeorum religionem notat, quae  magnam par∣tem constabat, quarum  se fuisse olim, ait Gal. 1.14. Cumque  ei religioni attribuit, idem dicit quod infra, c. 26.5. scil. se in∣stitutum esse in Pharisaismo, quae est accuratissima Patriae legis forma. De Dieu. Intelligit se in Traditionibus, & Ca∣balis Judaicis, nec non in glossis fal∣sis supra legem Mosis (quarum tum major inter Judaeos erat authoritas quam ipsius Mosis Math 5.21.) pro∣bè fuisse institutum, praecipuè in praecisis observatiunculis & regulis Pharisaeoram, c. 26.5., and imbued with the strictest Judaical Principles, and was a great Zelot for that way, and a bitter enemy to Christianity. And he tells them, that all the Senate, or Sanhedrim, es∣pecially the high Priest, could attest the truth of what he said; for, from them he received commission to apprehend all such Christians, as he could find in Syria, and to bring them bound to them to Jerusalem to be scourged, or otherwise punished. 2ly, He declares to them the manner of his conversionPaulus non fuit regenitus an∣te conversionem suam in itinere Da∣masceno. Fuit enim acerbissimus ho∣stis, & persecutor Christi, & Eccle∣siae Christianae ut de se fatetur, Phil. 3.6. & 1 Tim. 1.13. Gal. 1.13. Simeon, Cornelius, &c. carebant quidem cogni∣tione veri Messiae, sed non in corde ge∣rebant acerbum odium ac amarum ho∣stilitatem contra Christum sicut Pau∣lus. Quod se ait in justitiâ legis fu∣isse irreprehensibilem non intelligen∣dum est de verâ sanctimoniâ vitae sed de superstitiosâ & rigidâ obser∣vatione ceremoniarum, & traditio∣num patriarum, ut nemo Pharisae∣orum haberet quod reprehenderet, Gal. 1.14. Streso., [see Chap. 2. Sect. 1.], how travelling to Damas∣cus to pursue his persecuting design, when he was come nigh to that City, a great light from Heaven shon round about him; upon which he fell to the ground, and heard these words articulately spoken to him by ChristProbabile est, Paulum ipsis cor∣poralibus suis oculis vidisse ipsum Christi corpus splendore suo in ocu∣lis Pauli coruscans. Vidit fulgur cor∣porale ex nubibus; circumfulsus est radiis Spiritus Sancti intus in consci∣entiâ, sed simul potuit ipsum Christi corpus gloriosum videre. Sicut enim vox quam audivit fuit ex ipsius ore, v. 14. ita probabile est lucem quam vidit fuisse ex ipsius Christi corpo∣re. Et loca superius allegata ex Act. 9.27. & 22.14. & 26.16. & 1 Cor. 9.1. & 1 Cor. 15.8. omni∣no videntur postulare hanc fidem, quod Paulus ipsum Christum homi∣nem viderit corporaliter. Post re∣surrectionem est visus Dominus à mul∣tis, post ascensionem à nemine, prae∣terquam à Stephano & Paulo. Sed inde non sequitur; Christi corpus fu∣isse in terrâ. Potuit enim virtute Christi, corporalis visus Pauli ita ro∣borari, ut quod in coelis erat in ter∣ris conspiceret. Sic Stephanus, sub∣latis in coelum oculis, Jesum vidit stantem ad dextram Dei, Act. 7.55., Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And they that were with him heard a voice indeed [ch. 9.7.], (as the people did, Joh. 12.19. when some said it thundred, others said an Angel spake), but understood not distinctly what was said. He further declares how Christ told him, he had provided one Ana∣nias to come unto him, and to shew him what he had designed for him to do, and suffer, for his Name sake. And thus being blinded by the brightness of the glory that shone a∣bout him, he was led by those that were with him to Damascus, and there by the Ministry of Ananias he recovered his sight. Ananias also shewed him, how God had chosen him, that he should know his will, and have the
Gospel revealed to him, and should see Jesus, and hear him speak to him from heaven, and should make known to all menUt esset testis & praeco quod Jesus Christus, quem Judaei crucifixe∣rant, vivat & in coelis sedeat ad dex∣tram Patris in gloriâ. Hujus rei  testis, est Apostolus, quâ in re excellit caeteros Apostolos qui Christum quidem ideò in carne vide∣runt, Act. 10 41. 1 Joh. 1.1, 2. ut idonei Christi testes essent, sed Paulus vidit ipsum in gloriâ, & ex coelo audivit loquentem, & sese manifestan∣tem. Ergo ait 1 Cor. 9.1. Annon sum Apostolus, annon vidi Dominum Jesum? Non tantum vidit Christum exstaticè, & in visione nocturnâ, Act. 18.9. & 22.9. & 23.11. 2 Cor 12. sed &, hoc loco, corporaliter, non minus quam caeteri Apostoli., the things which Jesus had already and should further make known to him. Ananias also having further instructed him, exhorted him to be baptized, and by Faith in Christs blood to wash away the guilt of all his sins, (of which Baptism is a sign and seal), and earnestly to implore grace from Christ, to sanctifie his na∣ture more and more. Paul having thus open∣ed to them the manner of his Conversion and Call, to be an Apostle; he now further shews them, how at his first coming to Jerusalem after this, (see ch. 9.26.), as he was in the TemplePaulus Christianus precatur in Templo Judaico. Faciebant id tum temporis adhuc etiam caeteri Apostoli & Christiani, Act. 3.1. Non religione & observantiâ praecepti ceremonialis, Deut. 12.5. 2 Chron. 7.12, 13. sed quia intempestivum adhuc, & cursui Evangelii noxium erat, ab∣rumpere communionem cum Judaeis in externis cultûs exercitiis. Paulus igitur ascendit Templum ardenterque petiit (ut probabile est) ut sibi a∣pud Judaeos liceret praedicare Evan∣gelium, populum suum Christo lucri∣facere, & Ecclesiam quam vastave∣rat iterum aedificare: Inter precan∣dum raptus est in Paradisum seu ter∣tium coelum, audivitque verba▪ in∣effabilia & summas accepit revelati∣ones, 2 Cor 12.3, 4. praying, he fell into an Exsta∣sie or Trance, and in that Exstatical Vision saw Christ, who commanded him to get him spee∣dily out of that City, because his former zeal against the Gospel, would hinder his preach∣ing of it now from being successfull. Against this, he humbly argued, that his former zeal against Christianity, (which was so remark∣able and notorious, by his imprisoning the Professors thereof, and causing them to be scourged in the Consistories of many Cities, and by his assisting in the stoning of Steven, and keeping the Garments of his accusers whilst they slew him) might be an argument to the Jews, that they were very great and cogent reasons, that had wrought such a strange change in him; and so he might in all likelyhood, be a fitter person to publish the Doctrine of Christ now, by how much the more he had opposed it formerly, [see Sect. 3. of Chap. 2.]. But this did not pre∣vail for his staying at Jerusalem, but Christ commanded him to depart from thence, tel∣ling him he would send him to preach to the Gentiles, who had not that exception against him, and would more readily receive his Do∣ctrine. Hitherto the Jews had patience to hear him, but when he mentioned the Gentiles, and that he was appointed to preach to them, they cried out, he was a Villain, and unworthy to live, and expressing their fury by throwing dust into the air, and casting off their Clothes as if they would presently stone him, the chief Commander of the Guard, bid the Soldiers carry him into the Castle, and com∣manded, that he should be scourged till he should confess what he had done, that had so enraged the Jews against him. As
they were going about to bind him, in order to the scourging of him, the Apostle declares himself a free-born Denizon of Rome, whom the Roman Laws would not permit to be so dealt with, before any sentence was legally passed upon him. When they heard this, they ceased from their design of scourging him; and the Colonel (who had himself purchased the freedom of a Citi∣zen of Rome at a great rate) was afraid he had already done more than he could well answer, in binding him, and putting Chains upon him. Act. 22. v. 1. Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defence which I make now unto you. v. 2. (And when they heard that he spake in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kept the more silence; and he saith) v. 3. I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a City in Cili∣cia, yet brought up in this City at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the Law of the fathers, and was zealous towards God, as ye all are this day. v. 4. And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into prison both men and women, v. 5. As also the high Priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate of the elders: from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to Damascus to bring them which were there, bound unto Jerusa∣lem, for to be punished. v. 6. And it came to pass, that as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me. v. 7. And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? v. 8. And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? and he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest. v. 9. And they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me. v. 10. And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do. v. 11. And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus: v. 12. And one Ananias, a devout man according to the Law, having a good report of all the Jews, which dwelt there, v. 13. Came unto me, and stood, and said unto me, Brother Saul, re∣ceive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him. v. 14. And he said, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst know his will, and see that just One, and shouldst hear the voice of his mouth. v. 15. For thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard. v. 16. And now, why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash a∣way thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. v. 17. And it came to pass, that when I was come again to Jerusalem, even while I prayed in the Temple, I was in a trance, v. 18. And saw him saying unto me, Make haste and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy testimony concern∣ing me. v. 19. And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee.
v. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. v. 21. And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles. v. 22. And they gave him audience unto this word, and then lift up their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live. v. 23. And as they cryed out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air. v. 24. The chief Captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging: that he might know wherefore they cryed so against him. v. 25. And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned? v. 26. When the centurion heard that, he went and told the chief Cap∣tain, saying, Take heed what thou dost, for this man is a Roman. v. 27. Then the chief Captain came, and said unto him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yea. v. 28. And the chief Captain answered, With a great sum obtained I this freedom. And Paul said, But I was free-born. v. 29. Then straitway they departed from him which should have exami∣ned him: and the chief Captain also was afraid after he knew that he was a Roman: and because he had bound him. v. 3. Natus Tarsi] Tarsus illa, est Ciliciae Metropolis; quam Romanae civitatis jure donavit Antonius Triumvir. Et hîc, celeberrimam Scholam fuisse Strabo testatur, lib. 14. Ex hac progressus Paulus venit Hierosolymas; ita Graecam literaturam si∣mul, & Hebraicam perfectè didicit, quam multis locis in scriptis suis manifestat. Nutritus ad pedes] Docentes altiori loco positi erant, & Auditores inferiori loco per subsellia. v. 4. Hanc sectam persecutus sum usque ad mortem] quantum scil. in me erat, Hanc viam funditùs deletum & extinctum ivi. v. 5. ] i. e. Synedrium magnum. v. 10. Deus jusserat Ananiae, quae ipse jussurus esset Paulo. Et haec jussa erant facienda Paulo. v. 14. ] Syr. Ar. & Aethiop. Constituit. te Non gravatè verto, sumpsit te ut cognoscas voluntatem ejus. Propriè enim  est, prae mani∣bus sumere id quo uti velis, sive ad rem sive ad personam referatur. v. 22. audiverunt usque ad verbum hoc] ut qui pati non possent, Gentes fieri par∣ticipes communis salutis.
SECT. XXII. THE next day Claudius Lysias the Colonel, being desirous to know the bottom of the business, called the Sanhedrim or Senate of the Jews, and brought out Paul to them, to see what they could object against him. The Apostle beginning to speak for himself, declares that both during his continuance in the Jewish religion, and since his conversion to Christianity, he had walked uprightly according to his knowledg, and the light of his ConscienceConscientia, est judicium ho∣minis de seipso, quo per comparatio∣nem sui ipsius cum Lege, & Evange∣lio, observat, & agnoscit quid in se Legi, & Evangelio sit conforme, vel contrarium; & ex his vel cum gau∣dio concludit quod Deum amicum, vel cum dolore, quod Deum inimi∣cum habeat.. Ananias the high Priest being impatient to hear this, com∣manded those that stood nigh him to smite him on the mouth. Paul hereupon freely reproves him for his injustice, calling him whited wallThese words of Paul must not be taken for reviling words, Mat. 5.22, 39. or words of revenge or recompencing evil with evil, but for a serious reproving this man, and a bold denunciation of Gods judgment upon him. Loquitur Christus de vin∣dictâ privatâ non de vindictâ pro∣pheticâ, & judiciali. Praeterea, pri∣vatae vindictae interdictum non adi∣mit nobis licentiam aliorum erga nos injurias detestandi, reprehendendi, & ob oculos ponendi auctorum, sine irâ & odio personae, & hoc sensu pro∣babilius sumitur haec invectiva scil. ut justa reprehensio injuriantis., or Hypocrite, who sitting there as a Magistrate to judg according to Law, yet openly transgress'd the Law him∣self, by commanding an innocent person, un∣heard, and uncondemned to be smitten. See Deut. 25.1, 2. He also boldly denounces Gods judgmentsId mihi verisimilius est, au∣divisse Paulum vocem emissam ab a∣liquo ex his, qui ad judicandum se∣derant (venisse enim sacerdotes & omne concilium constat ex cap. 22.) neque tamen scivisse à quonam illo∣rum vox profecta fuerat. A Ponti∣fice autem profectam non putavit, cum propter ejus authoritatem, à quâ indignum erat tam praecipitem offensionis significationem edi, tum propter simulatam sanctitatem, à qua tam iniqua vox non videbatur erup∣tura. Audivit ergo Paulus vocem in turbâ, & illi à quo emissa est, de∣nunciavit paratam esse à Domino pae∣nam. Qui autem cum Pontifice ve∣nerant, omnes ad judicandum sede∣bant. Rivetus in Isagog. ad Script. Sacr. cap. 21. Sect. 8. against him for it, [see 2 Tim. 4.14.]. The standers by reprove Paul for this, as one that spake contumelious words against Gods high Priest. The Apostle replies, he did not know him, nor acknow∣ledg him to be a lawful high Priest or an High Priest of Gods appointing, but look'd upon him as an usurper, and one brought in by the sinister practices, and corrupti∣ons of that time; and therefore he might be reprehended for his faults without break∣ing Gods command, Exod. 22.28. Besides he could not own any man, to be a lawful high Priest now, seeing that Function was disannull'd, by the coming of the great High Priest Jesus, who had accomplished all that was typifyed thereby. However though he had spoken nothing but what was just, yet because to the standers by, it had a shew of reviling, therefore he declares, he should have avoided this also, had he known him to be, or could have acknowledged him to be, a lawful High Priest. The Apostle now dis∣cerning the Sanhedrim to consist partly of Pharisees (who be∣lieve the resurrection of the body, and another life after this, and the real subsistence of Angels, and the Souls and Spirits of men separated from their bodiesSee Heb. 11.13, 14. 1 Cor. 15.19., &c.) and partly of Sad∣duces, (who deny all this), out of a prudent policy declares himself, (as to those points) to adhere to the Sect of the Pha∣risees,
and to be fully of their opinion. And though there were more points in question, yet he shews, that for holding of these, the Sadduces chiefly hated and persecuted him. Here∣upon there grew a heat and division between these two parties, the Doctors of the Law, (which were generally Pharisees), ta∣king his part, and pleading, that 'twas possible he might have had some extraordinary revelation by an Angel or Spirit, and therefore 'twould not become them to resist his Doctrine, lest, if it were truly revealed to him from God, they should by opposing it, fight against God himself. These two parties growing thus hot one against another, the Colonel to prevent further violence and tumult, commanded the Soldiers to take Paul away from among them, and to bring him into the Ca∣stle. The night following, the Lord appeared to the Apo∣stle in a Vision to comfort and encourage him, and told him, that as he had preached his Gospel, and defended it at Jeru∣salem, so he should do at Rome also. Act. 22. v. 30. On the morrow, because he would have known the cer∣tainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him from his bands, and commanded the chief priests and all their Council to ap∣pear; and brought Paul down, and set him before them. Act. 23. v. 1. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, said, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience before God untill this day. v. 2. And the high Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the mouth. v. 3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judg me after the Law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the Law. v. 4. And they that stood by, said, Revilest thou Gods high Priest? v. 5. Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high Priest? For it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy peo∣ple. v. 6. But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, he cryed out in the Council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question. v. 7. And when he had so said, there arose a dissention between the Pha∣risees and the Sadduces: and the multitude was divided. v. 8. For the Sadduces say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess both. v. 9. And there arose a great cry: and the Scribes that were of the Pharisees part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil in this man: but if a spirit, or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against God. v. 10. And when there arose a great dissention, the chief Captain, fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded the Soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among them, and to bring him into the Castle. v. 11 And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.
v. 1. Ego omni conscientiâ bonâ servivi Deo ad hunc usque diem] Nunc quidem se∣cundum Christum, ante verò quantum ex Pharisaeis Magistris haurire poteram. Non quasi omni peccato sit vacuus, sed studium recti profitetur se semper habuisse, quic∣quid alii de se dicant ac sentiant. Nam  magis reertur ad▪ publicam functionem, aut certe ad actiones in communi ad omnes pertinentes: ut magis hic suam publicam functionem, & actiones, quam privatos mores, contra accusatores tue∣atur. v. 3. Percutiet te Deus] Utitur jure Prophetae. Simile illud Esaiae 50.11. & 22.17, 18. & Jer. 22.30. Paries dealbate] Egregia Similitudo ad exprimendos homines impios qui honoris aut commodi causa pios se simulant. Introrsum turpes, speciosi pelle decorâ. Pari comparatione utitur Seneca. Miseri sunt sordidi, turpes, & ad simi∣litudinem parietum suorum extrinsecus culti. Sic Christus vocat hypocritam sepulchrum dealbatum, Mat. 23.28 vid. Ezek. 13.10. v. 5. ] Ex calculatione Bezae tum praeerat Ananias, homo supra modum improbus, qui per vim Pontificatum invaserat nec melius ges∣sit. Vide Antiquit. Joseph. lib 20. c. 6, 7. Sensus ergo est: Ego non agnosco in hoc homine Pontificem Dei, sed hypocri∣tam, seductorem, & veritatis persecutorem. Alioquin bene scio, Principi maledicen∣dum non esse, Exod. 22.28. Flac. Illyr. Non agnovit eum esse Sacerdotem aut Principem Senatus qui eas dignitates pre∣tio comparásset. Didiceat enim hoc à Gamaliele Paulus, Judicem, qui honoris con∣sequendi causâ pecunias dederit revera neque judicem esse neque honorandum, sed Asini ha∣bendum loco, ut est in titulo Thalmudico de Synedrio. Grot. v. 6. De sp & resurrectione] i. e. ob spem resurrectionis in judicium vocor; . Quia totius religionis caput quam Paulus prositebatur & scopus, erat resur∣rectio mortuorum. Recte de eâ se judicari dicit: nam & Christum docebat ex morte excitatum & ejus beneficio omnes fideles aliquando ex morte resuscitandos esse. v. 10. ] milites. Abstractum nimirum singulare, pro concreto plurali. v. 11. Dominus ei apparuit per Angelum, ut suprà aliquoties. SECT. XXIII. THE Apostle had soon a notable experience of Gods gra∣cious protection over him, promised unto him in that forementioned Vision. For early the very next morning above Forty Jews combin'd together, and bound themselves by an Oath, and by a Curse and execration on themselves that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed him. And they came to the chief Priests and Elders being confident of their assistance, and acquainted them with what they had re∣solved on, and perswaded them to intreat the Colonel, that he would bring Paul down on the morrow to them, that they might further examine him, and by the way, before he could come at the Council, they resolv'd to kill him. This conspi∣racy, by the wonderful providence of God, coming to the knowledg of a Nephew of Pauls, he is by him acquainted there∣with, who thereupon desired one of the Captains of the Guard, to bring that young man to Lysias their chief Commander: which being done he acquainted him with this wicked conspiracy a∣gainst the life of his Uncle. Hereupon the Colonel presently gave order that a Guard both of Horse and Foot should be made ready against Nine of the Clock that night, and a Horse or Mule provided for Paul to ride on, and that they should convey him safe to Felix the Procurator or Governour of Judea, under the Roman Emperor, who had his ordinary residence at Caesarea. And he wrote a Letter to the Governour concerning the Prisoner, to this sense, viz. That he found nothing brought against him, that was punishable either with death or bonds by
the Roman Laws, and Imperial Constitutions; (for the Romans had not as yet set out any decrees against the Christians) and therefore he had rescued him out of the hands of the Jews, who had treacherously conspired against his life, and had given or∣der to his accusers to appear before his Excellency, and there to implead him. Felix when he had read the Letter, command∣ed Paul should be secured in the Hall call'd Herods Hall, and wen his Accusers were come, he said, he would hear him. Act. 23. v. 12. And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and bounded themselves under a curse, saying, That they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. v. 13. And they were more than forty which had made this conspi∣racy. v. 14. And they came to the chief Priests, and Elders, and said, We have bound our selves under a great curse, that we will eat nothing untill we have slain Paul. v. 15. Now therefore ye, with the Council, signifie to the chief Captain, that he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though ye would en∣quire something more perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come neer, are ready to kill him. v. 16. And when Pauls sisters son heard of their laying in wait, he went and entred into the Castle, and told Paul. v. 17. Then Paul called one of the Centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man unto the chief Captain: for he hath a certain thing to tell him. v. 18. So he took him, and brought him to the chief Captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, who hath something to say unto thee. v. 19. Then the chief Captain took him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him, What is that thou hast to tell me? v. 20. And he said, The Jews have agreed to desire thee, that thou wouldst bring down Paul to morrow into the Council, as though they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly. v. 21. But do not thou yeild unto them, for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they have killed him: and now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee. v. 22. So the chief Captain let the young man depart, and charged him, See thou tell no man, that thou hast shewed these things to me. v. 23. And he called unto him two Centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred Soldiers to go to Cesarea, and horsmen threescore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night: v. 24. And provide them beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe to Felix the Governour. v. 25. And he wrote a Letter after this manner, v. 26. Claudius Lysias, unto the most excellent Governor Felix, sendeth greeting. v. 27. This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them: Then came I with an army, and rescued him, having under∣stood that he was a Roman. v. 28. And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into their Councell. v. 29. Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their Law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death, or of bonds.
v. 30. And when it was told me, how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent straitway to thee, and gave commandment to his accu∣sers also to say before thee what they had against him. Farewell. v. 31. Then the Soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris. v. 32. On the morrow they left the horsmen to go with him, and re∣turned to the Castle. v. 33. Who when they came to Cesarea, and delivered the epistle to the Governour, presented Paul also before him. v. 34. And when the Governour had read the letter, he asked of what province he was. And when he understood that he was of Cilicia: v. 35. I will hear thee, said he, when thine accusers are also come. And he commanded him to be kept in Herods judgment hall. SECT. XXIV. FIve days after, the High Priest and the Elders appear,Christ. Nero. 59. 3. with TertullusTertullus est nomen Italicum; & arguit hunc hominem non esse Judaeum sed Italum. Vocatur Rhetor, sive Orator, quia eloquentiae, & juri Romano studuerat ad causas in foro pro pretio dicendas, &, ut videtur, linguam suam elocavit ad suscipien∣dum quarumvis causarum patroci∣num. His hominibus quadrat illud, Isa. 5.20. their Advocate, before Fe∣lixHistorici tum Ethnici, tum Judaicus Josephus, nos docent hunc Faelicem fuisse pessimum praesidem, qui potentiâ fatris Pallantis qui erat in flagranti Caesaris gratiâ, subnixus sibi, omnia malefacta impuneratus est, ut ait Tacitus Annal. lib. 12. Et Josephus testatur quod promiscue insontes cum sontibus vexaverit, crudeles! patra∣verit lanienas, & summum sacerdo∣tem Jonathanem per sicarios opprimi curaverit. at Cesarea; who sitting in judgment to hear the matter, their said Advocate after an insinuating preface to propitiate the Go∣vernour, (wherein he magnified his prudence and care for the good of their Nation), ac∣cuses Paul of three things, namely, of Sedi∣tion, Heresie, and Profanation of the Temple, [see Act. 21.28.]; acquainting him, that they intended to have proceeded against him in their own Court, and to have judged him there according to their Law, but were pre∣vented by Colonel Lysias, who took him out of their hands, and forced them, (who ought to have been his Judges), to come and im∣plead him before his Excellency. And those Jews whom they had brought with them for witnesses, attested this charge, saying, That those things were so. Paul having now liberty given him to make his defence, he in the first place declares, how much it comforted him, that he was to answer before a Person whose long experience in govern∣ing the Jewish Nation, had furnished him with skill and abili∣ty to judg the more equally of such things as were now brought before him. Then he answers particularly to the three pretend∣ed Crimes laid to his charge. 1. For that of Sedition, he clears himself from it, by shewing, that there were but Twelve days since he came up to Jerusalem; and one end, among others, of his coming thither was, to declare himself a sincere wor∣shipper of the true God. Now these Twelve days were thus spent. The day after he came thither, he visited James, and the Bre∣thren, who perswaded him to purifie himself with those four men who had a Vow on them, [as we have seen Sect. 20. of this Chapter], which he consenting to do, and the day fol∣lowing,
(viz. on the third day, which was towards the end of the Feast, see ch. 21. v. 27.), entring into the Temple to perform those, the Jews there took him, but he was rescued out of their hands by Colonel Lysis. The day after being the fourth day, he pleaded his cause before the Council, [Act. 23.]. On the fifth day, the Jews conspired to take away his life, Act. 23.12. That night the Colonel sent him to Antipa∣tris, whither he came on the sixth day in the evening. The next day being the seventh, he came to Caesarea, where he had been now a Prisoner five days. So that having been so many of those days in the hands of the Romans, it was not imagina∣ble he could raise (if he had had a mind to it) any such Se∣dition, or tumult at Jerusalem as the Jews pretended, and char∣ged him with. Nay the contrary was very evident; for he had behaved himself very quietly, neither could any of them prove that he had raised any disturbance, either in the Temple, or in any of the Synagogues, or in the City whilst he was there. As to their second charge, viz. that of Heresie, he plainly con∣fesses▪ that after the way which they call'd Heresie, so he worship∣ped the God of his Fathers. For that way of worshipping the God of Abraham which Christ had taught, and the Christians now practised, was the way that he did use: yet therein neither he nor they set up any new Religion quite contrary to what was before owned and professed, but had the same Faith for substance, that the Patriarchs and Prophets had before them. And in particular, he declares, that he believed the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which the more prudent part of his Ad∣versaries, viz. those of the Pharisees, professed to believe also. And this firm belief of a resurrection, and a day of judgment en∣gaged him to endeavour always to keep a good Conscience to∣wards God and man. For the hird thing charged against him, viz. the Profanation of the Temple; he shews, he had not been of a long time at Jerusalem, before this, and now he came to bring Alms to the poor Jews there, that were converted to Christianity. He acknowledges indeed, that he went into the Temple at this time, but with no intent to profane it, but to perform tse Rites therein, which the Law of the Jews requi∣red of such as had the Vow of the Nazarites upon them; which some Asian Jews not understanding, but misapprehending his intent, affied, that he carried Trophimus a Gentile of Ephe∣sus into the Temple. But this was utterly false, neither was there any the least ground for it, but only this, that Trophi∣mus had been seen with him in the City, see Act. 21.29. As for his being in the Temple, he acknowledges, he was there, but not with any such company as could be thought to profane it, or that could bring him under suspition of any intent to raise a Sedition. And for te truth of these things he appeals to those tre present of their own Sanhedrim; and desires them to sfie, whether wn e was brought before them, he was not dismissed with this testimony from themselvesSee Chap. 23.9.,
that there was nothing of moment charged against him, except (which only the Sadduces will charge him with) that he pro∣fessed to believe the Resurrection of the dead, and Another life after this. When Felix discerned how things went, he would not pass any sentence for the present in this case, but put them off say∣ing, When I know more exactly the things that belong to this way, (viz. whether the Christian Religion be deroga∣tory to the Law of the Jews), and when Lysias the Comman∣der comes down (whose testimony will decide that matter con∣cerning the tumult), I will determine the business between you. But for the present he commanded the Captain of the Guard to keep Paul safe, though in free custody, so that any of his friends or acquaintants might have liberty to visit him. Act. 24. v. 1. And after five days Ananias the high Priest descended with the elders, and with a certain Orator named Tertullus, who informed the Governour against Paul. v. 2. And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, say∣ing, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very wor∣thy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy providence: v. 3. We accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness. v. 4. Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thee, I pray thee, that thou wouldst hear us of thy clemency a few words. v. 5. For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedi∣tion among all the Jews thorowout the world, and a ring-leader of the sect of the Nazarens. v. 6. Who also hath gone about to profane the Temple: whom we took, and would have judged according to our Law. v. 7. But the chief Captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him away out of our hands: v. 8. Commanding his accusers to come unto thee, by examining of whom thy self mayest take knowledg of all these things, whereof we accuse him. v. 9. And the Jews also assented, saying, That these things were so. v. 10. Then Paul, after that the Governour had beckned unto him to speak, answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of many years a Judg unto this Nation, I do the more chearfully answer for my self: v. 11. Because that thou mayest understand, that there are but yet twelve days, since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship. v 12. And they neither found me in the Temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people neither in the synagogues, nor in the City. v. 13. Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me. v. 14. But this confess I unto thee, that after the way which they call heresie, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. v. 15. And have hope towards God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and un∣just. v. 16. And herein do I exrcise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offence toward God, and towards men.
v. 17. Now after many years, I came to bring alms to my Nation, and offerings: v. 18. Whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the Tem∣ple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult. v. 19. Who ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had ought against me. v. 20. Or else let these same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me, while I stood before the Council, v. 21. Except it be for this one voice, that I cried standing among them, Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question by you this day. 22. And when Felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledg of that way, he deferred them, and said, When Lysias the chief Cap∣tain shall come down, I will know the uttermost of your matter. v. 23. And he commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister, or come unto him. v. 5. ] Sic Cicero dixit pestem civitatis, pro Rabirio; pestem patriae, pro Sestio. v. 16. ] Hebraismus, ubi: Saepe valet propter, i. e. Propter hanc fidu∣ciam exerceo meipsum, &c. i. e. omni, in id, studio incumbo; hoc unum prae om∣nibus meditor, ut conscientiam habeam sine offendiculo, ut conscientiam servem eam, quae nec Deum nec homines offendat, vid. 2 Cor. 6.3. & 2 Cor. 4.2. Haec , illa de qua mentio est, 2 Cor. 11.2. Haec , illa de qua suprà, cap 23.1. Haec , illa de qua ad Hebraeos, 13.18. v. 18. ] in casto: Abstinentem scil. à vino aliisque rebus à quibus Nazaraei abstinent. SECT. XXV. SOME time after, Felix and his Wife Drusilla, (who was a Jewesse, and Sister of that Herod Agrippa who killed James, and imprisoned Peter, Act. 12.), sent for Paul, and were wil∣ling to hear him discourse concerning the Doctrine of Christ. He applying himself to speak pertinently to Felix, insisted on those great duties which Christ injoins all men to observe, if they intend to be saved, viz. Justice between▪ man and man, Temperance, and Chastity; Virtues that were contrary to those Vices, that Felix was particularly guilty of. And withall, he dis∣courses of the last Judgment, at which all impenitent persons shall be punished for all their crimes and offences, either in these or other kinds. As the Apostle was pressing this Doctrine, Fe∣lix finding himself so much concern'd, fell a trembling, and not liking to hear such close and rousing Doctrine, he dismiss'd Paul for the present, and told him he would take some other time to hear him again. But being a corrupt Governour, and a taker of bribes, he hoped the Apostle would have given him some considerable bribe, to set him at liberty; and in expe∣ctation thereof sent for him, and talked with him the oftner. But after he had kept him Prisoner for the space of two years, he himself was by Nero removed from his place, and Portius Festus was sent to succeed him in the Government. And though Felix had nothing to charge Paul with, yet to gratifie the Jews,
after so many injuries which he had done them, and to pacifie them, that they might not follow him with complaints to the Emperour, he left Paul in prison. Act. 24. v. 24. And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was a Jew, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ. v. 25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. v. 26. He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftner, and com∣muned with him. v. 27. But after two years Portius Festus came into Felix room: and Fe∣lix, willing to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound. v. 25. ] Ut nunc se res habent, abeas; sub audiendum sorte . Beza ad praesens abi. In quo sensu eandem dictionem usurpat Aelianus de anim. lib. 2. c. 11. , ad praesens statui dicere. SECT. XXVI. FEstus being come to the Government,Christi Neronis 60 4 and going up to Je∣rusalem, the High Priest and Rulers of the Jews quickly began to inform him against Paul, and besought him that he might be sent for thither, to answer for himself before his Ex∣cellency there, intending to lay some Villains by the way to kill him as he came. But Festus (the divine providence so over∣ruling him) would not consent to that, but ordered that the chief Priests, and the rest in authority among them, should come to Cesarea, and accuse him, whither he intended after a short stay at Jerusalem to go. And accordingly after a few days he went down to Cesarea; whither being come, soon after his arrival there, he sate on his Judgment Seat, and command∣ed Paul to be brought before him. The Jews now bring in such a kind of charge against him as they did before, namely, that he had offended against the Mosaical Law; that he had pro∣faned the Temple; and that he had raised Sedition against the Roman govenment. But none of these things could they prove against him, so that Paul easily cleared himself of them all. However, Festus being willing to gratifie the Jews, ask'd Paul if he would go to Jerusalem, and be tryed there in the Jewish Court about these matters. The Apostle perceiving that the Governour inclin'd to send him to Jerusalem, (which course might have expos'd him to extreme hazzards), he tells him, that he was his prisoner, and that his Excellency was his pro∣per Judg; under the Roman Emperor, and not the Jews, (whom he had not wronged), and therefore it would be a piece of high injustice, to deliver him up to his enemies to be his Judges. Moreover, he tells him, that he was a Roman, and therefore might claim the priviledg of a Roman, which accordingly he
now did, and appealed unto CaesarCaesares legem fece∣rant, ut Civi∣bus Romanis ab omnibus tribunalibus inferiorum Magistratuum liceret apellare ad ipsum Caesaris tribunal.. Festus hearing this, (af∣ter he had consulted with his Councel), admitted his appeal, and told him he should accordingly go to Caesar. Act. 25. v. 1. Now when Festus was come into the Province, after three days he ascended from Cesarea to Jerusalem. v. 2. Then the high Priest, and the chief of the Jews informed him a∣gainst Paul, and besought him. v. 3. And desired favour against him, that he would send for him to Je∣rusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him. v. 4. But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Cesarea, and that he himself would depart shortly thither. v. 5. Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down with me, and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him. v. 6. And when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went down unto Cesarea, and the next day sitting in the judgment seat, commanded Paul to be brought. v. 7. And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusa∣lem, stood round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not prove. v. 8. While he answered for himself, neither against the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, nor yet against Cesar, have I offended any thing at all. v. 9. But Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me? v. 10. Then said Paul, I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well knowest. v. 11. For if I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things where∣of these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them. I appeal un∣to Cesar. v. 12. Then Festus, when he had conferred with the Councel, answer∣ed, Hast thou appealed unto Cesar? unto Cesar shalt thou go.
SECT. XXVII. SOME days after, King Agrippa, (Son of that Herod who slew James, Act. 12. who was King, not of Judea, but some neighbouring Province which the Romans had given him), and Bernice his Sister, came to Cesarea, to salute the new Governour. Festus relates to them Pauls case, and acquaints them, how vehemently the Jews accused him, and how earnest∣ly they desired to have had judgment against him. But he told them, he could not do it by the Roman Laws, without first hearing the cause, and bringing the accusers and accused face to face. This therefore he had done, and upon hearing of both parties, He found Paul absolutely free from all capital Crimes; and the differences between him, and the Jews, he saw, were about matters appertaining to their Religion, (which he contemptuously calls Superstition), in which he acknow∣ledges, he himself hd little skill, and therefore had a mind to have referr'd him to the Jewish Sanhedrim, to be judged there. But the Prisoner declin'd their judgment, and appealed to Caesar. Whereupon he had remanded him to Prison, till he could conveniently send him to the Emperor at Rome. Agrippa (who was born and bred among the Jews, and in probabili∣ty understood something concerning the Christian Religion) hearing this, desired that he himself might see Paul, and hear him speak for himself. Festus readily agrees hereunto. On the morrow therefore, the Governour, with Agrippa, and Bernice, and several other persons of quality, entred the Court and place of hearing with great pomp; and Paul was brought forth before them. Festus having made a short speech, wherein he shewed the occasion of their meeting, and wherefore he had brought forth the Prisoner before that illustrious Assembly. Agrippa told him he was permitted to speak for himself. Then Paul beckning with his hand to the standers by to hold their peace, and give Audience, he particularly addresses his speech to AgrippaQuis non delectetur concionator, concionem habere propter spem lucrandi Magnates mundi, quorum conversio multum potest ad lucrandos caeteros. Et tamen quando unquam pauciore cum fructu concionatus est Paulus quam coram hoc illustri auditorio? Ratio datur, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. Joh. 7.48, 49. Jacob. 2.5. Sicut pluvia cadens in montes & colles defluit, sed quae in valles cadit manet & penetrat, ita verbum quod in cor mundanum cadit, & superbum, profluit. Pomposi Phantastae non sunt discipuli Christi.. And first, he declares how happy he accounted himself, that he was allowed to speak for himself before King Agrippa, whom he knew to be well skill'd in the Law, and in the Scriptures, and in all the Questions and Customs of the Jewish Religion. Then he shews, that however the Jews reproached him, neither in his Life, nor in his Doctrine, was there any thing repugnant to the truth of the Jewish Religion. For the manner of his Life, he appeals to his Accusers own Consciences, (to whom his
Conversation from his Youth was well known); who were able to testifie, that he not only had lived honestly, but religi∣ouslyVide Phil. 3.4, 5, 6. Non erat ir∣reprehensibilis coram Deo sed coram Ju∣daeis & Pharisaeis. Vivebat enim ita ut caeci Pharisaei, qui legem Dei suis glossis corruperant, judicabant esse vivendum, adeoque Judaei & Pharisaei nihil habe∣bant, quod in illo carperent aut quod accusare possent: sed ubi vitam suam coepit comparare cum vero sensu legis & expositione illius, quam Christus dat, Mat. 5. tum ipsemet vidit, vitam suam non esse irreprehensibilem coram Deo., and was of that Sect, which is accounted the strictest of all the rest in the Jewish Religion, to wit, a Pharisee. For his Doctrine which he asserted, viz. the resurrection of the dead, he shews, it was a Doctrine acknowledged by the Pha∣risees, and a fundamental Promise made by God of old unto their Fathers, and ge∣nerally depended on by the most pious a∣mong all the twelve TribesNon dubium est quin post factum schisma duorum regnorum, plurimi ex decem tribubus habitatum concesserint in Judaeam ubi purus erat Dei cultus at∣que ita cum Judaeis sensim coaluerint, & cum iis in Babyloniam deportati sunt & cum iisdem in Judaeam vel Samariam re∣dierunt. Vid. 2 Chron. 31.5. Vide de hac re annales Usserii ad annum mun∣di 3327. & 3468. of the Jews, not only that dwell in Judea, but that are scattered upon the face of the whole Earth, (see Jam. 1.1.): And in contem∣plation, and intuition thereof, they desire continually and fervently to serve the Lord, hoping to attain that blessed Resur∣rection, and Eternal Life, through the me∣diation of the blessed Messias, of old pro∣mised to them. And yet for believing, and expecting, and prea∣ching this, he tells the King, he was accused of the Jews. Then he removes an Objection which might be made against him, viz. If he were brought up a Pharisee, how came he to believe in Jesus of Nazareth, and to hope for a Resurrection by him. Surely the Pharisees never taught him so. To this he answers, He was once as great and sharp an Adversary to Christ, and all that believed in him, as any man whatsoever; and thought himself bound in Conscience to endeavour the suppression of all those that owned him; which accordingly he did, being a principal Actor in the imprisoning of several of them at Jerusalem. And when some of them were by the Jews, tumultuously condemned to die, (as particularly Steven, Act. ch. 7.57, 58.), he was an approver of the sentence, Act. 8.1. And in other Cities besides Jerusalem, he brought them into the Jewish Courts, and Consistories, (which were kept in their Synagogues), and with threatnings and tortures compelled them to deny Christ, and (being exceedingly fierce against them) he forced some of them to fly to heathen Cities, and then pursued them thither also. He further declares, that as he was going to Damascus, with authority from the Sanhedrim on this persecuting design, at mid-day a light from Heaven, above the brightness of the Sun, shone round about him, and those that were with him; and when they were all fallen prostrate on the Earth, he heard a voice speaking to him in the Hebrew tongue; Saul, Saul, why dost thou thus persecute me? 'Tis hard for thee to kick against the pricks. But arise, stand upon thy feet, for thou art chosen by me to be a Preacher of the Gospel, and to proclaim unto others, what thou hast now, and shalt hereafter see and know. And for thy comfort, be assured, that I will deliver
thee from the persecutions both of Jews and Gentiles▪ to whom I shall send thee; and will bless thy endeavours to the opening their understandings, and to the turning of them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive, by Faith in me, remission of sins, and a portion of the heavenly in∣heritance, among my faithful ones, regenera∣ted by my SpiritPaulus hic non tantum refert quae Christus sibi dixerit in viâ extra urbem cum immediatè ipsum ex coelo alloqueretur; sed etiam quae postea nunciaverit in urbe per ministerium Ananiae.. He further tells the King, that having had so glorious a Vision, and having heard those words from the mouth of Christ, from Heaven, he could not but yeild obedience thereto, and accor∣dingly had preached at Damascus first, and then at Jerusalem, and then through all Judea, and at last a∣mong the GentilesNatio superba Judaeorum ferre non potuit, quod beneficia foederis ad Gentes quoque extenderentur. themselves, the Do∣ctrine of Repentance, and had shewed them their misery by sin, and how they should turn to God, and lay hold on his mercy offered in his Son, and should bring forth such fruits of holiness and righteousness in their lives, as are the genuine fruits of true Re∣pentance, and Faith in Christ. And for these things (he shews) it was, that he had like to have been killed by the Jews in the Temple. But being rescued by the merciful providence of God from their fury, he went on still with his work, de∣claring no other thing concerning Christ, but what Moses and the Prophets did of old foretell of him, namely, that he should be put to death, and should be the first that should rise again, by his own power, and thereby be eminently declared to be the Son of GodSee Rom. 1.1., and should be the Author of our resurrecti∣on, 1 Cor. 15.20. Col. 1.18. and should send out the light of his Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles. Festus sate still hither∣to, but being a Heathen, and not understanding these things, he interrupted the Apostle and told him, he talked like a man that had overstudied himself. But Paul with a great respect replied, that he was not mad, but spake the words of truth and soberness; which he was confident King Agrippa very well perceived; for these things he had been speaking of, viz. the Life, Death, and Resurrection of Christ, were things of very pub∣lick fame, and cognizance, and could not be unknown to him who was a Jew born. Then humbly applying himself to Agrippa again, he said, King Agrippa, believest thou the Prophets? doubt∣less, I am perswaded thou dost believe them, and if so, I pray thee consider, whether those very Prophecies be not exactly fulfilled in the Person of Christ? Agrippa hearing him thus speak, said, Paul, thou dost almost perswade me to be a Christian. The Apo∣stle answered, I heartily wish that both thou, and all here pre∣sent were as thorow Christians as I my self amNon requirit similitudinem se∣cum in officio sed in conversione & pietate. Non requirit aequalitatem in gradibus sed similitudinem in essentia∣libus pietatis., only I would not wish any of you in that condition of captivity in which I am at present. When he had thus spoken, the King, and the Governour, and the whole
company rose up, and departed, acquitting Paul in their judg∣ments, from deserving either death or bonds; yet 'twas not thought fit he should be released, because he had appealed to Caesar. Act. 25. v. 13. And after certain days, King Agrippa, and Bernice came unto Cesarea, to salute Festus. v. 14. And when they had been there many days, Festus declared Pauls cause unto the King, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix: v. 15. About whom when I was at Jerusalem, the chief Priests and the Elders of the Jews informed me, desiring to have judgment against him. v. 16. To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the Romans to de∣liver any man to die, before that he which is accused, have the accu∣sers face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the crimes laid against him. v. 17. Therefore when they were come hither, without any delay, on the morrow I sate on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought forth. v. 18. Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none ac∣cusation of such things as I supposed: v. 19. But had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. v. 20. And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him, whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these mat∣ters. v. 21. But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Cesar. v. 22. Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the man my self. To morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him. v. 23. And on the morrow, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice with great pomp, and was entred into the place of hearing, with the chief Captains, and principal men of the City; at Festus commandment Paul was brought forth. v. 24. And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men which are here pre∣sent with us, ye see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying, that he ought not to live any longer. v. 25. But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him. v. 26. Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my Lord: Where∣fore I have brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O King Agrippa, that after examination had, I might have somewhat to write. v. 27. For it seemeth to me unreasonable, to send a prisoner, and not withall to signifie the crimes laid against him. Act. 26. v. 1. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thy self. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself: v. 2. I think my self happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my self this day before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accu∣sed of the Jews:
v. 3. Especially, because I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently. v. 4. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own Nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews, v. 5. Which knew me from the beginning, (if they would testifie), that after the most straitest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee. v. 6. And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers: v. 7. Unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night, hope to come: for which hope sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. v. 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? v. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things con∣trary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth: v. 10. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints did I shut up in prison; having received authority from the chief priests: and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them: v. 11. And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities. v. 12. Whereupon, as I went to Damascus with authority and commissi∣on from the chief priests, v. 13. At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me, and them which journeyed with me. v. 14. And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speak∣ing unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why per∣secutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. v. 15. And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. v. 16. But arise, and stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness, both of these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will ap∣pear unto thee. v. 17. Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, v. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me. v. 19. Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the hea∣venly vision: v. 20. But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and Jerusalem, and tho∣rowout all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. v. 21. For these causes the Jews caught me in the Temple, and went a∣bout to kill me. v. 22. Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come: v. 23. That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles. v 24. And as he thus spake for himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thy self, much learning doh make thee mad.
v. 25. But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and soberness. v. 26. For the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak freely: for I am perswaded that none of these things are hidden from him, for this thing was not done in a corner. v. 27. King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou be∣lievest. v. 28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. v. 29. And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except ths bonds. v. 30. And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the gover∣nour, and Bernice, and they that sate with them. v. 31. And when they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man doth nothing worthy of death or of bonds. v. 32. Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Cesar. v. 13. Et Berenice] Fuit haec faemina infamis in fratre, ut nos docet Josephus, 20.5: eóque referendum illud Juvenalis, — Deinde adamas notissimus, & Berenices In digito factus pretiosior: hunc dedit olim Barbarus incestae, dedit hunc Agrippa Sorori. Ch. 26. v. 3. ] Attici pro Genitivis absolutè positis usur∣pant accusativos. v. 5. ] à superiori tempore, à multis hinc retro elapsis annis: Secun∣dum exquisitissimam illam haeresin] Loquitur Paulus non ex sua mente, sed ex Adversatiorum hypothesi, qui Pharisaicam habebant pro sanctissimâ & religio∣sissimâ. v. 10.  Calculum apponere simpliciter accipitur pro assentiri & comprobare Hoc dicit: se Stephani interfectionem toto animo, verbis, gestisque approbasse. Atque ex historia apparet nullum alium quam Stephanum fuisse à Ju∣daeis ne per tumultum quidem caesum ante Pauli conversionem. Oratoicè autem hic utitur numero plurali pro singulari. v. 11. ] Non enim simplici abnegatione Christianismi contenti fuerunt plerique Tyranni, ut ex his Plinii Minoris verbis ad Trajanum constat, Omnes & ima∣ginem tuam & Deorum simulacra venerati sunt, & Christo maledixerunt. v. 18. ] i. e. Jus ad vitam aeternam cum piis caeteris. v. 23.  pro , & hic & v. 8. Christus primus ex resurrectione mortuorum, non temporis respectu, cum multi ante eum resuscitati fuisse leguntur, sed dignitate & virtute, tanquam resurrectionis & vitae author. Ideo dicitur . v. 28. ] parum abest quin mihi persuadeas ut fiam Christi∣anus. v. 29. ] Et aliquatenus & valde, & propemodum & admo∣dum, exceptis his vinculis] Vincula vocat custodias sibi circundatas.
CHAP. VII. Containing Pauls Fifth and Last Journey, from Cesarea to Rome; which we call, Iter Ro∣manum.Iter Ro∣manum. SECT. I. FEstus and his Council determining now to send Paul to Rome, and therein (though acting unjustly, considering the inno∣cence of the Prisoner, who ought to have been acquitted) fulfilling Gods Counsel, [see Act. 23.11.]. He is delivered to Julius a Centurion, (of the Imperial Band), with some other Prisoners, (who possibly were great Malefactors), to be con∣veyed thither. Julius having received this charge; put him, and the other Prisoners into a ship of Adramyttium, (a Port-Town of Mysia), which (being as 'tis probable a trading ship) was to sail along by the Coasts of Asia. Aristarchus a Macedo∣nian, as also Luke and Timothy freely accompanied the Apostle in this Voyage. As they sailed along, they touched at Sidon, where Julius was very civil to Paul, and permitted him to go on shore, and visit his friends there, and refresh himself. Loosing from thence, they were forced to sail under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary; and when they had coasted by Cilicia, and Pamphylia, they came to Myra, a City of Lysia, where this Ship finished its Voyage. Thence in a Ship of Alexandria bound for Italy, they passed between those Promontories of Gnidus, and Salmone, and came at last, with some difficulty, to a part of Crete, call'd the Fair Havens. This Port being some∣thing incommodious to winter in, most of the passengers ad∣vise to put out from thence, and to endeavour to gain Phoe∣nice, another Haven of Crete; but they having been thus long at Sea, (the Summer being now gone, yea the great Fast of expiation, which was on the tenth day of the seventh Month, being past, after which the Sea was not sailed in by the An∣cients
until the beginning of March, because of the shortness of the dys, and the tempests which often arise between those two times), Paul not only contemplating the danger of the season, but being inspir'd by the Spirit of God, admonished them of the danger of the Voyage, if they should now put out to Sea again; shewing them, it would be hazzardous, not only to the Ship, and the goods in it, but even to the lives of the men also. Therefore he advised them, to stay and winter where they now were. But his words prevailed nothing, because the Master of the ship (who was thought better skill'd in his own Art) advised otherwise. The Southwind therefore blow∣ing at first, softly, and seeming to favour their design, they loosed from thence, and sailed along by Crete; but a little af∣ter, there arose a tempestuous wind, call'd EuroclydonFuit hic ventus conjunctus (ut etiam v. 20.) cum densissimis tenebris adeo ut nec sol interdiu, nec noctu ullum sidus, appareret; id quod tanto gravi∣us fuit navigantibus illo tempore, quo artificium pixidis nauticae nondum erat inventum, sed navis ex solo syderum conspectu erat dirigenda. Accessit hye∣malis pluvia cum nive & grandine, ut solet in hyeme: duravit denique haec tempestas complures dies, perpetuóque sine interruptione incubuit usque in noctem decimam-quartam., by which they were carried to a little Island call'd Clauda, and then be∣ing caught and tossed by that great tempest they had much ado to save the Boat, and draw it into the Ship. Which done, they undergirt the Ship, and (fearing lest they should fall into the Quicksands), they struck sail, and so were driven. Then they ligh¦ned the Ship, by casting some of the goods overbord; and on the third day they were forced to cast into the Sea the furniture of the Ship: And neither Sun nor Stars for many days appearing, and the weather being so exceeding tempestuous, they utterly despair'd of escaping. Now they having been for fourteen days together thus tossed with tempests, and under such fear of death, that they had not observed ordinary meals, Paul at last spake unto them, telling them, they should have harkened unto him, and so they might have prevented, and avoided this hazzard. However he bids them be of good chear; for no man among them should perish, only the Ship would be lost. For God (whose Servant he is, and who is pleased to own him, and protect him) had sent him a message by a holy An∣gel, that he must be brought before Nero the Roman Emperor, and that he would, for his sakeHoc Deo solenne ut propter paucos pios pareat impiis in tempora∣libus judiciis, Gen. 18.32. 2 Reg. 7.14. Jer 5.1. Imo propter paucos pios Deus saepe procrastinat judicia publica vel etiam auert., pre∣serve the lives of all those that were with him in the Ship. The Apostle further de∣clares, how confident he was, that this that was revealed to him from the Lord, should be made good. Yet he telleth them, that for all this, they must expect to be cast upon an Island. They having therefore for fourteen days together been thus toss'd in the Adriatick Sea, (not strictly so call'd, but in a large sense), at last the Mariners thought they drew near some Coun∣try, and by letting down their plummet, and sounding, they found it at first twenty fathoms, and trying again, they found it fifteen fathoms, which was an argument to them they were near a shore. But it being night, and they apprehending dan∣ger,
lest they should fall upon shelves for want of light to guide them, they durst go no further, but cast four anchors out of the Stern of the Ship, and so earnestly expected the day. But in the mean time, the Mariners let down the Boat into the Sea, (which before they had haled up into the Ship), under colour, as if they would have brought Anchors out of the Prow, or foremost part of the Ship, but intended therein to make their escape, fearing a Ship-wrack, and to leave all the rest to shift for themselves. Paul perceiving this, he told the Centurion and the Souldiers, that though God had promised to preserve them, yet they must not expect it, without using due means for their own preservation, which was to stay the Mariners in the Ship, whose help and diligence was especially needful to them on such an occasion. Hereupon the Souldiers, to pre∣vent the Mariners design, cut the Ropes of the Boat, and let it fall into the Sea. Then Paul while the day was com∣ing on, considering that the company in the Ship having been in so perpetual danger, and fear of being cast away, for so many days together, had eat no set meals, or so lit∣tle, that it was in a manner a continual fasting, he exhorted them now to refresh themselves by taking some food, which would the better enable them to bear the difficulties they were to grapple with, and (through the help of God) there should not one hairModus est loquendi petitus ex V.T. 1 Sam. 14.45. 2 Sam. 14.11. 1 Reg. 1.52. Per quem in N. Testamento Scriptura solet exprimere arctam Dei vigilanti∣am & custodiam circa pios. Mat. 10.28, 29, 30. Luc. 12.7. & 21.17, 18. fall from the head of any of them. Having thus spoken, he took bread, and praising God for it, and desiring his blessing upon it, in the presence of them all, he began to eat, and refresh himself; and the rest (being encouraged by his words and example) did the like; so great a comfort and blessing was this poor despised Prisoner to the whole company. Then taking an account of their number thy found they were two hundred seventy six souls in all, in the Ship. Which possibly was done upon the motion of Paul, that so after their deliverance, it might appear, how exactly his prediction [menioned v. 22. & 34] was verified and fulfilled. And when they had eaten what was sufficient for them, they cast out the lading of the Ship which yet remained, (see v. 18.19.), yea and the wheat it self, which hitherto they had spared, being so needful for their sustentation. In the morning they discovered Land, but knew not where they were. However they discovered a cer∣tain Creek, into which they resolved, if it were possible, to run the Ship. Therefore taking up the Anchors, and loosing the Bands wherewith before they had made fast the Rudder, they committed themselves to Sea, and made towards shore. But falling into a place where two Seas met, they ran the Ship a-ground, so that the fore part sticking fast, the hinder-part was broken with the violence of the waves; nothing now remain∣ing, but that every one should shift for his life, and swim to shore, if he could, the Soldiers (shewing a cruel ingratitude to
Paul, who had been so great a comfort to them, and for whose sake their lifes were spared) advize, that the Prisoners should be put to death, lest any of them should by swimming out make his escape from them. But the Centurion being willing to save Paul, (for whose sake he himself was preserved), diverted them from that barbarous purpose, and commanded that those that could swim should first cast themselves into the Sea, and get to land, that they might be the more helpful to others; and those that could not swim, should make use of bords or planks, or other broken pieces of the Ship. Which they accordingly do∣ing, it pleased God that they came all safe to land. And when they were come thither, they found the Island upon which they were cast was Malta. Act. 27. v. 1. And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they delivered Paul, and certain other prisoners, unto one named Ju∣lius, a centurion of Augustus band. v. 2. And entring into a ship of Adramyttium, we lanched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus a Macedonian of Thessaloni∣ca, being with us. v. 3. And the next day we touched at Sidon: And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself. v. 4. And when we had lanched from thence, we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. v. 5. And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra a City of Lysia. v. 6. And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria, sailing into Ita∣ly, and he put us therein. v. 7. And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Gnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Creet, over against Salmone, v. 8. And hardly passing it, came unto a place, which is called the Fair∣havens, nigh whereunto was the city of Lacea. v. 9. Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dan∣gerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them. v. 10. And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives. v. 11. Nvertheless, the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship, more than those things which were spoken by Paul. v. 12. And because the haven was not commodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might attain to Phenice, and there to winter, which is an haven of Creet, and lieth towand the south-west, and north-west. v. 13. And when the south-wind blew softly, supposing that they had ob∣tained their purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close by Creet. v. 14. But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, cal∣ld Euroclydon. v. 15. Ad when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we lt her drive. v. 16. And running under a certain Island, which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat: v. 17. Which when they had taken up, they used helps, under-girding the ship: and fearing lest they should fall into the quick-sands, strake sail, and so were driven.
v. 18. And being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day they light∣ed the ship: v. 19. And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship: v. 20. And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be saved, was then ta∣ken away. v. 21. But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loo∣sed from Creet, and to have gained this harm and loss. v. 22. And now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of any mans life among you, but of the ship. v. 23. For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve. v. 24. Saying, Fear not Paul, thou must be brought before Cesar, and lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee. v. 25. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me. v. 26. Howbeit, we must be cast upon a certain island. v. 27. But when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and down in Adria about midnight, the ship-men deemed that they drew neer to some Countrey: v. 28. And sounded, and found it twenty fathoms: and when they had gone a little further, they sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms. v. 29. Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four ancres out of the stern, and wished for the day. v. 30 And as the ship-men were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would have cast ancres out of the fore-ship. v. 31. Paul said to the centurion, and to the soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. v. 32. Then the souldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off. v. 33. And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them all to take meat, saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting, having taken nothing. v. 34. Wherefore, I pray you to take some meat, for this is for your health: for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you. v. 35. And when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to eat. v. 36. Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat. v. 37. And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls. v. 38. And when they had eaten enough, they lighted the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea. v. 39. And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discover∣ed a certain creek, with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were possible, to thrust in the ship. v. 40. And when they had taken up the ancres, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the main sail to the wind, and made toward shore. v. 41. And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship a-ground, and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves. v. 42. And the souldiers counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and escape.
v. 43. But the Centurion willing to save Paul, kept them from their pur∣pose, and commanded that they which could swim, should cast them∣selves first into the sea, and get to land: v. 44. And the rest, some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship, and so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land. Act. 28. v. 1. And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called Melita. v. 1. ] suum erat cuique cohorti Romanae nomen, quo ab aliis dis∣cerneretur. Haec dicta fuit Augusta, forte quod primaria esset, quae ante Caesari∣am Monarchiam praetoria dicebatur. v. 2. Adramyttium est urbs Troadis maritima ad montis Idae radices. Ferra∣rius. 2. Aristarchus] Hic Aristarchus Christianus factus, Paulum ex Macedoniâ in Ju∣daeam usque comitatus fuerat. Act. 19.29. Idem Paulum jam custodiae datum ex amore in ipsum, & veritatem comitari sponte voluit, Romaeque primum adjutor e∣jus, deinde vinculorum particeps fuit, Col. 4.10. v. 9 ] Tempus designat Lucas ex more Judaici populi. De festo expiationis videntur haec intelligi debere, cujus fit mentio, Lev. 23.27▪ v. 14.  est quaevis violentior procella. v. 25. Credo enim Deo] Fidem Deus· ad consequenda hujus vitae beneficia saepe requirit, ut ostendat eam multo magis ad consequendam aeternam esse necessariam. v. 33. ] Non quasi toto illo tempore omni cibo abstinuerint, sed quod ju∣stis, & ordinariis conviviis non vacarent; ut sic jejunii nomen improprie accipia∣tur de insolita cibi abstinentiâ. Non quod tam diu prorsus impasti manserint, sed quod per curas, & negotia non licuerit illis toto illo tempore justum prandium aut justam caenam sumere, aut tantum cibi comedere, quantum naturae necessitas pos∣ceret. Nihil cibi sumentes] scil. quod satiaret aut naturae satisfaceret. SECT. II. IN this Island they were very courteously received by the Islanders, who made a great fire for them to warm and re∣fresh them, coming wet, and cold out of the sea. Paul having gathered a bundle of sticks, and laying them on the fire, a Vi∣per that was in the wood, feeling the heat of the fire, leaped out upon him, and fastned on his hand; which the Islanders seeing, they presently concluded that he was certainly some notorious Malefactor, whom divine vengeance followed, though he had now escaped at sea. Thus the very light of nature suggested even to Barbarians themselves, that wickedness would not go unpunished; see Rom. 1.32. But the Apostle shaking off the venemous beast into the fire, and receiving no harm at all from it, (see Mark 16.18.), they presently chang'd their opi∣nion, and took him for a GodSee the like judg∣ment of the men of Lystra concerning Paul and Bar∣nabas, Act. 14.11, 19., come to them in the shape of a man. Thus it pleased God by a new miracle to confirm the Apostles authority, and thereby to prepare the hearts of of these Islanders to receive the Gospel. The landing of these shipwrack'd persons being made known to Publius the Governor, or chief man of the Island; he out of his great compassion and humanity entertained them all three days at his own charge. It so happened, that the Father of Publius was at this time sick of a Feaver, and bloody Flux; which being made known to Paul, he went to him, and praying with him, and laying his hands on him, he perfectly healedSee Jam. 5.14, 15. him. This being noised in the Island,
several other diseased people were brought to him, and were also healed by him; upon which, Paul and his Christian asso∣ciates were much honoured by the Islanders. Having stayed there three months, (in which time 'tis like Paul made many Converts, and planted a Church in the Island, as Ecclesiasti∣cal History informs us), at their departure they were fur∣nished by the Inhabitants of the Island with all necessaries for their journey. From hence therefore they set sail for Italy, in a ship of Alexandria, whose sign was Castor and Pollux, and sail'd first to Syracuse in Sicily, thence to Rhegium in Italy, and thence to Puteoli a Port near Naples; where they found some ChristianAdeò jam dilatata erat Christi∣ana religio, ut in Italiae urbibus inve∣nirentur Ecclesiae Christianae. A quo fuerint plantatae non constat, nisi quod ex Act. 2.10 certum est inter eos qui Hierosolymae, per Petri praedica∣tionem fuerunt conversi, etiam fuisse Romanos, qui in patriam reversi, sermonem Domini secum tulerunt, & in patriâ seminaverunt Professors, who were very glad of them, and importun'd them to stay a week with them. Thence on foot they travailed towards RomePuteoli per septiduum commo∣rati, terrestri itinere Romam profecti sunt. Streso., and when they were come as far as Appii forum, several Christians that dwelt in Rome, hearing of their approach, came thither to meet and welcome them; and others met them at a place call'd the three Taverns. When Paul saw these Christians, he praised God exceed∣ingly. He knew, there was a famous Church there (long ago plantedSee Rom. 1.8.), to whom about three years before, he had written a large Epistle, and had of a long time desired to see them; therefore could not but now rejoice, that God had vouchsafed to him such an opportunity. The sight of these Christian-Romans did much revive and comfort him. He was glad they had so much liberty at Rome, that they durst come forth, and thus publickly own him, who was in bonds; and he hoped for much comfort and succour from them, against the troubles and dangers he expected at Rome. When they were come to Rome, the Centurion delivered the Prisoners to the Captain of the Guard who suffered Paul (mo∣ved thereto possibly by the good testimony given of him by Julius) to dwell in a private house which he hired, only with a Soldier to guard him, carrying on his right hand an Iron-ChainSee v. 20. Act. 12.6. Eph. 6.20. 2 Tim. 2.9. Custodia Militaris talis erat, ut is qui in noxà esset catenam manui dextrae al∣ligatam haberet, quae eadem militis si∣nistram vinciret. Eadem catena tam reum, quam militem tenet. Seneca lib. 1. de tranquil. animae., which probably he girded a∣bout him when he was in the house; but going abroad he was bound with the same to the left hand of the Soldier. After they had been there three days, Paul desired to speak with the chief of the Jews in that Ci∣ty; (his constant love to his own Nation en∣gaging him always to desire to gain them in the first place), and when they came to him, he spake to them to this purpose, Country men, I have done nothing against my own Nation, or contrary to the Laws or Customs of the JewsRecipiendo enim Christianismum nihil fecit contra mores patrios, i. e. contra Mosis legem. Christianismus enim, & lex Mosis, non pugnant: sed lex Mosis est umbratica repraesentatio futuri Christianismi, quae Christianis¦mo cedit nec se opponit. Corruptelae legis mosaicae pugnant cum Christia∣nismo, sed non ipsa lex Mosis.; yet was I by the Jews at Je∣rusalem apprehended and accused before the Roman Governour, who found no capital
Crime laid to my charge, and therefore would have dismiss'd me, had not the importunity of the Jews inclin'd him to deliver me into their power; which that I might avoid, I was ne∣cessitated to Appeal unto Caesar, only to clear my self, not intending to lay any thing to the charge of any of my Country-men, or to exasperate the Emperor against them, though I have been so ill used by them. And for this cause I was sent hither, and now have sent for you to acquaint you, that for the sake of Jesus Christ, the true Messias, (whom all true Israelites long looked for, who is now come in the flesh, to be their Redeemer, and in whom all the true Israel of God repose all their hope and confidence of salvation, and by whom they expect a joyful resurrection from the dead), I am bound with this chain. The Jews replied that they for their part were not possess'd with any prejudice against his person; for they had not recei∣ved any letters out of Judea concerning him, neither had any of their Brethren that came from thence spoken any evil of him. But as for this Profession and Doctrine of Christianity, they acknowledged, the Jews their Brethren, as also the Gen∣tiles, did generally oppose it, and spake hardly of it; yet they desired to hear what he had to say for it. Hereupon a day being appointed for that purpose, many of the Jews came to his lodging, to whom he opened at large these two points, 1. That the Kingdom of the Messiah promised by God to the Fathers was to be a spiritual, not an earthly Kingdom. 2. That Jesus of Nazareth was the true Messiah, in whom all that desire to be saved, ought to trust and believe. Both these he confirmed by testimonies, out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets; con∣tinuing his discourse from morning till night.Est primum signum & pars es∣sentialis Orthodoxae Ecclesiae, & do∣ctrinae, Scripuram habere pro unicâ regulâ doctrinae, cujus judicio standum, & cadendum: &, qui ab hac regulâ, ab hoc judice recedit, ad aliud tribunal provoct, & in alia authoritate suam fidem fundat, is ab orthodoxâ Eccle∣sia discessisse juicandus, & pro haereti∣co habendus, non Catholico. Stres. The effect of which discourse was this, some believed, and embraced the Gospel; others remained altogether unmoved and unperswa∣ded; and so they parted in some difference and disagreement among themselves. Paul at their departure, told those that would not be perswaded, that this unbelief of theirs was a thing which the Prophet Isaiah had long ago punctually foretold, viz. ch. 6.9. wherein he shews, that God had bidden him go and tell that people, that hearing they will hear and not understand, and seeing they will see and not perceive; for their heart was waxed gross, and they heard heavily with their ears, that is, they had contracted a wilful hardness, deafness, and blind∣ness; upon which it follows, that they will not convert, nor hearken to any counsel, that should make them capable of mercy. This being their case, he tells them, upon this refusal and obduration of theirs, he was to preach the Gospel (the word of salvation), to the Gentiles, who would gladly embrace it. See Rom. 15.9, 10, 11, 12.
After this, Paul dwelt two years in his own hired house at Rome, preaching the Gospel, (the doctrine of Christ that tends to the setting up the kingdom of God in the souls of men, see Mat. 4.23. & 13.19.), to all that came to him, without any disturbance, he having, as it seems, some Christian friends even in Nero's family, Phil. 4.22. Act. 28. v. 2. And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us every one because of the present rain, and because of the cold. v. 3. And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastned on his hand. v. 4. And when the barbarians saw the venemous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live. v. 5. And he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm. v. 6. Howbeit, they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a God. v. 7. In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island, whose name was Publius, who received us, and lodged us three days courteously. v. 8. And it came to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody flix, to whom Paul entred in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him. v. 9. So when this was done, others also which had diseases in the island, came, and were healed: v. 10. Who also honoured us with many honours, and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were necessary. v. 11. And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintred in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux. v. 12. And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days. v. 13. And from thence we set a compass, and came to Rhegium, and after one day the south-wind blew, and we came the next day to Pu∣teoli: v. 14. Where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven days: and so we went toward Rome. v. 15. And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii-Forum, and the three Taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage. v. 16. And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard: but Paul was suffered to dwell by him∣self, with a soldier that kept him. v. 17. And it came to pass that after three days Paul called the chief of the Jews together. And when they were come together, he said un∣to them, Men and brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. v. 18. Who when they had examined me, would have let me go, because there was no cause of death in me. v. 19. But when the Jews spake against it, I was constrained to appeal unto Cesar, not that I had ought to accuse my nation of. v. 20. For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see you, and to
speak with you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain. v. 21. And they said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judea, concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came, shewed or spake any harm of thee. v. 22. But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as concern∣ing this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. v. 23. And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his lodging, to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, prswading, them concerning Jsus, bth out of the law of Mo∣ses, and out of the Prophets, from morning till evening. v. 24. And some believed the things which were spoken, and some be∣lievd not. v. 25. And when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, af∣ter that Paul had spoken one word, Well spake the holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers. v. 26. Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive. v. 27. For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. v. 28. Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it. v. 29. And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves. v. 30. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and re∣ceived all that came in unto him. v. 31. Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence; no man forbidding him. Ch. 28. v. 6. ] Nihil incommodi ei accidere]  de malo Morali sive culpae usitatè dicitur, ut Luc. 23.41. 2 Thes. 3.2. rarò de malo Phy∣sico sive poenae. Syrus vertit nihil odibile ipsi factum esse. i. e. Nullum incommodum turpe & ignominiosum, scil. nihil novum insolitum & admirandum, unde crimi∣nis alicujus, prout suspicati fuerant, reus haberi posset. Mutatâ sententia dicebant Deum esse] Herculem forsan , qui in Meli∣t colebatur. v. 11. Cujus insigne erant Dioscuri] Solebant olim, naves hujusmodi insignibus ornare, & inde appellare, quomodo etiam hodié-num usitatum est. Virgilius dixit, Centauro invehitur magna. Dioscuri, sunt Castor & Pollux, Jovis ex Laedâ filii qui mari imperabant: unde ho∣rum praesidio & tutelae navis haec erat commissa atque dicata ab iis, qui eam possi∣debant. Et invaluit apud Nautas haec superstitio, exhalationes gneas quae in tempe∣statibus conspiciuntur, esse hos ipsos Deos scil. Castorem & Pollucem. Et si xha∣latio solitaria appareat, trisle esse praesagium; si autem gemina, prosperae navigatio∣nis praenuncium, ut testis est Plinius. Ovid. 1 Trist. Fleg. 3. & pictos verberat unda Deos. v. 15. Alii obvium venerunt ad sorum Appii, alii ad tres Tabernas; illi prius, hi seriùs. Nam tres Tabernae propriores erant Romae. v. 16. , seorsim sine aliis. Cum milite qui ipsum custodiret] Intellige ita ut eadem catena & miliem constringeret. Sen. Epist. 5. quemadmodum eadem ca∣tena & militem & custodiam copulat, sic ista quae tam dissimilia sunt, pariter incedunt. Haec est catena cujus mox meminit eam monstrans Paulus v. 20. & Eph. 6.20. Col. 4.18. Phil. 1.7. 2 Tim. 2.9. Philem. 10.13. v. 20. Propter spem Israelis he. Propter Messiam ab Israele speratum ac de∣sdratûm, vel propter bona à Messiâ speta. vid. 1 im. 1.1.
SECT. III. ONesiphorus a Citizen of Ephesus, coming to Rome at this time, very diligently sought out Paul there, and often refresh∣ed him, and was not ashamed to own him notwithstanding his bonds, 2 Tim. 1.16, 17. SECT. IV. THis year, 'tis probable, Paul was brought to his trial at Rome, though Luke makes no mention of it. For that his trial was something early, may appear by his own words in his Second Epistle to Timothy, written some time after, where he speaks of his first answer, (at which all his friends forsook him, through fear of suffering), that is, possibly, all such of his friends as had power at Rome, or might by their Testimonies have stood him instead; which he prays God may not be laid to their charge, 2 Tim. 4.16, 17, 18. SECT. V. FEstus, the Roman Procurator dying in Judea, Nero sends Albinus to succeed him in that Province.Christs. Neronis 66 6 In the mean time the High-Priesthood, by the means of King Agrippa, being taken away from Joseph, and given to Ananias a Saducee, (the Son of Annas), this new High-Priest taking his opportunity, before the arrival of Albinus, called a Council of the Jews, and brought JamesBrother of Joses, Mat. 13.55. sirnamed the less, Mark 15.40. called the Brother, that is, the Kinsman of the Lord, Gal. 1.9. being the Son of Mary, the Sister of the Lords Mother, see Act. 15.13. Son of Alpheus, be∣fore them, and caused him to be condemned to be stoned; see Joseph. lib. 20. ch. 8.. Eu∣sebius in his Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. ch. 22. says, he was thrown down from a Pinacle of the Temple, and then his brains were knocked out with a Fullers Club. Vide Annales Ʋsserii. This James, the Son of Alpheus and Ma∣ryShe is called Mary of Cleophas, Joh. 19.25. either because her Hus∣band had two Names, Alpheus and Cleo∣phas, (as was usual with the Hebrews), or else because she had had two Hus∣bands, first Alpheus, by whom she had had James and Joses, and after his death Cleophas, by whom she had Ju∣das and Simon., (Sister to the blessed Virgin), called James the less, [Mark 15.40.], and the Lords Brother, [Gal. 1.19.], that is, (af∣ter the Jewish manner of speaking), his Cou∣sin-German, being an Apostle, and so of an unlimited Commission, thought it sutable to his office, to take care of all converted to the Faith among the Twelve Tribes, scatter∣ed abroad in divers Countries, and accordingly he addresses this Epistle to them. 'Tis probable, he wrote it not long be∣fore his martyrdom, because he seems to intimates, that the vengeance that was to fall on Jerusalem was drawing nigh; see Jam. 5.8, 9. The general occasion of which, seemeth to be, the great degeneracy, both as to Faith, and Manners, and the growth
of Libertinism, which he understood to be among them. Which evils that he might obviate, he writes this Epistle to them, wherein he gives them many serious Admonitions. istle of Iames.1. COncerning the right bearing of afflictions, or outward temptations; He tells them, they are to account it matter of great and solid joy, when they meet with divers troubles and afflictions for the profession of the Gos∣pel; by which afflictions, they may be proved, whether they will, even in adver∣sity, stick close to Christ, or no. For they should consider, that those temptati∣ons are trials of their Faith; and the trial of their Faith worketh patience, through the operation of the Spirit of God. And they should learn to be pati∣ent to the end, (Mat. 10.22.), that so nothing may be wanting to them, for the perfecting and making up all the parts of holiness in them And because 'tis a hard matter to bear afflictions aright, and a great deal of heavenly wisdom is requisite thereunto, he advises, that when any of them, in such times of pres∣sure as those were, do find themselves to want this wisdom and skill to manage themselves aright, that then they should humbly beg it of God, who giveth libe∣rally, and upbraideth not. But then (he tells them) they must ask in Faith, and with a fixed dependance on God, not wavering, or doubting either concerning his power, goodness, or faithfulness. For doubting or wavering keeps men in a perpetual disquiet, and agitation of mind, not knowing what to depend on. Besids, this is the way to have their prayers blasted, God not being wont to hear them, that do not sincerely depend on him. And he further tells them, that 'tis not only in prayer, that this fluctuation, or wavering of spirit, pro∣duces such ill effects; but he shews them, that such a person hath the infelicity of never knowing in other occasions, where to fix or what course to take. And having given them this caution concerning prayer, he returns to his purpose a∣gain, of comforting the afflicted under their trials. And in order hereunto, he counsels the poor Christian, who is through afflictions or the Cross, humbled by the Lord, and brought low, to comfort himself, yea to glory in this, that he is exalted to the high dignity of being an adopted Child of God. And the rich man he counsels, not to rejoice in his riches; but if God have given him an humble frame of mind, and a preparedness to bear the Cross, and to be brought low, to rejoice in that frame of spirit. For all his glory (as he is a rich man) is very fading. As the Sun when it is risen scorcheth the green grass, and maketh the florid part of it presently to wither; so a rich man (when God permits it) soon fadeth in his estate, and cometh to nothing, notwithstanding all his counsels and endeavours to the contrary. He concludes this admonition, declaring that Christian to be blessed, who patiently endureth the afflictions which he shall meet with in the way of his duty; for when he shall be tryed, and found faithful, he shall at length obtain the crown of eternal life, which the Lord hath graciously promised to them that love him, and that testifie their love to him, by a patient enduring tribulations for his sake. From Ver. 1, to 13. 2. Having thus spoken of outward temptations, (or afflictions), he comes now, to speak of inward, namely, such as sollicite to sin, and which consist in evil inclinations. And he advises them, to take heed of that Blasphemy that casts the blame of these temptations upon God. For God is of so pure and ho∣ly a nature that he cannot be tempted or stirred up to sin by any means what∣ever; neither doth he sollicite or stir up any one to it. But a man is tempted, or stirred up to evil, by the inward lust, or original corruption of his own heart; the gradual motions whereof are these. 1. By the instigation of this in∣ward lust, or concupiscence, a man is drawn aside from true good, and allur'd to evil. 2. This inward lust solliciting, and enticing, gets at length the consent of the will, and so is said to conceive. 3. Then a man actually sins, and so sin
brings forth. 4. Sin being committed, by its desert bringeth forth or procureth death. Therefore they should take heed of permitting themselves so far to be de∣ceived, as to ascribe the cause of their impiety unto God. For He is immu∣tably the Author of all good, and from him dscends every good gift. God is the Father of lights, and spiritual illumination, and (says he), of his own free mercy and good will, he hath regenerated and converted us (who are be∣lievers among the Jews) by the word of his Gospel, that as the first fruits dicuntur qui ante alios vo∣cati sunt, 1 Cor. 16.15. were under the Law consecrated to God, so we might be consecrated to him be∣fore any other people, and so he hath allowed us the favour of being the first that have been called to this dignity, [see Eph. 1.12.], therefore we ought to be far from admitting any such blasphemous thought concerning God, as if we were moved at any time by him to sin or evil. From Ver. 13, to 19. 3. Having mentioned their regeneration by the preaching of the Gospel, he takes occasion to shew them, how the Word ought to be heard and received. In particular, that they should be swift and ready to hear it, but slow to speak or cavil against it, and slow to wrath, not being soon offended, and angry at the convictions or reproofs of it. For mans sinful anger doth not put men upon do∣ing those things, that are just and righteous in Gods account. And because wrath is such a hindrance to the righteousness which God requireth, he adviseth, that all filthy, and evil speaking, and overflowing of malice, all scoffs, and railing, &c. should be laid aside, and that with meekness they should receive the word, which God by his Spirit does, as it were, graff and implant in the soul, that it may bring forth fruits acceptable unto Him, and which being accompanied by his di∣vine grace, is his power unto salvation. He further shews, how they should not only be hearers of the Word, but doers of it. And he declares the vanity and unprofitableness of bare hearing, by a similitude taken from a man looking his face in a Glass, who soon forgetteth the fashion of his own countenance, ha∣ving only a slight view thereof: So the preaching of the Word usually maketh but slight impressions on careless hearers. But they that look narrowly, and di∣ligently inquire into the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, (which is a perfect Law, teaching the way to true liberty, and freedom from sin, wrath, and e∣ternal death, and brings us into a free state, a state of Sonship) and abide, and remain in the knowledg and belief thereof, and obedience thereto, not being forgetful hearers, but mindful of the duties, and workFaith is our work, Repentance our business, the life of love and praise our duty. Dr. Manton in loc. the Gospel prescribes, such persons shall be blessed in this course. And lst any should challenge a share in this blessedness to whom it does not belong, he shews, who are hearers only, and not doers of the Word, namely, such as allow them∣selves in any known sin, and particularly in the sins of the tongue. For he tells them, that that man miserably deceives his own heart, who thinketh himself truly religious, yet bridleth not his tongueAudi multa, loquer opportuna.. Such a mans profession of the Christian Faith, he assures them, is but vain. But they that would manifest their pro∣fession to be sincere, and immaculate, and such as God (who is the Father of Christ, and of all true Believers in him) approveth, must manifest it by works of Charity, and Purity, keeping themselves from the wickedness and defile∣ments that prevail in the World, wherewith so many are polluted. From Ver. 19, to the end. He comes now to admonish them of another Evil,Chap. 2. that it seems was too common amongst them, which was this, They over-esteemed the richJacobus cum intellexit morem invalescere dandi  ex opi∣bus, non ex virtutibus, huic malo, multa post se mala tracturo, occurrit. Grot., giving them all the respect and observance they could devise, in their Synagogues, and Courts of Judicature; yea they went so far, as to esteem the Wicked-rich above the Godly-poor, honouring and observing those that were apt to hale them to the Judg∣ment
Seats, despising and disesteeming the poor, and not regarding them accord∣ing to their excellency in grace: Yea they were prone to favour the cause of the rich against the poor in judgment. The Apostle shews them the evil of this practise, by putting this case to them. Says he, If there come into your Syna∣goguesThe Jews used to keep Courts in their Synagogues. Therefore Mat. 10.17. We read, They shall scourge you in their Synagogues. Act. 22.19. Beat in every Synagogue: Because where Sen∣tence was given, there Judgment was executed. And 'tis probable, that be∣ing now converted to Christianity they still held the same course., or Ecclesiastical Courts, a Rich man, with a Gold Ring, and goodly Apparel, and there be a difference to be decided between him and a Poor man, who is in poor Clothes; and you shew great respect to the Rich man, and favour him in his cause, but con∣temn the Poor manMaimonides Saned. cap. 21. says, It is expresly provided by the consti∣tutions o the Jews, that when a poor man and a rich plead together, the rich shall not be bidden to sit down, and the poor to stand, or sit in a worse place, but both to sit, or both to stand. See Thorndick, of the right of the Church in a Christian state. pag. 38, 32.; are ye not then partial, and perverse Judges, whose thoughts and determinations are evil, and perverse? That therefore he may restrain them from this undue proceeding, he shews, that God hath put a three-fold dignity upon the Godly-poor. They are Elected of God, Rich in Faith and the graces of the Spirit, and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. And that he might further shew them their practice herein, not only to be vain and evil, but sensless and irrational, he useth a new Argument to this purpose. D not rich men (says he) oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? It seems, many of the rich men among whom they lived were bitter enemies, and reproachers of Christianity; and therefore he in∣timates, that wealth was not to be such a motive to them to favour the cause of the rich, when it came to be tried before them. Indeed, if they did dispense their respects aright, giving the rich men only, what is just, and meet, and did not deprive their poorer Brethren, of what is due to them, and in all things carried themselves according to that Royal Law of the King of kings, con∣tained in the Scripture, (which enjoins us to love our Neighbour as our selves, and to do to others what we would judg fit to be done to us), then they did well; but this partial respecting of the rich, with contempt of the poor, plainly shewed them to be transgressors, and not fulfillers of this Law. For the Law, Lev. 19.15. (to which place 'tis probable he pointeth), saith, Thou shalt do no unrighteousness in judgment: Thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor the person of the mighty; but in righteous∣ness shalt thou judg thy neighbour. But here they might object this, that which he reprov'd in them was a small offence, and might be easily excus'd, and their obedience in other things might make amends for such a small failing as this was. To this he answers, that, Suppose a man should be an exact ob∣server of all other points of the Law (which yet is impossible) and willingly offend in one particular, he is guilty of breaking the whole Law. Not that all sins concurr in one, but because a contempt of the same Law and Law-giver is manifested in the breach of one Command as well as of all. For obedi∣ence to Gods will is required universally to all that he commands, and he that offends in one command, though he keep all the rest, fails of the obedience which is due from him, and so is punishable as well as if he had offended in all. And that he may make this matter the more clear, he instances in the Sixth and Se∣venth Commandments, shewing that in the violation of either, the authority of the Lawgiver, and of him that commanded both, is violated. But they might again object, that they shall not ultimately be judged by the Law, as gi∣ven by Moses, (which requires perfect obedience in every respect, and pronounces a Curse upon every one that in the least transgresseth), but by the Gospel, [see ch. 1.25.]. He answers, that he would have them so speak, and act, and carry themselves in those matters, as those that shall be judged by the Gospel, which is a Law of Liberty indeed, but not of licentiousness; of liberty from sin, but not of liberty to sin. And if they would not come under the rigour of the Law of Moses, they must not be cruel and injurious to their poor Brethren. For the equity of that Law requireth, that those persons should find no mercy, who will
shew none. Therefore mercy is not to be hoped for, by those that only honour rich men, but by those that are full of Bowls, and bounty to the poor. For as the mercy of God rejoiceth over his justice; so mercy exercis'd by man, gives him occasion to hope, yea to rejoice in the mercy of God, and exceedingly supports him against the fear of his justice and judgment. From Ver. 1, to 14. 5. Having spoken of the Gospel, as a Law of Liberty, v. 12. lest this ex∣prssin should encourage some Hypocrites to live as they list, provided they did but profess Faith in Christ, he admonishes them to take hed of such a vain, un∣profitable FaithFaith doth save in that way of concurrence in which any act of the creature can be said to save; see Eph. 2.8. But Faith which is only in the tongue and lips, which is alone, and by it self, such a Faith as the Devils may have, such a Faith is dead, and can no more be accounted Faith than a dead man can be accounted a man; such a Faith doth not save. Sola sides justificat, sed non fides quae est sola., because such a Faith, as is void of good works, cannot save. So that in this whole dis∣course, the Apostles intent and drift is, to shew, not what justifieth, but who is justified; not what Faith doth, but what Faith is. He that hath a true Faith, is sure of Salvation; but not always he that saith he hath Faith. His drift therefore is, not to shew, that Faith without works doth not justifie, but that a bare Assent to the truths of the Gospel, which is nt accompanied with good works, is not Faith; and the Justification he here speaketh of, is not so much of the Person, as of the Faith. For as professions of love to those that are indigent, and in want, without performance, are vain; so such a Faith, which is but a naked assent to the Gospel, or a bare profession of it, without producing good fruits, is unprofitable and dead. He further urgeth his present Argument, by framing a Dialogue, between a true Believer, that can manifest his Faith by his works, and a boasting Hyprocrite, that can produce no works to evidence or demonstrate the truth of his Faith. The true Believer may say to such a person thus; Thou boastest with thy tongue, and saist, thou hast Faith. I shall not boast, but humbly produce the real testimony of my works, (see Mat. 11.4, 5.), as an evidence of my Faith. Thy Faith is not productive of good works. Now shew me thy Faith without works, and make it appear to me by any Scripture-ground, (if thou canst), to be a sincere and true Faith; and if thou canst not, I will shew thee my Faith, accompanied with good works, and demon∣strate it to be sincere by my works, seeing they are a real evidence and proof of it. But thou wilt say, thou hast a true Faith, for thou belie∣vest there is one God. Thou dost well in so believing; yet if this Faith of thine consist in a bare knowledg, or assnt of thy mind, and do not produce in thee a real love to God, and affiance in him, and a serious endeavour to please him, what advantage hast thou thereby above the Devils? For they believe this truth as well as thou, but are far enough from having any true Faith; for instead of conceiving any hope there∣by of salvation, they are fill'd with unceivable horror, upon the appre∣hension of his justice. All knowledg of God, out of Christ, is very un∣comfortable to sinners. But wilt thou rightly understand and consider, (O vain ProfessorThe Apostle doth not direct this to any one person, but to such an order or sort of men. Hypocrites must be roused with some asperity & sharpness.!), what may be said against thy Faith, and to prove to thee, that Faith without works is dead? seeing good works are a proper and inseprable effect of true and saving Faith? I say, they are such effects, as do not give life to it, but declare it, and manifest it, as Apples do not give life to the tree, but shew and demonstrate life to be in it. I shall further prove this point to thee, by the examples of persons justified of old, and shall shew, that they were not justified by a dead and fruitless Faith, but by a Faith bringing forth good works. And I shall instance only in two, Abraham and Rhab. As for Abraham, I demand, whether he were not justified by works, (particularly, that eminent work, when he really
purposed, and had God continued the command, would actually have offered up his Son Isaac on the AltarHeb. 11.17.), I demand, Whether by that, and his other works, he did not shew, that he had a true and lively FaithSo that James doth not take Justification here in that sense, that Paul doth when he speaks of mans Ju∣stification before God; but for a shew∣ing forth of his justification before men. Paul speaks of the justification of a sinnr, from the curse of his natural condition, and the accusations of the Law. James, of the justification and approbation of that Faith by which we are thus accepted with God. Paul shews how a sinner is absolv'd; James how a Believer is approved. Also by the word Faith, when he denieth that we are justified thereby only, v. 24. he understandeth a naked assent and pro∣fession of the Christian Faith, which is not accompanied with good works, as the true saving Faith is. Paul dis∣puteth how we are justified, and James how we shall evidence our selves to be justified. The one taketh justificati∣on for acquittance from sin, and the other for acquittance from hypocrisie. The one for the imputation of righte∣ousness, the other for the declaration of righteousness Paul speaketh of the office of Faith: James of the quality of Faith. Paul pleadeth for saving Faith, James pleadeth against naked assent. The one speaketh of the justifying of the person; the other of the Faith. Paul having to do with Pharisaical Justicia∣ries proveth invincibly, Justification by Faith, without works. James having to deal with carnal Professors, proveth as strongly, That a Profession of Faith, without Works, is dead.? Thou seest therefore, that his Faith rested not in a bare knowledg, or profession, but was operative; it had efficacy and influence upon his works; it did not exert it self in acts of belie∣ving only, but also in working; so that his Faith, by producing good works, was declared to be a perfect and true Faith, and such as had all the parts belonging to it. And his Faith was impro∣ved, and strengthened, and perfected by works, as the inward vigour of the spirits is increas'd by motion and exercise. Yet this must not be so understood, as if works did perfect Faith, by com∣municating of perfection to it, but only that they do stir up, exercise, and excite the vigour of it. This therefore being an evident discovery of A∣brahams Faith; it plainly appear'd, how truly it was said of him before, Gen. 15. that he believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. So that the first testimony, and solemn approbation which Abraham had from God, was because of his Faith. And by his readiness to sacrifice his Son, he de∣clared he had a true justifying-Faith; and accor∣dingly the Lord saith after this trial, Now I know that thou fearest me, Gen. 22.12. And hereupon he was called, the Friend of God. You see then, that by Works (that is; by the parts, and offices of a holy life) a man is justified, that is, acquitted from hypocrisie, and his Faith is manifested to be good, and right, and he himself just and righteous. You see also, that he is not justified by Faith on∣ly, that is, by a bare, and naked profession, or dead and vain Faith, such as consisteth in a meer assent, or empty knowledg and speculation, which is so far from justifying, that it is not properly Faith. I come now to my other instance, viz. that of Rahab, which I the rather make use of, because some might say, that indeed Abrahams Faith (the great pat∣tern of Believers) might produce good works, but every Believers Faith cannot arise to the strength of Abrahams. For answer to this, I shall shew, that the weakest Faith, that is true, and saving must produce good works. And for the proof of this, I shall instance in Rahab an Harlot meretrix] Videtur vox etiam cauponam significare: plerunque cauponae talem etiam quaestum laciebant. Dicitur meretrix, scil. quae talis sue∣rat antequam ad verum Deum (ab hospitibus Hebraeis edocta) se conver∣teret. Sic Mat. 21.31. Meretrices di∣cuntur intrare in regnum coeleste. Op∣timè Rahab figuram gerit eorum, qui ex gentibus extraneis in Christum cre∣didêre: Nam & horum saluti vita pri∣or flagitiosa nihil obstitit., and an Heathen, when God first wrought upon her, yet after she was converted, her Faith, how weak soever, express'd it self in a very self-denying act. Had she said to the Messengers of the Children of Israel, I believe the God of Heaven and Earth hath given you this whole Land for a Possession, yet I dare not shew you any kindness in this City; it had been such a dead barren Faith, as we have been speaking of: but her Faith prevailed so far with her, that she perform'd a grateful office to them, though she ran a great hazzard thereby, and expos'd her self to the rage of the people of her City, for harbouring spies, and sending them out by ano∣ther way, to escape the great danger they were in. See Josh. 2.
He concludeth this whole dispute, shewing, how little is to be ascribed to an empty profession of Faith without works: such a Faith, he tells them, 'tis but as the body without the vital spirit, which every body knows to be no more than a meer carcass. From Ver. 14, to the end. 6. He re-assumes the discourse he had been upon before in the end of the first Chapter, admonishing them to take heed of offending with their tongues,Chap. 3. and particularly, not to arrogate to themselves a supercilious Mastership over others, (taking upon them to censure them at pleasure), because such heavy censures draw down upon themselves very great and heavy judgments; see 1 Cor. 11.31. Mat. 7.2. And he disswades there from, 1. Ʋpon consideration of the common frailty, incident to all men; telling them, that In many things we offend all. And 2ly, Because bridling the tongue is a sign of some good progress and growth in grace. He that can govern his tongueProv. 13.3. He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life. Prov. 22.23. Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue, keepeth his soul from trou∣bles. aright doth thereby manifest himself to be a sincere, and grown, and well improv'd Christian, and able to bridle the whole body, that is, able to govern all his other actions a∣right, which are acted by the members of the body. This he further illustrates, by two Similitudes. 1. Of a Bridle-bit. 2. Of a Rudder, or Helm of a Ship. If we guide the Bri∣dle well, we rule the Horse; if we rule the Stern aright, we guide the Ship: So the Tongue, though but a small member, yet well ordered, and governed, ef∣fecteth de magnis se jactat i. e. res magnas efficit. great things. But great inconveniences a∣rise where this small member is not well-governed. For as a little fire kindleth much wood, so an evil Tongue is a fire, (there is a worldMundus iniquitatis, id est, res plenissima iniquitatis. of sin in it), 'tis a powerful means to kindle great strifes and divi∣sions. An evil Tongue is of so cursed an influence, that it often defiles the whole body, that is, involves the other members in guilt, and defiles them, by drawing them to act, and commit sin, [see Eccles. 5.6.]. It sets on fire the whole WorldQuidam circulum seu orbem condi∣tum, (ut sit , &  pro ), redduni, ut significetur, linguam perversam totum orbem mundi, velut infernali igne in∣flammare. Glass., or, (as some render it), the whole course and revolution of our lifeAccendi à linguâ rotam nativita∣tis nostrae] Humanae vitae cursum rotae comparat. Quum alia vitia vel aetate vel temporis successu corriguntur, vel saltem non occupant totum hominem, vitium linguae spargi ac grassari per om∣nes vitae partes asserit. Calv. ] Rota nativi∣tatis] vitae cursum aut revolutionem sig∣nificat. from youth to manhood, from manhood to old age. The evils of the tongue diffuse themselves into all the parts of mans life, and it sets on fire, with its wickedness, the wheel and course of all our natural faculties, being it self set on fire by the Devil, and kindled with that fire that comes from Hell. And having thus shewed the cursed influence of the Tongue, he comes now to shew, how difficult the cure is. He tells them, there are no kind of Beasts but may be tam'd by humane art and skill; nothing in nature so violent and hurtful, but humane art and industry, hath made it serviceable to the use of men. But the Tongue is harder to be tam'd than any of these. 'Tis such an indisciplinable member, that no mans reason, or skill, can tame anotherv. 8. Linguam; nempe alienam, nemo domare potest, sicut animalia sera mansuefacimus. Grot. mans unruly tongue; nor can he tame his own of himself, without the assistance of divine grace. An evil Tongue is an unrestrainable evil, full of deadly poison, spitting forth the venome of re∣viling, backbiting, reproaching, cursing, and many other evils. But some might here object, With our tongues we praise God, therefore the Tongue is not so full of venome as you suggest. For answer, he shews, What a foul sin it is in any Christian to use this member to so distant offices as some do, namely, therewith in the publick con∣gregation to bless God, and afterwards to judg and rail at their Christian Bre∣thren, who, for that Image of God they bear upon them, are to be regarded,
and used with kindness: What, says he, shall two such contrary things, as blessing and cursing, proceed out of the same mouth? This, he tells them, ought not to be. And if they would further understand the monstrousness of this practice, he will represent it unto them, by three Similitudes. Can a fountain (says he) send forth two sorts of waters, of so different a nature, as bitter and sweet? or can the Sea send out salt water and fresh? Can a Fig-tree bear Figs and Olive-berries too? Can a Vine bear Grpes and Figs, the the fruit that belongs to another Tree? And as these things are impossible in the ordinary course of Nature; so he shews them, 'tis absurd in manners, that the same Tongue should bring forth good and evil, should bless and curse, pray and revile. Therefore the tongue should be employed to those good uses to which God has appointed it, and not to the contrary. From Ver. 1, to 13. 7. He comes now to shew, what is one of the prime causes of the unruliness, and intemperance of the Tongue, namely, A false perswasion, which is in some, of their own wisdom and knowledg, whereas there is no true wisdom in them. He tells them, that if any will approve himself to be a truly wise and understand∣ing man, he must by the goodness of his conversation and works, testifie that there is in him, such a wisdom as is accompanied with meekness. But if he nou∣rish bitter envying, and strife in his heart, and vent it by his Tongue, he hath no reason to glory and boast of his wisdom; for he does plainly lye against the truth in such vain brags and boastings. Such wisdm as that, he may assure himself, descendeth not from heaven, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For the effects of envy and strife, are confusion and all manner of evil. But the wis∣dom that is from above is first pure, it will not allow or brook any filthiness, either of sin or error; then peaceable, not rigid, but gentle, mild, equitable, receding from its own strict right in order to peace; 'Tis also gentle, and mo∣derate, and persuasible, full of compassions, and mercy, being fruitful in good works, without judging, sine dijudicatione]. Jaco∣bus hîc dijudicationis verbo nimis anxi∣am, ac scrupulosam inquisitionem no∣tat, qualem serè in hypocritis cernere licet, qui dum nimis exactè inquirunt in fratrum dicta, & facta, nihil non in sinistram partem rapiunt. Calv., or too severely cen∣suring the actions of others, and without hypocrisie. He concludes this whle discourse, shewing the happiness of those that have this wisdom, that disposes to peace; for the fruit of righteousness, which consists in peace] Ut sensus sit. Pax (h. e. vera selicitas) quae quasi fructus è justitiâ nascitur, seritur iis qui operam dant paci. Pisc., (comprehending in it, all true blessedness) is sown for them that have that meek wisdom, and are of a peaceable disposition themselves, and endeavour to make peace among others. From Ver. 13, to the end. Chap. 4.8. Having shewed, in the foregoing Chapter, that a false perswasion of their own wisdom and knowledg, was one great cause of the dissentions among them, (which were so violent, that they resembled, as it were, wars and sight∣ings) he comes now to shew other causes of their contentions and quarrel∣lings, which were their carnal and pleasing lusts, viz. their covetousness, en∣vy, and pride, which warr'd in their members, (that is, in their wills and affections, see Rom. 7.23.), against the motions of the Spirit of God. He tells them, they eagerly and passionately coveted the honours and riches of this world; but yet could not obtain what they desired. They envyed] ye envy, non  Ye skill. Sic Calv. Beza, Cajetan, &c. Vous portés envie & jalousie l'un à l'autre, &c. Amtraut. and grudged their Neighbours the good things God had given them, yet could not attain to their happiness. They coveted them eagerly, but it no∣thing availed them: They strove and quarrell'd with one another about them, yet obtain'd them not, because they sought them not of Gd by prayer, who is the alone Author and Giver of all blessings. Or if they did sometimes seek to the Lord for them, yet they sought them not in a right
manner, nor for a right end, namely, that they might serve him with them; but they sought them, that they might consume and waste them upon their lusts. Hereupon, he calls them, AdulterersAdulteros apellat metaphoricè, quia à Deo ornicatur, as{que} adulteratur, quis∣quis amorem, quem Deo debet, ad mun∣dum transfert. Estius., and Adul∣teresses, in a spiritual sense; because, the love of the world had alienated and estranged their hearts from the Lord [Mat. 12.39.] He tells them, that to give up, or engage their affections to the pleasures, profits, and honours of the World, or to seek to gratifie worldly men, or worldly lusts, is reckoned by God as hostility against himself. For friendship with the WorldSee 1 Joh. 2.15, 16., and conformity to the vices which reign in it, is that which renders a man hate∣full to God, it being a plain siding with his Adversaries. From Ver. 1, to 5. 9. He dehorts from Pride and Envy. He shews them, that 'tis not for no∣thing that the Scripture speaks to this sense and purpose, though not in express words. The Holy SpiritBy Spirit, we understand here the Spirit of God, because that phrase, The Spirit which dwelleth in us, is most properly, and most usually applied to the Spirit of God, who is given to us, that he may dwell in us, Rom. 8.9, 11 1 Cor. 3.16. An putatis quod inaniter Scriptura dicat, Ad invidiam concupiscit Spiritus, qui habitat in nobis! Quae verba qui∣dam deducta esse arbitrantur ex Num. 11.29. Dixit autem Moses illi, An in∣vides meâ causà? O si daretur, totum po∣pulum Jehovae prophetas esse! q. d. com∣munis est ille Spiritus, qui in utroque nostrûm, & in aliis Dei servis habitat. Immeritò igitur illis prophetantibus, (Eldad & Medad), invides; quia sine omni invidentiâ ego expecto, ut om∣nes & singuli in populo, Spiritu Dei instructi, prophetare possint Ab hy∣pothesi ergo ad thesin progreditur A∣postolus, & erotematicè ait, Ad in vi∣diam concupiscit piritus qui habitat in nobis? Quâ interrogatione idem sen∣su exprimitur, quod in paraphrasi ver∣borum Mosis dictum modò est Glass. Cap. 4. v. 5. Ego de spiritu Dei ac∣cipio, & interrogativè lego hanc sen∣tentiam. Probare vult Apostolus, ex quo invident non regi eos Dei Spiritu, quo∣niam ipse aliter fideles instituat. Negat Jacobus regnare Dei Spiritum ubi vigent pravae cupiditates, quae nos ad mutuam contentionem irritant. Calv. that dwelleth in us, doth it incite or move to envy? No, that is impossible; for he, is liberal in his communications of Grace, which forms mens hearts to Humility and Charity, that are con∣trary thereunto. Therefore the Scripture saith, [Prov. 3.34. according to the Septuagint], God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. He advises them therefore, to submit themselves to the gui∣dance and direction of the Spirit of God, and to re∣sist the Devil when he tempts them to any of those sinful lusts, and he shall flee from them. He advises them, to seek unto the Lord, and to emplore his aid a∣gainst these lusts by fervent prayer, and to draw nigh to him by true Repentance and Faith; and he will draw nigh to them by his grace, blessing, and help; see Zach. 1.3. Mal. 3.7. He advises them, to cleanse their hands, which were full of violence, and extorti∣on; and to purifie their hearts, which were fill'd with malice, and envy; that is, to look to the reforming both of their inward and outward man. And those of them especially should take care of this, who have hi∣therto been so double-minded, and have had their hearts as it were divided between God and the world. Lstly, he exhorts these envious, proud, ambitious, covetous persons, to exercise a deep penitential mourning before the Lord for their sins; and to turn their carnal rejoicing in their possessions, into weeping, and mourning at the sad apprehension of the approaching judgments, and to humble themselves in the sight of God, depre∣cating his displeasure, and earnestly imploring his par∣don in Christs name, that so he may, by giving them a sense of his pardoning mercy, raise up their hearts again, and revive and comfort them. From Ver, 5. to 11. 10. He comes now to disswade them from another sin, and that is detra∣ction, or speaking evil of one another. For he tells them, he that detracts from, or censures his Brother, detracts from the Law, and judges, or condemns the Law, which commands us to love our Brother, and condemneth rash judging, Lev. 19.16. Mt. 7.1. He therefore that judgeth his Brother, is not an obdient observer of the Law, but foolishly arrogates to himslf, as it were, a power to judg and controul the Law, as if it had forbidden some things with∣out just cause. But they are to know, there is but one Law-giver, who can give Laws to the Conscience, who is God the Lord, (Isa. 33.22.); into whose
place, they arrogantly put themselves, who rashly judg their Neighbour, and conse∣quently condemn his Law, that forbids it. Now he tells them, this Law-giver is the only Judg, who hath power to save those that obey him, and to destroy those that resist him. What is man therefore, that he should dare to usurp his office by judging his Brother. 11. Having reprehended those that contemned the Law, he now comes to re∣prove those that contemned providence, promising to themselves a long time in this world, and an happy accomplishment of their carnal projects, without any sense or apprehension of their own frailty, or the sudden strokes of God. He there∣fore here persontes them, and gives an accurate representation of their thoughts, shewing how vain their peremptory carnal confidence of success in their affairs, is, seeing no man can foresee, what will be on the morrow; our life being like a vapour appearing for a little time, and oft times on the suddain vanishing away. Therefore there should be a continual acknowledgment of divine providence in their hearts, and such an outward profession of it in their words, as may distinguish them from profane men, who have no sense thereof. But you, says he, glory in thse your insolent boatings, and presumptions, by which you openly publish the wicked stupidity of your hearts. And for you, that are Christians, to be guilty of this, (who have received so much light, and knowledg, to the contrary), this will render you the more inexcusable, and make you more liable to punishment on that account. From Ver. 12, to the end. 12. He now sharply reprehends the carnal rich men among them, and de∣nounces the judgment of God against them, for their Injustice, Intemperance, and Cruelty. He bids them, weep and howl in contemplation of the calamities that hung over their heads, which they could not escape, except they seriously repented. He tells them they had hoarded up riches, viz. Corn, Wine, and Oyl, and such like perishable commodities, till they were corrupted; and had laid up Garments, that is, Silks, wearing Clothes, and Linnen, and such kind of Wares till they were moth-eaten. Their Gold and Silver, they let lye useless by them, and as it were, canker and rust in their Chests; and their Garments they suffered to be mth-eaten, rather than they would employ those their riches to good uses. And he tells them, this moth, and this rust will at the day of Judgment be witnesses against them, and of their avarice and covetuousness. And these witnesses shall be turned into tortures, after the last Judgment, when they shall be punished in Hell, wherein their miserable souls, and bodies, shall be preyed on by torments, as by fire; and those cutting reflecti∣ons upon the rust and moth, will be bitter and terrible, and gnaw upon their Consciences with a sharp and bitter anguish. And that he may further intimate their folly, he tells them, they had hoarded and heaped up wealth against the last days, viz. those scattering and fatal days to the Jewish Cmmonwealth, which were now approaching. All that treasure which with so much wrong to others, and violation of their Consciences, they had heaped together, was but heaped up for the Spoiler, and the violence of the Romans. And that he may further aggravate their hainous guiltiness, he tells them, that they were not only uncharitable to the poor, and backward to help them, but they were op∣pressors of them, and that oppression of their poor servants, and labourers in de∣frauding them of their wages, cried for vengeance against them, in the ears of the Lord of Hosts; see Deut. 24.14, 15. But this was not all, he tells them, of another crime they were guilty of, viz. their sensuality, charging them for li∣ving like luxurious GluttonsEnutrire corda, significat indul∣gere sibi, non modò ad naturae satie∣tatem, sed quantum fert cupiditas., making every day a FestivalIta vos pavistis quotìdie sicut fieri solebt in diebus solenniorum convivi∣orum post victimas . Grot. Ut in die festo in quo slent mactari victimae in epulum. Vatabl., or a day of slughter, wherein many Beasts were killed for Sacrifice and Food, and a great part of which was reserved for the use of the worship∣per, which he was to carry home, and eat with his friends; see Prov. 17.1. Prov. 7.14. Lastly, He reproves them, for their tyrannical and oppressing cruelty,
in procuring, by their power and authority, the condemnation and destruction of the JustTaxatur hic crudelitas divitum in pauperes, quod eos in judicio iniquè opprimerent. Quae oppressio Metaphoricè mors dicitur, quod ut iis vitam acerbissimam redderent. Justum autem vocat non Christum (justum ) ut ali∣qui exponunt, sed pauperes innocentes, justitiae addictos, per Enallagen numeri usitatam, Isa. 3.11. 1 Tim. 1.9. ut in il o exemplo: Romanus praelio victor. Gomar., they not resisting them, nor having any means to defend them∣selves against their violencev. 6. Non resistitur vobis] i. e. lecistis pro arbitrio nec quisquam vobis resistit.. From Ver. 1, to 7. 13. Having thus shewed, how the wicked rich men shall be punished for their wickedness, and opprssin; he cmes now to comfort the poor faithful Brethren that were oppressed by them, and to exhort them to exercise patience under their sufferings, till Christ should come to execute vengeance on the obdu∣rate Jews in the destruction of their City Jh. 21.22. This he presseth from the examples of the husbandmans waiting for the fruit of the earth, and from his patient expecting, in order to that, both the showers that come in the Seed∣time to fit the ground, and for those that come before Harvest, or Reaping, to plump the Corn. So, he tells them, they should be patient, and encourage their hearts, because that Coming of Christ before mentioned, was near at hand. He further exhorts thm, not nly to bear those injuries patiently, which they re∣ceiv'd from wicked rich men, but those also which thy suffered from divers of their Brethren, who together with thm did profess the holy Faith. He advises thm, that they should not in a groaning. manner require vengeance against them from the hand of God, but forgive them; otherwise they had great rea∣son to expect to be judged, and punished by Christ the Judg, whose coming was so nigh, that they might as it were say, He was at the gate. And that he may yet further perswade them to patience, he sets before them, the example of the Prophets, who, though dear to God, and employed to speak to the people from him, (and so might seem sheltred under the Buckler of their special Com∣mission), yet were exercised with many and sharp afflictions; and therefore, why should they promise themselves freedom and exemption? He assures them, that himself, and the other Apostles, did esteem and look upon those, as blessed persons, who did patiently bear those trials and afflictions, the Lord was plea∣sd to exercise them with. And to confirm what he had said, he sets before them the instance of Job, who having patiently endured very sore afflictions, at last God mad a very gracious end with him, giving him double to all that he had lost, Job 42.10. From whence it appears, that God is far from despi∣sing us in our fflictions, and that he is a God of tender bowels and compassions. From Ver. 7, to 12. 14. In the next place, he seriously dehorts them from rash and unnecessary swearing, or swearing by Creatures,v. 12. ] Quae valdè caveri volumus, ea dicere sole∣mus cavenda ante omnia. which (it seems) was too common a∣mong the Jews at that time. He forbids them to use any unlawful or unne∣cessary Oath; but in their ordinary converse, barely to affirm, or deny, without adding any Oath thereto, lst they bring upon themselves the judgment. Alia exemplaria habent . Ne in simulationem incidatis; quia multum utentes juramentis, multa mentiuntur. Receptissima lectio est, , i. e. , ne in condemnationem incidatis. Treidl. of God. Ver. 12. 15. He comes now to direct them, how to behave themselves, both in an afflicted and in a prosperous condition, and especially in time of sickness. In affliction, he tells them, their duty is prayer; in prosperity, their duty is giving of thanksv. 13. ? is any merry? the effect is put for the state, gladness for prosperity, which is wont to make the heart glad and merry., or singing to Gods praise. And when any of them are sick, he advises them, to send for the
EldersThe term Elder is given to all the Offices and Administrations in the Church, from the Apostle to the Dea∣con. of the Church to pray over thm, and if thy have the gift of healingHoc intelligendum est de iis Se∣nioribus, qui temporario illo sancto dono eant praediti, sicut praecipit Chri∣stus, Mat. 10.8. infirmos curate; & Apo∣stoli paruerunt, Mar. 6 13. & unxe¦runt oleo multos infirmos, & curarunt, & 1 or. 12.18. Posuit Deus in Eccle∣sia, primum Apostolos, &c. dona sana∣tionum, & v 30. Num omnes habent donum sanationum? q. d. minimè. Go∣mar., (which at that time, was given to some Teachers and Elders, see 1 Cor. 12.9.), that they should anoint them with OylOleam apud Hebraeos divinam gratiam significabat., calling upon the Name of Christ, who is the Au∣thor of all such miraculous healing, see Act. 3.16. This gift our Saviour was pleased should accompany the prea∣ching of his Gospel in those primitive times, for the confirmation of it; but now it is ceased since the Gos∣pel is sufficiently confirmed. He further tells them, that the prayer thus made to the Lord, by the Elders, and by the sick person, proceeding out of a true Faith, shall be a means of saving, and recovering the sick per∣son from that distemper, except when it pleaseth God otherwise to order it, for his own glory, and the good of the sick person. He further adds, that if any special sin hath drawn down this disease upon this sick person, it shall, upon the earnest prayers of the El∣ders, and the Repentance, and Faith of the sick person, be remitted; so that his disease shall be removed. Therefore he advises them, in such cases, to con∣fess their sins one to another, that they might more particularly, and perti∣nntly pray one for another, mutually succouring one another by their counsel, and prayers, under the wounds and burdens of Conscience, that so both the wounds of their Consciences, and the maladies of their bodies may be healed. And for their encouragement, he tells thm, that the effectual fervent. prayer of a righteous man availeth much, that is, the prayer wrought, and excited in him by the Spirit of God, and which proceeds from the vehemency of an earnest spirit, and fervent affections. This he further proves to them, by instancing in Elias, who was a man subject to like passions with us; and if he obtained so much of God by prayer, that he shut and opened the Heavens'Tis true we have no such thing in the History (which we have at large, 1 King. 17. & 18. ch.) that he prayed it might not rain. The Scripture only expresseth, that he foretold a drought. But it seems, the worship of Baal being every where received in that kingdom, extorted from that good man, (so full of zeal for God), an earnest prayer to the Lord for drought, as a punishment upon that wicked people: by which judgment the people being corrected, he prayed again or rain, and obtain'd it, 1 King. 18.42. For 'tis usual in Scripture to give us the substance of an history in one place, and in another the circumstances of it. See 2 Tim. 3.8. Psal. 105:11. Heb. 12, 21., that is, the Clouds, [see Luc. 4.25. Deut. 11.17.], surely our fervent prayers shall not be in vain. From Ver. 13, to 19. Lastly, From Prayer, he passes to another Christian office, viz. Admonition, exhorting them, to do what they can to reduce and convert an erring Brother, viz that errs either in Faith or Manners; whereby they will be instruments in Gods hand of saving a soul from eternal death; and procure that God may cover and hide his sins, that is, remove them out of the sight of his justicePeccata sic velantur ut in judicio non revelen∣tur., and not impute them to his condemnation. From Ver. 19, to the end.
SECT. VI. THE Philippians about this time, send Epaphroditus, one of their Teachers, to Rome, to visit Paul, and to carry him some moneys which they had gathered for his maintenance. He being come, joined himself to the Apostle, both as an Helper, and a fellow-Soldier in the cause of Christ. Whilst he was there, he fell into a grievous sickness, so that he was nigh unto death. See Philip. 2.25, 26, 27, 30. and Philip. 4.10, 14, 18. SECT. VII. PAƲL being now aged, and still a Prisoner, converts, and gains to Christ, Onesimus, a Servant that had run a∣way from his Master Philemon, at Colosse. By which Onesimus, he writes an Epistle to Philemon at Colosse, a City not far from Laodicea in Phrygia. The occasion of the Epistle was this. Philemon, one of the Colossian Pastors, had a Servant, (Onesimus by name), who not abiding his Masters service any longer, watched his time, and ran away; and as it seems, did not run away empty, but also purloined something. Having run up and down from place to place, at last, by the special providence of God, he comes to Rome, where now Paul was a Prisoner for Christ, and preached the Gospel in bonds. Among other Fish, that that great Fisher of men caught, with the spreading Net of the Gospel, this poor fugitive was one; who being converted, and brought to a sa∣ving-knowledg of Christ, he for some time ministred to Paul in Prison. But the Apostle, because he was another mans servant, (and particularly, his dear friend Philemon's), and of right belonged to him, being his lawful possession, and as it were his mony, (as the Law speaks, Exod. 21.21.), he would not de∣tain him from him, without his free consent. He therefore sends him back to his Master, earnestly desiring him to pardon him, and to receive him into favour again. And because the Holy Ghost in this matter gives a remarkable instance of Gods free-grace to sinners; and intimates our duty towards those that are penitent, therefore, for the perpetual edification of the Church, he would have this be received among the other Ca∣nonical Epistles.
In the Epistle there are three parts,The Epistle to Phi∣lemon. 1. The Preface. 2. The Matter of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. IN the Preface, the Apostle joins his Brother Timothy with him, as one He that concurred with him in his request to Philemon. He also salutes Apphia, (probably the Wife of Philemon); and Archip∣pus, one of the Pastors of the Church, [Col. 4.17.], whom he calls, his fel∣low-Soldier in the spiritual warfare of the Gospel. He salutes also the Saints in Philemon's Family. To all these, he wishes abundance of grace and peace from God the Father, the Fountain of all Blessings; and from Jesus the Medi∣ator, who is the Conduit-pipe, by whom they are conveyed. And in the first place, he tells them, how he rejoiced and blessed God for the report he heard of his Faith in Christ, and love to all his Saints; and he daily prayed for him, that his liberality, and readiness to communicate to such as are in want, being a fruit of his Faith, and springing from it, might be an effectual means to in∣duce others to take notice of, and acknowledg (to the praise of God) those good things that were in him, and his Family; namely, their kindness and love towards Christ., and his Members. And he assures him, he was much com∣forted by the report of that great Love and Charity of his, whereby the bowels of the poor Saints were refreshed. From Ver. 1, to 8. 2. He comes to the Matter of the Epistle, in which he requests Philemon to take Onesimus his fugitive. Servant into savour again; whom he had, during his imprisonment, through the assistance of grace, converted to Christ. He tells him, that though he might by vertue of his Apostleship received from Christ, in∣join him, and other Christians, what he judged convenient; yet he rather chose to request this of him, upon the score of love; and be doubted not, but that he would do that for Paul now aged, and in bonds for Christ, which he under∣stod would be acceptable unto him. He intreats him therefore, to receive One∣simus again, whom (since his conversion) he loved as if he were his own Son. I acknowledg, says he, that formerly, Onesimus was not Onesimus, that is, profitable to thee, as his name signifies; but now he will approve himself a useful and diligent servant to thee, as he hath been to me. Therefore I have sent him back again to thee, and intreat thee to receive him, as my own bowels, tht is, to entertain him with all kindness, as one very dearly beloved by me. Indeed I wuld gladly have kept him here still with me, that he might have done all those good offices and services for me, (while I am here in Prison for the cause of Christ), which I know thou wouldst willingly do, if thu wert here. But without thy consent I would not do it, that thy kindness in affrding him to me, may be perfectly free, and not, as it were, extorted from thee. And for his leaving of thee so injuriously, thou oughtest to pass that over, because there may come great advantage to thee thereby. For it seems, he was by the spe∣cil providence of God permitted thus to run away from thee, for a little while that by the conversion wrought on him, (to which his flight gave occasion), he might be an useful Servant to thee afterwards, all his life along ita hic dictum quomodo a∣pud Horati∣um serviet ae∣ternum.. Receive
him therefore now, not as a Servant only, but more than so, receive him as a faithful Brother in Christ, and as one that is very dear to me, and therefore he ought to be much more so to thee, and that not only in respect of those outward and bodily services which he may perform for thee, but because he believes in Christ. If therefore thou account me thy companion in the Faith, and in the mi∣nistry of the Word; deny me not this request, but receive Onesimus as thou wuldst do my self, if I should come unto thee. If thou hast sustained any loss by him, or if he oweth thee any thing, put that on my account. I hereby engage to the, under my own hand, that I will satisfie thee for it. Yet I may tell thee, th u owst more to me (being converted by my Ministry) than all this amounts to; I say, thou owest to me (under God) thy conversion, and so oughtest to look upon me as a prime instrument of thy eternal well-being, and salvation. Therefore (dear Brother) let me obtain this kindness from thee (for the Lords sake), which will much rejoice me; yea indeed, in a matter so agreeable to the mind of the Lord, refuse not to refresh my bowels, and comfort me. I have written to thee, being confident thou wilt hearken to me, and grant me my request, yea that thou wilt shw more favour to Onesimus than I have desired of thee. To Conclude, I am in hopeSpes Pauli hoc loco non niti revelatione divinâ, sed precibu i∣delium; quarum exauditionis, eventus probabilis quidem erat, sed incertus. vi. Phil. 2.24. Gomarus., that through your prayers, and the intercessins of other Christians for me, I shall be dlivered out of these bonds, and shall be gi∣vn t yu again. Therefore prepare me a lodging a∣gainst that time. My Companions here salute thee. The grace of Jesus Christ (both as to the effects, and sense of it) reside in your souls and spiritsSee Gal. 6.16.. Amen. From Ver. 18, to the end.
SECT. VIII. EPaphroditus having now recovered his health, and being to return to the Philippians, by him Paul in his own and Timothy's name writes an Epistle to them. For having under∣stood by Epaphroditus their spiritual state and condition, he thought fit to write to them, (which he does in a most affe∣ctionate manner). 1. To confirm them in the Faith, and to prevent their be∣ing offended at his sufferings for the Gospel. 2. To encourage them to walk worthy of the Gospel, es∣pecially in unity, and lowliness of mind. 3. To warn them against Seducers who mingled works with Faith in the matter of Justification. 4. To quicken them to divers Christian duties. And Lastly, To Testifie his exceeding thankfulness to them for the relief they had now sent him. In the Epistle there are there three parts,he Epistle to the Philippians. 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. IN the Preface, He joins Timothy with him in this his address, because he was his Companion, when he came formerly to them, and had assisted in the instructing of them, and was a person much valued by them. He tells them, that they both sent this Epistle to all the Saints that compos'd the Church at Philippi, (who were called to believe in Christ, and by their union with him derived grace and holiness from him), and in particular to the Pastors and Overseers of their Church, and to the DeaconsPotest bifariam accipi hoc nomen vel pro Ministris & curatoribus Paupe∣rum, vel pro Senioribus qui constitue∣bantur ad mores regendos. Calv in loc., that is, such who being join'd to the Pa∣stors were to inspect the manners of the Church-mem∣bers, and to serve the Church in taking care of the poor. To all these he wisheth abundance of grace and peace, from God the Father, who is the Fountain and Source of all grace and spiritual blessings, and from Jesus Christ the Me∣diator, by whose merits and intercession we obtain them. Ver. 1, 2. 2. He comes to the body of the Epistle, wherein in the first place, that he might shew, how dear they were unto him, he informs them, that when ever they came to his remembrance, especially in prayer, he could not but bless God for them, and make mention of them with joy. The reasons of which were, 1. That they had been brought to a participation of the Gospel, (whereby they were brought into fellowship with Christ and his Church), and they had
been constant in the profession of it from the first day of their vocation even until now. 2. Because he was confident, that God who had begun a work f grace in them would carry it on, and perfect it more and more until the dayUsque in diem mortis vestrae, quâ à Christo visitabimini, & parti∣culare judicium susinebitis. Dionys. Carthusianus in loc. wherein Christ shall come, and take them to himself out of this world. 3. He shews, that it was but reasonable, that he should have this good opi∣nion and hope of them, for he had them in his heart, and remembredabere in corde hoc loco signi∣ficat habere in memoriâ. A Lap. them both in his bonds, and all his suffering, for the defence and maintenance of the Gospel, as those that were partakers of the same grace bestowed on himself, and as those that were ready to suffer fore Christ as he wasEgo opinor sensum esse, Eum ipsos ubique etiam in vinclis suis, totâque illâ confessione, in animo in∣sculptos habere, ut pote suos consor∣tes gratiae Christi, aut confratres in Christo. Flac. Illyr.: And therefore he solemnly protests, that he bears a most entire love Phavorin. Sic 2 Cor. 9.14.  Beza vertit, maxi∣mo amre vos complectenium. Visera vocat affectum animi: ad∣did Jsu Christi ut declaret hunc affectum esse pietatis, non humanum. Erasm. In i e. instar viscerum h. e. amo∣ris visceralis Jesu Christi. and affection to them, wrought in him by Christ, and such as is like unto tht (as to its fervency and sincerity) which Christ Jesus himself bears to those that are his members. And he earnestly prays that their love to God, and to one another, may more and more abound, together with a more full know∣ledg of spiritual things, and a sense est experientia interior animae, se in∣terius Spiritus Sancti testimonium de gratiâ & adoptionem ad salutem, de quo Rom. 5.1, 5. &c. 8.16, 17. Glass. and taste of Gods love in Christ towards themselves. And that they may be endued with a spirit of discerning, and be able to try things that differ, and discern truth from error, good from evil, and may chuse and approve that which is most excellent; and further, that they may be sincere and walk inoffensively, till the day of Christ, in which he shall take them to himself out of this world. And Lastly, that they may be full of good works, and may bring forth all those fruits of righteousness, which spring from Faith in Christ, and tend to the glory of God, as their main aim and end. From Ver. 3, to Ver. 12. 3. He removes the scandal they might take at his present sufferings, which he shews, tended rather to the furtherance than the hinderance of the Gospel. For first, his bonds for Christ were famous in Nero's Court, and several o∣ther places in and near Rome, and people inquiring into the cause of his suf∣ferings did learn somewhat of Christ and the Gospel by that means. 2. Many of the Brethren in the Ministry of Christ, having heard of his constancy under his sufferings, were encouraged to shake off all fear, and to preach Christ more boldly than ever. 'Tis true, he acknowledges, that some did preach Christ out of a spirit of envyP obabile est, hos contentiosos praedicatores fuisse Christinos ori∣undos ex Judaeis, sed ambitiosos mer∣cenarios, improbos, utpote qui Pau∣li aemuli ex evangelio non illud quàm suam gloriam & lucrum quae∣rebant. ales suerunt illi contra quos agit Paulus, 2 Cor. 11. against him, envying th success God gave to his ministry, and endeavoured to get that glory to themselves, and to draw people from approving him, to applaud them; supposing to gall and grieve him there∣by. And some preached Christ out of a pious inent, desiing sincerely to maintain, and confirm what he had preached, and out of true love to Christ, and to himself his prisoner, knowing that Christ had appointed him an Apostle, and that for the defence of the Gospel he now lay in prison. Yet notwithstanding by both ways, Christ was preached and made known; by some in pretence, by others in truth, and that was it which comforted him and made him rejoice. 3. These afflictions he met with, he was confident would tend to the further∣ance of his salvation, through the help of their prayers, and the supply of grace from the Spirit of Christ. And (he tells them) he trusts, that according to his former expectation and hope, no terror should ever make him asham'd to own the truth of Christ, but with all boldness he should avow it, and that Christ should be magnified by him in the body, whether his life be further prolonged, or ended by martyrdom. For the case stood thus with him, If he lived, Christ should be the scope of his life, and he intended to live to his service; if
he dyed, death would be an unspeakable advantage t himMihi enim Christus est, & in vitâ & in morte, lucrum: ut sit ellipsis vocis  pro , & . but if he lived longer in this mortal body, he foresaw this would be the fruit of his labours, viz. The gaining of Souls to Christ. Yet what to chuse he knew not. For he was in a straight, whether he should desire to dye pro , seu , dissolvi, ut vulg. vertit. Sed potest activa signi∣ficatio commodè retineri. Cupio  migrare ad Christum., and be with Christ, which was btter for him; or to live longer, which was more needful for them. And being satisfied of the great need they had of him, and the benefit they might reap from his life, he tells them, that this is the thing that he is sure he desires; and hopes, and upon probable conjecture was confident. Scio me hoc sperare. of, that he should yet be permitted to live, and to pass some part of his life among them, for the fur∣therance of their Faith, and augmentation of their joy and comfort, that they might have more abundant matter of rejoicing in Christ, having received a new proof of his power, and good-will towards them, in delivering him, their Apo∣postle, from death, and sending him to them again. From Vers. 12, to 27. 4. He exhorts them, that whatever should befall him, they would mind their duty, and behave themselves as becometh the Gospel, ordering their conversation according to the Precepts of Christ, and jointly contending the best they can, with prfct unity, and joint stedfastness of mind, to maintain and defend the Faith of Christ, which wuld be matter of great joy to him, whether he came and saw it, (as he hop'd he should), or only heard of it, being absent. And what∣ever opposition or persecutions they met with in this course, he bids them not suffer themselves to be discourag'd or affrighted at them, seeing they were great signs that their adversaries (who brought them upon them) were in the way of perditin, and that they who suffered such things patiently for Christs sake, and the Gspel, were in the way of salvation; they portended destruction to their adversaries, but through Gods gracious disposing, they should promote their sal∣vation. And this should further encourage them, that as grace to believe in Christ, so also grace to suffer couragiously for him and his truth, was a part of Christs purchase for them, and for his sake given unto them: And hereby they had communion and co-partnership with him (their Apostle) in afflictions, who suffered many hard things at Philippi, and elsewhere, as they themselves had seen, and at this present suffered bonds at Rome. From Ver. 27, to the end. 5. He comes now to exhort these Philippians to unity and concord among themselves; and that he might more effectually perswade them thereunto, he con∣jures them that if ever thy had found any consolation in Christ, if any com∣frt of mutual love, if any fellowship with God by the communication of the graces of his Spirit, if they had any pity or compassion on him, a Prisoner for Christ; He ntreats and obtests them by all these, and as they would give proof of all thse, that to all the other matter of rejoicing which he had concerning thm, they would add this also, (and so make his joy complete), namely, to live in unity among themselves, having as it were the same mind and judgment, the same will and affections, and minding and carrying on the same designs. He exhrts them, not to do any thing out of opposition or contention one against ano∣ther, nor out of vain glory or ambition; but to carry themselves with all humility and lowliness of mind, as if they had every one a better opinion of anothers wisdom, and goodness than of his own; and to this end they should not look so intently on those gifts and abilities which they discern in themselves, but withall, and much rather, should consider the gifts and abilities of others more eminent than themselves. And if they would but esteem others more, and themselves less; this would tend to frame their minds to humility. And that he might press them effectually to the practice of this virtue, he sets before them thē example
of Christ, who being from all eternity true God, and being in the form, that is, having the form or essence of God, and the natural properties of the Dei∣ty, so that he thought it no encroachment or usurpation to reckon himself in equa∣lity with his Father, (the same glory and mjesty justly belonging to him), yet did He empty himself of that divine glory, which befoe he had, not by cea∣sing to be what he was, but by assuming somthing to himself which before he had not, to wit, the humane Nature. In which respect, being nw God mn and Mdiator, he is less than the Father, Joh. 14.28. And therefore on this account he emptied himslf, and divested himself of the Robes of his Majesty, and from being Lord of all, he lssened and humbled himself to the cnditin of an ordinary man, yea of a servant; and He was made in the likeness of men, that is, like to one of us in the essential parts of humane Nature, to wit, of Soul and Body; and was found in fashion as a man, the truth and reality of his humane Nature being evidently known unto those who did converse with him, by the fashion and proportion of his body, and the whole strain of his carriage and actions. And bsides the humbling himself thus lw in his incarnation, he humbled himself yet lower afterwards, even to suffer the vilest and most cul death, (which was in use among the Romans, and inflicted only on their Slaves), to wit, the death of the Cross. And because he humbled himself so low, Gd hath highly exalted him in his Resurrection, Ascension, and placing im at his right hand in Heaven; and hath given him a Name, that is, hath exalted him to a Dignity which is above all other Names and Dignities, to wit, he hath made him King and Head of his Church, and given him all power in Heaven and Earth, and installed him in the possessin and administrtion of his heavenly Kingdom, (wherein his divine Majesty, which had been eclipsd before, doth now shine forth in full glory), and hath appointed that the divine honour, due to God only, should be given to him, (compare Isa 45.23 with Rom. 14.10, 11.), and that all reasonable Creatures, in whatsoever place of the created World they be, whether in Heaven, ErthUt per terrestres homines in ter∣râ, vivi; sic per subterraneos, mortui, qui in terrâ conditi sunt, intelli∣guntur. Alii per subterraneos, Daemo∣nes intelligunt, quòd Infernus illis potissimum puniendis sit destinatus. Mat. 25.41. unde ab ejus ingressu adeò abhorrent, Luc. 8.31. Go∣mar., or Hell; yea and all men which are dead and in the graves, should at the Resurrection, and day of Judg∣ment, worship him as the true God, and express and testifie their subjection to him, (some willingly, others by constraint), when they come to stand at his Tribunal, to receive their doom; and that all Nations and people should confess Christ crucified to be Lord and Judg of the World, acknowledging his dominion and soveraignty, and that to the honour of the Father, who hath sent him, and who will be glori∣fied in the glory of his Son. Therefore seeing Christ thus humbled himself, to make peace for lost man with God, and afterwards was highly exalted by God, and crown'd with glory; so proportionably may they expect to be exalted and re∣warded by God, if they humble themselves, that they my maintain and preserve the Churches peace and concord. From Ver. 1, to 12. 6. He exhorts them, that they would still shew themselves obedient to his Pre∣cepts and not only as they had donev. 12. Si∣cut semper obe∣distis] semper scil. à con∣versione when he was present with them, but now much more in his absence, that it may appear, that love to the truths of Christ sway'd them, and not any other respect. And particularly, he exhorts thm, to work out their own salvation with fear and trembing, that is, carefully and diligently to practise all those means that God hath appointed for the accomplishing their salvation, shaking off security, and carnal confidence, and not trusting in their own strength and power, but humbly imploring the assi∣stance of Gods grace. For 'tis he alone who works in us both to will tht which is good, and enabls us to perform it. And because the nature of man, (as 'tis now corrupt) is prone t murmur against the providence of God, and to dispute his will and command, H adviseth tm, to do all their actions so as those that do acquiesce in the good will of Gd, and to take heed of ht
and eager disputings among themselves concerning things that do not concern the vitals of Religion. And they should be the more careful to carry themselves thus, that they may approve themselves blameless and harmless, walking as the Children of God in a corrupt age, among whom they should shine as lights in the World; holding forth, in their profession and practice, the way to eternal life reveal'd in the Gospel, that those Pagans among whom thy lived, might fall in love with it; and that he himself may have cause of rjoicing in their sal∣vation, at the day of Judgment, because his labours under God had so much pro∣moted it. And he assures them, that their eternal Salvation was a thing so earnestly, and so affectionately desir'd by him, that if, as in the Law the Wine was poured out on the Sacrifice, so his Blood (like Wine) should be poured out as an additional offering to confirm their Faith, (whom he had by his preaching and ministry brought to consecrate and offer up themselves as a living Sacrifice to God); he would rejoice therein for their sakes, and of all the faith∣ful to whom the fruit of his death should redound; and he desires them to rejoice with him, that he was so minded. From Ver. 12, to 19. 7. He declares his purpose of sending Timothy to them to know their state, as soon as he shall see how it will go with himself. For he expected a comfort∣able account of them by him, at his return. He tells them, he had no man with him, who might be compar'd with him in affection to them, or who did more sin∣cerely regard their spiritual good. For others (as it seems) that were at this present at Rome, refused to undertake so long and tedious a journey; but Ti∣mothy was willing to undertake it, and whilst othersv. 21. Vox Omnes non genera∣tim, & simplicitèr de singulis, sed synecdochicè de plerisque; & studi∣um illud sua quaerendi non absolutè sed comparatè cum Timothei since∣ritate & Zelo, accipiendum est. minded their own private concerns, He minded the advancement of the Interest of Christ. And he tells them, that they themselves have had great proofs of his sincerity when he was with them, and know how in the preaching of the Gospel he had rendred to him (their Apo∣stle) all the service and assistance he could, and that with like affection as a good Son renders to his Father. And he tells them, that he not only intended to send Timothy to them, but hoped (through the goodness of God) to be at liberty shortly, and to come to them himself. However in the mean time he thought it needful to return unto them Epaphroditus their Pastor who hath been his partner in labur and danger, since they had sent him to him, to relieve him in his necessities. And one reason why he sent him back was, be∣cause of his great pastoral affection unto them. He being exceedingly disquieted to think, what sorrow the report of his sickness had brought unto them: and he sent him the rather, that they might be comforted in seeing him recover'd, who had been so nigh unto death. But he tells them, God shewed much mercy to Epaphroditus in recovering of him, and not to him only, but to himself (their Apostle) also, in not adding one grief to another, viz. Epaphroditus's death, to his imprisonment. He sent him also the more readily, that his own trouble might be somewhat removed, which accrued to him on consideration, that their Minister, (whose company they so much desired) had been so long detained from them on his account. He exhorts them therefore to receive him with such an affection as they ought to express towards the faithful Servants of the Lordv. 29. In Domino] i. e. Propter Do∣minum, ac se∣cundum Do∣mini verbum, cum omni gaudio., and to give all due honour and respect unto him, and to all such Ministers as he was, because he had hazzarded his life for the service of Christ, being less careful of himself, than of the Apostles welfare, and because he had done what lay in him that nothing necessary should be wanting to him; and so did that, which they themselves by reason of their absence, and far distance, were not able to do. From Ver. 19, to the end. 8. Intending now to warn them to beware of those false Teachers, who in the point of justification mingled the righteousness of works with that which is by Faith in Christ; he first exhorts them, to rejoice in Christ Jesus as the
only Author and Purchaser of our Peace; and that they would joyfully rely up∣on his Righteousness, Merit, and Intercession, and not seek for any other way of Salvation out of him. He excuses himself for inculcating the same instructi∣ons so often, seeing it was safe and convenient for them that he should so do; for he could not too often press them to close with Christ, and the Doctrine of his all suffi∣cient Righteousness and Merit. He comes then directly to warn them to be∣ware of these false Apostles, whom he calls Dogs, (for their barking against the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, and the faithful Preachers of it), and evil-Workers, (because under pretence of building up the Church, they did what in them lay to destroy it, and were besides (as it seems) men of wicked lives). He calls them also the Concision, alluding to Circumcision, whereof they gave out themselves to be Patrons and Defenders, and call'd themselves by it; but he ta∣keth that name from them, and calls them, the Concision; as if he should say, the Dstroyers and Renters of the Church. He shews, that not they, but him∣self, and other true Believers, had right to that Title of Circumcision, they only having the thing signified thereby. For first, They worshipped God with the in∣ward spiritual affections of a renewed heart. 2. They trusted in Christ Jesus a∣lone, as the Substance of all the Types and Shaddows in the Old Testament, and rejoi∣ced in him, as the only and all-sufficient Saviour of mankind. 3. They renoun∣ced confidence in any outward Priviledg, (such as the Circumcision of the flesh was), or in any thing else besides Christ. From Ver. 1, to 4. 9. Intending to demonstrate the vanity of relying upon any thing besides Christ for Justification; he sheweth, he had as much to boast of upon the account of outward Priviledges (such as the Circumcision of the flesh), as any of those false Teach∣ers had, if he had found it safe to venture his Salvation on such a bottom. He was circumcised the eighth day after his birth, as Isaac and his posterity were. He was of the Stock of Israel, and so no Proselyte, or Convert from among the Gen∣tiles. He was of the Tribe of Benjamin, and so came of that Tribe which with the Tribe of Judah clave to the house of David, and the true worship of God at Jerusalem, after the revolt of the Ten Tribes; and if he had a mind to speak of the ancientness and nobility of his Stock; he might say, he was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, descended by both his Parents of Abrahams Race, (called the He∣brew, Gen. 14.13), and from Ebr, of whom the Jews were called Ebrews, who lived before the confusion of Tongues at Babel, Gen. 14 13, 20, 21, 25. And he was not an ordinary Ebrew or Jew neither, but of the strictest Sect a∣mong them, even a Pharisee, which Sect were for a severer interpretation, and stricter observation of the Law than the rest of the Jews, Act. 26.5. And as a signal Testimony of his great zeal to the Law, and the Jewish Religion, he had been a violent Persecutor of the Christian Church, whom he look'd upon as enemies thereto. And lastly, As to his personal obedience and observance of the Law, he was able to say as much as another, his Conversation having been so blameless be∣fore men, that it could not be justly taxed by them. But however when he was in his unconverted state, he had relyed on these things for Salvation, and count∣ed them great advantages in order thereunto, yet now being savingly enlightned, he saw that nothing could redound to him by trusting in them, but real hurt and damage, and therefore he had taken his confidence off from them, and wholly pla∣ced it on Christ; yea he did not only esteem them so when he was first con∣verted, but did so still. For he could not but account all such things by which men seek salvation out of Christ, detrimental and hurtful, so far as they keep them from closing with him. He could not but account them lss, not only be∣cause they can not effect that, for which men do rely upon them; but because their high esteem of them, and confidence in them, hinders them from embracing Christ. He tells them, therefore that he undervalued and disesteem'd them all, in com∣parison of that excellent knowledg of Christ, which draws the heart effectually to close with him, and by a lively Faith and affiance to rely on him, and to take him for its Lord and Saviour. And for this blessed Saviours sake, he tells them,
it was, that he had forsakn Friends, Countrey, and all things that could be dear to him in this World, when he first betook himself to the preaching of the Gospel, and still counted them as dung, in comparison of gaining the favour of Christ, and of being found at the day of Judgment ingrafted into him by Faith, and a real member of him, and one that did nt rely on his own righteousness, (such as mn endeavour to acquire by the observation of the Commandments of the Law), but on that righteousness which men are made partakers of by Faith, when they believe in Christ, and which results from his active and pas∣sive obedience, and which God freely and graciously imputes to all true Believers for their Justification. And he intimates, how easily he could bear those fore∣mentioned l sses for an experimental knowledg and sense of Christs grace work∣ing in him; particularly, that he might feel in himself, that power whereby Christ was raised from death to life; raising him daily more and more to newness of life, and that he might taste the comfort that ariseth from fellowship with him in his sufferings, suffering for him and with him in his mystical Body, (Col. 1 24.), being made thereby conformable to his death, by mortifying inward corruptions, and bearing the Cross for him. And he tells them, he shall not grudg at that, if he may by any means (though with some difficulty), attain un∣to the resurrection of the deada Metony∣my of the Subject for the Adjunct., that is, unto that perfection of holiness, which accompanies and attends the resurrection of the just, 1 Thes. 4.14. He acknowledges he had not as yet attained to that degree of holiness, nor look'd upon himself as already perfect, or as one that had already won the prize and rich reward, which is given at the end of the race. But he was in his Christian race, and pursued after that prize with great desire and diligence, and hop'd as∣suredly to obtain it, not by his own strength, but by th assistance of Christ, who for that end laid hold on him, (as he was in the way going to Damascus to per∣secute the Christians), and effectually call'd and converted him, and brought him into the way of Salvation. He says again, that he dare not affirm, that he had attained to the state of perfection, but he was as the Racer running his race, not casting his eye back, or being satisfied with what he had done, or with so much of the way as he had overcome, but stretching as hard as he could to get the goal, or end of the race, that so he may obtain the prize, viz. the prize of eternal Glo∣ry, which shall be given to them to whom God vouchsafes that high favour effe∣ctually to call them to a participation of the merits and righteousness of his Son Jesus Christ. From Ver. 4; to 15. 10. He exhorts those who were more grown Christians, (and being compar'd with others less knowing, might be called perfect] appellat in rebus divinis optimè versa∣tos, ut 1 Cor. 2.6. & 14.20.), to agree, and be alike mind∣ed in his proposed Doctrine, namely, to renounce all carnal confidences, and to rest in Christs Righteousness alone, and by virtue derived from him, to labour to grow daily more and more in grace and holiness. And if any among them, being seduced by false Teachers, were of a contrary mind in some things, (as namely, that the Ceremonial Law was not wholly abrgated, &c.), he gives ground of hopeLoquitur pro spe quam ex priore ip∣sorum pietate conceperat. Sic & Gal. 5.10., that God (who had brought them to the knowledg of the Gospel) would reclaim them from this their error, and discover unto them the danger of it. However he exhorts all lovers of truth and peace among them to an orderly walking, according to the rule of the Scriptures, in those things wherein they were agreed, preserving mutual love, and avoiding further rents and divisions. He exhorts them also, to be followers of him, and to observe those that did so, taking them for their patterns and examples. For he tells them, there were ma∣ny false Teachers who walk'd otherwise, whose example was not to be followed; of whom he had often warn'd them, and could not but now again (though with grief of heart) acquaint them, that by their pressing, bsides Faith in Christ, the observation of the Levitical Ceremonies, and the works of the Law, as ne∣cessary to Salvation, they undermin'd the Doctrine of the Cross, and really op∣pos'd the virtue, power, and merit of Christs passion, [see Gal. 5.2.]. But the end of those Impostors, without repentance, he shews, will be very sad, who
minded nothing so much as pleasing their sensual appetitesQuorum Deus venter] Id pro Deo habemus cu∣jus causâ om∣nia facimus. Vid. Eph. 5.5., boasting of those things whereof they ought to be ashamed, (viz. their corrupting the Gospel), and savouring only earthly things. But as for himself, and those that followed his example, their carriage was far different. For our conversation (says he) is in Heaven, where Christ our Lord and Head is; whom we expect to cme one day from thence, to our unspeakable comfort; and who will change our vile Bodiesv. 21. Cor∣pus per cor∣pora sing. per plur., and make them like to his own glorious Body; which change he will effect by that divine and almighty power of his, whereby he will destroy death, and the grave, and can do all things possible to divine omnipotency; and there∣fre can and will bring about the resurrection and glorious change of our Bodies. From Ver. 15, to the end. 11. He comes now, towards the close of his Epistle, to exhort them to the pra∣ctice  of several Christian vertues. And, 1. having testified how affectionately he loved them, and how much he desir'd and long'd after their spiritual welfare, (and how their Faith and Conversion was matter of great joy and comfort unto him, yea the crown and honour of his Ministry); he exhorts them, (in the general), to continue and stand fast in the Doctrine of Christ, according as he had taught them. 2. He particularly exhorts Euodias and Syntyche, two eminent women in that Church, (who, as it seems, in some matters relating to Religion disagreed), to concord and agreement between themselves, it being a thing very agreeable to the will of the Lord. And he intreats one that was sometime his fellow-labou∣rer in that Church, to help those fore-mentioned women to accord their difference, and to agree; and the rather because they had been useful to him, (in their places), whilst he was preaching the Gospel, and planting a Church thereSee Act. 18.26. Rom. 16.3.; as Clement, and some other private Christians had also been, whom he judged to be truly gracious persons, and such as were to be reckon'd in the number of Gods ElectQuod di∣cit nomina il∣lorum esse Scripta in li∣bro vitae, me∣taphora est à rebus huma∣nis ad Deum translata quâ significatur illos compu∣tari inter fi∣lios Dei, & haeredes vitae aeternae., they giving such evident signs and testimonies thereof. 3. He exhorts them, To rejoice in Christ at all times, and in all conditi∣ons, raising up their hearts to a due consideration of his excellencies and be∣nefits, and feeding upon the sense and sweetness of them. For a Believer hath always ground of rejoicing in Christ, though not in the world, nor in himself. 4. He exhorts them, To exercise moderation, equity, and mildness, in their dealings with all men, because the Lord is nigh and present to judg all our actions, and his coming to judgment is not far off, at which time he will render to every one according to their works. 5. He exhorts them, To beware of anxious, heart-cutting, distrustful care a∣bout worldly things, or the success of what they undertake in their lawful cal∣lings; and for prevention of that, to disburden all their cares and troubles into the bosom of the Lord, by humble prayer, not forgetting also to praise him for all his benefits. And that, he tells them, is the way to have that sweet peace, which is wrought by the Spirit of God, to dwell in their hearts, (which none can conceive who have not experienced and felt, and those who have, cannot suffi∣ciently express it), which will (through the assistance of Christ) guard and keep them frm being overcome with inordinate cares, or such passions as the appre∣hesion of lsses and injuries usually stir up in men. 6. He exhorts them, that whatever things had truth, candor, and since∣rity shining in them; whatever things were honest, just, pure, and of good report; whatever virtues, or praise-worthy qualities they observ'd among those, with whom they convers'd: they should seriously think of them, and propose them to themselves, for their imitation. And lastly, That all those things which he himself had by his Doctrine and Life commended unto them, they should carefully observe and imitate, and so they might expect, that the God of peace would be with them with his gracious bles∣sing. From Ver▪ 1, to 10.
12. He dclares, how much he rejoiced, even with a motion of spiritual jy wrought in him by Christ, that their liberality towards him (which seem'd to have been for some time in the decay) had now reviv'd and flourished again. But he readily excuses their delay herein, which he assures himself proceeded, not from want of love to him, but of an opportunity of sending to him. Yet he would not have them think, that he rejoiced so much in their bounty towards him, because he could not bear want, or a straight condition. For he had learn'd, (being instructed by the Spirit of God), in whatever state he was therewith to be content. He could contentedly bear a lw condition: Yet the plenty their liberality had furnish'd him with, he could mak use of to the glory of God. He could do all those things, which consist in the ex∣ercise of Christian moderation under a prosperous condition, and of patience and contentation under an adverse condition, through Chrit enabling of him. However they had done well in sending him that supply by Epaphroditus, when he was in some straits, and thereby testifying by their Christian cmmiseration, that they shared with him in his afflictions and sufferings for Christ. And he acknowledges, that this was no new thing in them: For after he had finished his first preaching of the Gospel among them, and was departing out of their Country, they were so mindful of him as to send him contributions; and having received of him spiritual things, they were willing to communicate to him some of their temporals, which no other Church but they had thn done. Nay, when he was at Thessalonica, and since he came thence, more than once, they made a Collection, and sent it to him Yet he would not have them think, that he thus commended them, because he design'd to draw something more from them, but he desir'd that their Faith might he still more and more productive of such good fruits, as liberality was; which God would recompence at the day of judgment, and the benefit whereof would redound to themselves, though not of merit, yet of grace. He tells them, that he had received all that they had sent him by Epaphroditus, and the sum he acknowledges was large, and made him full and to abound, and hereby they had done an acceptable service to God, and which under the Gospel he accepts, and receiveth in the place both of Incense, and Sacrifice, which were offered un∣der the Law. And they will have no reason to repent of this their liberality. For Gd who looks on it as given to him, is able and willing to supply all their wants, and that nt for any merit of theirs, but out of his own rich and glori∣ous grace, which he dispenses through the merits and intercession of his Son Christ Jesus. Now unto this glorious God, who is the Father of all true Believers in Christ, he desires all honour and glory may be ascribed for ever and ever, Amen. From Vr. 10, to 21, He concludes with Salutations, and particularly sends Salutations to them from the Saints in Nero's house, some of his Servants, and Courtiers (it sems) being Converts, and Christians. He shuts up all with his Apostolical Be∣nediction. From Ver. 21, to the end.
SECT. IX. ABout this time, the Apostle, by Onesimus and Tychicus, sent also an Epistle to the Colossions, whom he had never seen, [Col. 2.1.], they having been instructed in the Doctrine of Christ by Epaphras [Col. 1.7, 8.], whom they had now sent to visit and comfort Paul, (as the Philippians had sent Epaphroditus), who it seems was now become Pauls fellow-prisoner; see Philem. v. 23. The Apostle understanding by Epaphras, how things went with them, and what was the present state and condition of their Church, and how they were infested with false Teachers of two sorts, viz. with some, who being converted out of Judaism to em∣brace the Faith of Christ, sought to impose upon them Circum∣cision, and certain Rites of the Ceremonial Law, abolished by Christ. And, 2ly, with others, who being converted from Gen∣tilism, yet obtruded upon them their Philosophical Speculati∣ons with some of their Heathenish Practises, as worshipping An∣gels, and other superstitious Observances, grounded only upon humane Authority and Tradition: The Apostle therefore be∣ing desirous to establish them in the true Doctrine of the Gos∣pel, taught them by Epaphras, against all impostures of false Teachers whatsoever, and to incite them to the study and pra∣ctise of Holiness, both in the general, and in the special duties that concern the particular conditions of men, he writes this Epistle to them. In the Epistle there are these three parts,The Epistle to  Colossians. 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface in which joining Timothy with him, (whom he calls his Brother in the ministry of Christ), he directs this Epistle to the Saints and faithful, who being implanted into Christ by Fiath), composed the Church at Colosse: wishing them abundance of grace and peace from God the Father, the Fountain of all blessings; and from Jesus Christ the Conduit-pipe, through whom they are conveyed. And in the first place, he tells them, that himself and Timothy, since thy heard of thir conversion, did give solemn thanks to God for it, and for their Faith in Christ, and sincere love to all the Saints, and did remember them continually in their prayers. And they rejoicd that they persever'd in that course, being thereunto moved by the hped-for rewardv. 5. Spes hic ponitur pro rebus speratis, quemadmodum Fides saepe capitur pro ipsis rebus quae creduntur. Davenant. of glory preserved for them in heaven, which was first made known unto them, and the hope thereof wrought in them by the word of
truth, that is, the Gospel. Which Gospel was come unto them, (being preached to them by Epaphrs), as the same was preached by the Apostles in the most eminent placs of the WorldTotus mundus, per Synecd. pro mgn mundi parte, pro cele∣betimis provincii & urbibus mun∣di., [see Rom. 1.8 Mat. 24.14.], and it brought forth the good fruits of a holy life among others, as it had done among them, ever since they came to have a true and effectual sense and knowledg of the good will and grace of God, which he hath manifested and revealed there∣in And they ought to remember, that they were brought to the knowledg of this G spel by Epaphras, who had faithfully discharged his duty towards them, and also had given hm an account of their truly spiritualv. 8. Charitatem cujus author est Spiritus anctus, & quae manat à corde Spirituali, i. e. renovato & regenerato. Dav., and Christian love, and affection unto hmself. Having thus shewed, how he praised God for them, he mentions now how he prayed for them, viz that thy might be fil∣led with the knowledg of Gods will, and furnished with all wisdom requisite for a clear discerning, and knowledg of all the mysteris of Chri∣stianity, and with spiritual undrstnding or prudence, wrought in them by the Spirit of G d, to order, and regulate their lives according to the rules of it, Phil. 1.9. That their conversation might be such as is worthy of the Lord, aiming in all things to please himUt per omnia Deo plceatis, ver∣bis, operibus, etim & opinionibus., being fruitful in good works, and growing more and more in the saving knowldg of God. Lastly, he prays, that such a measure of heavenly strength may be vouchsafed to them, out of the rich treasury of Gods glorious power, that they may be able to bear any affli∣ctions, or persecutions they shall meet with in their Christian course, and that not only patiently, but cheerfully. From Ver. 1, to 12. 2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle, and b ig to enter upon a sum∣mary declaration of the D ctrine of Salvation, he b gins with a solemn thanks∣giving to God the Father, who by regeneration, and savi g conversion, doth make all true Believers meet and fit to partake of Heaven, the bright, and glorious, and joyful inheritance of the Saints. He futher explains, How God doth this, namely, by drawing them (by effectual vocatin) out of the corrupt state of nature, and fr m under the rule of Satan the Prince of dkness (who ruleth by sin in the Children of disobedience), and translting them into a state of grace, under the government of Christ. In whom they have redemption from sin, Satan, and wrath, by vertue of a price paid by him to the Fathers justice, when he suffer∣ed on the Cross; one principal part of which redemption, is the remission of all their sins. And intending more fully to describe Christ, and to shew, That he is true God, and so a mt perfect, and an all-sufficient Redeemer. He first, speaks of the dignity of his person, declaring, that he is the Image of the invisible God, bth as he is his eternal Son, of the same Essence with the Fa∣ther [Heb. 1.3.], and also is he is God mani ested in the fl sh [1 Tim. 3.16.], by whom the invisible God doth manifest his glorious wisdom, power, and mercy. In the next place, he shews, that he is the first bornPrimogenitus omnis creaturae] h. e. Princeps, & Dminus praeci∣puus omnium creaturarum. Desump∣ta est appellatio ex d scriptione Le∣g d gnitatis primogeniturae, Gen. 4.3. Aliqui ad atenam ex Patre genera ionem referunt. Primogeni tus omnis creature, h e. Priu a a∣tre gnitus quàm ula creatura e ret uod ante omnem creturm fuisse dicitur, simpliciter aeernum est. Psal 90 2. Prov. 8 22. Glass. of every Creature, as being from all eter∣nity begotten of the Father, before any Creature was made or created, and s Lord and Heir of all the Creatures, as the first brn was among his Brethren, Gen. 49.3. 2. He shws, that he is the Creator of all things, as co-working with the Father, and that whether they be vsibe or invisible; particularly, whether they be Thrones▪ or Dominions, or Principlities, or Powers, whereby prbably are meant several degrees and digni∣ties of Angls, thuh what those are, is not revealed to us. And h further shws that not only all Creatures were madev 16.  idem vult quod  by him, but for him. viz. for his service, and the manifestation of his divine power and glory. And he is not only bfore
all Creatures, and their Creator, but also (together with the Father and the Holy Ghost) their Upholder, and powerful Preserver. 3. He comes n w to describe Christ in relation to his Church, declaring that he is the H ad of that spiritual Body, and by him the Church being called, it hath its beginning and ori∣ginal from him. And further, to set out the dignity of his person, he declares, that he is the first-bornPrimogenitus ex mortuis] h. e praestant stimus inter omnes qui re∣sugunt ex mortuis. Ut primogeni∣tus in V. T. erat princeps fratrum suorum. of the dead, that is, the most excellent person that ever rose from the dead, and the first and only one who rose by his wn power, and the first who rose from death to immortal life, and who by vertue of his resurrection, will raise again to life all his members. So that justly he hath the preheminence above all, and (by all Titles) the right of Dominion and Rule over all, [see Rom. 14.9.]. And further, that he may prove that Christ is an all suffi i∣ent Saviour, he shews, that it was the Fathers will, that this our Redeemer should be a person filled with all u ness, both of the Godhead dwlling in him (see ch. 2.9.), and of grace and merit [Joh. 1.14 16. Joh. 3.34], that he might be perfectly furnished to perform that great work of mediation, and to reconcile all things both in Heaven and Earth unto a provoked Gd, (which he hath appinted to be reconcil'd), by the merit of his death and passion, wh∣ther they be blessed mens Spirits already gathered into heavenly glory, or belie∣vers here yet living upon the Earth. Yea▪ seeing by sin, Heaven and Erth were set at variance, it was the Fathers will, by him, to make peace, not on∣ly betw en Gd and man, but also betwixt the Angelse Eph. 1.10. in Heaven, a Be∣lievers on Earth. And what he had spk n in the general, concerning Christs work of reconciliation; he now applies particularly to the believing Clssins, telling them, that though before their conversion they were a Strangers unto God, yea as Enemies, such as did hate God, and were hated of him ( eson their minds were set on evil works), yet now Chrit had rec ncled them unto God, by taking on him a true humane Body of Flesh and Blood, like unto ours in all things, sin only excepted and by suffering dath in it; and all this that they might be presented pure and holyThe word Holy doth here signifie pure, clean, fom all spot or sin. bfre God, and free from all guilt and sin, at the last day. From Ver. 12, to 23. 3. He tells them, if they expected to be thus presented holy and unblameable before God at the last day, they must constantly and st dfa tly adhere to the Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, not quitting their hope of eternal life and glory, which was begotten in them by it; which Gospel they had herd preached unto them by Epa∣phras, and was no other than that which at Chrits command was taught through the Worldv. 23. To every Creature] that is, to some of all orts of men, not in Judea only, but among the Gentiles. compare Mar. 16.15. with Mat. 28.19. Est Synecdoche generis hyperbo∣lica. by the Apostles, and which he himself was called by God to preach am ng the Gentiles. And as for his sufferings, he sheweth, they had no reason to be scan∣daliz'd at them, for he himself underwent them joyfuly, considering that they tended t the good and benefit of the Colossis, namely, to confirm them in the Dctrine of the Gspel, and to encourage them to suffer for it, if cal∣led to it, and also because thereby he filled up the measure and share of those sufferings allotted to be suffered by him in his Body, (as a member of Christ and in conformity to him), which are appointed by the dispensation of God, and re∣main to b suffered and undergone by Christ mystical, namely, the Church; which sufferings and afflictions of particular members redound to the great bene∣fit of the whole Church, and tend to edifie them in patience, and to confirm them in the truth; of which Church, he tells them, he was called to be a Minister by the appointment of God, and chiefly among the Gentiles, (of wh m thse Col ssi∣ans were a part and so his commission to extended them), that God by his minitry might fullfill his word of prophesie, and promise of calling the Geti s in the days of the Gospel, [see Isa. 65.1. Zach. 2.11.]. Nw the subject matter of this Gospel, (whereof he was appointed a Minister), he shews, was in tims
past a mystery, and in all former ages and generations hid, (from the Gentiles simply, from the Jews comparatively), being kpt under dark shadows, and mystical representations [Rom. 16.26.], but now was clearly manifested and revealed to the holy Apostles, and by them to the faithful. And to them God is pleas'd to manifest the exceeding great and glorious excellency of this mystery, which is, Christ preached among, inter vos. Ingens ar∣canum Dei patuit, cum Christus, i. e. Doctrina Christi, Gentibus sonuit in spem vitae aeternae Est ergo hic du∣plex metonymia. Christus pro Doctri∣na Christi: Et spes pro causa spei. Gr. the Gentiles, in and through whom, hope of pardon and bliss is vouch∣safed to them. And this Christ, says he, we preach; exhorting and teaching every man that will hear, whether he be Jew or Gentile, (with all the spiritual wisdom afforded to us) to believe in Him, that being pardoned through his merits, and renewed by his Spirit, we may present them before the Judgment Seat of God perfectly righteous in him. And in this work, he tells them, he faithfully labour'd and travell'd, having found great and corroborating strength from God, carrying him on in it. From Ver. 23, to the end. 4. Having thus declared the Doctrine delivered to them to be true, and per∣swaded them to continue stedfast in it; he now comes to shew them, that they ought to avoid all corrupt Doctrines contrary thereunto, which false Teachers wuld obtrude upon them. And in the first place, he desires they should know what great care and sollicitude he had for them in his mind, and how he strove in his prayers with God, not only for those Churches which he himself had plant∣ed, and among whom he had familiarly conversed, but for them also, though not converted by him, and their neighbour Church of Laodicea, (to whom he wil∣leth this Epistle should he read, ch. 4 16.), and for all other Churches who had never seen his face. And his great desire and endeavour was, that their hearts might be comforted, and encouraged against all the troubles they met with, and that they might be knit together by the bond of love, as the members of the natu∣ral body are by the nerves and sinews, that so instructing and edifying one ano∣ther, they might attain to a large measure of certain and assur'd knowledg and understanding, in the mystery of the Gospel, which may justly be call'd the my∣stery of God, being hid from the eye of natural reason, and made known only by him, and in which God is reveal'd and manifested to be the Father of Christ, and Christ to be the eternal Son of God. In which mysteryv. 3.  in quo my∣sterio., or divine revelation concerning God the Father and Christ, all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledg (to wit, that are necessary to salvation) are hidden and wrapt up. And this he testified unto them, to prevent their seducement by false Teachers, who by false arguments, and ensnaring perswasions sought to beguile them. And he was the more sollicitous concerning them, because though he was absent from them in the body, yet he was present with them in Spirit, that is, not in bare con∣ceit or phantasie or affection only, but so as he was well acquainted with their state, and had knowledg of their affairs (either through the information of Epa∣phras, or through extraordinary revelation, see 2 King. 5.26.), and rejoiced exceedingly to see and behold, in the apprehension and vision of his mind, the good order and government of their Church, and the stedfastness of their Faith in Christ, which he would gladly have them continue in. He exhorts them, therefore, that as they had received the true Doctrine of Christ Jesus our Lord and Savi∣our, taught them by Epaphras, and had embraced him by Faith, so they would constantly adhere to that DoctrineIn hâc Doctrinâ permanen∣dum, quia hac receptâ, Ipse Christus Dominus recipiebatur. Daven., conforming their lives thereunto, and endeavouring to walk worthy of Christ, being like trees well and deeply rooted in him, or like a house firmly built on him, as the only sure foundation, that being established and setled in the Faith, (as they had been taught), they might grow in that grace with thanksgiving to God for so great and wonderful mercy of revealing his Son to them. From Ver. 1, to 8.
5. He comes now to caution them against those things whereby seducers sought to draw them away from Christ: and those he reduces to three heads. 1. The Speculations of the Gentilish Philosophy. 2. The Traditions of Men. 3. The Rudiments of the World. 1. He cautions them, to take heed lest any make a prey of them, and seduce them from the sound Doctrine of Christ, by amuzing them with the sublime speculations of their mysterious Philosophy, which flies as high as Angels and Intelligences; and teaches (though very fallaciously) that they are Mediators between God and manSee Mr. Medes Aposta∣sie of the latter times., and so ought to be the objects of humane adoration, see v. 18. 2ly, He cautions them against walking after the Traditions of Men, that is, the superstitious Rites invented by men, and obtruded as parts of Divine Worship, having no authority from the Word of God, nor other warrant than Antiquity, Custom, or Hu∣mane Institution. 3. He warns them, to take heed of them, who would per∣swade them, to observe Circumcision, and the Levitical Rites, which were Ru∣diments, or ElementsSic Dave∣nant. in loc. Elementa mundi, v. 8. h. e. rudimen∣ta priscae Ec∣clesiae Judai∣cae. fitted for the infancy of the Church, and by which God thought fit to instruct the former Ages of the World [Gal. 4 3.], and his people under the Old Testament; the following of which things, he tells them, was not according to the Institution or Injunction of Christ, but did draw away the heart from him. He shews them, that Christ alone is a most perfect Sa∣viour; for in his person the fulness of the Godhead dwelleth bodily, that is, personally, and subtantially, in opposition to the Shaddows and Types of the Old Testament. For God is said, in the Old Testament, to dwell in the Tabernacle, Ark of the Covenant, and Temple, as in the Shaddows and Figures of Christs humane Nature, which he was to take on him, in the ful∣ness of time; which he having now taken on him, God now dwells in the same, really, personally, and substantially, with all his fulness; so that 'tis folly to seek salvation any where else but in him alone. 2. He acquaints them, that all that are united to him by Faith, are compleat in him, as having from him all things necessary to Salvation. 3. He declares, that He is above all Princi∣palities and Powers, that is, all the holy Angels, (by whom God doth execute many great and mighty works, as it were, by Princes and Potentates), as be∣ing their Head and Lord, and upholding and ruling them as his Creatures. And they being his Servants, and so our fellow-servants, ought not to be worshipped by us, [see Rev. 22.8, 9.], nor are they Mediators between God and us; that being an honour due to him only who is their Head, [1 Tim. 2.5.]. From Ver. 8, to 11. 6. He begins here by a Figure call'd Hysterosis, to oppose himself against the third sort of errors, which he had caution'd them against, v. 8. namely, urging the Mosaical Rites, and Elements of the former Ages of the World, as necessary to salvation. And first, He answers an Objection which he foresaw the Colossians might make against what he had before said. He had said, v. 10. Believers were com∣pleat in Christ. But possibly they might say, That some Teachers among them taught them, That they, being Gentiles, and wanting Circumcision, were un∣clean, and so not perfect in Christ. The Apostle answers, that they, being Believers, and united to Christ, need not be outwardly Circumcised; for they had by him, the thing signified by Circumcision, namely, the spiritual Circumcision of the heart, which consists in cutting off, and putting away the body of manifold sins, form'd, and compacted of our innate corruption, whereof particular sins are the members. And the means of this their renovation is Baptism, (which succeeds in the place of Circumci∣sion), and which (as it was anciently administred to adult and grown persons) was a clear representation of the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, and by proportion represented also how Christians ought to dye unto sin, and rise unto newness of life. Which new life they live by Faith in Christ, and that Faith, God who raised Jesus Christ from the dead, works in them by his own
Spirit. He uses also another Argument against the necessity of Circumcision, namely, that when they, in the time of their natural state and condition, were dead in sins, and without Circumcision in their Flesh, (as being Gentiles, Eph. 2.11.), God had quickned them, as he did Christ, infusing into them the new life of grace, and giving them a right to the life of Glory, having pardoned all their sins, both original and actual, freely for his sake, upon their belie∣ving in him. Yea Christ hath by his death, blotted out, and abolished the hand∣writing of the Ordinances, and those Legal Ceremonial Injunctions, touching Circumcision, and the observation of Days, and several Washings, and Sacri∣fices, Eph. 2.15. in the observance of which, the Jews testified against them∣selves, their own guiltiness and liableness to punishment. For, by killing a Beast they testified they deserved to dye themselves. But now Christ, having by his death satisfied the Justice of God for our sins, hath thereby can∣cell'd those OrdinancesChirographum  pro  quod in decretis positum erat. Nonnulli re∣ferunt ad praescripta Judaica (quo∣rum caput erat Circumcisio) seu ad Legales Ceremonias, cum continua illarum repetitio nihil aliud fuerit, quam perpetua peccatorum confessio, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. which testified our guiltiness, and bound us over, and declar'd us liable to wrath and vengeance. Now seeing the debt is paid, and the obliga∣tion to wrath which we were under, (by reason of our sins), cancell'd, to revoke this hand-writing of ordinances, (which testified so much against us), and to seek to bring it in force again, as false Teachers labour'd to do, (by urging Circumcision, and the Legal Observances), must needs be, not only a great folly, but very pernicious. Nay further, Christ by his death hath not only cancell'd this hand-writing that was against us, and taken it out of the way, and nailed to his Cross, but thereby also hath vanquisht, and disarm'd his and our enemies, the Devil, and all the powers of Hell, and hath carried them, as it were, in triumph, and made a shew of them openly, making them a spectacle of shame and scorn in the eyes of God and good Angels, as the Roman Generals us'd in their Triumphs to have their Captives carried disarm'd, and bound, after their Triumphal Charriots. From Ver. 8, to 16. He draws now a Conclusion from the former Argument, namely, That seeing the Ceremonial Law was abolished, therefore none should presume to condemn them, or lay sin to their charge, for using any of the Meats or Drinks prohibited by that Law, or for not observing the Jewish Festivals, whther anniversary, or monthly, or weekly, to wit, the Seventh-day-Sabbath. If any did so, they should not regard their censures. For these things were but shaddowsCeremoniae fuerunt umbra rerum futurarum, cujus umbrae cor∣pus, h. e. complementum adumbra∣tum, est Christus. of good things to come, and were to remain only untill the coming of Christ, who is the truth, body, and substance of them. Some of them pointed at Mo∣ral Sanctity, this Christ in his own person clearly taught and perfectly fulfill'd; some pointed at the expiation of sin, and this Christ truly wrought by his active and passive obedience; some presignified that eternal Rest which true Believers shall partake of hereafter. 'Tis not imaginable, that those Seducers, the Apostle here bends himself against, ever pleaded for or strove to maintain the Christian-Sabbath, the first day of the week. Therefore 'tis not probable, that in opposing them, he should implead that day. Besides, the Sab∣baths, here mentioned, were a shadow of things to come, whereas the Lords day is a memorial of some thing past, namely, the glorious Resurrection of Christ. The old Seventh day Sabbath might shaddow out something of Christ; and the Ancients generally understood it, to shaddow out his Rest that day in the graveConcern∣ing the mora∣lity of the Christian-Sabbath, see Knowl. and Practise, pag. 256.. So that the Apostles Argument runs thus, Seeing the Ceremonial Ordinances were but shaddows and representations of good things to come, and to last only till Christ came; to observe them now under the Gospel, is in effect to say, That Christ the body, or substance is not yet come. Ver. 16, 16.
7. He comes now to argue against the first sort of those errors he mentioned, v. 8. namely, worshipping of Angels, which tended to make Christians lose the reward. Nemo velit vos culpabiles reddere. Let no man arrogate to himself an imperious power over you, to de∣termine what he pleases, as the Bra∣beutae were wont in the Olympick Games. Nemo vos  pro libidine. provided for them in Heaven, by de∣parting out of the way leading thither, though they that perswaded them unto it, cover'd their error with a plausible shew of humility, pretending, it was presumption to go to God without the mediation of those excellent Creatures. But thereby they boldly intrudedPenetrans in ea quae non vi∣dit, i. e. quae non novit, jus sibi fa∣ciens loquendi de incognitis. into things they knew nothing of, being vainly puft up with a conceit of their own corrupt minds. He shews, that these Angel-wor∣shippers do not acknowledg Christ for the Head of the Church while they apply themselves to Angels to be their Mediators to God; whereas He alone doth discharge the office of the Head, compleatly giving life, and growth to his whole Church, and to every member thereof. Which members being furnished with spiritual life from him, and knit to him, and to one another by the nerves and sinews of one common Spirit, they grow and encrease with such an encrease of grace, and holiness, as is from God and tends to his glory. From Ver. 18, to 20. 8. He argues now against the second sort of errors which he mention'd, v. 8. namely, superstitious Rites, humane Traditions, and Doctrines of men. His Argument against them is to this purpose, that seeing they professed in their Bap∣tism to be spiritually dead with Christ, and to be freed by his death from the Levitical Odinances, [those Rudiments or Elements appointed by God to instruct the former World], why should they submit to superstitious Rites and Ordinances (of the like kind) invented by men? Could they think, that God would ab∣rogate the Ceremonies of his own Institution, that men might appoint theirs? Why as if they lived in the Old World, should they be under the Decrees and Traditions of men, which draw them to the Observation of things of the like nature? And he particularly instances, in one of those Traditions, or injuncti∣ons, namely, concerning abstinence from meats. Touch not, taste not, han∣dle not, that is, such or such meats; whereas all kind of meats are appointed by God for the use of men, and are to perish in the using. These observances, he acknowledges, were set off with a specious shew of wisdom, as if they were voluntary services, and free will offerings to God, giving him more than he re∣quired. They had also a shew of Humility, and submissive obedience to the In∣junctions of Superiors. Lastly, they had a shew of Mortification, and Auste∣rity to the body; they that practis'd them, not seeming to have those things in any esteem, which God hath made for the necessary satisfying of nature,Capellus, sic . Culpat Apostolus quod honorem Corpori nullum habeant, ad carnis expletionem, h. e. ad sa∣tietatem necessariam, quemadmodum cum jejuniis, & aliis modis, superstitiosi se affligunt. Gomar. but rather despising them. From Ver. 20, to the end. 9. Having thus dispatched the Doctrinal part of his Epistle, he comes now  to the Practical. And in the first place, he gives some general exhortations, such as concern all Believers, and then some special, which belong to certain and particular conditions of men. And first, Seeing they were risen with Christ, as he had intimated, v. 12, 13. of ch. 2. he exhorts them, that they should set their affections on things a∣bove, and that, because Christ their Head was above. And further, they had in their Baptism professed themselves dead to Sin and the World, and therefore ought really so to be, and to have their thoughts often upon their eternal life and bliss, which though it was hid from the eyes of the World, yet it was reserved for them in Heaven, (where Christ was), in the safe keeping of God, [see
1 Pet. 1.4, 5.]. And when Christ, who is the Author and Procurer of this blissful and eternal life for them, shall appear to judg the World, then they shall appear also with him in glory. Next, he presseth them, particularly, To morti∣fie their corrupt lusts, such as Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Con∣cupiscence, and Covetousness, which he calls Idolatry, because it draweth a∣way our Love, Trust, and Joy from God, and placeth them upon Wealth and Riches. These Lusts, he shews, are the several MembersThose Lusts may be called Mem∣bers, because the Reason and Will of corrupt man doth produce Ope∣rations by them as the Body doth by the Member. of the Body of Sin; and are said to be upon the earth, because they draw the Soul down towards the earth, and are exercised upon earthly things as their proper Objects. Now that he might further prss them to a serious endea∣vour to mortifie these Lusts, he tells them, that the wrath of God, with its dreadful effects, cometh upon those who go on contumaciously and im∣penitently in such ways. And they should remember how they themselves formerly liv'd in those sinful courses when they were moved and acted by such vile affections, and therefore now they ought more carefuly to mortifie them. 2. He exhorts them, to put away from them, that is, to mortifie their more spiritual Corruptions, instancing in anger, wrath, malice, (sins of the heart), and disgraceful con∣tumelious speaking against their Neighbours, as also all filthy communica∣tion, and lying, or saying, or suggesting any false thing, to the injury of others, which are sins of the Tongue. This he urges from the present spiritual estate of all true Believers among them, who had (as they profess'd in their Baptism) begun to put offThere were many Ceremo∣nies in Baptism, us'd in the Primi∣tive Church, viz. Putting off old Cloaths, drenching in water so as to seem to be buried in it, putting on new Cloaths at their coming out, to which Paul alludes in several places, as ch. 2.11, 2. Col. 3.9, 10. Rom 6.4, 5. Thorndike of the Rights of the Church, ch. 4. the old man, that is, the corruption of Nature, with manifold actual trans∣gressions proceeding there-from; and put on the new m, that is, new and spiritual qualities, whereby their cor∣rupt Nature is renewed, being illuminated with a saving and tranforming knowledg, and so conform'd to the Image of God, in such a manner, that in this new man, as in a Glass, Gods Wisdom, Righteousness, and Holiness may be clearly seen and discovered. And lest any should think that God regards not this inward spiritual renovation, but accepts men according to their external priviledges and conditions, he tells them, that now under the Gospel, neither the having of those things helps, nor does the want of them hinder any man, but whosoever believes in Christ, and is renewed by his Spirit, is ac∣cepted of God; He being an All sufficient Saviour to all such, and that in all respects whatsoever. From Ver. 1, to 12. 10. Having ended his exhortation to mortification, and putting off the old man, he comes now to exhort them. That as they had begin to put on the new, so they would put on all the parts and particular virtues belonging thereunto, as became such as were selected from the World, and effectually called to the know∣ledg of Christ, and to believe in him. And the excellent virtues, he exhorts them to put on, are these, namely, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing, and freely forgiving one ano∣ther, (if any of them have just cause of complaint against another), even as Christ hath freely forgiven them. And above all those graces before-mention'd, he ex∣horts them, especially to put on Charity, which is the most perfect bondCharitas, vinculum perfectissi∣mum, animos scil. conjun∣gens., binding, and knitting all the faithful, and members of the Church together. And that the loveEt que cet amour de la paix que Dieu recommande, &c. Amiraut. of peace, (which God so effectually recommends to his Chil∣dren), should rule in their hearts, and bear sway in them, against all contrary motions; unto the entertaining of which they were called, and strongly obliged, being all members of one body, under one head, Christ Jesus. And that they may the better entertain and continue this peace among themselves, he exhorts them, to be thankful one to another for the benefits they receiv'd one from ano∣ther; and to cherish inclinations in themselves, not only of requiting, but of conferring benefits. And seeing 'tis the word of Christ, or the Doctrine of
the Scriptures, that teaches them all these divine Lssons; he advises them to read it diligently, and frequently to meditate on it, that it may dwell in them richly and copiously, and that they may be furnished thereby with all true and sound wisdom; so that their minds and hearts being filled with those di∣vine documents, they may be able to instruct and admonish one another, and stir up one anothers affections, by singing of these holy Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, therin contained; or compos'd agreeably thereunto, by the direction of the Spirit of God. Yet they must be careful they sing with affections rightly com∣pos'd (according to the measure of grace given them) that they may praise and glorifie God, not with their mouths only, but with their hearts. Lastly, He shuts up this Discourse with giving them one general Rule, viz. That what∣ever businss they enterprize or enter upon, whether it be by way of speech, or action, they should do it with invocation and calling upon God in the Name of Christ; through whose mediation also they should render praises to God (our gra∣cious Father in Christ) for any success afforded to them in any of their businesses, and for all his other mercies also. From Ver. 12, to 18. 10. He comes now to exhort them to the duties that concern particular Relations: 1. He exhorts Wives willingly to submit themselves to their own Husbands (as is comely and decent) in all things lawful and agreeable to the will of the Lord. 2. He enjoins Husbands to love their Wives, and not to be harsh and rigorous towards them in word or deed. 3. He exhorts Childr to obey their Parents in all honest and lawful things, agreeable to the word of God (see Eph. 6.1.); for such obedience is highly pleasing to the Lord. 4. He enjoins Parents to use their authority moderately over their Children, not irri∣tating or exasperating them by too much severity and rigorous dealing. 5. That Servants be obedient in all lawful things to their own Masters (who according to the Laws of men, and in things temporal, belonging to the flesh, or body, have the rule over them, though not over their Consciences); and that they should not do their duties only when their Masters are present (as if they only took care to please them, and look'd no further); but with singleness of heart should shew all fidelity and diligence in their absence also, as those that fear the all-seeing eye of God. And whatever service they do for their Masters, they should do it heartily, and with good will (Eph. 6.7.), as aiming to please God, and serve him therein, and not only and meerly to please and serve their Ma∣sters. And if they do so, they may assure themselves, that this their fidelity (being in conjunction with other graces) shall be rewarded with the inheritance of eternal life; because in thus serving their Masters, they serve their Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; and he takes their service as done to him, and accordingly will give them the reward which he hath promised to all his faithful servants. And if any of them do meet with wrongs, and injuries, and hard usage from their Masters, he tells them (for their comfort) that there is a day coming when their wrongs shall be considered, and they righted; and the Lord will punish the wrong doer, and give him his just desert. For God is a righteous Judg, and there is no respect of persons with him. From Ver. 18, to the end. Lastly, He exhorts Masters to give to their Servants that which is just and  equal, either by strict Law or Contract, or by the Law of Charity; remem∣bring that they have a Master above them in Heaven, to whom they must give an account of their dealings with their Servants. Ver. 1. 11. Having thus finished his Precepts concerning particular Duties, in the close of his Epistle he judg'd it meet to add a few more general Directions that concern all Christians. And, 1. He exhorts them to perseverance, and holding on to prayer, and to watchfulness and fervency therein, and to join thanks∣giving thereunto. And in particular, he desires them to pray for him, and Timothy, That God would afford them opportunities, and endue them with a
spirit of holy boldness and freedom in preaching the mystery of the Gospel, whereof Christ is the subject-matter, and the substance; for the publishing of which, he now suffered imprisonment. And more especially he desires them to pray for himself, that whilst he suffered for the Gospel, he might be enabled to make manifest and discover the deep and mysterious doctrine thereof, in such a manner, as was meet and fit, both in respect of the excellency of the Gospel it self; as also in respect of that great trust of the Apostleship committed unto him. 2. He ex∣horts them to carry themselves wisely towards the Heathen and Infidels, among whom they lived (who were without the visible Church), and to im∣prove every opportunity of doing them good, and of gaining them to embrace the faith. And particularly, that they labour to order their speech and ordi∣nary conference so, as it may be always gracious, that is, may express some grace that is in the heart of the speaker, and may be apt to work some grace in the hearts of the hearers, Eph. 4.29, and that it be seasoned with the salt of holy and divine wisdom, that they may speak fitlyV. 6. ] Hic infiniti∣vus est vice gerundii: Sci∣endo quomodo respondere cuique debeatis, nempe de fide interrogati, 1 Pet. 3.15. Gr. and to good purpose upon every oc∣casion, and especially when they shall be questioned concerning the grounds of Christianity. From Ver. 1, to 7. Beginning now to conclude his Epistle, he tells them, that he had sent Ty∣chicus, his fellow-servant in the Lords work; and Onesimus (one of their own Countrey or City) to acquaint them with his present condition, and with the state of things in the place where he was, and to inform him of theirs, and to strengthen and comfort them under all their trials. He sends them salutations from AristarchusThis Aristarchus being descended of Jewish Parents, and being con∣verted by the Apostle's Ministry, had accompanied him in the most of his journeys, and was taken with him in the tumult at Ephesus; and after that, he accompanied him going into Asia, and was carried Prisoner with him to Rome, and therefore he called him his fellow-prisoner. See of him Acts 19.29. Acts 20.4. and 27.2. a Mace∣donian, and John Mark, Nephew to Barnabas, touch∣ing whom they had received commandments (that is, had been written to), that if he came unto them, they should receive him, and entertain him kindly and respect∣fully, as a true and faithful servant of Christ. He sends them also salutations from another eminent person with him, namely, Jesus sirnamed Justus: These three being descended of Jewish Parents, had been converted to the faith; and being now believing-Christians, and compani∣ons of the Apostle in his afflictions, were the only persons of the Jews who assisted him there at Rome in preaching the Gospel (whereby the Kingdom of Christ is set up in the hearts of men), and thereby they did much comfort him. He sends them also salutations from Epaphras, one of their City and Church, who in his prayers did always striveSee Rom. 15.30. 2 Cor. 1.11. earnestly and fervently for them, that being fully and perfectly instructed in the knowledg of the will of God, they might continue firm in their obedience thereunto. For he could not but bear him this testimony, That he had a very great zeal for them, and for their neighbour-Churches of Laodicea and Hierapolis. He salutes them also from Luke and Demas. He desires these Colossians to sa∣lute from him their neighbours of Laodicea, and particularly one Nymphas, an eminent person for piety among them, and his Christian Family, who were so piously instructly, and so orderly governed, that they deserved the name of a little Church. He gives order, That after they have read this Epistle them∣selves, they should cause it to be sent and read in the Church of the Laodice∣ans; and that another Epistle written from Laodicea (either from the whole Church, or from their Ministers) unto him, informing him of their case (of which he sent them a Copy) should be read by these Colossians, for the better clearing of some passages in this his Epistle to them; and that they might the better understand upon what occasion he had written some things con∣tained therein. He directs them to admonish their Minister Archippus (who in the absence of his Collegue Epaphras, had, as it seems, been somewhat slack),
to consider the nature and weight of the Ministerial charge with which he was intrusted by Christ, i. e. . A Chri∣sti authoritate, and that he would labour faithfully to discharge all the parts of it. He shuts up this Epistle, telling them, That he sends his salutation to them written with his own hand, that they may be assured that the rest of the Epistle was dictated by himself, though written by his Scribe. He desires them to remember his bonds and imprisonment for the Gospel of Christ; and to encourage themselves to bear the like troubles, for the same cause, if they should be called to it. Lastly, He wishes, the free and undeser∣ved love and favour of God in Christ, with all the fruits and tokens of it, may be their portion. Amen. From Ver. 7, to the end. SECT. X. BY Tychicus also, at the same time, as 'tis probable, He sent an Epistle to the Ephesians. For, having planted a Church at Ephesus, the chief City of Asia the less [Acts 18.19.], and afterwards for three years together preached and spread a∣broad the Gospel in that City, and thereabouts [Acts 19.]; and having in his last journey to Jerusalem called together the Elders and Teachers of that Church, and warned them con∣cerning the arising of Seducers among them; He thought it needful at this time to write to them, to confirm them in the truth they had receiv'd, and to arm them against such Do∣ctrines as derogated from the Grace of Christ. In the Epistle there are these three parts,The Epistle to the Ephesians. 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. IN the Preface he declares he was an Apostle of Christ; thereunto appointed, not by the will of man, but of God. His Epistle he directs to all the faithful at Ephesus, who were effectually call'd to believe in Christ, and sancti∣fied by his Spirit; heartily wishing unto them abundance of Grace and Peace from God the Father (who is the source and fountain of spiritual blessings); and from Jesus Christ, who is the Conduit-pipe by whom they are conveyed, Ver. 1.2. 2. He comes to the Body of the Epistle: and his scope being to establish these Ephesians in the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel already received, and to unfold to them the grounds and causes of their salvation, together with the freedom of God's grace in Christ manifested therein; in the first place he falls into a high admiration of the free mercy of God (who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ), and solemnly blesses his holy Name for bestowing on Be∣lievers all sorts of spiritual blessings and graces, which descend from Hea∣ven,
in coele∣stbus nempe rebus. Sunt enim res coe∣lestes, eligi ut simus sancti & adoptari in fi∣lios. Knatchb. and which he communicates to them in and through his Son. And the first of these he shews, is this; That he hath in his eternal election, even before the foundation of the world, separated them from other men, and designed to communicate these blessings to them, in and through Christ, to the intent that they should be holy and blameless before men, and sincere as in his sight, living in the exercise of love to God, and one another. Yea, in and through Christ, he hath predestinated them to the adoption of sons, that is, to be his adopted Children, not for any foreseen merit, or prepa∣rations of grace in them, but according to his own gratuitous mercy, and the good pleasure of his own will. And all this to the praise of his glorious grace, which is not only the End of his electing them before time, but the Cause also that in time he makes them lovely, and fit to be accepted of himself, in and through his beloved Son, in whom they have redemption through his blood shed on the Cross; and the satisfaction he hath made for them to his Father, hath acquired for them the remission of all their sins. And he hath caused the riches of his grace to abound towards them, in not only sending his Son to make atonement for them, but in revealing the Gospel to them, and thereby imparting that true wisdom (the right knowledg of Himself and his Son unto them) and that spiritual prudence which is requi∣site to direct them to order their Christian conversation aright. And he hath made known unto them that great mystery and secret of his will (which could not be known, either by Angels or men, before it was revealed) whereby is discovered and manifested what he hath resolved in his eternal Purpose, concerning the way of saving sinners, according to his own good pleasure and free grace. Which secret was then only clearly to be manifested, when that time arriv'd, unto which (according to his wise and admirable dispen∣sation) he hath reserved the fulness of his revelations, and the accomplish∣ment of his promises, which he before made. Now one part of this glorious mystery, is this, That sin having made a division between the glorious An∣gels in heaven, and corrupted men on earth, he hath found out a way to reconcile them by his Son; even as if a Prince that hath soveraignty over two Kingdoms, between which there is war, because one of them is fallen into rebellion whilst the other continues in their obedience, should by pardon∣ing the one, reconcile them, and compose the difference between them, and so form them into one Empire. And having hitherto spoken of Believers in ge∣neral, he now comes to make application of this his Doctrine, first, to the Jews, and next to the Gentiles. And first he shews, That the Jewish Be∣lievers (whereof himself was one) had, in and through Christ, and by virtue of his merit and intercession (not for any merit in themselves) ob∣tained a right to a glorious inheritance in Heaven, being predestinated there∣unto according to the gracious purpse of God, who worketh all things ac∣cording to the counsel of his own will, that so his glorious Attributes, (viz. His infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and Mercy) manifested in that work, might be acknowledged and highly praised by them to whom the Gospel was first preached [Mat. 10.6. Acts 13.46.], and who were first called, and were the first who trusted or hoped in Christ for salvation, before there were any considerable number of Converts among the Gentiles. 2dly, He shews, that not only believers among the Jews, but the believing Ephesians also, who were Gentiles, had in and through Christ obtained a right to this Heavenly Inheritance, having been brought to believe in Him after the Gospel had been once preached to them. And then they were sealed for the Children of God, not by such an outward seal as Circumcision, but by the renewing and sanctifying work of the Spirit (whom God had graciously promisedSpiritu promissionis, qui promissio∣nem Evange∣lii cordibus obsignat; vel spiritu promis∣so, quem scil. Deus per pro∣phetas promi∣sit ut per Ezek c. 36.26. Joel 2.28. to give) wrought in their hearts, whereby he imprinteth his image upon them, which is holiness. And the bestowing this his holy Spirit on them, was an earnest of that heavenly inheritance, the full enjoyment whereof was not to be expected till the last day; at which time, all that
are the purchas'd est com∣parare, acqui∣rere. possession, acquisition, and peculiar people of Christ, shall obtain compleat redemption, and their bodies shall be raised up, and uni∣ted to their souls, and so both soul and body made for ever happy. And Gods end in all this is (as was before mentioned, v. 12.), the praise of his own free and glorious grace. From Ver. 3, to 15. 3. He tells them, That having heard so good a report of their faith in Christ, and love to all the Saints, he could not but give solemn thanks to God on their behalf, and earnestly pray for them; beseeching him who is now known to us by a more glorious title than that of The God of Abraham, even The God of our Lord Jesus Christ (as he is Man and Mediator, and sent by him, John 20.17.), and the Father of glory; that is, who is in his own nature infinitely glorious, and the Author of all the glory communicated to any of the Creatures (and to whom all honour and glory ought to be ascribed), that he would please to impart unto them that Wisdom, and Revelation of divine mysteries (whereof his Spirit is the Author), that they may attain to a more full and exact proprie est, major exacti∣or{que} cognitio knowledg of Christ, and his benefits; and that he would so illuminate their understandings, that they may be capable clearly to discern and apprehend what he hath call'd them to a participation of, and which is as yet only the object of their hope and expectation, viz. the rich and glori∣rious inheritance, which he hath prepared for his SaintsV. 18. Ut scia∣tis quàm co∣piosa sit glo∣ria haereditatis illius quam paravit San∣ctis. in Heaven, and which only they shall be possessors of. And further, that they may be sensible of the greatness of God's Power, which he exerteth in and towards believers, in regenerating of them by his Spirit▪ and carrying on a work of grace in them (in despight of men and devils) from one degree to another, till grace be swallow'd up in glory: which power, he shews, was no other than that by which he raised Christ from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, in the highest degree of glory next to himself, in heaven, far above all principalitiesNomina sunt Ordinum Ange∣licorum, Deo ministrantium in coele∣stibus. Estius. Col. 1.16. Et, quod infra est Ephes. 8.10. evincit, agi hîc de eximiis Angelorum classibus. Grot. Every name] i. e. Every creature however named. and powers, and all things excellent, and famous, and worthy to be named either in this world, or the world to come; the Father having placed all creatures in a state of subjecti∣on unto him, even under his feet, to be disposed of as he seeth fit. And over and above all, he hath given him in a special manner to be Head of his Church, which is his body, and his fulnessChristus in omnibus creden∣tibus implet omnia; mentem luce, voluntatem piis affectibus, corpus ipsum obsequendi facultate, Grot. Christus datus est Ecclesiae caput, & in omni∣bus membris, omnia bona, & felicia operatur, & omnià veri Capitis officià perficit., as he is the mystical Head thereof; see 1 Cor. 12.12. So that he doth not judg himself (in that sense) to be perfected and com∣pleated, till he hath all his members. Lastly, He sheweth, That this Saviour, animating and enlivening all the mem∣bers of his body by his Spirit, perfecteth and compleateth all things in them (gradually) which appertain to their spiritual life, sanctification, and salvation. From Ver. 15, to the end. 4. The Apostle now intending to set forth unto these Ephesians the happi∣ness  of that condition in which free-grace had placed them; he takes occasion in the first place to shew them the misery of their former Heathen-state before thir conversion, they being then spiritually dead in sins and trespasses (with∣out any life of grace in them) and walking according to the common course and customs of the Nations and Gentile-world, and according to the instiga∣tion of Satan, who being cast out of the higher Heaven of glory, wanders about now; and exercises the power which God permits unto him, in the lower regions of the air, and powerfully works in the children of disobedience. And he shews, that the JewsDicit , quan∣quam ipse ta∣lis non fuerat (vixerat enim vitam non quidem ullo modo comparandam cum eâ, quam duxit postea Christianus, sed tamen proòiorem quàm sui temporis Judaei, Phil. 3.6. utens figurâ  per quam, ea quae sunt odiosa, facimus nobis communia. Grot. before their conversion, were equally miserable, having
their conversation among these children of disobedience, and were no less obsti∣nately rebellious against God, than the disobedient Gentiles; fulfilling those lusts which their sensual appetites and phant'sies were plea∣sed with, and were by natureNon eâ naturâ quâ primum a Deo conditi sed quâ sumus per peccatum Aae depravati; vel juxta Augustinum in Joh. 12. Ideo naturâ filii irae, quia peccante primo homine vitium pro naturâ inolevit. Zeger. children of wrath, even as others; that is, were born, and liv'd, and con∣tinued in a damning-condition, as other Heathens did. But God, who is infinitely rich in mercy, without any desert in us in invite him to it, when we were dead in sins, by that power by which he raised Christ from the grave, hath quickned us, and bestowed a new spiritual life upon us, yea hath (in assured hope) raised us up from the dead, in Christ our Head, and hath set us with him in Heaven: For He sitting there who is our Head, we are at presnt not unfitly said to sit there also, and shall infallibly come thither in due time. And God's end in thus graciously working upon the first converted among the Jews, and those since-converted Ephesians; he shews, was, that to all succeeding ages he might give an evident proof and example of the exceeding riches of his grace, and that not only for his own glory but for the encouragement of all vile sinners to the end of the world, to seek to him for mery in and through his Son. He tells these Ephesians therefore, that they ought to be sensible, that their salvation, from the first step to the last, depends on God's free favour and grace in Christ, and not on any desrt in themselves. Yet they are so saved by grace, that faith is not exclu∣ded; this bing the hand or instrument whereby we lay hold upon the righte∣ousnss and benefits of Christ offered to us in the Gospel. And this faith is also the gift of God, as salvation is. Works therefore have no meritorious or causal influence upon our salvation (which all men naturally have a propension to rely upon), but even our best works are excluded (being effects, not causes of that grace by which we are saved), that all ground of boasting and gloriation may be taken away from men, and all the glory ascrib'd intirely unto God, in and through Jesus Christ. Yet lest any should think that the Apstle, by extolling free-grace, and excluding works from being the cause of our salvation, should seem to depreciate and vilifie works, and an holy life, as altogether unnecessary; he shews, they are absolutely re∣quired of those that shall be saved; because all true Converts, whether Jews or Gentiles, are God's workmanship, that is, form'd to a new life, and renewed through the intervening mediation of Christ, that they may make conscience of bringing forth good works, to which God hath before prepared them (that they should walk in the practice of them), by giving them his holy Spirit, and thereby disposing and fitting their understandings and wils to produce them, and giving them the Rule of good works in his word to guide them. So that, though good works be necessary as fruits, and as the end of regeneration; though they be the way which leadeth to Heaven, and are evidences of our right to salvation; though they are necessary in reference to the peace of our own consciences, and for the edification of others, yet they are not meritorious of salvation. From Ver. 1, to 11. 5. For the further establishment of these Ephesians in the Doctrine of Free-grace in Christ, he remembers them of their former miserable condition before their conversion, when they were in the flesh, that is in the corruption of Na∣ture, not having so much as Circumcision the sign of God's Covenant [Gen. 17.11.] which the Jews (who were circumcised in their flesh by the hands of men) made use of as a matter of reproach unto them. He remembers them also, That at that time they were so far from having any saving-interest in Christ, that they had not so much as any offer of Christ made to them by the Gospel; they were then aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, having no union or communion either with the invisible Church of true believers, or with the visible Church of Professors, which was in those times among
the people of Israel, Deut. 32.9. They were strangers to the Covenants of promise, that is, to God's Covenant and promise of Christ in due time to be exhibited, and of eternal life promised to sinners through faith in him; they were strangers to the Covenant of Grace made with Adam after the fall [Gen. 3.15.], and afterwards frequently renewed with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; with Israel upon Mount Sinai, and with David: therefore called Covenants in the plural number, though it was always one and the same Covenant for substance, though it had various discoveries and manifestations, and was various as to circumstance and manner of Administration. He tells them, they were so far from having any actual interest in the saving-blessings which were promised in this Covenant, that they had not this Covenant at all revealed to them, nor any right to the external priviledges of it; yea, further, they were such persons as had no hope, that is, no true ground to hope for the forgiveness of their sins, or salvation, they being without God in the world, that is, without any clear knowledg of the true God. But, now, they who were before afar off from Christ, his Church, his Covenant, any saving-hope, and from a true knowledg of God, were now brought nigh to God, and united to his Church, through faith in Christ, who by his death and bloody sacrifice had purchased that great blessing for them. For he is the only author and procurer of our peace with God. And whereas be∣fore, Jews and Gentiles were so much separated by reason of their Religion and religious rites, he hath now united them into one and the same Church. For he hath taken away the Ceremonial Law, which was the middle-wallHe seems to allude to that sept or wall in the Temple, that separated the Court of the Jews from that of the Gentiles. of partition between them, and the occasion of a perpetual standing-strife, while the Jews reproached the Gentiles for want of Circumcision, and the Gentiles reproached the Jews for having of it, and for observing other of the Mosaical-rites, which they judged absurd. Now Christ hath abolished this enmity by his death which he suffer'd in the flesh, and taken away the ground of it, having removed the law of commandments, consisting in insti∣tutions and ordinations concerning certain ceremonial rites belonging to the ex∣ternal worship of God (which were prescribed as so many types and shadows of Christ to come, Heb. 9.10.), that so he might form all the converted among Jews and Gentiles (who believe in him) into one people or Church under himself their Head (called here one new man, because renewed by the Holy Ghost), and so make peace between them. And, being thus united into one Body or Church, he hath reconciled them to God by the sacrifice, of himself on the Cross▪ having removed the enmity which was before between God and them by reason of their sins; and the enmity that was between thems lves, by reasn of the diversity of their Religions. And he further shews That Christ had published the glad tydings of this peace and reconci∣liation (which was purchased by himself on the Cross) both to the Jews who were within the visible Church, and to the Gentiles who were without the bounds of it; though to the later he preached not immediately in his own person (Mat. 15.24. except to some few, who were the first-fruits of the rest), but mediately by his Apostles, and their Successors, Mat. 28.19. And through this Saviour, he tells them, that both believing-Jews and Gentiles have equal liberty of access to God, as to a reconciled Father, by the assistance of that one Spirit, who quickens and actuates the graces of all the people of God. Wherefore, by way of conclusion, he setteth before these Ephesians the excellency and blessedness of their present state, they being now no more stran∣gers and forreigners, but free-men and fellow-citizens with the Saints and Members of the Family of God, the Catholick Church, and added to that spiritual building which is built upon the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apo∣stles, Christ himself being the personal foundation, and chief corner-stone thereof [Joh. 28.16. Psal. 118.22.] binding the two walls of this building together, viz. Jews and Gentiles. And all the parts of this building being firmly joined to him by faith, and among themselves by love, the whole Edifice
daily grows, not only by the addition of new Converts and Members, but every Member thereof in particular grows in grace (through the vertue and power of Christ, they being living stones, 1 Pet. 2.8.), and so the whole building growethSic apud Claudianum, strages dicuntur crescere in cumulum, ita ut tandem magnus cumulus fiat. Pisc. Est Translatio in Allegoriâ. Nam Au∣geri est proprie corporis naturalis. Surgere, de aedificiis dici solet. to be a holy Temple unto God, wherein he manifests his presence, and is constantly served and glo∣rified, as he was in Solomon's Temple. And what he spake of this spiritual building in the general, he now applies to these Ephesians in particular; shewing, that they were built (together with all other sincere belie∣vers) upon Jesus Christ the foundation, and that for this end, that they might be a fit habitation for God to dwell and manifest his special pre∣sence in, by the saving-operations of his holy Spirit. From Ver. 11, to the end. Chap- 3.6. Lest the Ephesians should be offended at the Apostle's present capti∣vity and bonds at Rome, he sets before them the cause of them, which was his preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles (of whom these Ephesians were a part) for which he was accused of the Jews, and so given over into the hands of Infidels. And they might easily be convinced, that these things happened for their good, if they had heard and understood his est assignatio parti∣um quualem in familiâ facere solent dispensatores, 1 Cor. 9.17. & supra c. 1. 10.  vocat ipsum Aposto∣latum, summum in Ecclesiis hono∣rem. Gal. 2.9. Rom. 1.5. calling of grace to be an Apostle, with relation chiefly to the Gentiles, and particularly to them. He shews he was sufficiently furnished by God with knowledg and insight into the Doctrine he was to preach: for he had by extraordinary revelation from God [Gal. 1.12.], that sacred secret or mystery of the calling of the Gentiles, made known unto him (as he had briefly written of it before in the two former Chapters); which mystery was not so clearly made known in the former agesNam quae sunt apud Esaiam & alios veterum Prophetarum, valde generalia sunt, & ante adventum perobscura. Vid. Rom. 16.25. of the world, as it was now revealed by the Spirit of God unto the holy ApostlesPatuit Paulo apertiùs quam ipsi Petro, rituum Judaicorum opera non modo non imponenda Gentibus, sed ne à Judaeis quidem observanda posthac, quasi ex praecepti necessita∣te: vid. Rom. 7. & Gal. 4. Meritò mysterium vocat, quod etiam Aposto∣lorum praecipuis non satis patuerat antea. Grot. and Prophets of the New-Testament; namely, That the believing-Gentiles should be fellow-heirs of the heavenly inheritance with the believing-Jews, and should be incorporated into that one mysti∣cal body whereof Christ is the Head, and be copart∣ners and partakers of the promise made by God of the forgiveness of sins, and adoption in and through Christ; and they were to be brought to this happy estate by the preaching of the Gospel, and by faith in Christ, with∣out the observation of the Ceremonial Law, or Circum∣cision. And he shews, that God of his free-grace to him, was pleased to call him to the office of the Apostleship, and so employ him in preaching the Go∣spel, furnishing him with gifts ordinary and extraordinary, for the discharge of it; and powerfully assisting and blessing his Ministry with admirable success both far and near, Rom. 15.19, 20. And he could not but look upon him∣self as more unworthy, and less to be esteemed of, than the, Comparati∣vum, factum ex superlatiuo. Mini∣missimus, non simpliciter, sed secun∣dum aliquam considerationem, scil. quantum ad id quod fecit adversus Ecclesiam. meanest of God's Saints and Children, by reason of his former enmity to Christ and his Church. Yet the Apostolical Office (called here grace, because given of God's free-grace and favour) was bestowed on him; and his office was, To preach and set forth unto the Gentiles the incomparable and incomprehensible riches of the mercy of Christ towards them, in receiving them freely into covenant, without lay∣ing those impositions of Circumcision, and other Rites, upon them, which were required of the Jews; and to make known unto all men what is the communion or fellowship of this mystery, viz. That the Gentiles, with the Jews, should have one Faith, one Lord, one Hope, and one common Sal∣vation,
which thing was hid (as it were) from the ages before, in the counsel of God, being not so fully and clearly revealed till these times. And he intimates, that none had reason to wonder why God should save the Gen∣tiles as well as the Jews by Christ, seeing he hath created them both by him (not as an instrument) but as one co-working with him, Heb. 1.2. Joh. 1.3. He shews also another effect of his preaching the Gospel to the Gen∣tiles, which was, That the glorious AngelsSee Eph. 1.21. Col. 1.16. 1 Pet. 1.12. (who have their ordinary resi∣dence in Heaven, though sometimes they are employed on Earth) may by what is done in the Church (that is, by the gathering of Jews and Gentiles into one Church by the Gospel) behold, as in a glass, the manifold wisdom of God, and his divers ways of dispensing grace and salvation in several ages, and that according to his decree long before made, which he purposed to execute in and by his Son. Through whose Merits and Mediation all that believe in him have boldness and liberty given them to approach and make their addresses to God with confidence of acceptance. And therefore seeing he was persecuted for this reason especially, because he preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, and asserted their interest in Christ, and through him, in all the blessings of the Covenant of Grace, he desires they would not be discouraged or disheartned at any thing that shall befall him in this cause, and he tells them it would be their glory if they were not. From Ver. 1, to 14. 7. That they may not be discouraged, he tells them, He daily bows his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus (and in him the Father of all the regenerate, whether triumphant in Heaven, or militant here on Earth; and that whether Jews or Gentiles, whom he will have named his Children, counting them for his Family) that he would according to his rich and glo∣rious mercy furnish them by his Spirit with a daily encrease of spiritual strength in their minds and hearts, whereby they may be enabled to resist the Devil, and all the Enemies and Adversaries of their souls, which they shall meet with in their Christian course; that being firmly united to Christ by faith, he may constantly dwell in their hearts by the gracious operations of his holy Spirit, quickning, ruling, and fashioning them daily more and more to his own will. And further, that they may be rooted and firmly setled in an experi∣mental knowledg and sense of the greatness of God's loveAgit de Charitate Dei erga nos, non Contrà, ut ex mox sequentibus patebit. Sic initio Epistolae funda∣mentum salutis nostrae saepiùs collo∣cavit in ipsâ charitate, misericordiâ & beneplacito Dei. Eodem modo fecit, etiam capite secundo v. 4. Tunc ve∣rò dicimur in eâ firmiter radices e∣gisse, cùm vivâ fide tenacissimè in be∣nignitate Dei haeremus & persevera∣mus. Flac. Illyr. and free-grace in Christ; and may be able, with all true believers, to understand (in some measure) the vast dimensions of the love of the Father and the Son to lost sinners; which is so large, so free, so wonderful, that 'tis beyond the reach of any created Ʋnderstanding fully to comprehend it. And lastly, that they may be fil∣led with all the fulness of God; that is, with all the graces of his Spirit, which he usually imparts to his Children in this life; and so made more and more partakers of the Divine Nature. He concludes his prayer with an heavenly Doxology or Thanksgiving unto God, who hath be∣gun a good work in them, and is able to carry it on, and to bestow more and greater good things upon them, than they can ask or imagine, according to that Almighty Power which he hath hitherto evidenced, in converting and quickning of them to a new life. To this All-wise, most Powerful, and most Gracious God, he desires all glory may be ascribed in the true Church, and among the visible Professors and Members thereof, in and through the mediation of Christ Jesus; and that in all ages and generations, as long as the world shall stand, and to all Eternity after time shall be ended. From Ver. 14, to the end. Having thus dispatch'd the doctrinal part of this Epistle,Chap. 4. he comes now to the practical, wherein he exhorts the Ephesians to divers Christian duties, in
testimony of their gratitude to God for all those benefits before-mentioned. And first, to general duties, common to all Christians; and then to more special and peculiar, to some particular Relations. The more general duties he ex∣horts to, are these contained in this Chap. and to the 22 verse of Chap. 5. And in the first place, as an Apostle that was at that time a prisoner for the Cause of Christ, he exhorts them to walk worthy of their heavenly vocation; expres∣sing the worthiness and answerableness of their walking, in these particulars: 1. In lowliness of mind, and meekness. 2. In long-suffering, and a loving-for∣bearance one of another. 3. That they would endeavour to maintain an union of heart and spirit, of judgment and affection, among the members of the Church; even such an union whereof the Spirit of God is the Author: which union is maintained by a peaceable disposition and deportment, that being the bondV. 3. In vin∣culo] per vin∣culum, i. e. per pacem quae a∣nimos con∣jungit. Vatab. or ligament that binds Christians together; whereas discord and divi∣sion cuts that bond asunder. And he inforces this exhortation to peace and unity, by an argument taken from those many things wherein the Church and all the true members thereof agree. He instances in seven, which are as so many bonds and engagements to this union. 1. The whole invisible Church of real Believers, is but one mystical body, knit by faith to Christ their Head, and by the bond of love among themselves; and the Catholick Church made up of all Christians, and true Churches in the world, is also one; be∣cause they have the same King, Laws, Word, Sacraments of admission and nutrition, which they visibly subject themselves unto. 2. There is one Spirit, who by his gifts and graces animates, moves, and governs this Body or Society of true believers. 3. The hope following upon their effectual vocation is one, that is, there is but one object of their hope, viz. Heaven and Eternal Glory. There is but one Heaven prepared for all the Saints; and their hoping to meet and live for ever in that one and the same Heaven, should be an argument to them to live in peace and concord here. 4. There is one Lord Jesus, who by his work of redemption hath obtained a right to rule over his people as Mediator, Lord-Deputy, and Administrator, under his Father, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. And Christ being not divided [1 Cor. 1.13.], there ought not to be any divisions in the Church. 5. There is one Faith, that is, one true and saving-faith by which both Jews and Gentiles are saved, namely, faith in the Messiah. 6. One Baptism, by which we own Christ, and profess our selves his followers, and take on us his Livery. There were indeed divers washings among the Jews; but now one Baptism only among Christians. 7. One God, who is the Father of Christ, and in him of all true believers [see Deut. 6.4. 1 Cor. 8.6.], who hath a soveraignty over all his creatures, whose powerful Providence runneth through them all, upholding them in their being; directing, disposing, governing of them all, and all their actions, and is in all the truly regenerate by the gracious operations of his Spirit. From Ver. 1, to the 7. Having press'd them to endeavour after unity, by an argument taken from those many things wherein the Church and all the true members thereof agree; he now answers an objection which he foresaw some would be apt to make against what he had said. They would object, That though there be many things wherein the Church and all the true members thereof agree; yet there are many things also wherein they differ. To this he answers, that the di∣versity of gifts and graces, and their divers measures, bestowed by Christ upon the several members of the Church, do all tend to unity, seeing they all come from one and the same Author, and are all given for the promoting one and the same End. This he proves out of Psal. 62.18. where David by a prophetical spirit speaking of things to come as already past, foretels that Christ should in a triumphant manner, ascend up on high, that is, to the highest Heavens, and should lead captivity captive; that is, as he had upon the Cross foiled all the spiritual enemies of his Church and people, and
begun to triumph over them; so in his ascension he should continue the tri∣umph [see Judg. 5.12.] as Conquerors us'd to do. And as they us'd to scatter the spoils, and other rich gifts, among the applauding-Citizens and Soldiers, so should Christ at his ascension pour forth and distribute a large measure of the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit unto his Church, and the seve∣ral members thereof: which Prophecy the Apostle shews was now fulfilled by Christ. He further declares, That Christ ascending to Heaven by his own di∣vine power, did presuppose his foregoing humiliation and abasement, in all the degrees of it, even his descending to the lower parts of the earth; which expression is to be understood, not by comparing the parts of the earth among themselves, but by comparing Earth with Heaven, the Earth being the lowest part of the World. And particularly, it either pointeth out his conception in the womb of the Virgin [see Psal. 139.15.], or his burial [expressed by a like phrase, Mat. 12.40.], with all the other steps of his humiliation inter∣vening. So that the Person who thus descended to take on him our humane nature, with the sensless infirmities thereof, is the same also who ascended to the highest Heavens, the seat of Majesty and Glory, far above all the vi∣sible Heavens, and that for this end, That he might fulfil all prophecies and predictions concerning himself (whereof this of David was one), and all those parts of his Mediatory Office which were yet to be perform'd in Heaven; and particularly, that he might fill and adorn all the members of his Church with the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit. He further sheweth, This was the end of Christ's appointing those extraordinary and ordinary Officers in his Church, which he then reckons up. First, Apostles, whom he says Christ did give at his ascension (though he sent forth some of them before, Mat. 10.1.), because some were then added to the Apostles [Acts 1.26. and 9.15. and all of them were then solemnly installed and publickly confirmed by Christ in their Office, by his visible pouring forth the gifts of the spirit in an extraordinary manner upon them, Acts 2. v: 3, 4. 2. Prophets, see 1 Cor. 12.28. who foretold things to come; and by the extraordinary as∣sistance of the Spirit, and Divine Revelation, expounded the writings of the old Prophets. 3. Evangelists, who were the companions of the Apostles in their travels [Gal. 2.1, 3.], and sent out by them as occasion offered it self, to water such Churches as they had planted [1 Cor. 3.6. 1 Tim. 1, 3.] and thee to remain until the Apostles should recall them, 2 Tim. 4.9. Such were Timothy, Titus, Silvanus, Apollos, Tychicus, &c. Lastly, Pastors and Teachers, which, according to some, are two distinct Offices, and so they think they are distinguished Rom. 12.7, 8. and 1 Cor. 12.8. In so much that by Pastors (as they conceive) are meant those, who besides their ability to open the Text, are chiefly gifted with the word of wisdom, wisely and powerfully to apply the word, for working upon the affections as the matter requireth. And the Teacher (to them) is the Catechist, who is gifted with the word of knowledg or ability to open the Scripture, and to establish Truth and confute Error. But there are others that take Pastors and Teachers for one and the same Office. However, the Apostle shews, that all these Gifts and Offices, though divers in themselves, yet are an argument to unity, be∣cause they are all given for the compacting and knitting together the Saints by the work of the Ministry,In opus in ministerii] in opus dispen∣sationis, i. e. ad dispensan∣dum & docen∣dum verbum ] pro  vel  Hebraicè Pisc. and for the edifying the body of Christ, and the particular members thereof, in faith and holiness: which work of the Mi∣nistry in thus edifying the body of Christ, is to last and continue to the day of judgment, till all that shall be saved, come (one after another), by means of one and the same faith (for kind, viz. faith in Christ) and the acknow∣ledgment of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, that is, till Christ's my∣stical body shall be compleat and perfect, and attain its full stature. He shews also, that another end unto which the work of preaching is subservient, is, To preserve from error, and that we should not be like children, wavering and inconstant, tossed with every wind of doctrine, nor be deceived with the cheat∣ing
arts, id est, Aleato∣riâ Fraude. and treacherous seducings of corrupt men. And further, the Mi∣nistry was ordained not only to preserve from error, but that believers cleaving to the truth, and living in love, may grow up in Christ pro . Grot.; that is, by ver∣tue and influence derived from him, may make progress in all Christian Ver∣tues. being united to him who is the Head. And that he might shew the com∣munion that the members of the Church-Militant have with Christ their Head, and with one another; and how all Gifts and Offices in the Church tend to the edification of the whole body, he uses a similitude taken from a natural body, which is wade up of several members joined together, and by cer∣tain junctures. of supply, viz. the Nerves and Arteries (by which the blood and spirits are conveyed to the several parts, from the Head and Heart) the particular members do not only receive nourishment to themselves, but con∣vey it from one to another, so that every member receives due encrease in mea∣sure and proportion to what it was to be, and to act; and so the whole body grows to maturity. Thus it is with all sincere believers, viz. with all the true mem∣bers of the Body of Christ, the Church Militant: They are joined to Christ the Head by faith, and to one another by love. And all the Offices and Functions of the Church are junctures of supply and subministration; through which, as through so many Channels, the knowledg of saving-truth, and matter of spiritual nourishment, is conveyed from Christ the Head, to the particular Members. And by that spiritual nourishment communicated to them from Christ (by the means of these conveyances), they grow in grace, accor∣ding to the effectual working of the Holy Ghost, which he works in every member, imparting to it such a measure of grace as he judgeth convenient, according to the place and function it holdeth in the body, and the use which he intends to make of it for the good of the Church: and so the whole body grows up in love to Christ the Head, and the particular members in love and charity one towards another. From Ver. 7, to the 17. 2. He earnestly beseeches and obtests them in the Name of the Lord Je∣sus, and as they would answer it to Him, Not to walk as other unconverted Gentiles walk, following that which their unrenewed minds dictates unto them, having their understandings darkned, so that they see not that which by the light of Nature they might see, being utterly estranged from that spi∣ritual life which Christ communicates to those who believe in him. And all this, through the great ignorance that is in them; the cause of which igno∣rance, is the great hardness of heart which they have contracted through a long course and custom in sin; insomuch that they wilfully refuse good, and are obstinately bent upon evil; being hardned, not only naturally from their birth (Psal. 51.5.), but voluntarily by their own wilfulness, Exod. 8.15; and judicially by God, Exod. 9.12. Yea, in a kind of senslesness and fearlesness of God's judgments, he shews, they give up themselves to all impurity, and to the committing of all the unnatural sins of the flesh, and that with gree∣diness. But he tells them, the knowledg of Christ, and his Doctrine (wherein they had been instructed), was utterly inconsistent with such dissoluteness and prodigious licentiousness; and this they would make to appear, if they had learn'd ChristSi ita edo∣cti estis Evan∣gelium, quo modo illud revera se ha∣bet, prout à Jesu ipso prae∣dicatum est. Grot. (speaking to them by his Ministers) in such a manner as they ought, and had been inwardly and effectually taught by his spirit, and had re∣ceived the divine truth as it was preached by himself, and is delivered in his Gospel. Which Gospel or Doctrine of Christ, he shews, does injoin them, 1. That they daily endeavour to put off and divest themselves of the old cor∣rupt nature (which bears a resemblance of the old Adam) by which they were led in the days of their unregeneracy, and which daily grows worse and more corrupt, and more corrupts and depraves a man by its deceitful lust∣ingsPer cupidi∣tates seducen∣tes. Grot., and carries him on to destruction, if it be not resisted and subdued. 2, That they seriously endeavour to have their understandingsAlludit ad ritum Baptis∣mi in quo ve∣stes depone∣bantur & re∣sumebantur. Grot. renewed, and to get a new quality of divine light in the supream power of their
soulsHîc, spiritus mentis, est ipsa mens; sic He∣braei dicunt lutum coeni. [Col. 3.10.] and that they put on the new man, taking care that not only their minds be renewed, but their wills and affections also, that they may indeed be new creatures, and live in the exercise of righteusoness and true holiness; which renewing-work is carried on by God's creating-power, who forms the new man after his own image. From Ver. 17, to 15. 3. He gives now six particular precepts belonging to the second Table; 1. To abstain from all lying (which is a sin prejudicial to humane society), and that they labour always to speak the truth. For we are all members of the same body of mankind. As therefore in the natural body, if one mem∣ber should defraud and circumvent another, it would be accounted monstrous; so it must needs be in them, if they allowed themselves in lying, to the inju∣ring of any man in the world, much more of their fellow-Christians, between whom there is a straiter union. 2. He advises them to take heed of sinful anger, which usually is rashly kindled [Prov. 14.17], and upon very light cause; and ordinarily exceeds the just bounds. If they find any such com∣motion or inflammation of mind in themselves as this, he exhorts them to suppress it speedily, even before the Sun go down; lest by giving way to it, and persevering in it, they should open the door to Satan to enter into their hearts, who would be ready enough to incite them, by his uncessant suggesti∣ons, to act some great evil or mischief. 3. He exhorts these among them, who in the time of their Paganism and unregeneracy had made no consci∣ence of Stealing, that now they should do so no more; but to be laborious in a good and honest Calling, that they may be able to spare something for the supplying the necessities of others. 4. He gives directions for the right order∣ing of the tongue, and forbids all corrupt and unsavoury communication and discourse, such as argueth a rotten and an unrenewed heart [Mat. 12.35.] and which is contagious and infectious to the hearers. He prescribes, That their speech should be seasoned with the salt of divine wisdom, that it may be a means of conveying grace to others, and working gracious effects upon them. And he inforces his exhortation with this reason, Because by corrupt commu∣nication they would grieve the holy Spirit of God: Not that he can pro∣perly be grieved; but he is said to be grieved, when we do that which in it self is apt to grieve him, if he were capable thereof; and which provokes him to do that, which grieved persons use to do, namely, to withdraw his gracious and comforting-presence. And all true believers should especially take heed, that they do not grieve this holy Spirit, because by his renewing and sanctifying of their hearts, he imprints the draught and lineaments, as it were, of his own image upon them, whereby they are not only set apart, and marked, and sealed, as his peculiar goods; but themselves also may be thereby assured that they are His, and shall be safely kept under that seal, until the day of the redemption of their bodies, that is, the resurrection and day of judgment, Rom. 8.23. Lastly, He amplifies and enlarges his second precept concerning the restraining of anger, by forbidding the several branches, degrees, and effects of it, such as are, bitterness, wrath, and fierceness, and such an∣ger as carries with it desire of revenge. Also clamour, or terous words, and loud menaces, evil speaking, or disgraceful contumelies; and malice, which is a rooted and setled anger. And as a proper remedy against all these, he ex∣horts them to exercise mutual kindness; neither carrying it loftily, nor mo∣rosely; and to be tender-hearted, having a sense of the miseries and infir∣mities of others; freely pardoning wrongs and injuries, setting God s exmple before their eyes, who freely pardons believers, in and through his Son, all their offences. From Ver. 25, to the end. Seeing they did all profess themslves to be Children of God by adoption,Chap. 5. he exhorts them to imitate their heavenly Father in the exercise of kind∣ness, mercy, and forgiveness; and hereby to evidence themselves to be his
Children indeed. And that they should walk in love, that is, that all their actions towards their Neighbours should be ordered by love: which exhortation he enforces by an argument taken from Christ's example, who loved us, and eminently evidenced his love, by giving himself freely, and of his own accord, even unto death for us; yea, offering himself a Propitiatory-sacrifice unto God, as was typified by the Levitical offerings and sacrifices; which sacrifices was highly acceptable to God, and is said to be of a sweet savour unto him [see Gen. 8.21.], because thereby he was satisfied and appeased. Next, he enjoins them to take heed of Fornication, and all other sorts of uncleanness, so usual among unconverted Gentiles in that City. As also, to beware of CovetousnessIn talibus urbibus maxi∣mè regnabat perlas & nefas rem augendi cupido. Nam non quaeritur unde habeas sed oportet habere., or injurious getting Estates. He would have them so free from those vices, that none of them, being Christians, might be once named or suspected as guilty of any of them; and that among themselves these vices might not be once named without detestation; remembring, that they were Saints by profession, separated from the world, and dedicated unto God. 3. That they would avoid all filthy impure discourse (which is contrary to decency, Christian gravity, and mo∣desty) and all foolish talking (which only discovers the speakers folly and indiscretion) and scurrilous jestingCùm testetur Aristoteles  saepa poni, pro ; non dubito si in hoc loco accipiendam esse vocem Casaub. Deus ipse post labores resici ani∣mum voluit ut ad labores novos reddantur homines alacriores. Et ad jocandum propensionem indidit mortalum animis; quae frustrà foret nisi honestè quis & ex virtute jo∣cari posset. Habet ergo Urbanus pro fie solam honestatem, ad quam dirigit omnem, quam ex ludis jo∣cique percipit voluptatem.; otherwise innocent facetiousness whereby the spirits may be refreshed, and the mind more fitted for serious things, is not forbidden. And he intimates to them. That Christians should be careful not only to avoid those things which are palpably gross and evil, and cried out against by all; but also such things which are inconvenient, and unbeseeming their Christian Pro∣fession. And therefore he exhorteth them, that instead of scurrilous jesting, they should for their mutual cheering, rather recount the favours and mercies they had recei∣ved from God (and particularly that great and wonder∣ful Mercy of redeeming them by his Son) and accor∣dingly excite and stir up one another to praise him for them. And that they might give the more heed to what he now wrote, he tells them, That this they might assure themslves of (and they could not be ignorant of it, if they well understood the Gospel), that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater (because he sets his prime affections of love, delight, and confidence, upon riches in that measure which is only due to God),V. 5. In Reg∣no Christi & Dei, hc. qui Deus est. Pro relativo prono∣mine, quando{que} usurpatur con∣junctio. Glass. hath ay right to the Kingdom of Heaven (which is the Kingdom both of the Father and the Son), unto which we can have no access but by and through the Son. And lest any should think within themselves, that these things he had now reproved, were no such great matters, or at least not so dangerous as he affirmed, he tells them, That all such suggestions were vain and deceiving; for those sins would certainly draw down the wrath of God upon those children of disobedience that went on in them, as they had done upon Sodom and Gomorrah. He advises them therefore, Not to join with those that lived in those sins, lest they should partake with them in their pun∣ishments. And he backs his advice with an argument taken from that blessed change that was wrought in them since they became Christians. They were formerly ignorant of God, and the way to Heaven (having blind minds, un∣renewed hearts, and living prophane lives), and were in a state of misery, liable to the wrath and curse of God [see chap. 4.18.]. But now they were light in the Lord, that is, enlightned by the Spirit of God, and brought to the saving-knowledg of God and Christ, and into a state of favour with God, and of joy and peace, and filial confidence flowing from the snse thereof; so that there was as much difference between this their present and former condition, as between darkness and light. And seeing they were so changed, thy should walk as the children of light. And he tells them, That the fruits of the spirit, dwelling in the hearts of the children of light, are all sorts of
goodness, righteousness, truth, and fidelity. And they that are children of the light, and acted by the holy Spirit, must labour to bring forth those fruits, and must diligently search and enquire what is the good and acceptable will of God, as 'tis revealed in his word, that they may conform themselves unto it. And further, he advises them to take heed of being partners or compa∣nions of wicked men in their sins (which are works of darkness, and which bring those that live and dye in them, without repentance, unto utter dark∣ness; but instead thereof (as occasion offered it self, and Christian prudence required, they should seriously reprove them: And if they could not conveni∣ently do it by words, yet they should be sure to do it by the holiness of their con∣versation, which might possibly prove a more effectual way of reclaiming them. For (he tells them) the wickedness of the unconverted Gentiles was so abominable, that it was even a shame to mention what was done by them in secret. ButV. 13. But all things being discovered by the light, are made manifest. Sic legit Hammondus. if those wicked practises were reproved by the light of God's word in the mouth of the Reprover, or by the light of his holy life, then they would be made manifest in their black and ugly colours, unto the actors of them. For the nature of light is to manifest and discover all things. And hereby he shews, they would imitate God himself whose great design in his word is, To convince men of their sins, and to call them to repentance, and thereby to convey the light and knowledg of Jesus Christ unto them. For his perpetual voice in the Gospel is, according to that saying of Isaiah, chap. 60. v. 1. (to which he seems here to allude) Arise thou that sleepest; and Arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine v. 14.] ] nimi∣rum in Evan∣gelii perpetuo tenore. Forsan & haec Chri∣stus olim dixerat ut il∣lud Act. 20.35 upon thee with his saving-light. In the next place he exhorts them to walk circumspectly, and with all the prudence they possibly could; and then they will be more fit to reprove sin in others: and they should be careful to redeem the time, that is, im∣prove it to the best advantage of glorifying God, and doing good to their neigh∣bours, because the days were evil, and full of troubles, so that opportunities of doing good might in a short time be taken from them. And further, that they labour to be acquainted with the will of God revealed in his word, whereby they may be directed in all their particular duties, and how to avoid the snares and temptations they may meet with. And because they lived among people much given to drunkenness, he cautions them to take heed of all ex∣cessive and immoderate drinking of wine, which transports men to insolent and outragious practises; and instead of filling themselves with wine (as those Hea∣thens us'd to do), they should labour to be replenish'd with the gifts and graces of the Spirit, which will fill their souls with joy and gladness, more than wine can fill drunkards with merriment. The wine, when it mounts into the head with its fumes, it makes a man talk idly and foolishly, and often transports him to sing lascivious and petulant songs. But when the Holy Ghost fills the heart of any man, if it excite him (as it does sometimes) to sing, it carries him to sing and set forth the praises of God. He exhorts them there∣fore to converse together as becomes Christians; and if they sing, that thir spiritual joy should vent it self in a melodious singing the praises of God in Psalms, and divine Hymns and spiritual Songs; their understandings, hearts, and affections, going along with the matter sung; so as it may tend to the glory of God, and their mutual edification: For they should be always that is, upon all due occasions, ready to offer up praise to God for all his mercies both spiritual and temporal, and that in and through the interes∣sion of Christ, by vertue of whose merits and stisfction only, our srvices of prayer and praise find acceptance with God [see Eph. 1.6.]. From Ver. 1, to 21. 5. Having exhorted them to such duties as blong to all Christians in ge∣neral, he comes now to thse which belong to them, as they are members of Families. And first, he premizes, that they should all observe that order which God had placed them in, whether natural or civil, and accordingly
submit themselves one to another, in the fear of God; that is, so as they may evidence and testife, that they truly fear God, who injoins that submission. This premized, He then exhorts Wives to submit themselves to their own Husbands, having a due esteem for them, which is a great root of love and submission. And the manner of this submission must be as to the Lord; that is, it must be willing and sincere, as resembling that submission they perform to Christ. It must flow from conscience and respect to that duty which they owe to Christ, who accounts that subjection flowing from respect to his Ordi∣nance, as obedience to himself. The grounds of this subjection, he shews, must be, 1. The Husband's headship and superiority, by reason of his Sex; in which respect the Man is call'd the Image of God in a sense peculiar to him∣slf which agreeth not to the woman, 1 Cor. 11.7. And God would have some resemblance of Christ's headship over the Church, held forth in the Husband's over the Wife. And as Christ is the Saviour of his body, and his dominion tends to the procuring and bringing about the Church's good and salvation; so the Husband's superiority and authority is given him for the procuring the good and welfare of his Wife; namely, that he may defend her from injuries, provide comfortably for her, as he is able; and direct her in things necessary, according to his power. And upon this account the Wife ought to practise this duty of submission, because her Husband's power and authority over hr, is for her good. For his dominion is not to be tyrannical or rigorous, but loving, gentle, and amiable; and such as the Wife may look upon as a mercy to her self, as well as a dignity to her Husband. And as Christ is the Head of the Church for its good, so the Husband is appointed the head of the Wife for her good and benefit. As therefore all that are regenerate, and true members of the Church, do willingly subject themselves to Christ; so he shews 'tis fit that Wives should be subject to their own Husbands in every thing that is lawful and honest. In the next place he comes to the duty of Husbands; exhorting them, Not to abuse that su∣periority which God hath given them over their Wives, by a domineering, harsh, or bitter carriage [see Col. 3.18.]; but instead thereof, to love them with a special and conjugal love, such as no other must share in. This he inforces from Christ's example, who loved his Church not in words only, but in deeds; testifying the greatness of his love, by giving himself for it [see v. 2. of this chap.], that he might translate it from a state of sin and death, to a state of grace and life; that he might regenerate and san∣ctifie it, that he might cleanse it, and do away the guilt of sin cleaving to believers, by justifying their persons [Rom. 8.1.]; and the filth, and power, and activity of sin, by the renovation of their natures. And the external means by which be effecteth all this, are, 1. Baptism, call'd here, the washing of water. And, 2. The Ministry of his word. And his end in thus cleansing and sanctifying his Church in this life, is, That it may be holy, not having blemish, spot, or deformity (that is, exempt from blame and reprehension); when it shall be presented to himself, as the Bride to the Bride∣groom, for the solemn consummation of the begun-marriage, Rev. 19.7. And according to this example, Husbands ought to love their Wives even as their own bodies, For there is so near a union between them, that he that loves his Wife, loves himself. 'Tis therefore as unnatural for a man, not to love his Wife, as to hate his own flesh; which all men are so far from doing, that they nourish and cherish it, and do all things imaginable for its preserva∣tion. And after the same manner does Christ also nourish and cherish his Church, and provide all things necessary for it, because his Church is as nearly join'd to him, as Eve was to Adam, of whom (being made of a rib taken out of his side with flesh on it) he said, Gen. 2.23. This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my self. So all believers, by reason of the spiritual union betwen Christ and them, are members of his body, and as it were of his flesh and bones, as Eve was said to be of Adam's. And
because the Wife is so nearly conjoin'd to her Husband, that she is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; therefore a man is to leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife (that is, to love his Wife more than them), and they twoThe Law saith, A man shall be joined to his Wife, and they two (not they three, or four) shall be one flesh. And this union cannot be dis∣solv'd, except in the case of Adul∣tery, Mat. 19.9. or wilful desertion of the one party persisted in, and that out of hatred of the Christian Profession of the other party, after all means used to the contrary, 1 Cor. 7.18. See pag. 99. of chap. 5. of the Harm. of the four Evang. shall be one flesh; that is, as one flesh, or one body. And this union between Man and Wife, he shews, resembles the union between Christ and his Church, which he calls a great mystery, because Christ and Believers come thereby to be not one flesh, but one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. But leaving this spiritual union of Christ and his Church, he concludes the matter he was upon, exhort∣ing the Husband to love his Wife as himself, and the Wife to reverence her Husband. From Ver. 21, to the end. 6.Chap. 6. He enjoins Children to be obedient to their Parents in all things that are pleasing to the Lord. 1. From the equity of it, Because the Law of God and Nature requires it. 2. Because this is the first Commandment of the se∣cond Table, which hath a particular promise annexed to it, viz. length of days; which promise is either actually fulfill'd by God; or else by change of the benefit he gives them a much better life in his own Kingdom for it. From Ver. 1, to 4. 7. He enjoins Fathers, that they be not too severe towards their Chil∣dren, nor abuse their fatherly power over them, by unjustly provoking them, or imbittering their spirits, which is done by denying them what is fit,See Lam. 4.3. or commanding them things in themselves unlawful, or inveighing against them with bitter wordsSee 1 Sam. 20. v. 30., or by immoderate correcting of them. But he tells them, their duty on the contrary is, To bring them up in good nurture, and to give them such admonitions and instructions as may teach them to live ac∣cording to the Doctrine of our Saviour, and the Rule of the Gospel. Ver. 4. 8. He enjoins Servants, in all lawful things to be obedient to their own Masters (who acording to the Laws of mn, and in things temporal be∣longing to the flsh or body, have the rule over them, though not over their Consciences); that they serve them with reverence, and fearCum mag∣na solicitudi∣ne. Estius. of offending them; that they serve them faithfully and sincerely, and with regard to Christ's command; and so in obeying them, they will srve Christ: that they serve them not only with eye-service, when they are present to overlok them, and that meerly that they may please them, and avoid their displea∣sure; but that they may approve themselves the faithful servants of Christ (who sees the heart), and such as desire to do what God enjoins them, chearfully; and accordingly set themselves to serve their Masters with good will, and a voluntary obedience; designing thereby not only to please them, but God also; and to serve Him, in duly serving their Masters, according to his command, remembring, that God will faithfully reompence either here (as he does sometimes) or hereafter [see Col. 3.24.] all those who make conscience of doing good, and performing their duty as service to him, and that whether they be bond-men or free. From Ver. 5, to 9. 9. He exhorts Masters, in doing the duty of their places towards their Servants, That they also do it as unto the Lord; that is, so as to endeavour to please and approve themselves unto God thereinWhich seems to be the meaning of that phrase Ye Maters, do the same things unto them; which is to be understood not of the duties themselves (which are much different from the duties of servants) but as to the manner of doing them, viz. with singleness of heart as to the Lord, and in obedience to his will and command.. And particularly, that they exercise their authority over them, not wrathfully and imperiously, but mildly and gently, remembring that they also have a Master above them in
Heaven, who will bring them to account, as for other things, so for their car∣riage towards srvants; for there is no respect of persons with him. Ver. 9. 10. In the conclusion of this Epistle, he encourages them to be strong in the Lord, that is, to act their faith on his Almighty Power and Strength; and to put on the whole armour of God, that is, all those divine and spiritual defensatives and weapons which Christ hath afforded them for the repelling of all the subtil temptations and stratagems of Satan. For they are to remember▪ that the Christians warfare is not only against flesh and blood, but the whole Army of unclean spirits, the usurping Princes and Potentates of this world (the greatest part whereof lies in darkness and ignorance) who rve about in the regions of the airHebraeo∣rum sententia est omnia a terrâ ad coelum nempe astrife rum plena esse talium spiri∣tuum. Grot.. Their danger therefore being so great, thy had need be harnss d with the whole Armour of God, that they may be able to r sst in the time of temptation, and to hold out to the end against all the assaults of Satan, or the allurements of the flesh and the world; that having done all required of them, they may be able to stand in the day of battl. The particular pieces of spiritual armour he advises them to put on, are thse: 1. The Military Girdle of Truth and Since∣rity. 2. The Breast-plate of Righteousness, whereby we are inclin'd, and do accordingly endeavour to give bth to God and man their due and right, Acts 24.16. 3. Seeing the way to Heaven is not smooth and eeven, but hath much trouble and temptation, many piercing briers and thorns, and much ruggedness in it, they should prepare themselves with Christian courage and resolution (by a frequent meditation on the Gospel which brings peace and salvation) to pass through those difficulties and hardships, and thereby they shall have their feet, as it were, shod and fenc'd against the inconvenience and craggedness of the way▪ as knowing God to be their reconciled Father in Christ, and that there is no wrath in their cup, and that their wearisom journey shall have a happy close. 4. Above all the rest, they should be sure to take the Shield of Faith, by which we believe the truth of God's word in general, and in a special manner do receive and rest on Christ for pardon and grace, as he is offered in the Gospel; which Faith, as a Shield, guardeth against temptations of all sorts, helpeth to repel them; yea, if any of the fiery darts of Satan, that is, his violent temptations, be shot into the soul, this grace quencheth the heat and horror of them, and the despair they are apt to kindle. 5. He exhorts them to take the Helmet of salvation, that is, the Hope of salvation [1 Thes. 5.8.], which is a grace whereby we patiently expect salvation [Tit. 1.2.] according to the promise of God; which assured and well-grounded hope of eternal salvation, supplies the place of an Helmet, se∣curing the head, and so fortifying and magnanimating the Christian in his spiritual warfare. 6. They should take the word of God, which supplieth the place of a Sword, to fight with against our spiritual Enemies, and is call'd here the Sword of the Spirit, because the Spirit of God hath revealed it [2 Pet. 1.21.], and doth join his own power and efficacy with it, to ena∣ble us thereby to resist and drive away the devil, to chase away temptations, and to slay and kill the inward lusts and corruptions of our own hearts. 7. The seventh piece of Armour, or rather a duty to be practis'd, and a means to be used for the obtaining of all those forementioned pieces of spiri∣tual Armour, from God, together with the right skill to make use of them against our spiritual Enemies, is Prayer, whereby we presnt our desires to God for things agreeable to his will [1 Joh. 5.14.] in the name of Christ [Joh. 16.23.] with confssion of our sins, and a thankful acknowledgment of his mercies, Phil. 4.6. Which duty he shew should be thus performed. 1. They must pray always, that is▪ upon every occasion, in all their necessi∣ties, and in every business, as the matter requires; yet not so as never to in∣termit, but so as not to give quite over, but to return to it again. 2. They must use all kinds of prayer, namely, not only prayerVid. Grot. in loc. strictly taken,
whereby we seek those good things we want, from God; but also Supplica∣tion, whereby we deprecate evils and judgments, whether felt or feared. 3. They must pray in the spirit, that is, with the heart and spirit, being stirr'd up and assisted by the Spirit of God, Rom. 8.26, 27. 4. To prayer they must join watchfulness. And 5. Importunate perseverance, reiterating their pe∣titions for the same blessings, as oft as occasion offereth it self, until they be granted. See 2 Cor. 12.8. Luke 18.5. And lastly, Their prayers must be offered up not only for themselves, but for others; none are to be excluded, who are in a capacity to be bettered by them [see 1 Joh. 5.16.]; no, not our very Enemies; but the Saints, as they are to have the chiefest room in our hearts, so also the chiefet share in our prayers. And the Apostle desires, that he himself in particular may be remembred in their prayers, desiring them to beg of God on his behalf, That God would give him a gift and dex∣terity of ready uttering, and expressing his conceptions in his publick preach∣ing, together with boldn ss and courage, conjoin'd with gravity and prudence, to deliver all his message as he ought to do, without fear or partiality; that he might make known the mystery of the Gospel with which he was intrusted. For the maintaining of which, though he was prsecuted, and at prsent in bondsThat is, in the custody of a Souldier, with whom he might go abroad, having (as the custom of some Prisoners was) a Chain on his right arm, which was tyed to the Soldier's left arm., yet he did still continue to preach it, as an Ambassador of Christ. From Ver. 10, to 20. He now concludes his Epistle, telling them, That he had sent Tychicus (whom he highly commends as a faithful Minister in the word of the Lord) to inform them particularly of his condition, and that he might comfort their hearts by his presence, and by relating to them God's gracious dealing with him in his sufferings. He shuts up all, wishing unto them, 1. Peace, that is, peace with God with their own consciences, and with one another, and all sorts of prosperity. 2. An encrease of mutual love and charity, and of faith; all which graces flow from God the Father as the Fountain, and from Jesus Christ as the Conduit-pipe, through the vertue of whose merits and interces∣sion, all saving-benefits are conveyed unto us. He concludes all, wishing that the favour of God, and his grace, may be daily more and more manifested towards all them that love our Lord Jesus in sincerity, that is, that mani∣fest the ardor and sincerity of their love to Christ, by the purity and incor∣ruptness of their lives and conversations. From Ver. 20, to the end.
SECT. XI. ABOUT this time, as 'tis probable, the Apostle wrote his Epistle to the HebrewsThe name [Hebrew] was common to all the Jews, the posterity of Heber and Abraham, who were thereby put in mind of their Fathers separating themselves from profane persons and idol ters. Eber withdrew hmself from the wicked world in his time, and retained the primary language in the confusion of Tongue▪ (called from him the Hebrew tongue) and propagated it to his posterity, see Gen. .21. Numb. 24.24. And so Abraham also withdrew himself from the wicked world in his time▪ bing caled of God, Gen 12.1. and so became another Father of the Church. Where∣upon, as he was called an Hebrew from Heber, Gen. 14.13. so all his posterity were called Hebrews from him. (that is, the believing-Jews, the posterity of Abraham), and sent it by Mark; who having delivered it where Paul appointed him. went away to Peter now at Babylon; for Peter mentioneth Mark there with him, 1 Pet. 5.13; and seems to speak directly of this Epistle in those words of his, 2 Pet. 3.15, And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, even as our beloved Brother Paul, according unto the wisdom given unto him, hath written unto you. Now that PaulSome think Paul did not express his name in the beginning of this Epistle, as he us'd to do in others, lest some Jews (who were possess'd with prejudice against him) if they had seen his name in the beginning of it, might have been hindred from duly weighing the matters he wrote of. did write unto them while he was a Prisoner at Rome, those words Heb. 10.34, do sufficiently intimate, For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, &c. The occasion of this Epistle seems to be this. Many of the believing-Hebrews had entertained the faith of Christ, and yet adhered too much to Moses and the Levitical Priesthood and Ordinances, and possibly were something doubtful in their minds whether Jesus of Nazareth were indeed the true Messias or no. Yet for their entertaining him so far as they did, they were not only reproached and reviled by their Countrey-men, as Apostates from the Law; but were greatly persecuted by them. The Apostle understanding their state, wrote this Epistle, partly to instruct them, and partly to support and encourage them. The Parts of it are two: 1. Informatory. 2. Hortatory. In the first he informs them of the transcendent excellency and dignity of Christ's Person and Office; shewing and decla∣ring, (1.) That he was God, ch. 1. (2.) More excellent than Angels, notwithstanding his Humanity and Humiliation, the cuses whereof are there assigned, ch. 2. (3.) A more excel-Prophet than Moses. By Moses the people were led but only towards Canaan. By faith in Christ believers enter into a better rst ch. 3. and 4, to ver. 14. (4.) A more excellent High-Priest than Aaron, from v 14 of ch. 4, to v. 11 of ch. 5. (5.) A more excellent King and Priest than Melchizedeck. In treating of whom he prefaces something by way of reproof concerning their
dulness and improficiency, and exhorts them to make progress (and not to stick in their first principles), and to be stedfast in the faith, representing to them the horrible danger of re∣lapsing after they have tasted the gifts of the Spirit. From v. 11 of ch. 5, to v. 19 of ch. 10. In the Second part, he practically exhorts them to sundry Christian duties. From v. 19 of ch. 10, to the end. THE Apostle intending now to represent to the Christian Hebrews the ex∣cellency of the New Testament above the Old, he shews them,The Epistle to Hebrews. Chap. 1. That God in the former ages of the world spake to their Fathers and Ancestors by the Pro∣phets, manifesting his will unto them by parts. and piece-meals, now a part of it, and then another (as the capacity of the people in sundry times did require), and in divers manners, sometimes by lively voice, sometimes by visions and dreams, sometimes by inspiration and immediate revelation, sometimes by Urim and Thummim, sometimes by signs from Heaven, some∣times by Types and symbolical representations; but now in these last daysThe last days are to be reckoned from the time Christ began to execute his Ministerial Function, to the end of the world., that is, these Gospel-days, he hath spoken to us (who are the children and successors of the Fathers) by his Son: See Mat. 11.27. And having mentioned the Son of God, the true Messias, the Saviour of the world; he sets before them the transcendent excellency of his Person, declaring and asserting, 1. His Deity and Godhead, and so pointing out his Kingly-office. This he proves by many arguments. (1.) He is the Son of God, and so more ex∣cellent than all the Prophets by whom God formerly spake. (2.) As by na∣ture he is truly and properly the Son of God, and Heir and Lord-Proprietor of all creatures both in heaven and earth; so he was ordained and appointed to be so, as he is Mediator, by the External Counsel of God the Father, Psal. 2.8. that as the Father is Lord over all, so the Son might be also. And 'twas very fit it should be so, because (3.) it was by him, as having his being from eternity, and being the Eternal Wisdom of the Father that the Worlds were made, that is, all things above and below, visible and invi∣sible; by him (I say) not as a meer Instrument, but as a primary and prin∣cipal Agent therein with the Father, Joh. 5.19. Joh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. (4.) He is the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express Image of his Person. As the brightness issuing from the Sun is of the same nature with the Sun, and cometh naturally and necessarily from the Sun, and is of the same conti∣nuance with the Sun, and yet the Sun and the brightness are distinct each from other, and the one is not the other; so the Father and the Son are of one and the same essence, they are coeternal; the Son is from the Father by eternal generation, and the Person of the one is distinct from the other, Joh. 5.17. And lastly, The incomprehensible glory of the Father most brightly shi∣neth forth in the Son, Joh. 17.5. And He is the express image of his per∣son, that is, as no one thing can be more like another, than the picture or image on the thing stamped, as to the Seal or Instrument wherewith it was stamped, the one carrying the very form of the other; so Christ is the express image of the Person of the Father: First, As he is the second Person in the Sacred Trinity; the whole Divine Essence, and all the Divine Properties being communicated to him. 2. As he is Immanuel, God with us, his Humane Na∣ture being hypostatically united to the Divine Nature; and so he is visibly the Character or express Image of God. For in Christ incarnate, the Divine Pro∣perties
are most conspicuous, as, Almighty Power, Infinite Wisdom, Truth, Justice, Mercy, and the like. In Christ as God-man, dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. And in this respect Christ saith of him∣self, Joh. 14.9. He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father also. As he that seeth the Character or Figure which is on the thing stamped, sees therein the figure that is on the Seal wherewith it was stamped. 5. He up∣holds, preserves, orders, and governs all things made, by the word of his powerUt Reges verbo suo & mandato subdits facilè gubernant; ita filius Dei sine ulla difficultate, omnipo∣tente suâ providentiâ ac voluntate, quasi verbo solo mundum sustinet, & regit, that is, by his powerful Providence. As the Fa∣ther supports and gverns all things made, so doth the Son. 6. By offering up himself a Sacrifice on the CrossFrom the Regal Office of Christ, he proceeds to his Priesthood, the first part whereof is noted in these words. Faith applies the me∣rit of Christ's Sacrifice for our justi∣fication, and draws vertue from him for our sanctification., he hath done that which is sufficient to purge the soul from the guilt of sin, and which actually doth it, when it is rightly applied; so that his blood doth truly cleanse from all sin, 1 Joh. 1.7. The Priest's Sacrifice was of unreasonable beasts, but Christ's Sacri∣fice was of Himself. 'Tis true, only the Humane Na∣ture of Christ was offered up, 1 Pet. 3.18. and 1 Pet. 4.1. yet by reason of the hypostatical union of his two Natures in one Person, He is said to give himself, Eph. 5.2. and to offer up himself, Heb. 7.27. and to sacrifice himself, Heb. 9.26. 7. Having by his death offered up a suf∣ficient Sacrifice for the expiation of our sins, he rose from the dead, and ascend∣ed into Heaven, and sate down on the right hand of the Throne of the Ma∣jesty on high, there to continue an High-Priest for ever to make intercession for us: so that he was so far from being vanquish'd and swallowed up by his suf∣ferings for our sins, as thereby way was made for his entrance into the highest degree of glory and dignity that could be attained unto. 8. The Apostle shews, That Christ is above Angels, having a more excellent name than they, by how much the name Son is more excellent than the name Angel or Messenger. And the name of the Son of God is by inheritance due to Him, being ac∣cording to his Divine Nature the Son of God by eternal generation; and as Man, being God's Son, because by assumption of the Humane Nature into per∣sonal union with the Godhead, he is made so to be, Luke 1.35. So that the same person who was the Son of God, and to be incarnate, is now the Son of God inarnated. Further, they might consider, that Christ's Divine nature is infinitely more excellent than the Angelical: yea, his Humane nature, by vertue of its hypostatical union with the Divine, hath likewise a dignity transcendently surpassing the Angelical nature; Christ having, as Mediator between God and man a more eminent Function than belongs to any Angel. This last argument the Ap stle confirms with eight reasons in this Chapter, whereof the sven first are taken out of so many places of Scripture; 1. From Psal. 2.7. where God the Father speaking of his Son's incarnation (which was first wrought in and by his conception, and then manifested to the world by his birth), Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, that is, de∣clared thee to the world to be my only begotten Son. As if God the Father had thus said to the Son: Thou, and thou alone, art truly and properly my Son, not by grace or adoption, but by nature and eternal genera∣tion; and now I do in this last age of the world declare thee so to be, by thine Incarnation, Doctrine, Works, Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension into Heaven; whereby it manifestly appears, that thou, infi∣nitely surpassest all the Angels in Heaven. 2. From 2 Sam. 7.14. I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son. In which place, in Solomon the Type, God promises the sending of the Messias, whom he would openly acknowledg for his Son, and so declare him to the world. 3. From Psal. 97.7. which contains a prophecy of Christ's Royalty. Now says the Apostle, when God the Father speaks there of bringing in again
his first begottenChrist is the first begotten of God, in regard of the eternity of his Sonship. He was begotten before any creature was made, therefore stiled the first-born of every creature, Col. 1.15 Christus meritò adorandus, ut pote qui sit primogenitus Dei filius, quia ante eum nullus; & simul unigenitus quia solus est Proprius Dei filius Joh. 1.18. Rom. 8.32. & Col. 1.15. vocatur , h. e.  primo-ge∣nitus ante omnem creaturam. Ali∣vocem eam Metaphoricè interpre∣tantur, scil. Dominum ac Principem∣per Metaphoram, à primogenitis Ve∣teris Test. similitudine ductá, qui post-genitorum erant Domini. Cum inducit in orbem terrarum] h. e. cum de inductione loquitur per Metonym. subjectae materiae pro adjuncto. Qualis vero inductio & adventus Christi hîc intelligitur? Quae ex Psal. 97. (de quo hic agi∣tur) ad Christi regnum describan∣dum aderuntur, illa illustriora sunt quàm ut videantur statui ejus humili posse convenire. Id circo alii de se∣cundo Adventu ad judicium inter∣terpretantur, quo stipatus erit An∣gelorum adorantium ac servientium satellitio: qui Angeli, per metapho∣ram ii appellantur, quod sint Deo similes potestate, quemadmodum, & eadem ratione Magistratui id nomen tribuitur. Ps. 82.1, 6. Ps 138.1., in a glorious manner to judg the world, he says, Let the Angels of God worship him. And therefore he that is to be worshipped, is greater than they that are to worship him. 4. From Psal. 104.4. where the Psalmist speaking of God's glo∣rious power in creating the heavens, and the waters, clouds and winds under the heavens; before he descen∣deth lower to the earth, and the things thereon, he mentioneth the Angels, whom he hath made spiritual substances, speedy and active, of a lively and swift na∣ture (not flesh, which is lumpish and heavy), and useth them as his Ministers, in executing his great works both in heaven and earth; and sheweth, how they are ready to serve him at his beck, as the Winds, and flashes of Lightning, and other Meteors areSome render it, Who maketh his Angels winds, and his Ministers a flame of fire, that is, who useth them as Winds and Lightning.. So that the ar∣gument from that place lyes thus: They that are made Spirits and Ministers, are inferior to him that made them so: but so the Angels were made by Christ; therefore they are inferior to him. 5. From Psal. 45.6, 7; which Psalm declareth, That Christ is true God; that, as Mediator, he hath an everlasting King∣domThat phrase of delivering up the Kingdom to his Father, 1 Cor. 15 24. must be understood of the manner of his government by his Ministers, Ordinances, and other means. For all things being accomplished by them for which they were ordained, they shall cease, &c., which began at his ascension, when he was actually set upon his Throne in Heaven; that his go∣vernment is a righteous government; that he ordereth all things justly and righteously, loving righteousness, and hating iniquity. And that he might be such a King, God (even his God and Father, who deputed and sent him, and entred into Covenant with him, as he was Head of his mystical Body, Isa. 42.6.49.8.) anointed his Human Nature (yet so as united to the Divine Nature, both making one Person) with the Oil of gladness, that is, with the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, which quickned and made him joyful in all his undertakings for our redemption, and which re∣joyce the hearts of all such as receive of these gifts and graces from him. Which anointing he received, not in measure, but abundantly, above what was ever impart∣ed either to Angels, or any of the membersQuoad officium Christus nul∣los habet ; solus est Media∣tor. Juxta naturam humanam Chri∣stus  habet omnes omnino homines. Quia verò natura huma∣na in Christo condita est ad imagi∣nem Dei,  habet omnes fi∣deles, quos ídeo pro fratribus agnos∣cit, ipse promogenitus inter multos fra∣tres. Camer. Ʋnxit te oleo laetitiae prae sodalibus tuis, h. e. spiritualibus donis, & sapientiae thesauris, te locu∣pletavit supra tam omnia quam sin∣gula mystici corporis tui membra. Jacob. Capell. of his mystical Body. 6. From Psal. 102.25, 26, 27. from whence he proves, That the Son is Jehovah, one in essence with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, who in the beginning of timeV. 10. Terra dicitur fundata, similitudine sumpta ab aedificiis. created both Heaven and Earth, and all the creatures therein; therefre he was before them all, and eternal, and so more excellent than any of them. And further to prove this, he shews, That the heavens shall wax old like a garment; that is, shall decay by degrees, or rather at last shall come to an end; and as Vestures, when they are of no longer use, are foldedUbi usui amplius non sunt solent complicari & abjici, sicut coeli, scil. aër, & aether aufe∣rentur. Grot. Some think it should be read  mutabis, according to the Hebrew, and not , according to the IXX. But it was ordinary for the Apostles to cite Scriptures as they were found then in the Greek Bibles, though they varied from the Hebrew; because those Greek Bibles, and not the Hebrew, were in use among those to whom they wrote. up, and thrown aside; so when these natural Heavens shall be of no longer use, thy
shall as to their present condition be laid aside, and God shall change them; for though their substance shall be the same, yet in respect of their qualities they shall be changed, and shali be made now more glorious than before, Isa. 34.4. Isa. 66.22. And in that they shall at length be changed, they may be said to perish, Mar. 13.31. The Heavens may be said to wax old as doth a gar∣ment, in that they are appointed to an end; to an end, I say, of what they are now, 2 Pet. 3.10. But Christ is Immuta∣bleAeternitas Christi explicatur ex comparatione cum rebus creatis, sive in praeteritum tempus, quo Christus omnes res creatas praecessisse dicitur; sive in futurum, quo dicitur per∣mansurus illis pereuntibus., Mal. 3.6. For as he was before all time, and continueth in all ages, so he will beyond all time continue invariable. This Immutability attributed to Christ, is properly to be understood of his Divine Nature, which was no ways altered by assuming the Manhood, but re∣maineth the very same it was before. And in regard of his Humane Nature, his years shall not fail, in that being raised from the dead, he dieth no more, Rom. 6.9, but continueth and liveth for ever, Heb. 7.24, 25. 7. From Psal. 110.1, where God the Father in his eternal Decree predestinating his Son to be the Messias, and to execute in time the Of∣fice of a Mediator, saith unto him, Sit thou on my right handThis Dignity is not ascribed to his Humanity, singly, in it self considered; but in supposito, as it hy∣postatically subsists in the Person of the Son of God. 'Tis not the Humanity in it self singly taken, that sits on the right hand of God; but the Huma∣nity of that Person that sits on the right hand of God. As in the in∣carnation, the Humanity did not be∣come God, but the Humanity then became the Humanity of God. And Christ now sitting at the right hand of God, doth reign every where, even as Man also, though his Hu∣manity be not every where; as a King doth in his Kingdom, though his Body be not every where. By the particle [until], what is affirm'd of the time past, is not de∣nied for the time to come. (importing the super-eminent degree of Honour and Dignity he should be advanced to after his Ascension, as a consequent and reward of his exina∣nition and Passion) until I make thine enemies (viz. all that are enemies to thy Kingdom, the Devil, Anti∣christ, all wicked men) thy footstool; that is, utterly subdue them, and put them under thy feet.This Dignity is not ascribed to his Humanity, singly, in it self considered; but in supposito, as it hy∣postatically subsists in the Person of the Son of God. 'Tis not the Humanity in it self singly taken, that sits on the right hand of God; but the Huma∣nity of that Person that sits on the right hand of God. As in the in∣carnation, the Humanity did not be∣come God, but the Humanity then became the Humanity of God. And Christ now sitting at the right hand of God, doth reign every where, even as Man also, though his Hu∣manity be not every where; as a King doth in his Kingdom, though his Body be not every where. By the particle [until], what is affirm'd of the time past, is not de∣nied for the time to come. Not that the Son shall leave off all Rule and Reign; but that he shall then leave off the administration of that Dele∣gation which he had formerly undertaken as Mediator; there being then no more need of it, or of his using those means and actings which formerly he did, when his enemies are all fully overcome, and his Church fully gathered. And thenceforth he shall reign together with his Father to all eternity, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Dan. 7.14. Luke 1.33. So that the Apostle's Argument lyes thus: He that sits at God's right hand in glory and dignity, is much more excellent than those Creatures that are only Ministers; and such is the condition of Christ, as he proves from this verse; and such is the condition of Angels, as he proves from the next. For they are ministring spirits sent forth from God (having no other Lord that hath power to send them) to mi∣nister for the good of them who shall inherit salvation, that is, that blessed and glorious estate which is in Heaven reserved for the whole mystical body of Christ. For being the children of God, they are joint-heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.16, 17. and therefore God appoints these his servants to attend them for their good. From v. 1, to the end. Chap. 2.Wherefore seeing Christ was a Teacher so much superior to all that came before him (yea, to the Angels themselves), he shews, they ought greatly to heed, and regard, and faithfully retain the Doctrine of the Gospel, which had been preached to them, lest they be like leaking-vessels, letting it slip out of their minds and memories. For if the Law given by the ministry of An∣gels [Acts 7.38.] was firm, stable, and inviolable, and might not be neglected or disbeyed, and the transgressorsTransgres∣sion, by a Me∣tonymy of the effect, is put for the trans∣gressor. Eph. 1.23. Tit. 2.11. and disobeyers of it, were justly and severely punished; he asks, how could they expect to escape who neglect the Gospel which reveals the great salvation purchased by Christ. Which glorious Gospel was first published by Christ himself, in the most clear and distinct manner that ever it was published, and was confirmed by his Apostles,
who heard his Sermons, and saw his works, God bearing witness to their Doctrine by sundry glorious miracles, and the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost poured out upon them, according to his own good will and pleasure. From Ver. 1, to 5. And that he may further perswade them, that more heed is to be given to the word of Christ, than to the word spoken by Angels; he shews them, That God hath given a greater authority to Christ, than ever he did to Angels. For He hath not put the Church, or Kingdom of the Messiah, of which here he treats (called here  the world to come, in re∣ference to the Old-Testament-times, and to those who lived before Christ was exhibited in the flesh, and longed to see this new world, see Mat. 13.17.) in subjection to Angels, but unto his Son, and that as He is God-man: and therefore in his Kingdom the Angels are to be in subjection to him, and not to be adored with him. This he proves from Psal. 8,Hic Psalmus sensu primùm obvio agit de Adamo, & semine ejus: sensu autem mystico referri debet, & ab Hebraei sapientibus referebatur ad Messiam, & semen ejus. Nam Adamum figuram gessisse Messiae recepta erat illis temporibus sententia ut diximus, Rom. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.45. Grot. whre what the Prophet spake of Man in the general, the Apostle shews may in a higher and sublimer sense be understood of Christ, who in the state of his humiliation was (to outward appearance) an ordinary man) yet God was mindful of him, and careful to afford him all needful succour; and though for a small space of time, viz. about thirty three years, he subjected him to a condition inferior to that of An∣gels (that he might perform all works of obedience and suffering that were requisite for the accomplishing man's redemption: yt after he had suffered in the flesh, he highly exalted him, and advanced him to Royal dignity (the most excellent that can be), crowning him with glory and honour, and gi∣ving him authority and dominion over the works of his hands, and putting all the creatures whatsoever (yea, the good Angels and wicked Spirits) in subjection under his feet; so that all must yeild obeysance to him, some as his enemies perforce; others willingly. And in that the Father is said to have put all the creatures whatsoever under him, 'tis manifest he hath left no∣thing unsubjected to him. And though we see not, says he, for the present all his enemies perfectly subdued, yet they shall be in due time; so that there is a further subduing of them still to be expected. However this we know, That Jesus, who in the state of his humiliation (that he might suffer death, and be a sacrifice to expiate the sins of men) was made, for a little time, lower than the Angels, is now highly exalted: And the reason why he was thus humbled, was, that he might through the free favour of God tastThe ground of this phrase may arise from the ancient custom of the Grecians in putting men to death by giving them a Cup of Poyson to drink. See Joh. 18.11. Mat. 20.22, 23. death, that is, partake of it (though not be swallowed up by it) , for the redeeming of allMors Christi est sufficiens reme∣dium pro omnibus, sed non sufficiens medium sine fide, Mar. 16.16. Joh. 12.32. There is an indefinite offer of the benefit of Christ's death to every one, none excepted, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. sorts of men, and of every particular person that shall repent and believe in him, see Joh. 10.15. For God (who is the supream Cause and untimate End of all things) having a purpose to bring many sons to gloryWhether this act of bringing many sons to glory, be attributed to the Father or the Son, there is no great incongruity. For the Father and the Son are one in essence, mind, will, and work. Whatsoever things the Father doth, these also doth the Son, Joh. 5.19. The sons of God and the sons of Christ are all one, even the rege∣nerate, and adopted. saw it convenient to make Him (who was to be the Captain of their salvation, and to guide and lead them to heaven) perfectly, and every way fit for that office, by exposing Him to many sufferings, and a cruel death, and so to make him a compleat and perfect Redeemer; there needing nothing more to be added to his sufferings for the satisfying of Divine Justice, and meriting remission of sins and eternal salvation. For, though Christ was ever perfect in himself; yet for bringing us to glory, much was wanting, till he had finished his sufferings. But by his sufferings he made up whatsoever was requisite thereunto. And if any should ask, How could Christ suffer and
dye? he answers, That Christ, who sanctifies us by his holy Spirit, took our humane nature upon him (a humane soul and body) and so became of one nature with us, for which cause he is not asham'd to call and acknowledg his sanctified ones for his brethren, as he proves from Psal. 22.22; where, though in the first sense the words may be understood of David, who pro∣fesses that he will declare the Name, that is, the Attributes and Counsels of God in the midst of the Israelites, his brethren [see Deut. 17.20.]; yet in a sublimer sense they ought to be understood of Christ, who declared the Name, that is, whatsoever is meet to be known of God, viz. his Di∣vine Excellencies, Counsels, and ActionsSee Joh. 8.26.28. Joh. 17.6, 8. Joh. 15.15., and that unto his brethren, see Joh. 20.17. And as David sang praises to God in the midst of the Church or Congregation and Assembly of God's people; so did Christ pnblickly set forth God's praise among his Disciples, Mat. 26.30. And as a further evi∣dence of Christ's Humanity, the Apostle brings in two other Testimonies; the first from Psal. 18.2, where Christ, under the type of David, professes to trust in God, and to rest on him, to be supported and carried through all his suffer∣ings and undertakings: And from Isa. 8.18. where the Prophet IsaiahMany speeches of the Pro∣phets concerning themselves, and many prophecies concerning Cyrus and others (who were types of Christ), are in the New-Testament applied to Christ, being one way, and in one manner, verified of them; and in another way, and in another manner, many times fulfilled in him. Dr. Richardson. declares, That himself, and the Children God had given him, were for signs, as their names intimated, to foretell and fore-signifie the good∣ness of God to the Jews, and tht he would be with them, and help them against their enemies. Now that which was historically true of Isaiah and his children, the Apostle shews may be fitly applied to Christ. The Prophet and his Children were a type of Christ, and of the faithful which believe in him (whom God hath of his free-grace given unto him, to be fitted and brought to glory) who are his children, begotten to him by his Spirit in the Ministry of his Gospel; whom (by way of reioycing for the good success of his Ministry) he presents with himself unto his Father, as one who faith∣fully fulfilled the charge committed to him, in fitting them for glory, and bringing them to it, though in the world they were accounted Wonders and Monsters. The Apostle further shews, That Christ, out of love to his Chil∣dren, would partake of the same humane nature with them, that he might by his own death on the Cross satisfie the Justice of God for them, and so eva∣cuate and destroy the power of the Devil, which he, as an Executioner, hath by the Law against sinners. And another end of his death, was, That he might deliver his Children from the fear of death (both temporal and eternal), to the bondage of which they were before subject. And being to suffer death for those ends, certain it is, that he took not on him the na∣ture of Angels, but the humane nature, and was of the very substance of man, and was born of the seed of Abraham, to whom the promise that the Messiah should come of his seed, was often made [Gen. 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18.]. Wherefore it became him in all things to be like his brethren, sin only excepted [Heb. 4.15.], that he might be a compassionate High-Priest, and faithful in all that he was to transact and negotiate with God on the behalf of man, and that he might make atonement and reconciliation for sinners by the Sacrifice of Himself. And lastly, That having himself been expos'd to so many sufferings and temptations, he might more readily pity and succour his members when they are tempted. From Ver. 5, to the end. Chap. 3.The Apostle having distinctly set forth the Divine Nature of Christ, and his Kingly-office, in the first Chapter, and his Humanity in the Second; he now comes to set forth his Prophetical-office in this, and part of the next Chapter. And that he might set forth his Prophetical-function with grea∣ter advantage, in the first place he exhorts the believing-Hebrews, to whom
he wrote (who were effectually called to embrace the faith of Christ, and thereby raised to a hope and expectation of heavenly things) to consider and ponder in their hearts the high dignity and excellency of Christ (that so they might constantly adhere to him, and obey him) who was sent with Com∣mission from his Father to preach that Gospel to them which they professed to believe, and to be their High-PriestThe Function of an Apostle and High-Priest, were the greatest Functions that ever God instituted in his Church. None greater than an Hi h Priest under the Law. None greater than an Apole under the Gospel. Both never conjoin'd in one man, but here. also, to make atonement for their sins. Of the first of these he treats in this, and to the 14 verse of the next Chapter, and then proceeds to speak of the other. For the setting forth of his Prophetical-office, he declares thse parti∣culars: 1. Because the Jews had generally too high a conceit of Moses, and were apt to profess themselves his Disciples in opposition to Christ [see Joh. 9.28.]; he tells them, That as Moses was faithful in deliver∣ing all things committed to his charge, that either concern'd the service of God, or the welfare of the people of the Jews: So Christ was as faithful in delivering the mind and will of his Father, who deputed and appointed him to this Office. He was as faithful in his message for the changing the Levitical Ordinances and Priesthood, as Moses was in appointing them. 2. He shews, that Christ was much to be preferr'd before Moses, though Moses, compar'd with other men, was a person very extraordinary. And for the proof of this, he makes use of two Metaphors, the one taken from a Builder, and an House; the other from an Heir and a Servant. 1. As the Builder of the House is justly accounted worthy of more honour than the House; so Christ (who is the Builder1 Pet. 2.5. Eph. 2.20. All that are brought into the Church, are built by Christ; that is, have their gifts and graces, their functions and priviledges, from Him. of the House (his Church) is worthy of more honour than Moses, who is himself but a part of that House. And as no house, nor part of an house, is built by it self; so neither is the Church. But Christ, who is God, is the builder of the Church, and every member of it, and also of all things else; and so more excellent than Moses. 2. As a Son and Heir ruling over his own house, is more excellent than any person that is only a Servant therein; So Christ is to be look'd upon as a Son, and Moses but as a Servant. Moses was faithful indeed, in the Church, as a Servant, to te∣stifie and declare that which he had received, and which was afterwards more fully and openly to be spoken and declared concerning Christ and his King∣dom: but Christ, as a Son and Heir, having rule over his own house, gives precepts and commands by his own authority. And he shews them, how they may approve themselves parts and members of this House or Church, viz. if they hold fast their faithFaith is that grace whereby we are united to Christ, receive spiri∣tual life from him, are made lively stones, whereby we grow up an holy Temple; yea, whereby Christ dwel∣leth in our hearts, and so we be∣come his house. Dr. Gouge in loc. in Christ, and their resolute profession thereof, and their hope and expectation of the heavenly reward (which rejoiceth the heart, and supports it under afflictions), and if they persevere in the exercise of those graces with stability and constancy to the end [see Col. 1.23]. From Ver. 1, to 7. 3. He shews them, that the Holy Ghost, Psal. 95.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. admo∣nishes such as from time to time should live in the Church, to take heed of rebelling against Christ, and disobeying this Prophet, during the day or time wherein he speaks to them by his Gospel, lest they lose the eternal rest of Heaven, as their forefathers lost the temporal Canaan for not hearkning to Moses. As if he should have said, If ye will hear Christs voice calling to you in his Gospel, then harden not your hearts in this time and season of grace, wherein he speaks to you, as the Israelites did in the Wilderness when they tempted and provoked God, and would not believe his power, though they had testimonies enough of it, by the miracles which they saw he had wrought among them for the space of so many years together. Which provocations were
a grieving (as it were) of his patience; insomuch that he said of them, They were a sttish and stubborn people, whose heart was not upright before him: Neither had they seriously minded or consider∣edNoluerunt attentè conside∣rare, & opere exequi, rationem vi∣vendi, Deum{que} rite colendi, ipsis re∣velatam. Gejer. his miraculous Mercies or Judgments, nor set their hearts to know and observe his Commandments, and the ways wherein he would have them to walk: see Psal. 119. v. 27, 32, 33, 35. Whereupon his irre∣versible Oath went out against them [Numb. 14.23, 24, 28, 29, 30.], That they should never come into Canaan, but leave (every one of them but Caleb and Joshua) their Carkasses in the Wilderness. The Apostle also fur∣ther admonishes them, to take heed lest they imitate these Israelites, who by reason of their unbelief were ready, upon every hardship they met with, to destruct God, and to turn back again unto Egypt: so they should especially take heed, lest there be in any of them an evil and an unbelieving heart, and so should fall away, and depart from Christ, who, according to his Di∣vine Nature, is the ever-living God, who hath life in himself originally [Joh. 1.4. and 5.26.] and giveth life to others, Joh. 11.25. Gal. 2.20. 1 Joh. 5.20. And for prevention hereof, they should exhort and encourage one another daily, to persevere in faith and holiness (whilst they have time and opportunity to perform that duty, and to establish one another), lest the manifold deceits and baits of sin prevail upon any of them, to harden them. And he enforces his advice with this argument, They will hereby declare themselves to be indeed partakers of Christ, and to be spiritually united to him, if they persevere in that faith wherein they have been formerly in∣structed, and whereof they have made profession. By which faith, and a setled resting on Christ, Christians subsist,V. 14. The word transla∣ted [Confi∣dence] is . V. 15.  va∣let cum audi∣mus haec dici. and are supported in their spiritual life. And he further tells them, That forasmuch as it is said in that fore-cited Psalm, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the day Of provocation, &c. they ought to remember, that that caveat be∣longs to them, as well as to their Ancestors (to whom it was first given); and therefore so long as the opportunity of hearing the voice of Christ sounding in his Gospel continued, they should carefully listen to it, and by no means har∣den their hearts against it. And they should remember, that some of the an∣cient Israelites, when they had heard and received the Law from Heaven, and had heard God promising blessings to them that obeyed him, and threatning curses to the disobedient, did notwithstanding rebel, and fall off, and mur∣mur against him. But Caleb and Joshua did not so, and consequently not all that by the conduct of Moses came out of Egypt. Which thing should be matter of admonition to them, that they should imitate those few that ad∣hered to God, and not the many that fell off from him. For 'tis apparent, it was with those disobedient murmurers (that would have gone back to E∣gypt) that God was so highly provoked, and, as it were, wearied md grie∣ved for so many years together; so that not a man of them came into Ca∣naan, but they all died in the Wilderness. And 'tis apparent, that those con∣cerning whom God sware, that they should not enter into his rest, were such as disbelieved his Promises, and disobeyed his Precepts, and murmured against his Providence. So that 'tis plain and evident to us, why they were excluded out of Canaan, namely, Because of their unbelief and disobedience. From Ver. 1, to the end. Chap. 4.And seeing those ancient Israelites could not enter into the Rest promi∣sed to them, viz. the Land of Canaan, because of their unbelief; therefore let us (says he) who are Christian-Hebrews, fear, and be jealous over our selves, lest a promise being made to us in the Gospel of a heavenly and glo∣riousMat. 25.34. Rest, any of us (by neglecting the means which are appointed for the obtaining of it) should seem deservedly (even in the judgment of men) to miss of it, and to be excluded from it. For the abuse of the like privi∣ledges
usually procureth the like Judgment. And we that are Christians, says he, have the same priviledges that the Israelites had, and therefore should fear the like Judgments, if we abuse them. For unto us hath the Gospel been preached, as well as to them. Nay, we are advanced above them in that priviledg. They had the Gospel veiled, we have it unveiled. They had it darkly and obscurely, we have it clearly and plainly. It was one and the same Gospel that they had under the Old, and we have under the New Testament Joh. 5.46. and 39. But the word which they heard preached unto them, did not profit them, because it was not mixed with, or received by faith. But though they, by reason of their unbelief, were excluded out of Canaan (which was a type of Heaven); yet we, says he, who believe in Christ, do enter into it. We enter into the beginning of that Heavenly Rest here on earth, by tranquillity of Conscience, and peace with God; and shall en∣ter into the full enjoyment of it hereafter, even as God himself hath spoken, though not in express words, yet by necessary consequence: For whereas He by his OathIf they shall enter into my rest;] there is a reticentia in the form of that Oath. To make up the full sense, such a phrase as this may be understood, Let me not be accounted true. Haec verba propriè, & per se sunt Comminatoria; sed, ex conse∣quenti, Promissionem includunt. Quippe David incredulis ingressum in requiem patêre negans, docet, Nulli verè credenti requiem illam occludi. Cappel. excludeth unbelievers out of his Rest, he does tacitly and implicitly promise, that believers shall enter into it. Now lest any of these He∣brews should say, We have always enjoyed the Lord's Sabbaths, and our predecessrs have long inhabited Ca∣naan, Why then do you speak so much about entring into God's Rest? The Apostle shews, that neither of these Rests could be meant by DavidCum ingressum in requiem Dei neget David infidelibus, Psal. 95. tot annis post obitum Josuae, tot seculis post sextiduum Creationis, quâ peractâ Deus ab operibus suis dicitur quievisse; sequitur, Tertium aliquod quietis genus, à Davide de∣signari, quod à praecedentium utro∣que fuit figuratum. Idem., nor intended by himself in this discourse. And first he shews, that the Rest meant by God's Oath, Psal. 95.11. is not the Rest of the Seventh day. For although the works of God were finished in six days, when he laid the foun∣dation of the world, and (as he himself testifies, Gen. 2. v. 3.) He rested on the seventh day from all his worksQuies quâ Deus, opere Crea∣tionis absoluto quivisse dicitur, po∣test esse typus lllius quietis quâ Christus absoluto nostrae redemp∣tionis opere, quietem laboribus fuis dignam nactus est. Idem.; yet besides this, there is another Rest to be entred into, whereof the Sabbath was but a re∣semblance. And again in that place before quoted, Psal. 95.11. above three thousand years after that, there is mention made of another Rest which God promises to them that believe and obey him; and excludes, by his Oath, unbelievers and the disobedient from it. And this plainly appears to be a Rest to come; so that it cannot be that Rest which was at the beginning of the world. Therefore the first Rest is removed; and 'tis evident that there is another Rest, besides that of the Sabbath, for believers to enter into. 2. He shews by the Rest, intended by God's Oath and Promise (which they to whom it is expresly made, shall assuredly partake of) cannot be meant Canaan. For the Israelites that came out of Egypt with Moses (to whom the Gospel was first preached, before it was preached to them whom Joshua brought into Canaan) did not enter into Canaan by reason of their un∣belief. And long after the other Israelites had entred into Canaan, the Psalmist limits or designs a certain dayDesignari ait in Psalmo, mysticè, scil. tempora Mes∣siae. Grot. , h. e. per Davidem., saying, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts (that is, in this Gospel-day, or time, hear the voice of Christ calling to you in the preaching of his Gospel), and harden not your hearts against his Call, that so you may enter into his Rest. And 'tis plain he speaks there of another Rest yet to be entred into. For if that had been the Rest meant by the Psalmist which Joshua (in the Syriac Dialect called Jesus) led the people into, then he would not have spoken of any day or time future to that, for the entring into it, which yet 'tis ma∣nifest he speaks of in that Psalm. From all these premisses, he shews, it clearly follows, That there is now for Christians a Rest still behind, to be enjoyed, besides the typical Rest of the Land of Canaan (though shadowed
out by that, and by the Seventh-day-Sabbath), namely, a spiritual, heaven∣ly, and eternal Rest or Sabbatism; the beginning of which is in this life, and the perfection of it in the life to come. Into this Rest all true belie∣vers enter, and so here rest from fulfilling the works of the flesh, and shall hereafter fully rest from all their labours and troubles, as God rested from his works. Let us all therefore (says he) look to it, that by a stedfast faith we enter into that Rest, lest following the example of our Forefathers disobe∣dience in the Wilderness, we fall, and perish, as they did. And we ought to take the more heed to our selves, because the Gospel which invites men to en∣ter into this Rest, is quick and powerful (through the operation of the Spi∣rit of God), and sharper than any two-edged sword (cutting which way soever it is turned), and pierces to the dividing asunder of soul and spi∣rit, that is, the actings of the understanding, and the motions of the will and affections. It divides the jointsThese Me∣taphors taken from the Bo∣dy, are appli∣ed to the Soul., that is, cuts asunder the most reso∣lute and compacted purposes of the will. It pierces to the marrow, the se∣cretest and innermost contrivances and designs of the soul. It reaches the very secret thoughts and intents of the heart, and tries and judges of them. This word shews, that nothing is hid from the eyes of God, but all things are to him naked, and unveiled (so that he sees the outside), and opened, a Metaphor taken from Beasts, which being ex∣coriated, were cut down from the neck to the rump, all along the back-bone, so that every part within might be clearly seen. (so that their very inwards are discovered), and made conspicuous in his sight with whom we have to do. And therefore if there be any secret unbelief, hypocrisie, or backsliding-principle in any of us, we are to remember that he sees, and takes notice of it. From Ver. 1, to 14. The Apostle comes now to assert the Priesthood of Christ, and from thence he encourages the believing-Hebrews to perseverance and stedfastness in the profession of the faith. And (1.) he shews, That seeing we have a great High-Priest, whose word is lively and mighty in operation, and before whose eyes all things are naked, and who hath passed through these visible Hea∣vens, and gloriously ascended unto the right hand of the Father in the highest Heaven; therefore they should be sure to hold fast their profession of faith in Him. And this their High-Priest, he tells them, is a merciful and compas∣sionate High-Priest, who having sometimes felt those infirmities in his flesh which we feel, and been exercis'd with such temptations as we are liable to (yet so as they never drew him to sin), we have good cause to believe, that he will be merciful to us, and ready to relieve us when we are tempted. Therefore let us come boldly, in the name of this our High-Priest, to the Throne of Grace, for the obtaining all seasonable grace and assistance that we need in our passage towards Heaven. From Ver. 14, to the end. Chap. 5.The Apostle goes on to set forth the excellency of Christ's Priestly Office, shewing him to be more excellent than any typical Priest, in all Priestly re∣quisites, yea than Aaron himself; therefore the believing-Hebrews had rea∣son to moderate their thoughts touching the Levitical Priesthood, which they were apt too highly to esteem, to the prejudice of Christ. And in the first place he considers the chief things observable in the Aaronical High-Priest, and applies them unto Christ. First, The Aaronical High-Priest being taken from among men, and severed and set apart from the common multitude, was appointed to act and negotiate for the good of men, in the things wherein they have to do with God; particularly, to offer gifts, oblations, and sacri∣fices for their sins. 2. He was to execute this his Office with pity and compassion, is to have so much com∣passion as is sufficient. to the ignorant, and those that are out of the way, being him∣self compassed with infirmities. 3. He was to offer for his own sins as well as for the people's. 4. He must be called of God, as was Aaron. No man could legallyThe prin∣cipal honour of the High-Priest was, That he was a kind of a Mediator be∣tween God and man. assume this honour to himself, but he that was of Aaron's line, and so called to it by God, who assign'd that high dignity to that line
only. Now the Apostle shews, that all these may well be applied to Christ. And first, he instances in the last of them, That Christ did not intrude him∣self upon this Office, nor assumed the honour and glory of it to himself, but the Father glorified him by ordaining him thereunto. And this he proves from two places in the Psalms: 1. Out of Psal. 2, where God the Father says to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; that is, in this day of thy resurrection I have bestowed this special dignity upon thee, to be a King and High-Priest; and thou shalt ascend into Heaven, as the High-Priest did into the Holy of Holies; and then he commands him, to ask of him the ends of the earth, or to intercede for the salvation of many, which is a special part of his Priestly Function. His second proof is out of Psal. 110, where God's deputing Christ to that Function is declared. For 'tis God the Father that saith, Thou art such a Priest as Melchisedec was; that is, a King and Priest together; and thy Priesthood shall never cease, or be suc∣ceeded by any, till this Mediatory Kingdom of thine shall be delivered up to me, See 2 Cor. 15.24. The Apostle having thus proved that Christ was called to be a Priest, he proceeds to shew, that the other things which belonged to the High-Priest, belonged unto him. For, 2. He was a Son of man, of the same nature andHe assumed our Humane na∣ture, being like to us in infirmi∣ties that were not sinful. mould with us. 3. He offered a sacrifice for the sins of the people (but not for his own, for he had none), and that sacrifice was, Himself on the Cross. 4. He was a merciful High-Priest, having had experience of our miseries. For in the state of his humiliation, when he was here in the fleshIn the days of his flesh] i. e. his mortal and weak flesh, compassed with infirmities, Joh. 1.14 In Hea∣ven he hath flesh still, but immor∣tal, and void of these natural weak∣nesses., in his agony in the Garden, and on the Cross, feeling the weight of God's wrath lying on him for our sins, he offered up ardent prayersSupplicatio Christi ex intimo cordis dolore profecta, duplex enar∣ratur: Ʋna in horto cum dixit, Pater, si fieri potest, tollatur a me ca∣lix iste: quam precationem suppli∣cem non solum proposuit semel, sed etiam majori contentione (&, ut vide∣tur, non sine clamore) ter repetiit, Luc. 22.42, 44. Mat. 26.39. Mar. 14.36. Altera in cruce, cum cla∣more valido conjuncta: Deus mi, De∣us mi, ut quid dereliquisti me? Mat. 27.46. Mar. 15.34. Lacrymarum quidem Evangelistae non expressè meminerunt, sed taraen in neutrâ supplicatione defuisse, ex circum∣stantiis colligi potest. Gomar. and sup∣plications, with strong cryes and tears unto his Father, who, he knew, was able to save him from death, or could support him in suffering of it, and restore him from it; not permitting him to lye under the power of it, or to be swallowed up by it. And he was so heard, that he was delivered from that which he fearedExauditus est. Nam liberatio∣nem primùm à doloribus Inferni per mortem, deinde a morte per resur∣rectionem consequutus est. Idem  a metu. From the right ta∣king or apprehending a thing, ari∣seth Fear.. And though he were the beloved Son of God, and so more excellent than any High-Priest, yea, than any Creature; yet by his grievous sufferings he was inured to submit to his Father's will; and experimentally knew what Obedience meant, and how hard a lesson Patience under the Cross is (which is the highest and chiefest point of a Christian's obedience); and thereby he became more fit to compassionate us. Yet it is not to be won∣dred at, that so excellent a Person, and so dear to God, should suffer as he did: for by his sufferings he was made a full and perfect Redeemer Heb. 7.26.], so that nothing more need be added unto what he has done and suffered for the redemption of man. And ha∣ving paid the full price of our redemption, he became the author of eternal salvation to allJoh. 3.18, 36. and 6.47. (of what rank or degree soever they be) that obey him, by believing in him, and exercising the other graces and parts of obedience which he requires. So that from the whole discourse he infers, that Christ must needs be a Priest of a more excellent Order than was Aaron's (which was an exspiring Order, and not to last for ever), and that he was called and openly declared of God, viz. in that 110 Psalm, to be an High-Priest after the order of Melchizedec. From Ver. 1, to 11. The Apostle now intending to speak more largely of this great Mystery, he thinks fit to preface something, (1.) By way of Reprehension, from v. 11 of this Chapter, to the end. (2.) By way of Exhortation, ch. 6. from v. 1,
to 4. (3.) By way of Commination, from v. 4, to 9. (4.) By way of Con∣solation, from v. 9, to the end. And first, He tells them, He had many things to write concerning this Mystery; but if he should speak of them, manyHaec reprehensio non absolutè de totâ Hebraeorum Ecclesiâ, sed se∣cundum quid, & ex parte tantum de multis intelligi debet. Est ergo haec Epistola ita attemperata, ut simul lác habeat infantibus & solidum cibum adultioribus, omnibus tamen escam salutarem. among them would hardly understand them by reason of their great dulness and carelesness; which was so gross, that when in respect of the time wherein they had enjoyed the Gospel, they might have been able to teach others (as particularly their own Families); they, by returning to an observation of the Mosaical Ceremonies, and holding the observation of them necessary to salvation (as it seems many of them did), shewed themselves to stand in need to be instructed in the very first principles pro  Hebraismus. Prima Ele∣menta oraculorum Dei. of the Gospel, in which the greatest and most necessary Oracles of God are contained. So that instead of making progress in Christianity, they were gone backward, and at present shewed themselves like Babes, who needed milk, and not strong meat, see 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. For as he, that is got∣ten no higher than MilkRepuerascit, adeo{que} jam redit ad infantiam, eam{que} priore dete∣riorem. Hebraei pleri{que} licet Chri∣stianismum amplexi redibant ad ty∣porum ceremonialium observatio∣nem ut necessariam ad salutem. Hae verò Ceremoniae vocantur Elementa Mundi, Col. 2.8, 20. Gal. 4.4. in∣firma & egena Elementa, Gal. 4.9. Cappel., will be hurt, and not fed, by having more solid food given him; so those a∣mong them that stuck in the observation of the typical Ceremonies [those weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4.3, 9. Col. 2.8, 20], and judged the observation of them necessary under the Gospel, shewed themselves to be very ignorant of the word of Righteousness, or doctrine of salvation by faith in Christ, and to be in∣deed very Babes. But the strongerPerfectos eos vocat non abso∣lutè sed comparatè cum rudioribus. Christians among them, who by long use, and a diligent hearing, read∣ing, and meditating on the word, have their judg∣ments and understandings exercis'd to discern between true and false Do∣ctrine, between good and evil; they can rellish sublimer mysteries, and feed on them as on stronger meats. From Ver. 11, to the end. Chap. 6.The Apostle having thus reprehended their dulness and improficiency, he now comes to exhort them and stir them up to advance to a higher and per∣fecter degree of knowledg in the Christian Religion,Perfectionem vocat quam priùs Sermo∣nem justitiae, h. e. Doctri∣nae Christianae plenam & ju∣stam intelli∣gentiam. than the first principles or ground-work. For as the foundation of a house being once laid, we must not stay there, but proceed in raising up the building; so 'tis absurd to ad∣vance no further in the Christian Religion than the knowledg of the first principles of the Catechism; such as are, 1. Repentance, or turning from sinful works, whereof the end is death. 2. Faith in God, namely, in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3. The Doctrine of Baptisms, that is, the Doctrine usually taught at their Baptizings, whereby the people were in∣formed of the difference betwixt the outwardSee pag. 2. of this Apo∣stolical History Baptism by the Minister, and the inward Baptism by the Spirit; and possibly, concerning the nature and use, not only of this Sacrament, but of the other also; Baptism being here synecdochically put for both Sacraments. 4. Tou∣ching the rite of laying on of handsManus imponebantur & Bap∣tizatis ad obtinendam vim confir∣mantem Spsti; & ordinatis ad Pres∣byterium, & post peccata reconciliatis & corpore infirmis, imò & novis con∣jugibus benedictionem ab Ecclesiâ postulantibus. Grot. upon Mi∣nisters in their Ordination, or ConfirmingHuic accedit impositio manuum alia, quam prisc Ecclesia habuit in usu: Si quidem iis, qui in infantiâ fuerant Baptizati, post professionem religionis Christianae, Ecclesiasticâ consuetudine, non necessitate, manus adhibitis precibus imponebantur, ad accepti Baptismi & fidei Confirmationem. Gom. such as having been baptized in their infancy, and after∣wards well instructed in the Principles of Christianity, were to make profession of their Faith, and own their Baptismal Covenant, before they were admitted to the Lord's Table. 5. Of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the last Judgment, which will doom and decree to men
everlasting rewards and punishments. Now that they may not stick in these first Principles, he tells them, he desires to contribute his endeavour to carry them on to a more perfect degree and measure of knowledg in the mysteries of the Gospel; and hopes he shall (through the Lord's permission and assistance) be enabled to do itAd per∣fectionem feremur, ego docendo & vos attenden∣do.. And accordingly in the following Chapters he opens deeper mysteries, from v. 1, to 4. (3.) He comes now to shew them the great danger of apostatizing from Christ and his Doctrine, representing unto them, That if any have advanced so far, that they have been enlightned, and haveHave had a tast, and only a tast, as tast is opposed to eating. tasted of the heavenly gift (by the knowledg of Christ and his benefits, and the heavenly things revealed in his Gospel) and hve had some of the extraordinary (though common) gifts of the Spirit of God poured out upon them (though not of his renewing-graces), and have tasted the good word of God, that is, have heard the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the glad tydings thereof, with some kind of joy [Mat. 13.20, 21.]; and lastly, have had some tast and apprehension of the glorious priviledgesV. 5. Poten∣tias, i. e. glo∣riam. Vatabl. of the Saints, by some weak glances upon the glory of Heaven; and after all this, shall fall away, making a total, voluntary, and malicious apo∣stacy and defectionApostasiam hîc intellige tota∣lm, malitiosam, ac eum odio ac per∣secutione Christi, & Evangelii con∣junctam; h. e. eorum qui toti, de toto, in totum, decidunt. Intellige hoc loco peccatum illud singulare quod peculiariter peccatum in Chri∣stum, & peccatum ad mortem in Scrip∣turis appellatur, Mat. 12.31, 32. Mar. 3.28.29. Luc. 12.10, 11. 1 Joh. 5.16. Impossibile, non simpliciter & abso∣lutè, sed ex hypothesi, & respectu justi Dei judicii, & decreti, per fi∣lium patefacti, Mat. 12.31, 32. Im∣possibile ut tales ad veram adducan∣tur poenitentiam, Deo nunquam tis qui in talia peccata lapsi fuerint, salutarem poenitentiam inspirante. Vide Gomar. from Christ and his Gospel; he shew, 'tis impossible to renew them again unto repentance, that is, to renew them so, that they shall repent; because God hath decreed never to give repent∣ance to such persons. Fr they having wilfully cast off God, God casts off them. And there being no renewing but in and through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, these Apostates barr themselves from that; For by their apostacy from Christ, they do in effect declare, That he was an Impostor, and deserved to be crucifiedThey crucifie to themselves] , to their own condemnation., and all the other indignities that were put upon him. Ano∣ther sacrifice therefore must be offered up, if such be redeemed. The Apostle also further sets out the woful estate of Apostates, and the equity of God's proceeding against them, by an elegant comparison. As the fertile ground (saith he), which, drinking in the rain that comes often upon it, brings forth a plentiful encrease, to the joy and comfort of the Husbandman, does thereby testifie that it is blessed of God [see Gen. 27.27.]; but the barren earth (which after tillage and irrigation bears nothing but thorns and briars) is given over abandoned and disregarded by the Owner; and if it so continue, may expect ere long to be cursed by him (as the fruitless fig-tree was. Mat. 21.19.), and finally doom'd fit for nothing but to be burnt and destroyed, like the Land of Sodom. So they who after illumination and the means of grace afforded to them, do advance in Christianity, in Faith and Holiness, and go on towards perfection, do thereby declare themselves to be blessed of God; but such as do not make a right use of the means and helps God af∣fords them; but instead of making progress in Christianity, do fall off from Christ and their Christian Profession, they shew themselves to be in a cursed and miserable condition. But he tells them, That though he said thus much to them by way of caution, yet he was perswaded better things of the greatest part of them, than to think they would thus fall away. He accounted them his beloved brethren, and really believed the estate of most of them to be such, as would be so far from bringing a curse upon them, that it would in the end bring them to eternal salvationV. 9. Things that accompany salvation] or which neces∣sarily have salvation in them, and are the sure symptoms of a blessed estate. Fides, pietas, sanctitas, licèt non sint causa salutis nostrae, sunt tamen adeò cum salute conjuncta ut ne disjungi quidem possint. Hujus irruptae copulae vis, non est in operum nostrorum merito, sed in divini propositi firmitate. Capel.. And the ground of this his hope and perswasion, hîc intellige quod  dicitur, 1 Thes. 1.3. scil. apertam professionem Christianismi. Huic addit, ut & dicto Thessal. loco,  dilectionem conjunctam cum laboribus & mole∣stús. Grot. was
their good work of faith, whereby they testified a couragious profession of the Gospel, and that excellent CharityOfficiosam Charitatem. which they manifested by their past and present care, pains, and industry, to relieve and supply the SaintsSanctos fideles vocat Scriptura, non blandientis, sed cohortantis af∣fectu; ut meminerint, ad sanctimo∣niam vocatos, operam dare debere ut Elogio quo ipsos cohonestat Deus se reddant quàm dignissimos. Capel. that were in want; which tended so much to the glory of God, and the praise of his Name. And this, he tells them, God will not forget to reward, who is righteous and faithful in his promises. But, says he, though I conceive well of many of you for the present, yet I would not hereupon have you to wax secure, but to use all due care and diligence, even to the end of your life, for the consummation of your hope, and the heightning it to a full assurance. of attaining the salvation which I am perswaded is pre∣pared for you. You must not therefore grow sloathful nor sluggish, but imitate and follow their example, who continuing in the exercise of faith and pa∣tience, did at last come to enjoy their part in the pro∣misedV. 12. Promises] because eter∣nal Life is many times, and many ways promised; in which respect they may be counted many Promises. Pro∣mise is put for the thing promised; see Heb. 9.15. Complura erant Patribus pro∣missa, diversis facta temporibus; per quae tamen illud unum, & magnum Promissum de vitâ aeternâ nobis fa∣ctum, adumbrabatur, & mysticè in illis continebatur. Grot, eternal Inheritance. Now among those Ex∣amples of Faith and Patience, he particularly instances in Abraham, who was the Father of the faithful; to whom God made a promise, In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed; and confirmed it by an Oath, swearing by Himself, there being none greater to swear by. And Abraham, after he had long patiently expecetd the completion of it, saw the beginning and ground-work thereof, when Isaac was born to him of Sarah, which was a pawn and pledg to him of the accomplishment of the rest; and he lived to see Isaac have two sns, Esau and Jacob. Now by that promise made to Abraham of blessing  multiplying him, was meant the bringing his seed into Canaan, and all  believers to the Rest signified thereby. Moreover, from the use of an Oath among men (which is to assure and as∣certain the thing sworn, and to take away all doubt about the thing contro∣verted, it being made by God, who is appeal'd to as Judg and Avenger) the Apostle inferrs a reason why God confirm'd his Promise by an OathV. 17.  in which matter, in which case; or , quod a∣lias,  quare., viz. His superbundant goodness and willingness to declare unto the heirs of pro∣mise [that is, the children of Abraham after the spirit, Gal. 3.19.] the immutability of his Counsel, that what he had purposed, determined, and pro∣mised to Abraham and his seed, should assuredly be accomplished. And it was for man's sake, and man's good, that God thus bound himslf by oath, viz. To quiet and settle his mind in his Promise, that he might believe it with∣out wavering. For the Promise of God, and his Oath, are two immutable things (wherein 'tis impossible God should fail) and may afford strong con∣solation to thse who under the sense and guilt of sin, flye to it (as to a City of Refuge) and depend on it for the attaining eternal life and blissV. 18. To lay hold upon the Hope] Hope is here taken metony∣mically for the thing hoped for., which this Promise presents unto them, and gives them ground to hope for; which Hope believers have as a sure anchor cast within Heaven it self (figured by the Holy of Holies within the Veil), staying their souls from being tossed in the tempestuous sea of this world, and fixing their hearts upon the Om∣nipotency, Truth, and Faithfulness of God, and merit of Christ, who is en∣tred into Heaven for us (prefigured by the High-Priest's entring within the Veil) as our ForerunnerChristus eò priorivit, id{que} nostro bono, ut & nos eò accer∣seret, sicut ipse dixit Joh. 14. Habemus, inquit, non Promissum tantum sed & Exempium. Grot. or Harbinger, there to prepare a place for us, and to intercede for us, being appointed by his Father an High-Priest for ever after the Order, ad modum Melchisedeci. Hoc ideo quia Melchisedec non minus Rex fuit quam Sacerdo ne{que} ex ortûs lege id habuit, ne{que} alii id jus reliquit; in quo multum differebat ab Aaronis posteris. Similitudines tales non ad speculum respondent; nec premi debent singulae circumstantiae; sed observandum, quò tetenderit divina tam veterum temporum dispensatio. Id. of Melchisedec. From Ver. 1, to the end.
The Apostle now returns to the Priesthood of Christ again,Chap. 7. from which he had digressed from v. 11 of ch. 5, to this Chapter; and shews, that Christ was a Priest of a much higher Order than the Aaronical Priests were, as may appear by considering the nature of the Priesthood of MelchizedecSome take this Melchizedec to be Sem, the Son of Noah; but his genealogy is exactly set down in the Scripture; neither is it likely that Abraham would so long have for∣born his due respects and visits of Sem in Canaan, if Sem had lived there. Therefore divers learned men take this Melchizedec to be ra∣ther some eminent man in Canaan, raised up by God in those corrupt times, both good and godly, both King and Priest, living in Salem, after called Jerusalem, whose King in Joshua's time was called Adoni∣zedec, that is, Lord of Righteous∣ness, Josh. 10.1. as this man here is called Melchizedec, that is, King of Righteousness. By which place, or near to it, Abraham in his return from this Warr and Victory, was to pass. Dr. Richardson., after the manner of which, Christ's Priesthood was. For this Melchizedec, in his Name [King of Righteousness], and in his Title [King of Salem or Peace] was a Type of Christ; and be∣ing stiled, Gen. 14.18, a Priest of the Most High God, it appears he was both King and Priest. And accordingly when Abraham returned from his victory over Kederlaomer, and the other neighbouring Reguli or Kings, he came out and treated him and his Army royally, like a King, bringing forth bread and wine for them; and as a Priest blessed him, and received from him the tenth of all he had there. He further shews, how this Melchizedec (that he might more clearly represent Christ) stands in the History recorded of him in Genesis, as a Priest; of whose Father, and Mother, and Pedigree, there is no mention; neither of his birth or death, or that he had any successor in his Priest∣hoodThe History which declares him to be a Priest, maketh no men∣tion either of the beginning of his Priesthood, or of the ending thereof.. In all which particulars he was a type of Christ (and so represented Psal. 110) who is such a Priest as he, in respect of the conjunction of the Regal Office, and Sacerdotal; in respect of his being King of Righ∣teousness, and Prince of Peace; in respect of his being without Father, as He is Man; and without Mother, as he is God; and so He is without descent and genealogy; without be∣ginning of days, or end of life; and continueth for ever in that Office, that is, so long as there shall be any need of his mediation. So that Melchizedec, though he were a true Man, yet in his singular Prerogatives he was made like unto the Son of God; and was so set forth, as to hear a resemblance of Him, being appointed by God a visible Type of Him before He was exhibited in the flesh. The Apostle having set forth Melchizedec's excellency in himself, proceed∣eth to amplifie the same in reference to others. And first, sheweth how he ought to be preferred before Abraham, and before all the Levites that de∣scended from Abraham. For that act of Abraham's in giving a tenth to Melchizedec, implieth an inferiority in himself who paid them, and a supe∣riority in him that received them; because the Tenth was an holy tribute due to God, and so it was paid by Abraham, who paid it to Melchizedec as to God's Priest, standing in God's room, and in that respect greater than himself. 'Tis true, he shews that the Levitical Priests had commission by the Law to receive Tythes of all Jews that defended from Abraham, and there∣in were counted greater than their Brethren. But Melchizedec, who was no kin to Abraham (nor of that people), but a stranger to him, received Tythes, not from the Progeny of Abraham, but from Abraham himself; which is a greater dignity than to receive them only from his own people. 2. The Apo∣stle shews, that to bless authoritatively, is an act of superiority; now Mel∣chizedec blessed Abraham, who was so special a Favourite of God, and re∣ceived such excellent promises from him, and had them so often repeated to him. And certainly, he that blesseth one authoritatively, is greater than he whom he blesseth. Therefore Christ (whose Type and Shadow Melchize∣dec was) is much more excellent than Abraham, and than all the Leviti∣cal Priests which sprang from him. Further, to prove the excellency of Mel∣chizedec's Priesthood above the Levites, he tells them, in v. 8, That here, that is, in the Levitical Priesthood, though those Priests be superior to the
people, yet they dye as well as the people do; but there, that is, in that place of Genesis where Melchizedec is spoken of, there is no mention made of his death; which the Holy Ghost seems purposely to have omitted, that he might thereby witness, that he typically prefigured Christ, who doth indeed and properly live for everMelchize∣dec ever lives secundum hi∣storiam, Christ secundum ve∣rittem.; and so he implicitely testifies, not only the everlastingness of Christ's Person, but of his Priesthood also. He further shews, that the Levites paid Tythes to Melchizedec. On the same ground it may well be inferr'd, that all Adam's posterity did eat of the forbidden fruit in him, Rom. 5.12. Si quis excipiat; Christus decimas Melchizedeco dederit, eo{que} & minor eo fuit, ut pote qui non minus quam Levi in lumbis Abrahami fuerit: Consequentiam negamus; quoniam diversa omnino est ratio. Nam ante decimationem hanc, Christus, per promissionem Abrahamo datam fuerat exceptus, & praelatus Melchizedeco, & omnibus; ut pote in quo benedicendae essent omnes gentel terrae; Eo{que} & Abrahamus & Melchizedecus, Deinde, suit in lumbis Abrahami secundum carnem tantum, non secundum divinam naturam, cujus dignitate fit, ut humana natura ei hypostaticè unita, omnibus creaturis major sit. Deni{que} fuit in lumbis Abrahami ratione materiae, sed non ratione virtutis generantis; quia non fuit è semine virili generatus, sed miraculo virtutis Spiritûs sancti à virgine, & è virgine conceptus. Gomar. in Abraham, being in his loins when Melchizedec met him; therefore he is greater than they; and Christ as to his Person, being typified by Melchizedec, must needs be more excellent than they also. From Ver. 1, to 11. Hitherto the Apostle hath set forth the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, by shwing how Melchizedec was a type of Him; and that all the Excel∣lencies, typically held forth in Melchizedec, were really and properly found in Him. And therefore his Priesthood far excelleth Aaron's, which several of the Jews had in so high esteem; and so much rested on it, that they little regarded Christ's. This he proves by several particulars. 1. If a perfectSee Heb. 9.9. and 10.1. expiation of sin, and furnishing men with all they have need of to eternal life, could have been had by the Levitical: populus enim ad illud lege ad∣strictus. Cler in loc. Super hoc Sacerdotio legem acce∣pit populus ex tribu Levi, non autem ex aliâ tribu aut familiâ. Gomar. Priesthood (for unto that only the people were by the Ceremonial Law bound), there would then have been no need (as it appears there was by David's prophecy, Psal. 110.4.) that God should institute a Priest of another and more excellent Order, to wit, his own Son, to be such a Priest as Mel∣chizedec was, and not such an one as Aaron. And the change of the Le∣vitical Priesthood necessarily draweth along with it a change of the Levi∣tical Law, and the legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace; that under another Priesthood, another Law, and another dispensation of that Covenant, may succeed. Therefore the changeable Levitical Priesthood is not so excel∣lent as the unchangeable Melchizedechian Priesthood of Christ. Now that the Priesthood was changed, he evidenceth by the translation of it to another tribe: Christ our High-Priest (of whom these things are said) springing from the Tribe of Judah; whereas God had restrained the Priesthood under the Law, to the Tribe of Levi: For by Moses's speaking nothing that the Priesthood should be executed by any other Tribe, it appears that it was not God's mind that any that were of any other Tribe should be of the Priesthood, or attend upon the Altar. From Ver. 11, to the 15. 2. He gives a further proof of the change of the Priesthood, from the dif∣ferent manner of ConsecrationVid. Parae∣um in loc.. For Christ our High-Priest (who is raised up after the similitude of Melchizedec) was not made a Priest with such carnal rites and outward solemnities as the Law prescribed to be used at the Consecration of Aaron and his sons in their several successions; but he was made a Priest with the power of endless life, consecrated a Priest that should ever continue, and ever live to make intercession for us, and apply unto us the vertue f his sacrifice, for the bringing us to everlasting life, according as the Psalmist testifies in the fore-cited Psalm, where God the Father saith to his Son, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec. From Ver. 15, to 18.
3. He shews a reason why the Legal Covenant, with the Ceremonial Precepts, and Levitical Priesthood belonging thereto, was changed, because of the weakness and unprofitableness of it (in it self considered) for the ex∣piation of sin; therefore there was a necessity to introduce the Eternal Priest∣hood of Christ. For the Legal Covenant could not by it self, or by the strict observance of the Rites thereof, make the observersV. 19. No∣thing, i. e. no man. The Neuter gen∣der is fitest, ad universita∣tem designan∣dam. Theophy. thereof perfect. Nothing could be hoped for from that (considered in it selfLegis cere∣moniae adum∣brarunt non autem contu∣lerunt peccatorum remissionem, & reconciliationem cum Deo, per se. Causae quidem fuerunt adjuvantes quodammodo, nempe tanquam instrumenta remota (quod fidem, quae propinquum est instrumentum, excitarunt, ac confirmarunt) non verò causae principales. Gomar.), but legal purifications, and outward priviledges. It could not, of it self, cleanse from sin, reconcile us to God, justifie our persons, sanctifie our natures, and ever∣lastingly save us; and therefore to pacifie God, or purchase salvation (as the mis-believing Jews used it) it was weak and unprofitable. But the Priesthood of Christ (that better thingUnder this phrase [the bringing in of a better hope] Christ's Priesthood is comprized. For it is the ground of hope. Dr. Gouge in loc. hoped-for) being introduced, that hath efficacy, power, and vertue, to do all those things for us; and by it we have freedom of access to God. From Ver. 18, to 20. 4. He shews, that the Levitical Priests were made without an Oath, by a Law changeable at the will of the Lawgiver, God reserving to himself li∣berty to change it when he pleased: but Christ (as appears from Psal. 110.4.) was made a Priest by an Oath; where the Psalmist intimates, that there should be an end of the Aaronical Priesthood, but there should be no end of Christ's; for God hath confirmed it by an Oath, and will not change or re∣tract what he hath sworn. And as far as a Priest established by an Oath to continue for ever in that Office, is superiour to a Priest made by a change∣able Commandment, so much is the New Cove∣nantFoederis Evangelici duae erant Constitutiones, quas hic Apostolus  vocat. Prior est typica, altera spiritualis. Capel. hîc vocat totam Conge∣riem . Grot., or new dispensation of the Covenant of Grace (whereof Christ is Surety and Mediator), better than the Old Covenant (or the old Dispensation of that Co∣venant), which was under the Levitical Priesthood; For though this (in substance) is the same with the former; yet as to the manner of its dispensation, 'tis more clear, more free, more full, more surely ratified (viz. by the death of Christ), and accompanied with a more mighty operation of the Spirit, and is of largr extent. From Ver. 20, to 23. 5. The Levitical Priests were many, and mortal, and by reason of death were forced to leave their Office to others; but Christ is but one, and immor∣tal, and everJoh. 8.35 & 12.34. Rom. 6.9. Rev. 1.18. continueth, and hath no Partner or Successor, but executes an everlasting, unchangeable Priesthood, which passeth not to any other; and con∣sequently, he is able to save to the uttermost all that seek unto God for salvation, through faith in him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for all true penitent believers, manifesting his will and desire that such should partake of the vertue and benefit of his Sacrifice. From Ver. 23, to 26. 6. He shews how much Christ is to be preferred before those Levitical Priests, both in respect of purity and dignity. His perfect purity, he tells them, appears in this, That he is (as 'twas fit and necessary he should be in respect of procuring our pardon) holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from all possibility of being of the number of sinners. His high and supereminent dignity in this, that he is exalted, and advanced above all Creatures, and raised up above all the visible Heavens, to the right hand of his Father. And further, he is such an High-Priest as needs not offer sacri∣fice, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people, as the Aaro∣nical High-Priests often us'd to do, especially upon all appointed days; for he had no sins of his own to offer for. And he offered no Cattel or bruit Beast,
but Himself, in sacrifice, and that but once, upon the Cross; which once-offered-Sacrifice was abundantly sufficient for the expiation of sin. Moreover, the Levitical Law appoints men to be High-Priests that laboured with infir∣mities, and were sinners, and subject to mortality; but the promise made to Christ (and confirmed by God's Oath, and declared by David, Psal. 110, some hundreds of years after the Law was given) maketh the Son, and none but the Son (who is perfectly holy, and consecrated to this everlasting Office) a Priest for evermore. From Ver. 26, to the end. Chap. 8.The Apostle having proved the excellency of Christ's Priesthood in the for∣mer Chapter, he now proceeds to shew his faithful execution thereof, for the good and salvation of his Church, from the beginning of this Chapter to the 19 v. of ch. 10. In this Chapter he proves, That His Ministry is far to be preferr'd be∣fore the Levitical, by four Arguments. 1. From the Magnificence of it, v. 1. 2. From the Place where he ministers, viz. Heaven, v. 2. 3. From the Sa∣crifice which he presents, viz. his Body and Humanity wherein he suffered, v. 3, 4, 5. 4. From the Covenant whereof he is Mediator, from v. 5, to the end. In the first place, to excite their attention, he tells them, That this is the sum of the things he had before spoken concerning Christ's Priesthood, viz. 1. That the High-Priest, who intercedes for us Christians, is one that is en∣tred into Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God, and hath all power given unto him both in heaven and earth. 2. He is a Mini∣ster of the Sanctuary of HeavenSanctuary, or the most holy place, is here metaphorically put for Heaven, which it represented.. And, 3. There he presents his own body, or humanity, wherein he suffered (figured also by the typical Tabernacle), which the Holy Ghost miraculously formed and prepared for him in the womb of the Virgin; and by the efficacy of his passion still maketh intercession for us. But the Levitical Priests are only Ministers of the typical Tabernacle, which was made by the art and hands of man, Exod. 36.1. For every High-Priest must, according to his Office, have some gifts and sacrifices to offer; and so must Christ also: and he had no other to present in heaven but his own sa∣crific'd body. And that he doth exercise his Priesthood in Heaven, 'tis evi∣dent. For having on earth offered up himself a Sacrifice, if he should not have ascended into Heaven (the Sanctuary above) he should not have per∣formed all that belonged to his Office. Besides, if he had executed his Office only here on the earth, he could not properly be reckoned for a Priest, seeing He neither was of the Tribe of Levi, neither did, nor would offer such ty∣pical, figurative Sacrifices as the Priests (appointed by the Law) did offer; whose Ministry was only about types and shadows of heavenly things; the Tabernacle, and all things pertaining thereunto (framed and ordered by Mo∣ses according to the pattern shewed him in the Mount, (Exod. 25.40.) be∣ing only Representations of them.V. 5. , ob∣scura reprae∣sentatio. From v. 1, to 6. 4. He proves the excel∣lency of Christ's Priesthood above the Levitical, from the excellency of the New Covenant, or new dispensation of the Covenant of Grace (whereof he is the Mediator) above the old. For this Covenant is established upon bet∣ter Promises, viz. more spiritual, more clear, more extensive, and more uni∣versal: whereas the other was more carnal and earthly, more obscure, and more restrained to that one Nation of the Jews. And if the former Co∣venant, under the Levitical Priesthood, had been so perfectThat first Administrati∣on of the Covenant of Grace was said to be faulty, not in the matter and substance of it, as it was ordained and instituted of God; but because it was obscure, was not so surely ratified, and was not accompanied with that vertue, power, and efficacy, which the New Covenant is accom∣panied with., that there had been nothing wanting to it, and that it could not have been improved
and bettered; there would have been no need of a se∣condThe Sinai Covenant, and the New Covenant, are the two most illustrious Covenants, and made with the greatest solemnities, and tender'd to the greatest number of people; and these two were ma∣nanaged with peculiar Administra∣tions, most remarkbly distinct and opposite to each other. So that in these regards these two Covenants may be called the first and second Covenant, because they are the first and second most illustrious Cove∣nants; though in regard of time, and order of discovery, the Old Co∣venant was not the first (but the Covenant of Works); nor this New, the second. Roberts of the Cove∣nant. Covenant, or new Dispensation. But it ap∣pears it was not so: Because, when God speaks by the Prophet Jeremy (ch. 31. v. 31.), of making a New Covenant, he doth it by way of complaint or finding fault with the weakness and imperfection of the for∣mer [see Heb. 7.18.], saying unto them, The Co∣venant which I will now make with all true Israelites, is not after the rate of the Covenant which I made with the Israelites by Moses, when I brought them out of Egypt; a Covenant made up of external, carnal Commandments, the scope and drift of which the peo∣ple did not well discern; a Covenant that had the ex∣ternal form of a Legal Covenant, and an express Con∣dition of full obedience to be performed to all my Com∣mands; which Covenant they brake, so that I regard∣edThe Hebrew is, And should I be still an Husband to them? q. d. They have played the Harlot, and broken the Covenant on their part, and shall I be a Husband to them, or regard them? No, they may not expect it. them not. But this is the Covenant I will make in the later dayes, or times of the Gospel; 1. I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, that is, will illuminate their minds and understandings with the knowledg of my will and frame their hearts to yield obedience thereto, and so I will be their God to protect and defend them, and provide all good things necessary for them, either for this life, or that which is to come; and they shall be my people, to depend on me by a lively faith, and to worship me aright, and live in obedience unto me. 2. They shall have a more plentiful knowledg than was in the time of the Law. There shall not now be so many significant Ceremonies, as were in the time of the Law, the meaning whereof one shall teach another. For the Holy Ghost shall now be poured forth in so plentiful a measure, and the light of the Gospel shall now shine so brightly to all estates and conditions of men (even the meanest as well as the greatest), that the teaching of Friends and Neighbours (as 'twas us'd of old) shall be in a manner superflu∣ousV. 11. This is spoken not simply, but comparatively. There shall not now be such need as under the Law, to stir up men to know God. They shall not need in such a manner and sort as formerly, to instruct one another in the meaning of the types, and shadows, and observances required of them by the Law of Moses; which instruction was then necessary, that they might know the true God aright, and worship him according to his own Prescriptions. Neither shall they teach one another so darkly, so slenderly, and so imperfectly, under the New Testament, as they did under the Old; nor shall they need to take so much pains about teaching the knowledg of God, as they had been constrained to take in the teaching of the Gentiles in former times. For now a greater measure of lightHic statuitur aliud discrimen veteris & novi Testamenti, nempe Deus qui obscurius se patefecerat sub lege, plenum fulgorem emittet ita ut ejus cognitio futura sit fami∣liaris. Sed hyperbolicè extollit hanc gratiam cum dicit, neminem opus habiturum Doctore vel magistro quia quis{que} satis edoctus erit. Calv. and knowledg should abound, and all estates and conditions of people should so clearly un∣derstand the things of God, and the mysteries of sal∣vation (God so effectually teaching and enlightning them in the use of his own Gospel-Institutions: see Jer. 31.34. Isa. 54.13.), that they should seem rather to be taught by some immediate irradiation from God, than by any ordinary means of instruction. 3. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more; that is, I will be merciful to their persons in pardoning and removing their sins. Lastly, The Apostle from the Prophet's words inferrs a twofold consectary, or consequence. 1. From the Name the Lord gives this Covenant, calling it new, he inferrs the other to be old. 2. He shews, that that which waxeth old (and is by God's ap∣pointment
to be disannulled) cannot long stand, but is near vanishingThis the Apostle writ a little before the last Temple was destroyed by the Romans. away. From Ver. 6, to the end. Chap. 9.The Apostle roes on to set forth how Christ executes his Office, by compa∣ring him with the Legal Priests in the executing of theirs. And, 1. He shews the Peiests manner of executing their Office, to v. 11. And then Christ's manner of executing his, from v. 11 of this chap. to v. 19 of ch. the 10th. 1. He shews, the first Covenant (or first Administration of the Covenant of Grace) had an outward Legal Service, and Rites and Ordinances, justifications, be∣cause they represented the way of obtaining Justification. of Divine Worship, and a Worldly Sanctuary, frail and brittle, as made by the hands of men, of earthly Materials, and which was only a type and representation of the Heavenly Sanctuary above. And being to speak of the Ordinances and Services of Divine Worship that were performed in the Tabernacle, he first speaks of the Tabernacle it self, which had two partsThe Court of the people, as not belonging to the Priests, is here omitted.. In the first of which, viz. the Sanctuary or Holy-place, was, 1. The Golden Can∣dlestick [Exod. 25.31.], a type of the Church of Christ; the Shaft that sustained the branches (whereon stood the Lamps), being a figure of Christ, who sustaineth those Lights that be in the Church. 2. The Table whereon stood the Shew-bread Hypallage pro ., Exod. 25.23, 30, typifying the Saints communion with Christ [see Luke 22.30.]; which part of the Taber∣nacle had a veil which covered the entrance thereinto, called the first veilHoc velum erat oppansum primae parti Tabernaculi, quae san∣ctum dicebatur; sicut priùs velum, de quo v. 31. erat oppansum Sancto Sanctorum. Hoc velum sacrarium sacerdotum ab atrio populi separa∣bat. Mas., Exod. 26.36, whereby it was severed from the Courts appertaining thereunto. In the second part of the Tabernacle, he shews, was the Holy of Holies, being divided from the Sanctuary by ano∣ther veil made of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twi∣ned linnen, Exod. 26.31, whereunto belonged, 1. A GoldenThis is noted to distinguish it from other Ceners which were of brass, and were for the ordinary Priests to carry Incense up and down the Tabernacle: with such as these the two hundred & fifty which conspired with Korah, offered incense. Numb. 16.17. Conser, Levit. 16.12, 13, which the High-Priest filled with burning-coals taken from the Altar of Burnt-offering that stood in the CourtVide Pisc. in loc. (where the continual fire was), and made it fnd forth a sweet savour of the incense put upon it; that so a Cloud arising from it, might cover the Mercy-seat. 2. The Ark of the Covenant overlaid with Gold, Exod. 25.10, in which the Tables of the Covenant were kept, Exod. 34.1, 28. Deut. 10.1, 2. They are called the Tables of the CovenantTabulae foederis, i. e. Decalogi sic dicti, quod eo conditionis foederis legalis continebantur. Gomar., because the Ten Com∣mandments engraven upon them by the finger of God, contained a testimony of the Covenant which God made with his people, and testified what it was that God re∣quired of them. In which part of the Tabernacle was also theThe matter of the Pot is not set down in the History, but expres∣sed by the Apostle, who was guided by the Spirit of God. Most Interpreters refer  wherein, not to  the Ark (last named); but to , the Tabernacle, called the Holiest of all, in the precedent verse; it being confessed by all, that the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod, were within the compass of the Oracle, or most Holy place. It is not probable that Aaron's Rod (being a long shepherds crook, or a long white staff, and sprouting forth with Blossoms and Almonds) could lye in the Ark. Besides it's said, 1 King. 8.9 2. Chron. 5.10, That there was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables of stone. And it is said of the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod, that they were laid up before the Testimony or Ark [Exod. 16.34. Numb. 17.10.] and not in the Ark. Nos putamus Ʋrnam & Virgam potius extra quam intra, imò juxta aream fuisse quod aliquando significat vox in ut Prov. 1.21. in ostiis pro juxta ostia. Capellus. Hic est locus qui multis sus∣pectam fecit hanc Epistolam. Ego, qui hanc Epistolam maximi facio, nunquam adducar ut ejus au∣thoritatem deseram. Et pto objectis hoc modo optimè responderi, &c. Grotius in loc. Golden Pot of MannaErat id continuum miraculum quod tot seculae mansit incorruptum Manna cum in deserto ne tri∣duum quidem servari posset. Et mirabilius fuit videre storem incorruptum per tot saecula manentem, quam virgam avidam unâ nocte frondescentem., and Aaron's
Rod that budded, Numb. 17.1, 2, and over the Ark, the Cherubims of glory shadowing the Mercy-seat, Exod. 25.17, &c. from whence God ma∣nifested his presence, and was wont to speak with Moses, and to give him an∣swers, and to shew himself propitious to the people. But concerning these, he tells them, he intended not to enlarge, because he hasted to the services performed in these places. And he shews them, that when the Tabernacle was thus made, and the parts thereof fitly distinguished, and all the Sacred Ʋtensils set in their due places, the Priests went into the first and outward part of the Tabernacle, and performed the daily service according to the Law. But into the inner part, or Holy of Holies, none en∣tred but the High-PriestUnder the Law there were two sorts of Ministers, Prists and Levites. Levites were all the Male children of Levi except Aaron and his sons, who were Priests. Aaron, and the eldest son descending, generation after ge∣neration, from him, was the High-Priest; all the other sons of Aaron, and his posterity, were Priests. [Lev. 16.2, 17.], and he only one day in a year, viz. on the Fast, or great day of Expiation, Lev. 16.29; and then always he car∣ried with him the blood of a Bullock in a Basn, which was a sin-offering for himself; and the blood of a Goat, which was a sin-offering for the peopleBy errors of the people, all manner of sins may be understood, because there is an error of judg∣ment in every sin.; and he was to sprinkle the one and the other blood upon and before the Mercy-seat; thereby signifying, that there is no atonement with God, nor expiation of sin, but by the blood of Christ. He further shews, that the Holy Ghost (who was the institutor of all thse Rites and Ordinances, and therefore one true eternal God with the Father and the Son, and yet a distinct Person), signified this thereby, that the true, right, proper means of entring into Heaven (the true Holy of Holies) was not so fully and clearly manifested, as long as the Church under the Old Testament was instructed only by these Ceremonies and Rites of the first Tabernacle. For the first Tabernacle was but a figure or typical representation of good things to come, serving only for that present time of the Churches non-age; and the Gifts and Sacrifices then offered, could not of themselves perfectly justifie, sanctifie, or save any man; nor could they of themselves pacifie or quiet the Consci∣enceConscience cannot be satis∣fied till Gcd's wrath be pacified: but those Rites could not pacifie God's wrath; for they could not satisfie his Justice: nothing but Christ's blood could do that., nor satisfie it, that God's Justice was satis∣fied, and sin forgiven for any worthiness in them. The faithful therefore under the Old Testament, were not perfected (as pertaining to the Conscience) by the legal rites they performed, but by the Evangelical and Cele∣stial Truths, which those Rites typified; and so they were perfected as we Christians now are, though not so clearly and mani∣festly. And the Apostle shews a reason why those legal rites could not make perfect; namely, Because the nature of them was such, that they reached only to the outward man, they consisting, for the most part, in meats and drinks, and divers washings and ordinances that concern the flesh or body of man, which did not (separate from their signification, as many Jews took them) commend any man to God [1 Cor. 8.8.], and were impos'd upon them as a yoke [Acts 15.19.], until the times of the New Testament should come, in which these Ceremonies should be removed, and other more spiritual Institu∣tions introducedThe people of the Jews being a gross people, and much addicted to Idolatry, it seemed good to the wisdom of God to exercise them with a gross and bodily worship, that so he might keep them from Idolatry., wherein the Holy Ghost would work more powerfully. From Ver. 1, to 11. The Apostle having thus shewed how the Levitical Priests executed their Office, he comes now to shw how Christ executed His. He shews, that Christ being now actually exhibited, after a long expectation of him, and ha∣ving entred on his Priesthood (to procure for us all those blessings which were promised and figured in the Old Testament), he executeth his Office in a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle than that which was made with hands, viz. the Tabernacle of his own body (form'd in the womb of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, after an especial manner, without any spot of original sin; in which Tabernacle the fulness of the Godhead dwells. And he differs from the Legal High-Priest in this; The Legal High-Priest entred into the typical Holy of Holies with the blood of Goats and Calves, only once a year. But Christ entred into Heaven with his own bloodThis phrase [with his blood], implieth the merit of his death, that thereby expiation was made for our sins. (presenting his body, out of which the blood was shed, and which was the sacrifice it self that was offer'd up, which was more than the High-Priest did), and that but once for all; and hath thereby purchased and obtained eternal redemption for us, which the Levitical Priests could not do. Now that eternal redemption is the fruit of Christ's sacrifice, he proveth by arguing from the lesser to the greater. For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the water that was mixed with the ashes of the burnt-Heifer, or red-Cow [Numb. 19.2, &c.], purified from ceremonial uncleanness, and wrought that for which they were ordain'd, viz. external sanctification, to the purifying of the flesh or outward man; and he that us'd those rites, was san∣ctified and purified as to the works of external worship, how much more shall the bloodHis blood was effectual, not simply, as it was material blood; but as offer'd by the Eternal Spirit, whose blood it was. of Christ (who by the Eternal Spirit (that is, His Godhead) offer'd up him∣self a sacrifice (without spot) to God the Father, be able to purge our ConsciencesConscience is the most quick, lively, and sensible part of the soul. from all the spiritual uncleann ss of sin, which, makes us liable unto death; that being thus justified by faith in his blood, we may be sanctified in soul and body by his Spirit, and fitted to serve the ever-living God in a vital Christian cours. Now lest any should stumble at Christ's death, he shews there was a necessity thereof. For upon this account Christ took on him the glorious office, to be the Mediator of the New Covenant (or new Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace), that he might by the in∣tervention of his own death (as was requist) make atonement and satisfa∣ction for the sins of the faithful who lived under the Old Testament, as well as for them who live under the New (the merit of his death and passion extending it self to both); and that all such as are effectually called to believe in him (whether they lived before his coming in the flesh, or since) might by the vertue of his death, obtain the promis'd eternal In∣heritance. Another reason to prove the necessity of his death, he shews may be taken from the force of the New Covenant, which signifies also a TestamentThe New Covenant is of the nature of a Testament; and the be∣nefits promi'd therein, to wit, re∣mission of sin, reconciliation, sancti∣fication, and life eternal, are Legacies freely left to us by our dfunct Lord, who was dead, and is alive, to execute his own will for ever∣more. The Scripture is the Instru∣ment, or Evidence; the Apostles the Notaries, the Sacraments the Seals.. For as Christ was a Priest in reference to God, making an atonement for us by the sacrifice of himself; so he is also a Testa∣tor in respect of us, bequeathing those blessings to us, which he hath purchased for us with his own blood [see Luke 22.29.]. Now except Christ had dyed, his Testament or Will had not been ratified. For even among men a Testament is not of force while the Te∣stator liveth; but when his death can be proved, then 'tis firm and valid. Moreover, the first CovenantSi prius foedus sanguine dedi∣candum fuit, multo magis secundum, quod habet rationem Testamenti. Cap. had not its sanction without typical blood. Much less can the second, which hath the nature of a Testament. Now that the first was so dedicated and solemniz'd, may appear from the History of its solemnization, Exod. 24; where Moses sprinkling with a sprinkling Instrument made of Cedar-wood, Scarlet-wool, and Hyssop) the Book of the Covenant; and allSome think that all the people are said to be sprinkled, because the twlve Pillars, representing the twelve Tribes of Israel were sprink∣led. Others, that the Elders were sprinkled instead of the rest; or all may be put for a great part; that is, in a manner all of them were sprinkled, viz. all that stood near. the people, with the
bloodQuod sanguine consperserit populum, id solum Moses refert, Exod. 24. v. 8. Quali aspergillo fue∣rit usus, tacet. Apostolus dicit, ex lanâ & hyssopo fuisse conflatum: ne{que} id tamen de suo confinxit, sed ex alio historiae loco sumpsit, viz. Numb 19. v. 6. ubi simili aspergil∣lo sanguinem vaccae rufae spargere, jubetur sacerdos. De libro consperso nihil etiam ibi Moses; tamen quia probabile est librum altari impositum fuisse, dum fieret conspersio, recte dicit Apostolus altari consperso eti∣am librum conspersum fuisse. Nihil igitur de suo addidit Apostolus Scripturae veteri. Quod si omnino addidisset, non sequeretur tamen, vel scripturam imperfectam, vel aliquid praeter scripturas credendum esse. Dictante enim spiritu sancto de Mose ista in scripturas retulit. Paraeus in loc. of Calves and Goats mixed with the puri∣fying-water [see v. 13.This mixture of blood and water was requisite, to keep the blood from clotting. The blood typified the price of our redemp∣tion. The water, the virtue that issueth from Christ to cleanse away the filth of sin remaining in us. The mixture of blood and water, typified, that a cleansing-virtue accompanies the merit of Christ's Sacrifice.], declared, that that blood was the blood of the CovenantMoses's words, Exod. 24.8. something differ from these of the Apostle. Moses wrote before the death of the Testator, the Apostle after; so as the same thing which in Moses's time was a Covenant in the Apostle's time was a Testament., that is, a signSacramentaliter dicitur esse sanguis foederis, quia erat foederis symbolum, ratum ac certum id red∣dens fidelibus. Erat etiam figura sanguinis Christi, quo foedus novum erat sanciendum. Par. of it, and a seal confirming it, and the ceremony establishing it, which God appointed for them, or enjoined unto them. Yea, the Tabernacle and holy Ʋtensils, which were in themselves without pollution, were sprinkled with blood, because to man (not puri∣fied by faith in the blood of the Messias) all things be∣came polluted. Yea, generally, the course was under the Law, that all things that were purified, should be ce∣remonially purified by blood; yea, and without shed∣ding of blood, there could be no remission of sin. And thus it is in the New Covenant; there can be no re∣mission of sin, but by the shedding of the blood of Christ. As therefore the Law commanded, that the Taberna∣cle (which as to the inmost part especially, is an image, or figure, or pattern of Heaven), should be pu∣rified with the blood of Bullocks and Goats, so that the High-Priest should never enter in thither without such blood; so likewise it is very agreeable and pro∣portionable to these typesV. 23. Corruptibilia Taber∣naculi vasa, corruptibili sanguine purgari necesse fuit, necessitate, 1 prae∣cepti, 2. decori vel ordinis, 3. typi seu signifiationis. Incorruptibile verò coelum, & immortalem hominis ani∣mam incorruptibili Christi sanguine sanctificari necesse fuit, necessitate medii, quia nobis opus erat tali piacu∣lo, quia nullum aliud medium insti∣tuit Deus ad coelum nobis patefacien∣dum, ad expurgandas à peccatorum sordibus animas nostras, praeter im∣maculatum Christi sanguinem, quem pro nobis in cruce prosudit. Jac. Cappellus in loc. Cum dicit Apostolus  est metonymia qualem saepe usurpari necesse est ubi inter se comparantur res partim similes partim dissimiles. Nam quia per legalem  aditus dabatur in sanctuarium; ideo (effectum sumendo pro causâ)  dixit coelum summum, pro eo quod est aditum per ista in illud coelum dari. Grot. Per exemplaria coelestium intelligit Apostolus Mosaicum Tabernaculum ac populum ipsum, i. e. Judaeos, omnia{que} quae in ipso Tabernaculo erant; quae omnia pecudum sanguine, aquâ, lanâ, hyssopo (v. 19.) ex Dei mandato lustrari debebant. Per coelestia, intelligit fideles & filios Christi, ex quibus Ecclesia coalescit. Vide Corn. Alap. in loc., that Christ should shed his blood (which is a betterPotiores victimas dixit pro victimâ; quia tantum una est, sed propter antithesin, plurali numero liberè abusus est. Calv. sacrifice than any of the Levitical), and so enter therewith (not into the holy places made with hands, viz. the first and inmost Ta∣bernacle, but) into Heaven it self, to make way for our entrance in thither, and there to be our High-Priest, and to appear in the presence of God for us, as our Advocate. Yet the similitude betwixt Him and the High-Priest was not to hold in this, That as the High-Priest entred into the Holy of Holies once very year, with the blood of Bullocks and Goats; so Christ should often offer up himself, and often enter into Heaven. For then he should, since the beginning of the world, have dyed many times; which would have argued, That one Oblation of himself had not been sufficient. Therefore the case is far otherwise as to him. For now in the fulness of time hath he appeared, and that but once for all; and that now in this last age, this close, or shutting up of the Jewish State [see Mat. 24.3. 1 Cor. 10.11.], and that on purpose to redeem and rescue us from the guilt and power of our sins, by that one oblation of himself on the Cross, 1 Joh. 3.5. And as it is appointed by God, by a common law, Rom. 5.12, that all men shouldThat some men died not, as Enoch and Elias; and that some died twice, as they that were miracu∣lously raised up into this life again, was a special priviledg and exception from this general Rule. once dye, and then be judged as to their eternal state; so it is appointed of God, that Christ should only once offer us himself to bear the sins
of many, that is, of all that shall believe in him; and that he should come the second time to judg the quick and dead in a glorious manner, when he shall have no sin imputed to him (as he had at his first coming), and to accomplish the salvation of those who look for, and expect this his glorious appearing, that their bodies may be glorified and united to their souls, and so the bliss and happiness of both may be perfected and compleated. From Ver. 11, to the end. Chap. 10.In this Chapter the Apostle proceeds to shew the weakness and imperfe∣ction of the Levitical Sacrifices (considered in themselves, and separate from what they typified), and the power and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice. From Ver. 1, to 11. The weakness of the Levitical Sacrifices he proves by four Arguments. First, From the nature of the things injoin'd by the Ceremonial Law, which were only types, shadows, and darker draughts and delineaments (as it were) of thse spiritual and heavenly good things which were to be purchased and imparted by Chist. So that the Levitical Ordinances did not present the things themslves in their full proportion, lively image and shape, as the Gospel does. 2. Those Sacrifices which were often repeated year by year, could not (of themselves) make a satisfaction for sin, or justifie, or purge from the guilt and power of it, those who came to worship God by them. For if they could, they would have ceased to be offered; whereas the frequent re∣iteration and repeating of them, argued their weakness and imperfection. Could they once have taken away sin, or purged the Conscience from the guilt of it, there would have been no need to repeat them, seeing the worshippers once purged and cleared of the guilt of their sins by one of those Oblations and Sacrifices, would have been quieted in their Consciences, and not had them accusing and condemning them for them. But the case was far otherwise. For in those most solemn Sacrifices offered upon their annual day of humi∣liation [Lev. 16.21.], they were to make a solemn acknowledgment and confessionWe Christians also make a com∣memoration of our sins year by year, yea, remember the sins of our youth, and deprecate the wrath they de∣serve, but not by offering a new Sacri∣fice, as they did, whereby they pro∣fess'd, that no sacrifice formerly of∣fered was sufficient to expiate sin, or cleanse the conscience. The Sacrifi∣ces are said only to be a commemo∣ration of sin, unable to expiate it, and so left them in an estate of damnation, unless the Worshippers advanced fur∣ther to Christ, signified by those Sa∣crifices. of their sins, and not only of the sins committed that year since the last day of Expiation, but of their former sins for which they had formerly offered; which might intimate to them, that they needed another and better Sacrifice than those were, for the expiation of their sins, namely, that of the Messias to come, in and by whom alone, remission of sins was to be expected. For 'twas im∣possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats by its own vertue should take away the guilt of sin, or purifie the Conscience; and that by reason of the disproportion be∣tween the means of cleansing on the one side, and the thing cleans'd, viz. the Soul (together with the filth to be cleans'd away, to wit, sin) on the other. From Ver. 1, to 5. Having thus shewed the weakness of the Levitical Sacrifices, he comes now to shew the power and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice; and that he proves from Psal. 40. v. 6, 7, 8. where Christ is brought in as newly come into the world; and made Man, speaking to his Father after this manner: Foras∣much as thou didst formerly appoint Sacrifices as types to prefigure the Sacrifice of thy Son, but didst not intend they should continue longer than till He mould be offered up. Thou delightest therefore in those Sacrifices now no longer; but hast sent me into the world, and pre∣pared me a body, or humane nature (holy, harmless, and free from sin, that it may be fit to be join'd with my Deity) that therein I might offer up my self a true Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of men.
The words of the Psalmist are, Mine ear hast thou openedHebraea verba sunt, aures fodiste mihi. Quod quidam de docilitate exponunt; alii de mancipatione perpetuâ, ad obedientiam, ut ora∣tionis figura desumpta sit à ritu le∣gali. Exod. 21.6. Gomar.; but the Apostle retaining the sense and scopeThe Pen men of the New-Testament were not the Translators of the Old, but only quoted places out of it; so as they tyed not themselves to syllables and words, but to the sense. of the place, ties not himself to the very words. The variation is but the change of a figura∣tive phrase into a proper, to express the ready obedi∣ence of Christ to do the willSee Joh. 4.34. chap. 5.30. chap. 6.38. of his Father in the work of man's redemption, whereunto, by framing him a body, God had fitted him. And 'tis plain, that God was never pleas'd with the Levitical Sacrifices for their own sake, but only as they signified the death of his Son, Therefore in the fulness of time (when God saw it fit) Christ came into the world to do that which the Levitical Sacrifices did only prefigure, but could not effectuate. And when that time was come, Christ did assume our nature, and offered himself willingly unto the Father, declaring himself ready to perform his willWhen God had professed that he took pleasure no longer in Levitical Sacrifices, then cometh Christ with an Offering or Sacrifice of his own Body., and to be obedient unto him, even to the death of the Cross, for the redemption of sinners, as it was fore-prophesied of him in the Sacred Scripture, or Volume of the Law, Gen. 3.15. The Le∣vitical Sacrifices therefore being removed and taken away, as being insufficient to make expiation of sin, Christ's Sacrifice alone remaineth, as that only which pleaseth God, and is available to remove sin. Now by this one Oblation of the body of Christ, which he performed according to the willV. 10. Qua voluntate] pro, quâ voluntatis executione, hc obe∣dientiâ filii erga Patrem, sumus san∣ctificati. Sanctificationis nomine latè intellige universum genus beneficio∣rum Christi, ita ut  sit idem quod . We are sanctified by the offering up of the body of Christ, that being the meritorious cause of our sanctifi∣cation. of God, once for all sorts of men, we that believe in him are sanctified, that is, obtain remission of sins, justification, sanctification in this life, and a title to eternal glory in the life to come. Again, there was this difference between the Levitical Priests, and Christ: They were many, and ministred as Servants, repeating daily and frequently the same sacrifices (for kind) which God had enjoin'd; none of which had power, of themselves, to free the Conscience from guilt, or the offendor from the punishment due to sin. But Christ did not always stand ministring and offering sacrifices, as they did; but having once offered up himself on the Cross (which one Sacrifice sufficeth for sin for ever), he ceased and offered no more, but ascended into heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Father, and there continueth to execute his Kingly and Priestly Office, till all the enemies of our salvation, and at last Death it self, shall be vanquished; and then He shall lay down this form of governing, and with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all in all for ever; see 1 Cor. 15.24, &c. And he shews, it needs not be wondred at, that Christ hath now no more offerings to make, nor sufferings to endure; for by that one offering of himself, he hath made a perfect satisfaction to the Justice of God, and a full purchase of all thingsSee Heb. 7.25. that were requisite and needful, to bring those to eternal life who are sanctified by his grace, and brought to believe in him with a lively faith. He hath not left any other Offering to be made for them, after His. And he further proves the absolate perfection of Christ's Sacrifice, by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, recorded Jer. 31.31. where af∣ter God bad promised a new Covenant instead of the old, and had said, This is the Covenant I will make with them after those days (viz. when the days of the Old Testament are exspir'd); then He says, I will put my Law into their hearts, and their sins and iniquities I will re∣member no more. Now seeing God promiseth under the new Covenant, sanctification and remission of sins to all true believers (of which Cove∣nant Christ is the MediatorSee Chap. 8.6. Chap. 9.16., by whose death it is confirm'd); therefore his one Sacrifice once offered up, is abundantly sufficient. And if remission of
sins be obtained by Christ's one Sacrifice, there needs no repetition of it, nor any other offering for sin. From Ver. 5, to 19. Hitherto the Apostle hath doctrinally inform'd the Christian-Hebrews, that the Gospel-Ministry under the New Testament (ordained by Jesus Christ, God-man, our great Prophet and High-Priest), far excelleth the Levi∣tical Ministry under the Old Testament. He comes now practically to exhort them to divers Christian duties, which by way of application he inferrs from his precedent Doctrine, especially from the Priesthood of Christ. And first, He exhorts them constantly to hold fast their profession of faith in Christ. 2. To be very careful that their conversation be correspondent to the Precepts of the Gospel. In his Exhortation, he useth some arguments taken from the Leviti∣cal Types; which he so lays down, that withal they may tend to raise the minds of the believing-Hebrews to consider the excellency of the things sig∣nified thereby. And, 1. He shews them, That they having now free access unto God in Heaven, through the blood of Jesus, and not by the blood of beasts, nor through the old way, the veil of the Sanctuary, as the High-Priest was wont to enter into the Holy of Holies; but by a new and everlasting way (giving life and refreshment to them that walk in it) which Christ hath consecrated and prepared for them, through the sacrifice of his own Flesh and Humanity, which was a veil to cover and hide his Divinity. And see∣ing He is now the great High-Priest over the Church of God, invested with all authority and power, and having all in substance, which His Type prefi∣gured; therefore, (1.) They should draw near to Jesus with a sincere heart, and with fulness of faith, that so they might have their souls sprinkled with his blood, and delivered from the accusation of an evil condemning Consci∣ence (and so furnished with a good answer to all challenges), and their bo∣dies washed with pure water, that is, sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, which was signified by the legal washings. (2.) They should hold fast the pro∣fession of their faith or hope in Christ, without wavering or warping in time trial: for the promises which God hath made to those who constantly be∣lieve in, and adhere to his Son, shall certainly be performed. (3.) He ex∣horts them to maintain Christian communion, as an help to their stedfastness and perseverance in the faith; observing (e) one ano∣ther,V. 24. Observemus alii aliorum actus, ut, siqui languescant, eos ex∣citemus ad dilectionem, & pia facta. Grot. and exciting and provoking one another to love and all good works; and to maintain this communion both publikelyDeserere conventus est initium quoddam Defectionis Contra, in Ec∣clesiis Deus auget sua dona. Idem. and privately; and the rather, because the dayDies judicii Judaici, qui typus erat ultimi judicii. of vengeance on the obdurate Jews drew nigh. From Ver. 19, to 26. He further presseth his Exhortation to stedfastness in the faith, by divers arguments: 1. From the fearful case of wilful Apostates, who after illu∣mination and profession of faith in Christ, make defection from him, and wil∣fully reject him and the benefit of his Sacrifice. For such persons, he tells them, there remains no other sacrifice for sin, nor other way of remission, nor any other means to help them; But, having knowingly and wilfully rejected Christ, and maliciously betaken themselves to the side of his Adversaries, there remains nothing for them but a dreadful expectation of the fiery in∣dignation of God, which shall devour all such enemies of His. He shews, that the Contemner of Moses's Law (legally convicted under two or three wit∣nesses) was adjudged to capital punishment without mercy; therefore much sorer punishment is due to the Contemners of Christ, who tread under foot (as it were) the Son of God, counting him as a vile person, and as one that dyed as a Malefactor; and count the blood of the Covenant, by which
Christ was sanctifiedFilius Dei per sanguinem suum suit sanctificatus, h. e. Deo in sanctum victimam consecratus, ut ait Joh. 17.19. Pro iis ego me sanctifico, ut & ipsi sanctificati siut in veritate. Gomar. There is a sanctification by con∣secration, when any thing is devoted or dedicated unto God; and a san∣ctification by an inhabitation of the holy Spirit. (that is, consecrated to God as a Sacred Victim) an unholy thing, and do despight to the Spirit of Grace, as if he were a lyar, who convinceth them of the Deity and Divine Power of Christ. He further shews, That God professeth himself an Avenger of all sin and injuries done to his people [Deut. 32.36. Psal. 135.14.]; and much more will he shew himself an Avenger of so horrible a sin and injury against his Son. And 'tis a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, when, as an angry Judg, he taketh vengeance on his enemies. From Ver. 26, to 32. 2. He urgeth them to persevere; setting before them their former profes∣sion of the faith, and their sufferings for it, partly whilst they themselves were openly reproached and oppressed by the enemies of the Gospel; and partly, whilst they out of Christian sympathy join'd themselves as companions to those that were so used. And particularly, he acknowledges how they had shewed compassion to him in his bonds, in mourning for him, and relieving of him. He also takes notice, how they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, moved thereto from their assurance of a better inheritance in Heaven. Having there∣fore endured so much, he advises them not to desist or shrink from a bold and couragious professionV. 35. ] ita hic ap∣pellat liberam Christi professionem, ut Marc. 8.32. Act. 4.13, 29, 31. Grot. of Christ and his Doctrine, which would be crown'd with a great recompence of reward. He further tells them, they have need of patience, that they may be enabled to do and suffer whatever Christ shall call them unto; that so persevering, they may attain the promised re∣ward. For 'tis but a little while ere He will come to take vengeance on the obdurate Jews. In the mean time he shews them, that (as the Prophet Habbakkuk advises, ch. 24.) the just must live by faith; but if any apo∣statize from their profession, God will abhor those persons. But he tells them, he hopes better things of them (see chap. 6. v. 9.), namely, that they are not of the number of those that will apostatize, but such as will persevere in the faith, to the saving of their souls. From Ver. 32, to the end. He proceeds to press his former Exhortation to perseverance in the faith,  with divers arguments drawn from the nature, properties, effects, and ex∣cellency of Faith, and illustrated from the manifold experiences of the Saints of old. And, 1. he gives a description of FaithFides divina ab Apostolo de∣finitur  subsistentia (h. e. assensus firmus, & subsistens, licet inevidens) eorum, quae non videntur, h. e. quae non sciun∣tur per causam proximam.  eorum quae sperantur, fiducia, quâ quis stat, & consistit, con∣tranitens adversis sperata in dubium trahentibus vid. 2 Cor. 9.4. & 11.17. Heb. 3.14. vel, Fides est firma expe∣ctatio rerum sperandarum, & certa pro∣batio [] rerum quae non vi∣dentur, id est, certa confidentia, ea quae non videntur, fore, imo ita certa, ac si jam viderentur: est enim  demonstratio sive argumen∣tum ita certum, ut refelli non possit. decla∣ring it to be the substance or subsistence of things ho∣ped for; that is (firmly resting on God's Truth and faithfulness, and that he will infallibly perform what he hath promised), it gives, as it were, a present be∣ing and subsistence (in the mind of the believer) to things future, and which are not yet enjoyed, but only hoped-for and expected; and it evidently represents to the eye of the soul things that cannot be seen with our bodily eyes. 2. By faith, he shews it was, that the Elders and Saints that lived in former ages, ob∣tained the honourable testimony of God's approving of them. Thus God testified of Noah, That he was a just and upright man, and one that walked with him. Abraham also received this testimony, That he was the friend of God; and David, That he was a man after God's own heart. 3. Faith fully rests in what God hath revealed concerning his making the worlds (that is, all manner of Creatures, above and below, visible and invisible) out of nothing, (that is, out of no pre-existent
matter), by the word of his power. And if faith be assured of such an Almighty Power in God, whereby he made this excellent structure of the world; how can it doubt of His power and ability to perform any of his promises made to his people? Ver. 3. He now produces the examples of those ancient Worthies who gave emi∣nent proof of their faith. And, 1. He shews, that Abel by faith offered a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain. For Abel not only offered of the best and fattest of his Flock, whilst Cain in probability offered only some slight fruits; but Abel in his offering looked to the seed of the woman which should tread upon the Serpent's head; that is, unto Christ, who by his death should destroy the Devil, Heb. 2.14. By which faith (applying to himself the righteousness of the Messias) he obtained a testimony from God, that he was righteous, Mat. 23.35. For nothing can make a sinner righteous before God, but the righteousness of Christ laid hold on by faith, 2 Cor. 5.21. And God had respect unto A∣bel's person, and to his offering; manifesting his accep∣tation of them, either byIgne caelitus demisso, ut Levit. 9.24. Grot. At ignis hic sacrificium Caini re∣liquit intactum. Menoch. fire from Heaven, or some other way discernable by Cain. And his faith, and the fruits thereof, being registred in the holy Scripture; he thereby speaketh as evidently to us, as if we heard his voice. 2. He instances in Enoch, who by faith pleased God, and had the testi∣mony thereof, by an inward witness of the Spirit, testifying to his Consci∣ence that God approved him. Insomuch that he was translated from Earth to Heaven (not seeing, that is, not suffering or tasting death), and was not found any more on earth, among the living, though possibly those who lived at that time, missing of him, did search for him, as the Children of the Pro∣phets did for Elijah after he was taken up into Heaven, 2 King. 2.17. And that it was Enoch's Faith with which God was so singularly pleased, he proves by this Maxim, Without faithOpera ir∣regenitorum non sunt bo∣na opera quo∣ad formam & finem. Fides est ma∣ter & radix bonorum o∣perum. it is impossible to please him, seeing no man out of Christ can please him so, as to obtain eternal salva∣tion. Joh. 14.6. For he that comes to God either in prayer or thanksgiving, must believe that he is the only true God (such a God as he hath revealed himself to be), and that he is the RewarderEt quod sit mercedis dator iis qui Ipsum requirunt] quae metaphora invocationem & cultum Dei notat, ut Act. 15.17. Rom. 3.11. id quod solum fit recte per veram in Christum fidem, Rom. 10.13, 14. Eph. 3.12. Gomar. of those that diligently seek his favour (in the way he hath revealed in the Gospel), and that his Mercy is no other way obtainable. 3. He instances in Noah, who being warn'd of God concerning the com∣ing of the Flood (a hundred and twenty years after), believed and feared, and by the command of God prepared an ArkThe Ark was a type and a sacrament of their deli∣verance from eternal dam∣nation. And in this respect Baptism is sti∣led, in reference to the Ark, a like figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. When two types resembling one thing, are compared together, they are set out by the Greek word translated a like figure. to the saving of his Fa∣mily; by which he bore his testimony against the disobedient and unbelieving world, 2 Pet. 2.5, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith [see Gal. 5.5.], that is, an heirFactus est vitae coelestis haeres per eam justitiam quae est secundum fidem. Capel. Patrum fides habuit objecta duplicia; nempe promissa bona spiritualia ac communia reliquis fideli∣bus, & bona peculiaria corporalia, spiritualium adjuncta, & typos. Hinc fides utra{que} amplexa est, etiam quando temporalium tantum fit mentio. Gom. Justifying faith receiveth the things of this world from God as a Father in Christ; it extends it self to coelestial and temporal blessings. Dr. Gouge. The Apostle useth this word righteousness by faith, synecdochically, for that which follows up∣on it, viz. Eternal life. Idem. Justitiae] & vitae eternae ex justitiâ illâ fluentis: synecdoche membri metonymica. Pisc. of that eternal inheritance which is obtained by the righteousness of faith, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, whom he eyed in his preservation by the Ark, which was a type of Him, v. 7.
4. A Fourth Worthy he mentions, is AbrahamWhose faith he more largely describes, than any of the other Worthies. For it continueth to the 20 verse; only two verses are in∣serted, viz. 11 and 12, concerning Sarah's Faith, which also tends to the amplification of Abraham's. Though instances of sundry tem∣poral things be brought in as evi∣dences of his faith, yet many of them were types of spiritual and hea∣venly matters, v. 10, 16; and with∣all, the temporal things noted, were appendices to spiritual and hea∣venly. G. who by faith followed God, calling him to leave his own Countrey, and go whithersoever he should direct him, not knowing whither it was; only receiving a promise from God, that his posterity should be possessors of that place whither he was appointed to go, but no way as∣sured that himself should ever be owner of any part of it. And being come into the Land of Pro∣mise, he sojourned in it as a stranger, living in Tents erected for a transitory passage, and not in houses, as places of a fixed abode. And so likewise did Isaac and Jacob after him, who were heirs with him of the same PromiseOf the Promise made to A∣braham, read Gen. 12. v. 2, 3, 7. Of the like Promise to Isaac, read Gen. 26.3. Of the same to Jacob, read Gen. 28.13, 14.. And that which mov'd him not to go back again in a discontented mood, but patiently to bear this Pilgrim's life, was, because he had his eye on Heaven (which he expected God would give him as a reward of his faith and obedience), which is a City that hath foundations (whereas the Tents in which he dwelt, had none, but only were fastned to posts or stakes set in the ground), that is, the state of Heaven is unchangeable and unalterable; and whilst other Cities are built by men, God himself is the Builder and Maker of this City. He hath made it the place wherein he intends to ma∣nifest and reveal his own glory, and make it most apparent to Angels and Men; and by shewing them his glory, to glorifie them. Ver. 8, 9, 10. 5. Sarah also, though aged and barren, by faith leaning on the pro∣miseV. 11. Be∣cause she judg∣ed him faithful who had pro∣mised] At first she doubted, and laughed at it; but afterwards being reprehended by God, and better instructed by her Husband, and considering in her mind that it was God Almighty who had promised it, she believed it. of God, conceived by Abraham, when his body, as to the begetting of children, was as it were dead; and so the promise of God touching his in∣numerable off-spring took place. Ver. 11, 12. 6. He shews, that all those last mention'd, viz. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Sarah, died in the faith, that is, in assured expectation that the Pro∣mises made to them, viz. of a numerous off-spring, and the Land of Ca∣naan, &c. should be performed in God's due time, though they never enjoyed those good things promised themselves, but only by the eye of their minds saw them, and were confident of the accomplishment of them; and so saluted and embraced them by the arms of their faith, though afar off, rejoycing in them, and thinking it enough that their posterity should enjoy them. In the mean time they professed themselves to be pil∣grimsThis we read only of Jacob before Pharaoh; but the mind of one of the faithful in the main matters, maketh evident what is the mind of the rest. and strangers in the earth. And this lan∣guage of theirs, calling themselves sojourners in the Land of Canaan, and not possessors of it, signified, that they did not think themselves at home, but that they had another Countrey in their desires, which was not their own Countrey of Chaldaea, from whence Abraham first went out upon God's call; for he and his posterity had many opportunities to have gone back thither, if that had been the Countrey they looked after. But 'tis plain, the Countrey they had in their desires, was an heavenly, whereof Canaan was only a type; wherfore God is not ashamed to be called their God (even after their death, Exod. 3.6. Mat. 22.32.) who by their faith gave glory to him in this life, acknowledging his power and faithfulness. And when they dyed, he prepared for them a City, an heavenly City, which is a superabun∣dant recompence for their earthly Countrey which they left at his command. Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16.
By faithFides ra∣dix operis fu∣it, & princi∣pium inter∣num. Abraham when he was tried, and required by God to give a clear evidence of his obedience, Gen. 22, was ready, and did really intend to offer up Isaac, his only begotten Son of Sarah his lawful Wife, though he had received, embraced, and firmly believed the Promises of God, that a nume∣rous seed should spring from him, Gen. 13.15; Nay more, that the Mes∣sias himself (in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed) should come of him; for so the promise ran, In I∣saacIn Isaac, i. e. per Isaacum vo∣cabitur, h. e. Existet tibi semen nem∣pe, illud numerosissimum, quod tibi promisi, & praecipue Christus. Pisc. vide Rom. 9 7. vide Amos 7.16. shall thy seed be called; that is, that posterity thou shalt have by Isaac, shall be very eminent, and shall propagate thy name, and shall possess the Land of Canaan, and the Messias according to the flesh shall spring from his loins. And that which strengthned and supported his faith, was this; he reasoned andA due consideration of the grounds of faith, doth much streng∣then faith. consi∣dered with himself, that though he should sacrifice this his Son, God was able to raise him up again from the dead, and would undoubtedly work such a miracle, ra∣ther than fail of his promise. And accordingly Abra∣ham received him again in a similitudeRecepit in similitudine], h. e. non secus atque si Deus cum ex mortuis suscitâsset. Paraeus. Nomen  pro similitudi∣nis notâ accipitur. Calv. or like∣ness, and after a sort, even as if he had been raised from the dead; for his nearness to death was a type, figure, and similitude of death [and accordingly called death, 2 Cor. 1.10.], and he was as a dead man in his father's account. Ver. 17, 18, 19. 8. By faith Isaac having revelations from the Lord concerning future things, setled in his heart an assurance of the accomplishment of them; and accordingly with a prophetical spirit he blessed his sons. And though through his fatherly affection he had a mind to have conferred the main blessing on his eldest son, Gen. 27; yet God so over-ruled the matter by his Providence, that the younger had the greater blessing. Esau was blessed with temporal blessings, but Jacob with temporal and spiritual also. Jacob's posterity were to be Lords over Esau's; which cotinued from David's time (2 Sam. 8.14.) till the reign of Jehoram (2 King 8.20.), when the posterity of Esau broke the yoke from off their neck, as Isaac had foretold [Gen. 27.40.] Ver. 20. 9. By faith Jacob when he was near unto death, blessed the two sons of Joseph, adopting them into his family, preferring Ephraim the younger be∣fore Manasseh the elder, by God's appointment; and making them Heads of two distinct Tribes, he gave them portions in the Land of Cana as if he had been present at the distribution of it, Gen, 48.22. And inclining upon his Pillow at his beds-head, being weak and feeble, he held his staff in his hand too; and leaning on it, he worshippedEt ado∣ravit] sunt verba Mosis, Gen. 47.31. spectantia non benedi∣ctionem filio∣rum Josephi quae sequenti demum capite refertur, sed mandatum Jacobi quo se vetuit in Aegypto sepeliri. Paulus videlicet hâc connectione testatum voluit utrumque profectum à fide. Jacob. Capellus. God, devoutly praising of him, that he should be buried with his Fathers, as Joseph had promis'd him; and that his bones should be carried into Canaan, which was a token and pledg that his posterity should inherit that Land, and that God would bring them thither. Ver. 21. 10. By faith Joseph when he was near unto death, made mention of the depar∣ture of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Gen. 15.24, and commanded that his bones should be carried along with them, and buried in Canaan, which he was assured God in his due time would give them for an inheri∣tance. Ver. 22.
11. By faithFide permotos su∣isse Mosis Pa∣rentes, vidit  Deus, & id Apostolo nostro revela∣vit. Cap. it was that Moses's Parents, Amram and Jochebed (both of the Tribe of Levi) having received a revelation from God (as some thinkOraculo prius accepto, ex ipsis ori∣turum qui populo libertatis auctor esset. Quare cum in sans ipsis natus esset, mirum in modum pulcher, non dubitarunt quin is ipse esset ad quem id oraculum pertineret. Grot.) that from them should spring one who should be the procurer of liberty to that people; and a Child being born to them of more than ordinary beauty and comeliness, they believed, and concluded that this was He whom God intended for the Deliverer of his people; and therefore notwithstanding the cruel Edict of Pharaoh [Gen. 1.26.], they hid him three Months; and possibly by rea∣son of some discovery that was made of him, durt hide him no longer [Exod. 2.3.]. Ver. 23. 12. By faith Moses when he was forty years old [Acts 7.23.] refu∣sed to be called the adopted Son of Pharaoh's DaughterHujus generosi ani∣mi praesagium dedit Moses infans, cum diadema sibi per jocum a Rege impo∣situm in ter∣ram abjecit., preferring the afflicted condition of the people of God, and esteeming the re∣proachesProbrum Christi] h. e. Causâ Christi ut Eph. 3.1. Paulus dicitur vinctus Christi, h. e. propter Christum, & Col. 1.24. afflictiones Christi in carne meâ, quod eas propter Christum in carne sua perferret. Vel notari potest hic subjectum. Nam Ecclesiae afflictiones in utro{que} Testa∣mento Christi etiam sunt, propter unionem mysticam Capitis & membrorum. Vid. Act. 9.4. Gom. that the Members of Christ's Mystical Body unjustly suffer, greater riches than the Treasures of Egypt. For, such reproaches he knew would be recompenced with an exceeding great rewardMat. 5.11, 12. & 19.29.; and to this he had an eye. Ver. 24, 25, 26. 13. By faith he led the people out of Egypt [Exod. 10.29.], notwithstanding the King's threatnings; and was constant and couragious in doing his duty, as having the eye of his faith fix'd on him who is Invisible, and who is a ready help in time of trouble. Ver. 27. 14. By faith he kept the Passover, and sprinkled the bloodThe rite of sprinkling blood, was used only the first time of celebrating the Passover, because it was a sign of that particular deli∣verance which then only was given. There was not the like occasion for it at other Passovers; for such a Destroyer was only sent at that time. of the Pascal-Lamb on the thresholds and posts of the doors of the Children of Israel [Exod. 12.21. &c.] that the destroying-Angel that was sent to destroy the first-born of the Egyptians that night, might not hurt them. The King of Egypt had commanded the Midwives to kill all the Male-children of the Is∣raelites in the birth; which cruel Edict, because it took not effect, he made another more cruel, That all his people should cast every Son that was born of an Israelite, into the water, Exod. 1.16, 22. God therefore destroyeth all their first-born, and thus suiteth his Judgment unto their Sin. Ver. 26. 15. By faith the IsraelitesAll of them had not a true and sound faith. There were many Unbelievers among them, 1 Cor. 10.5. yet the fact hath its denomination from the better part. For the faithful's sake, the unfaithful were kept from drowning. The wicked, in temporal blessings, fare the better for the Godly. passed through the Red-Sea'Twas call'd the Red Sea, because the sand on the shores thereof were red, and the Moun∣tains bordering thereon were reddish., Moses being their Leader; which the Egyptians essaying to do, were drowned. 16. By the faith of Joshua, and the other Israelites (who trusted in God that he would accomplish all his Promises), the Walls of Jericho (a strong and well-fenced City, and a Frontier-Town that kept them from en∣tring far into Canaan) fell down when they had encompassed it
sevenThere be∣ing seven days spent in the Army's march about Jericho, one of them must needs be the Sabbath. In some cases some servile work may be done on the Sabbath. days: They went round about it once a day for six days together; and on the seventh day they went round it seven times; and then giving a great shout, all the Walls, over against which the Israelites marchedThat all the Wall about the City did not fall, may appear by this, else Rahab's House would have allen together with the Wall., fell flat to the ground, and the Army entred into the City, and destroyed it. Ver. 30. 17. Rahab, who, as it seems, kept an Inn or Victualling-house in Jericho, and probably had formerly been of an infamous lifeCertè quaerebatur Rahab ab exploratoribus, non ut meretrix, sed ut hospita. Quaevis caupona meretrix audiebat, etiamsi forte castè viveret. In eo censu potuit esse Rahab, etiamsi Scriptura passim ex usu loquendi re∣cepto, vocet eam . Her seeking to hide the Spies, was an act of faith very pleasing to God; but her doing it with a lye, is that which cannot be excused, or any way defended; the work she did was good, though she fil'd in the manner of doing it. Quod huic charitatis officio menda∣cium admiscuit, id non pertinet ad mendacii, sed ad infirmitatis umanae notationem. Capel., as many among the Gentiles of that profession were [see Jam. 2.25.]; having heard of God's won∣derful works, Jos. 2.9. &c. was thereby brought to be∣lieve and acknowledg the God of Israel for the true God; and understanding that He had given the Is∣raelites the Land of Canaan for a pssession, she desi∣red communion with them as the true and only people of God, and was resolv'd to live and dye with them. And as a testimony of her faith, she peaceably and courteously entertain'd the Israelitish Spies, and protected them, and dismiss'd them in safety; and thereupon was saved from perishing with her unbelieving and disobe∣dient fllow Citizens; and afterwards she was married among the Israelites, to Salmon the Father of Boaz, one of the fore-fathers of David, and consequently of Christ [M. 1.5.]. Ver. 31. 18. The Apostle having thus instanc'd in divers worthy Examples of faith; he shews, that besides thse there re many more that might be nam'd, and that a long time would not be sufficient to write of them. He mentions Gi∣don and Barac, Sampson and Jephta, David and Samuel, and some of the ancient Prophets. These being extraordinarily raised up by God for the special good of his Church, and the Commonwealth of the Jews, and firmly dpending on his power, they fearlesly discharged their duty in governing the Israelites, fighting their battels, and making conquests; Gideon over the Midianites, Barac over the Canaanites, SampsonSampson's pulling down the House upon himself, and the Ene∣mies of the Church (which were in, and upon it), was a lawful act, be∣cause he did it by a special warrant, which was the immediate and ex∣traordinary motion of God's Spirit, and did it in compliance with his function, to which he was deputed from his Mother's womb, Judg. 13.5, which was to deliver Israel out of the hands of the Philistines. Dr. Gouge. The Apostle here doth not observe the order of time, but of dignity; for Gideon had a more excellent spirit than Barak, and Sampson than Jepth∣tah. Samuel is put after King David, immediately before the Prophets, because he was a prime Prophet. over the Philistines, Jephta over the Ammonites, David over the Amalekites, Jebusites, Moabites, Philistines, Idumaeans, and Syrians. 'Twas their faith that gave them courage to fight those battels, and make those conquests. 'Twas by their faith that they not only lived godly and righteous lives themslves, but were eminent also in administring righteousness and Justice among the men of their times, see 2 Sam. 8.15. 'Twas by their faith that they obtained the performance of some special and particular Promises made unto themselves, as Da∣vid of a Kingdom. &c. 'Twas by faith that the Pro∣phets who lived after Samuel and David, obtain'd of God that such memorable things should be done for them. As particularly, Daniel obtained that miracle of mercy and deliverance from God; that the Lions, when he was thrown into their Dens, did him no hurt. O∣thers were so favoured by God, that the fire did them n harm when they were cast into it, as Daniel's three Companions. Others escaped present danger of being killed by the Sword, as David by Saul, Eli∣jah and Michajah by Ahab. Others out of weakness were made strong, that
is recovered out of desperate Diseases, as King Hezekiah. Others became won∣derfully valiant in battel, as Jonathan, 1 Sam. 13, and 14; and David's Captains, 2 Sam. 23, and routed the Armies of the Heathen-Canaanites, and such-like aliens and strangers from the Covenant of God. Another effect of the vigour of Faith, was this, That some women thereby received their dead children raised to life again, as the Widow of Sarepta that entertained Elijah, 1 King. 17; and the Shunamite that lodged Elisha, 2 King. 4. And by faith it was that other Worthies of the Old Testament when rack'd and tormented for a knowledging and professing the truth, re∣fus'd to be deliver'd to the prejudice of their Piety, and their Consciences, when they might; believing that thugh they were put to death, they should have a glorious resurrection to life eternal after death; and looking upon that as much more desirable than a present freedom from their trments. For if they would have denied God, and broken his Commandments, they might have had a kind of resurrection from the sentence of death pronounced a∣gainst them, and have lived longer in the world. But they refused that for a far better resurrection, which they assuredly expected. Here sme think the Apostle hath reference to the Case of Eleazer, and those torturings which were exercis'd under the Tyrant Antiochus, 2 Mac. 6.18: But we need not go so far: If the three Children would have fallen down and worshipped Nebuchadnezzar's Golden Image, they might have been delivered. If Daniel would have prayed to King Darius, he might have escaped the Lyons Den. The Apostle goes on to shew how other Worthies were tried by mockings and reproaches, as Micajah, 1 King. 22.24; and scourgings, as Jeremiah, Jer. 20.2, and 37.15; and bonds and imprisonments, as Joseph in Egypt, and Jeremy: Some were stoned, as Zacharias the son of Jehojada, 2 Chron. 24.21: Some were sawnHanc Judaeorum traditionem sequuntur Hieronymus & Epiphanius, & fuisse hoc supplicium non incog∣nitum vicinis Judaeae locis, apparet. Amos 1.3. 2 Sam. 12.31. 1 Chron. 20.3. asun∣der, as the ancient Jewish Histories testifie of Isaiah under the tyranny of Manasseh. Others being tempted with fair promises, and remaining resolute, were slain with the sword, as it happened to many in Ahab's time, 1 King. 19.10; as also in Manasseh's, 2 King. 21.16. Others were driven from their own homes, and forc'd to wander about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, destitute of all things needful, and many ways perplexed and afflicted. And yet such excellent persons as these, whose company the world was not worthy to enjoy, were forc'd to wander about in deserts and mountains, and to hide themselves in dens and caves of the earth. From Ver. 31, to 39. The Apostle having thus set forth the vigour of Faith by the admirable effects of it in doing and suffering: He concludes this discourse, declaring, That all these Saints, though they obtained testimonyAdepti te∣stimonium] scil approba∣tionis quod scil Deo pla∣cuerint., that through their faith they pleased God; yet they obtained not the accomplishment of the great promise (a) of the exhibition of the Messias, God having reserved that great mercy to the times of the New Testament,Non con∣sequuti sunt promissionem] h. e. (per Meton. adjuncti pro subjecti) rem promissam, nempe Christum exhibitum in carne, & pro nobis mortuum & suscitatum. that they should not be perfect∣edNe abs{que} nobis consummarentur] Id intelligendum, ratione meriti Christi, non ratione applica∣tionis: nam posteriore modo Patres fideles abs{que} nobis fuerunt consummati, utpote justificati (Rom. 4.3 & 6.23, 24.) & vitâ aeternâ donati propter Christum venturum, & meritum solvendum, fide appre∣hensum. Priori verò modo nequaquam, quia redemptor nondum advenerat, ideo{que} promissum re∣demptionis pretium nondum solverat. Gomar. Ʋt non sine nobis consummarentur] h. e. Ut eorum salus ex hoc ipso, nobis exhibito, Messiâ (nò∣stro{que} demum tempore peracto ipsius sacrificio) pendêret, per quem & nos unà cum eis justifica∣remur, & servaremur. Illyr., that is, justified and saved by any thing done in their time, but by
looking to our time, and Christ's satisfaction made thereinIta ut ab eo, quod no∣stris demum temporibus exhibendum ac praestan∣dum erat, salus ipsorum penderet. Bez., whereby both they and we are perfected; God not intending that the Infant-condition of the Church should be made perfect before the exhibition of Christ, nor without the more compleat condition of the Church after Christ. From Ver. 39, to the end. The Apostle having pressed these Christian Hebrews to perseverance in the faith, and to patience under the cross, and the afflictions they might meet with for the sake of Christ, from the many instan∣ces] Metaphora du∣cta est ab avibus magnâ multitudine volantibus, quae alis suis umbram in∣star nubis, faciunt; cujus locutionis exemplum extat Esa. 60.8. Lud. Cappel. of the former Saints mentioned in the foregoing Chapter (who have witnessed to them the power and ef∣ficacy of their faith): He comes now further to encou∣rage them to follow their example. And in order here∣unto he tells them, they should lay aside every weight, that is, the inordinate love of the world, and the im∣moderate cares and sollicitudes about it (which are so apt to press down the soul), and the sinPeccatum quod nos facilè circum∣stat] involvit, & implicat multo fa∣cilius, quam ulla erga pedes & crura currentis ad remorandum illius cur∣sum. Cap. that doth so easily beset us, that is, doth so usually incumber and entangle us (viz. the slavish fear of men, and of loss of our wordly comforts or life) and should run with pa∣tience the race that is set before them, and is appointed for them by God, persevering therein, whatsoever difficulties or afflictions they may meet with, as they that hope for a glorious reward when they come at the end of their course. And that they may be enabled comfortably to run their Christian course, and to persevere in the faith, he advises them to look up to Jesus, who by his word and spirit first worksEph. 2 8. Phil. 1.6, 29. 1 Cor. 1.8. the grace of Faith in us, and afterwards carries it on, preserves and encreases it. He adviseth them, not only to look up to him for help, but to eye him as their Captain and Leader, who for the joy that was st before him (unto which by his sufferings he was not only to come himself, but also to bring all that truly believe in him, Luke 24.26. 1 Pet. 1.11.) patiently endured the cross, and despised the shame (which was cast upon him by sinners both in his life, and at his death), and after his sufferings was advanc'd to the highest pitch of glory, dignity, and power (far above all creatures), next unto God himself; and will reward all the Mem∣bers of his Mystical Body for whatsoever they do or suffer for him. And he shews them, that it will be requisite they duly consider and often medi∣tate on Christ's Patience, and how great opposition and contradiction from sinners he endured, lest they grow weary and be discouraged under the Cross, and faint in their minds. But they might possibly object, That they had suffer∣ed much already; see ch. 10.32, 33, 34. He answers, They had indeed suffered much, but not so much as they must be ready and prepared to suffer. They had not suffered as their Lord and Master had done, to the effusion of his blood, striving against, and opposing the wickedness and infidelity of the ene∣mies of the Gospel, who by cruel and bloody courses endeavoured to force men from the faith, as they had dealt with Stephen and James, Acts 7, and 12. And therefore every suffering less than that, ought to seem tolerable in their eyes. From Ver. 1, to 5. And that he may further stir them up to patience and perseverane in the faith, he tells them, they should consider, that all their sufferings are but fatherly chastisements. Which consideration that he might imprint the more upon their minds, he asks them whether they have for∣gottenV. 5. Obliti estis?] legenda haec interrogativè. Grot. the exhortation and divine counsel of Wisdom to her children, Prov. 3.11, That they should neither despise nor disregard the chastnings of the Lord, nor
faint, nor sink under them. For God chastensLicet ab Hebraeo aliquantulum discrepat haec versio, Paulus tamen eam ut quae sola esset in usu non du∣bitat usurpare, quia, rem ipsam quod attinet, utrobi{que} sensus est idem. Vide Prov. 3.12. Capel. in love every one whom he acknowledges for his son, and receives into his especial care. And therefore in that they are chastised in order to their amendment, they are to reckon themselves to be dealt with by God as children. For what sn is there whom a wise father doth not cor∣rect, when he sees him stand in need of it? If any be totally freed and ex∣empted from chastisement (to which all true and genuine children are ob∣noxious, and which every prudent Parent inflicts upon his dearest children when he sees there is cause), 'tis an argument, that though they be in the fa∣ther's family, yet they are not owned and acknowledged by him (and so have no title to, or just expectation of the inheritance), but indeed are bastards and not sns; of which this is a shrew'd token, that God suffers them to go on without discipline, and to follow their own evil ways. Furthermore he tells them, they should consider, that our Parents who begat us, and were instru∣ments (under God) of our bodily and earthly being, did in our childhood chastise and correct us, yet we have not been incited thereby to reverence them the lss, or to forsake or renounce them. And shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of SpiritsPatri Spirituum] h. e. Patri Spirituali & coelesti. [Eccles. 12.7.] when he corrects us in order to our spiritual amendment, and that we may at last obtain of him eternal life, as a reward of our patience and obedience. And 'tis further to be consider'd, that earthly Parents chastise their chil∣dren only whilst they are childrenPerpetua quidem est Patrum, quamdiu vivunt, in liberos suos au∣ctoritas, & potestas, sed non eadem perpetuó. Castigatoriam enim illam jurisdictionem non perpetuam obti∣nent, sed ad paucos dies, i. e. annos. V. 10., and no longer; and many times by the rules of their own judgment and will (which very often are corrupt and depraved), but our heavenly Father's chastisements are all managed with infinite wisdom, and he purely intendeth our pro∣fit therein, that he may thereby form and fashion us unto holiness, and bring us to a participation of his own Divine Nature. 'Tis true indeed, he tells them, Afflictions are no pleasing things in themselves, nor joyous for the pre∣sent; but the fruit of sanctified affliction is righteousness and holiness, which bring peace to the conscience, after we have been some time exercis'd, and our corruptions subdued with this discipline. From all the foregoing considerations, he exhorts them to courage and constancy in the ways of Christ, alluding to the words of the Prophet Esay, chap. 35.3. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees; as if he should have said, Seeing so glorious fruits spring from sanctifi'd afflictions, be not dejected in mind, nor suffer fear to seize upon you (which weakens the hands, and infeebles the knees, and cau∣seth them to smite one againt another); but be couragious in your souls; and in case yur spirits begin to fail, quicken them up again, and endeavour to renew yur spiritual strength and courage; and make straight paths with your feetRectas or∣hitas facere pe∣dibus] est re∣ctum vitae cursum tene∣re, idque ita, ut etiam qua∣si vestigia quaedam sanctae vitae vestrae appareant, ad gloriam Dei & aliorum imitationem. Illyr.; that is, manifest the course wherein you walk, to be the right way that leadeth to life, that others may see it, and follow you therein, and look to it, that the lame be not turned out of the wayNe quod claudum est luxetur (amplius), q. d. Ne forte siquis jam claudus est ex pedum infir∣mitate, amplius novo offendiculo periclitetur ut salutis jacturam faciat. Capel., but that they rather be healed, that is, that the weak be not disheartned, or turned out of the right way, but rather cured of their fears, and confirmed in their Christian course. From Ver. 5, to 14. The Apostle having thus endeavoured to strengthen them in the Faith, and in a couragious profession thereof, he comes now to give them many wholesome precepts for the right ordering their life and conversation, that thereby they may adorn their profession.
1. That they endeavour as much as in them lies, to be at peace with all menQuantum id salvâ con∣scientiâ fieri potest. [Rom. 15.18.]; yet whilst they endeavour after peace, they must be sure they neglect not holiness. For withut peace with men, they may obtain eternal salvation; but without holiness no man shall ever see God to his com∣fort. Vr. 14. 2. That they be not only careful as to their own particulars, but also watchful one over another; that they look to it diligently, and take what care they can that none among them fail or fai short of the grace of God; that is, fail of the grace of God offered in the Gospel, or fall from the pure doctrine of grace; and that no root of bitterness spring up among them, viz. no dangerous er∣ror, heresie, or schism; no envy, or malice, to the troubling, polluting, and infecting of them. See Deut. 29.18. 3. That they take care there be no fornicators or prophane persons found among them, such as Esau was, who through the impa∣tience of his hunger, for one mess of meat sold his birth-rightThe priviledges belonging to the first born, were: 1. He succeeded to his Father in dignity and superiority over the Family. 2. He was to have a double portion of his father's good, Deut. 21.17. Thus the birth-right being translated to Joseph the first-born of Rachel, his seed made two Tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh. 3 He sustained the Office of a Prophet to instruct the Family, and of a Priest to pray with them, at least till God set the Tribe of Levi apart for that Fun∣ction. For the Levites were taken in∣stead of the first-born, Numb. 3.41. Primogenitura complectebatur non tantum primatum, & duplicem por∣tionem, quae civilia orderi possunt, sed & jus sacerdotii, eó{que} sacro sanctum filiis debebat esse jus illud: postquam Levi∣ticae Tribui alligatum fuit sacerdotium, ex illo jus Primogeniturae minoris fuit venerationis & momenti. Capel. with all the priviledges thereunto be∣longing (whereof the Priesthood was one); which was so provoking a sin in the sight of God, that after∣wards when he would fain have recover'd this blessing, he found no place for repentance r alteration of mind, in his Father Isaac; neither could he move him to re∣verse or recall the blessing, which as a Prophet of God, and as His Instrument (though with mistake as to his apprehension) he had conferred on Jacob, though he sought it with tears. And as Esau was rejected from the blessings of the birth-right (which before, Gen. 25.34, he had so vilely contemned); So prophane contem∣ners of the grace offered in the Gospel (whereby we be∣come Priests unto God, to offer up spiritual sacrifices ac∣ceptable through Christ) ought to fear being excluded from the mercy of God; and that though they earnestly seek it when it is too late, God will not repent or alter his righteous sentence upon them. 4. That he may further set out what a heinous sin it is, and how high a degree of prophaness, to neglect or despise the grace of God offered in the Gospel, he shews them the difference betwixt the Law and GospelQuanto lex Evangelica cum suis promissis, praestat legi Mosis, tanto damnabilior est ejus contemptus. Grot., and to how much better a state and condition they were advanced under the Gospel, than the Jews were in under the Law and old Administra∣tion of the Covenant of Grace, notwithstanding all their boasting of their great priviledges. That therefire he may shew the excellency of Christianity above Judaism, he tells these Christian-Hebrews, that they were not called to hear the promulgation of the Law given on Mount Sinai.Non accessistis] i. e. non estis vocati, & adducti per Evangelium ad montem Sinai, ut terrificam legis promulgationem audiatis, sicut popu∣lus Israeliticus; sed vocati estis ad montem Sion, &c., a material Mountain, that was in it self touhable and palpable by the hands of men (though in respect f God's charge it might not at that time be touchedNay, that command had so much terror in it, that they must not approach the border of the Mountain, Exod. 19.12, &c. If so much as a Beast touched the Mountain, it must be stoned, or shot through with an arrow.), a Mountain burning with fire, and co∣ver'd with blackness, and darkness, and tempest, the trum∣pet sounding, and the voice of God in a dreadful man∣ner promulgating the Law; which voice was so terri∣ble, that the people were not able to her it, but re∣quested that God would not speak to them any more, Exod. 20.19. And so formidable was the aspect of all things that appeared there at that time, that Moses him∣self. said, I exceedingly fear and tremble. The Apo∣stle having thus set out with how much terror the Law, and the old Admini∣stration was delivered, which was enough to keep these Hebrews from any de∣sire
to return to Judaism, he comes now to set before them the happy condi∣tion to wbich they were advanced under the Gospel. He tells them, that by the Gospel they have been called, and by faith received into the communion of the Christian Church, figured by Mount Sion (Psal. 2.6, opposite to Mount Sinai, Gal. 4.26.), which he calls the Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living God, beause it is set up, and especially governed by God. And hereby also they come to have communion with the holy AngelsWho are an innumerable com∣pany as to us, though not as to God., who are Ministers of Christ, and fel∣low-servants of believers [Rev. 19.10.], and make a part of the CatholickThe Catholick Church is diffused through the whole world, extendeth it self to all times and ages; hath two parts, one Militant here on earth, the other Triumphant in heaven. or universal Church, the great assembly of the first-bornPrimogenitorum] h. e. Electo∣rum, ut qui supra reliquos homines eas habent praerogativas, quas olim primogeniti supra reliquos fratres; nempe, 1. Potiorem partem haere∣ditatis. 2. Principatum. 3. Sacer∣dotiùm. Capel., that is, of the Elect, who by the special grace of God have received many heavenly priviledges above other men, as the first-born among the Jews had above his brethren; and whose names are inrolled in Heaven, and they reckoned by God as free Denizens of his heavenly City, though they be not actually possess'd of the glory thereofJam tum Deus illos habebat pro civibus coelestibus jure, etsi non∣dum possessione. Grot. Vide Luc. 10.20, Phil. 4.3. Apoc. 13.8. Nay further, hereby thy come to have spiritual communion with God himself, the Judg of all, and with the Saints in bliss, the spirits of just men made perfect, they being all Children of the same Father, and all united to the same Head, all Members of the same Body, and ha∣ving all a spiritual animation by the same Spirit. Yea, by the Gospel they are brought to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant (not to Moses the typical Mediator of the old) who hath established it with his own blood. And to faith in this blood (wherewith their consciences must be sprinkled before they can be admitted into Heaven), they are brought by the Gospel; which blood speaks better things than the blood of Abel. For that cried for vengeance on Cain, but this for mercy on penitent believersOr to the blood of sprinkling that hath much more efficacy in it to ob∣tain God's acceptance, than had the blood of Abel's Sacrifice, which was the first type of the blood of Christ; of which we read, and of which it is said, That God had respect unto it, Gen. 4.4.. Therefore he advises them to take heed they despise not Christ speak∣ing to them in the Gospel. For if they were destroyed that contemned Moses, who received his message on earth, and delivered the Law only from Mount Sinai, then much severer destruction is to be expected for them who dspise Him who came down from Heaven, and re∣ceived his message in the bosome of his Father, Joh. 1.18, and doth now speak to us from Heaven by his Spirit in his Apostles and other faithful Ministers. And that he might further set out unto them the excel∣lency of Christ's Person, and the dignity of his Gospel, he shews them, that the voiceChrist, as God, gave the Law by the ministry of Angels, Gal. 3.19. Cum lex est promulgata terrefecit terram, non Moses non Angelus ali∣quis sed, Dei filius. of Christ in promul∣gating the Law, shook the earth, that is, Mount Si∣nai; but he promised by the Prophet Haggai, ch. 2. v. 7, That he would shake not only the earth, but heaven also; whih prophesie was partly fulfilled at his first coming in the fleshQuae Christi adventu in terras aliquatenus impleta diximus ad Ag∣gaeum; multo autem perfectius im∣plebuntur in adventu ejus ad Judi∣cium. Grot.. For then at his birth an ex∣traordinary light shined about the Shepherds, Luk. 2.9; and an extraordinary Star appeared in the heavens, Mat. 2.29; and at his Baptism the heavens opened, Mat. 3.17; and at his Transfiguration a voice came out of the cloud, Mat. 17.5; and at his Passion the Sun was darkned, the Earth shook, and the Graves opened, and many dead Saints came out and appeared: And at the feast of Pentecost there came from Heaven a sound, as of a rushing mighty wind, and the Holy Ghost in the shape of cloven fiery tongues resting on the Apostles, and miraculously inabling them to speak all languages, all Nations were shaken with the preaching of the Gospel. But this prophecy shall be more perfectly fulfilled when Christ shall come to judgment, when heaven and earth
shall be burnt with fire; and whatsever corruptibility they have, shall be abo∣lished, 2 Pet. 3.7, that a new Heaven and a new Earth may succeed, wherein shall dwell righteousness; that is, wherein the Saints being made im∣mortal, and perfecly righteous, shall dwell and abide. The Apostle further com∣menteth upon these words of Haggai (following the Translation of the LXX, in his quotation of them), and shews, that this word once moreIn Hebraeo est  adhuc unum modicum est, sed videntur Graeci legisse  semel post. hac., doth in∣timate, that heaven and earth shall pass away, and shall be wonderfully chan∣ged and alteredNon mi rum hoc Nam in id facta est haec quam videmus ma∣china, u olim alteri meliori, & non immu∣tandae locum faciat. Vide 2 Pet. 3.13. & Apoc. 21.1. Novis istis coelis & novae terrae perpetuitatem immutabilem pollicetur Deus Esa. 66.22. ad consumnationem scil, saeculorum. Capel. Per  concutienda seu instabilia, intelligo coeli & terrae machinam, ut nunc est, corruptioni & vanitati obnoxia; quae vocat factitia quia creata a Deo: per  intelligo illam horribilem conflagrationem futuram in sine mundi, quam aliquatenus repraesentavit illa montis concussio in Legis promulgatione: per  coelum novum & terram novam, cum novis suis incolis, i. e. ut verbo dicam, regnum gloriae. Haec mihi videtur genuina hujus loci interpretatio. Paraeus in loc., in respect of their present state; that they being remo∣ved, he may make a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein his subjects may for ever abide under his Rule and Government. He concludes this mat∣ter with this serious exhortation, That seeing they had by faith in Christ ob∣tainedV. 28. ] i. e. cum habeamus cum obtineamus regnum, i. e. jus ad regnum illud. ]  pro  retineamus gratiam. Ut Ro. 15. v. 4. Spem illam teneamus. Per gratiam, intellige fidem ex gratiâ Dei profectam. Meton. efficientis. Pisc. a right to this glorious and immutable Kingdom [2 Pet. 1.11.], he advises them to hold fast and improve the grace they had already recei∣ved, that thereby they might be enabled to serve God acceptably, reverencing him in their hearts as their heavenly Father, and fearing to offend him. see∣ing he is to be their Judg. For he will be a consuming-fire to all disobedi∣ent impenitent sinners, and will execute his wrath very severely against all Apostates. From Ver. 14, to the end. The Apostle having thus instructed these Christian-Hebrews concerning per∣severance in the faith; he now comes, towards the close of his Epistle, to ex∣hort them to sundry other duties. 1. That brotherly love and Christian charity should abide and continue among them, and that they constantly persevere therein. See Heb. 6.10, and Eph. 4.3, &c. 2. That they should exercise Hospitality, and kindly entertain strangers and banished Christians, who were oftentimes constrained to forsake their own Countrey, and knew not where to turn in; see Rom. 12.18. 1 Pet. 4.9. And to encourage them the more hereunto, he tells them, that some have here∣by unawares entertained Angels (who at first did not discover themselves), as AbrahamAbraham & Lôt, cum primum ex∣ciperent Angelos. Arabes eos putarunt, quos quanquam ignotos multo cum honore exceperunt postea è nuntio quem adferebant, cognoverunt esse Angelos. Gen. 18.1; and Lot, Gen. 19.1. 3. That they should sympathize with, and shew compassion to those that are in bonds and adversity, remembring that they themselves also are in the body, and so subject to the like calamities; and are also members of the same mystical body of Christ, with other pious suffering-Christians, 1 Cor. 12.26. 4. Having in the former part of the Chapter commended Charity, Hospi∣tality, and Compassion; in this verse he commends Chastity; shewing the means whereby they may keep themselves chast, which is by lawful Wedlock, which God allows to all sorts and degrees of persons, of what estate and calling soever they be [1 Tim. 4.1, 3.], and pronounces it an honou∣rable
condition of life; but declares, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judg] Recte: Dei judicio reservat illa flagitia, quae solent hominibus aliis esse abscondita. Grot. Cubile impollutum] h. e. Sua natura purum est & licitum at{que} concessum, ita ut legitimo ejus usu non polluatur conscientia. Pisc.. 5. He advises them to take heed of Covetousness, lest that vice corrupt their manners; and he prescribes contentation with their present condition, and such things as they haveThat which is past, cannot be re∣covered, and it is a folly to grieve for it: that which is to come, is uncertain; uncertain whether we shall get it, or how long we shall keep it. Therefore be content with those things you at present have. Dr. Jones. His verbis excludit Apostolus, non sedulam industriam, non providam sagacitatem; sed sollici∣tam diffidentiam, cupeditatem inexpletam, semper{que} querulum fastidium rerum praesentium aut taedium. Capel., as a prime remedy against it. And to perswade them thereunto, he tells them, that God hath promised, That he will never leave or forsake those that trust in him. For though this promise was made to Joshua in particular [Jos. 1.5.]; yet any of God's faithful ones may apply it to themselves; and whosoever trusteth in God, as Joshua did, and re∣poseth himself on his good Providence, shall find God to be with him, and that he will not fail or forsake him. So that having so gracious a promise, be∣lievers may boldly say as David said of himself, Psal. 118.6. The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me. From Ver. 1, to 7. 6. He commends to them the example of their Church-Rulers and In∣structors (some of whom it seems were dead); advising them to imitate them in the stedfastness of their faith, and so sets before them the holiness of their conversation, and the happy issue contem∣plantes quis fuerit exitus conversa∣tionis ipsorum. Adfert rationem, cur eos imitari debeant à felici eorum exitu, beata{que} morte, quam contemplari eos jubet, eâ{que} ut Deo valde probatâ, moveri ad imitandam eorum vitam. Illyr. of it, viz. how after they had persevered in the faith to the end, they dyed happily in the Lord, with evident proofs of his love and favour. And he shews them, they may fetch a strong argument for their stedfastness in the faith, from the object of their faith, which is Jesus Christ, who remains still the same object of faith, the same means of salvation, the same foundation of his Church [1 Cor. 3.11.], the same in all his Offices, and the same in efficacy to all that believe in him, in all ages of the world, Rev. 13.8. And this being so, they had great reason to continue firm and constant in the faith of Christ, and to take heed of being carried away with new and strange do∣ctrines, which were very different from the Gospel. And he further tells them, that 'tis good and profitable for them, that their hearts should be established with the true doctrine of the grace and mercy of God to us in Christ (which gives true rest and quiet to the conscience), and not think that the mingling the observation of some of the legal ceremonies (as the distinction of meats, &c.) with the Gospel, is the right way to get peace and establishment. For such carnal rites and observances, as the distinction of meatsThe observation of the distin∣ction of meats, cannot settle or esta∣blish the heart in true and solid peace; but the grace of God in Christ, is the true Cordial that can strengthen the heart; therefore he advises them to stick to that, and not to be carried away with other doctrines., he shews hath nothing profited, as to righteousness and justification, those that have most busied themselves about them, and have walked most strictly in the observance of them. See Rom. 14.17. Col. 2.16. And besides the unprofitableness of these legal rites, he shews they bring great damage to the observers of them. For thereby they deprive themselves of all benefit which they might otherwise receive from Christ. For, says he, (to speak in terms agreeable to the Old Testament) We Christians have an
Altar, that is, a Sacrifice upon an Altar, viz. Jesus Christ, that was sacri∣ficed on the Altar of his Cross; of which sacrifice they have no right to eat, that is, have no part in it, who serve the Taber∣cleQuia Tabernaculum cum toto cultu erat umbratile, Christum ven∣turum praefigurans, ut docuit suprà cap. 9, deservire igitur Tabernaculo, h. e. Ceremoniàs observare post Christum exhibitum, erat Christum abnegare, & victimam ejus evertere. Paraeus. Dum figuram tenent, à veritate se faciunt alienos. Cluv Qui exhibito Christo adhuc de∣serviunt tabernaculo, h e. adaerent ceremoniis legis at{que} in illis suam co∣ram Deo justitiam quaerunt; illi non possunt edere de hoc altari spirituali, h. e. Non possunt reddi participes sacrificii, & beneficiorum per Christi mortem partorum. Glass., that is, addict themselves to the legal rites which were used in the Tabernacle, and belonged to the Ceremonial Law. The Tabernacle and Christ cannot stand together. If they will needs retain the shadow still, they have no right to the body. And as the High-Priest, who served in the Tabernacle, might not eat of the bodies of those beasts whose blood he brought once a year into the most holy place, to make atonement for sin (Lev. 16.6, 24, 27.], they being to be burnt with∣out the CampCum dicit Apostolus, comburun∣tur extra castra non suum seculum propriè respicit, sed Mosaicum, quo populus in deserto môre militantium castrametabantur.: so they, who since Christ was exhi∣bited, serve the Tabernacle, and adhere to the Leviti∣cal Ceremonies, cannot partake of Christ. For He, that he might fulfil the Type, and might sanctifieChristus ut sanguine suo san∣stificaret, h. e. à peccatorum sordi∣bus sanctos nos & puros redderet, &c. Zeger. his people with his own blood; that is, make a real atone∣ment and expiation of their sins by his own blood (which the High-Priest did only typically by the blood of beasts), and that he might confer grace upon them, suffered death without the gates of Jerusalem. And from Christ's going forth to suffer without the gates, and bearing his Cross, he deduces this tropological or practical use, that those that profess themselves Christi∣ans, should forsake the legal ceremonies, which were ad∣ministred within the Camp; and withdraw their hearts and affections from the world, and should go forth to Christ; that is, cleave fast to him and his doctrine, being ready to take up his Cross, and bear re∣proach for his sake. And he shews, their hearts should be the more disposed hereunto, because of the uncertainty and instability of all things here below. Here we have no abiding City, but we seek and expect one to come (if we be such as truly believe the Gospel), which hath firm foundations, and is eternal in heaven, see Heb. 11.10, 16. And seeing Christ not only bore his Cross, but offered up Himself a sacrifice for our sins, he exhorts these belie∣ving-Hebrews, and all Christians, to offer up to God, in and through his me∣diation, the spiritual sacrificesNon ex∣piatoria, & meriti, quale Christi soliùs est, sed Eu∣charistica & gratitudinis. Ea sunt pre∣ces Eleemo∣synae. of prayer and praise [1 Pet. 2.5.] and that continuallyJugiter] Ne putemus unquam nos ita perfunctos hoc officio ut deinceps non teneamur amplius eo ungi. Vid. Thes. 5.17., all the days of their lives; which sacrifices are the calves or fruitsFructum labiorum nostrorum] Sic vocat preces, laudes, gratiarum actiones, quas labiis nostris Deo offerimus confitentes nomini ejus, h. e. Deum pro acceptis beneficiis celebrantes: Sub specie gratiarum actionis, non dubium quin totum genus invocationis, & precum comprehendat. Meta∣phoricè, preces & gratiarum actiones appellat vitulos labiorum, Hos. c. 14. v. 3. of their lips [Hos. 14.3.], whereby they confess and magnifie his blessed NameNomen Dei passim sumitur pro Deo. Vid. Rom. 15.9.. And another sacrifice which they must offer up to God, and which he will graciously accept (in and through Christ) is, beneficence and liberality to those that are poor and necessitous [see Gal. 6.10. Phil. 4.18. Mat. 25.34, &c.]. From Ver. 7, to 17. He begins now to draw to a conclusion of his Epistle; and having before, at v. 7, advised them to follow the example of their spiritual Guides and In∣structors that were dead, and to imitate them in the stedfastness of their faith, and holiness of their conversation; He exhorts them now to submit them∣selves, and to be obedient to their Pastors and Teachers that were living, in all things they should enjoin them according to the word of God. For he tells thew, Such as they, watch and take care for the good of their souls, as those
that must give account to God of the people committed to their charge [see Ezek. 3.18, 19. 1 Tim. 4.16. Isa. 49.4.] He advises them therefore to be obedient to their directions, that so they may do their work with joy and comfort, and not with sighing and complaining to God against the stubborn∣ness and stiff-neckedness of their people; for thereby (besides that they will dishearten and discourage their Ministers in their work) they will highly pro∣voke God against themselves for this their refractoriness. Ver. 18. He entreats them to remember him in their prayers. For whatever calum∣nies false Teachers might spread about of him concerning his rejecting the Levitical Ceremonies, &c, he hoped that he did endea∣vour to keep a good conscienceConscience is a function of the understanding, whereby we apply the general knowledg that is in us, to our particular thoughts, words, and actions. The School men say, 'tis Applicatio scientia ad factum seu faci∣endum Neoterici, Est practicus syllogis∣mus hominem excusans aut accusans.; and was willing in all things to walk uprightly according to God's will and command. And he beseeches them the rather to pray for him, that the impediments of his coming to them being removed by their prayers, he might come the sooner, and they might the sooner enjoy the benefit of his presence and company. He concludes his Epistle with a solemn prayer; humbly beseeching God, the God of peace (who is both the Author and lover of peace and concord among Christians, Rom. 15.33. and 16.20.) who raised Jesus Christ from the dead, the great Shepherd of the sheep (whom he redeemed by his own blood, whereby he ratified and confirmed the ever∣lastingFoedus aeternum est aeterna re∣conciliatio cum Deo sanguine Christi sancita, de quâ supra cap. 9. v. 12. dixerat Christum semel per proprium sanguinem in sacrarium coeleste in∣gressum aeternam nobis redemptio∣nem parâsse Covenant that shall never be altered), that he would please to frame and fit] Aptos vos reddat. them for every good work, and would accomplish that in them which was yet wanting; and would work in them by his Spi∣rit what ever was pleasing in his sight. And this he begs for them through the mit and mediation of Je∣sus Christ; to whom, as to true GodThis Praise in the Scripture is never ascribed to any but to the true and eternal God., he shews all honour and glory ought for ever to be ascribed. Last of all, he exhorts them to take kindly, and to make a right use of the exhortations and advice he had given them in this short Epistle, wherein he had handled many weighty matters in few words, and had not dilated and enlarged upon them as he might have done. He sends them the good news, That Timothy was now set at liberty, and gone forth, as 'tis probable, to preach the Gospel; with whom (if he shortly return'd unto him) he hoped he should come to them, being very desirous to see them. And so with salutations to them all, but especially to their Church-governours, not only from himself, but from several Christians of Italy (who often visited him at Rome in his imprisonment); and wishing unto them an encrease of grace, and an abundant sense of the love and favour of God in Christ, he shuts up his Epistle. From Ver. 18, to the end.
SECT. XII. THE Apostle Peter being now at Babylon, seems about this time to have written his first Epistle to the Jews, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithy∣nia, of whom he had an especial charge, and of whose con∣version he had been a prime Instrument, Act. 2.9. The occa∣sion of his writing to them, seems to be, that he might confirm them in the faith, that he might stir them up to constancy and cheerfulness under the afflictions and sufferings they met with for the profession of the Gospel; and that he might exhort them to adorn their profession by a holy walking in their several rela∣tions. he First Epistle of Peter.In the Epistle there are these three parts, 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface contains a description of the Penman (whose Apostolick Office is mentioned, to give the greater authority to his Epistle) and of the Parties to whom the Epistle is directed, viz. the Christian Jews scat∣tered through several Regions, whom he minds of their excellent spiritual con∣dition, to comfort them under their outward afflictions and tribulations. For by the judgment of charity, he judges them elect according to God's decree and gracious predestination, and effectually called, that they should be sanctifiedEph. 1.4. In sanctificationem Spiritûs] i. e. Ut sanctificentur Spiritu, ut obediant fidei, & aspergantur san∣guine, &c. Vatab. by the Spirit, should obey the truth, and should by faith be sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and so brought into a state of peace and recon∣ciliation with God. To all these he wishes an abun∣dant encrease of grace and peace. V. 1, 2. 2. He comes to the Body of the Epistle. And first, he begins with so∣lemn gratulation, humbly and heartily blessingNos Deo benedicimus cum ejus beneficia & gloriam celebramus. God for all spiritual blessings which he vouchsafes to belie∣vers, who are by regeneration and the renewing of his Spirit, raised to a lively hope (by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead) of an inheritanceThis the Apostle saith, be∣cause many Jews looked for an earthly kingdom under the Mes∣sias. which is incorruptible (the beauty and glory whereof can ne∣ver be stained, and which is safely kept for them in heaven, Col. 1.5.); they being in the mean time kept and prserved by the power of God through faith in Christ, against the temp∣tations of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, so that they shall not fail
of attaining that salvationSalutis nomine intelligit non initium quod in hac vita habemus, per sanctificationis, justificationis, ac pacis conscientiae gratiam: Sed com∣plementum illius per glorificationem, quod in altera expectamus, constans perfectâ animi & corporis, ab omni miseriâ, liberatione, & aeternâ gloriâ, quae ut jam latent, sic ultimo die pa∣tefient, 1 Joh. 3.2. Gomar., which is prepared for them, and shall be openly given and bestowed on them at the last day. In the hopes of which salvation he shews, they had great matter of rejoycing, though now a little whileNempe dum brevis haec vita durat. (if need be, and God see it good for them) they be permitted to be in heaviness through manifold afflictions and temptations. And as their affli∣ctions are short, so are they necessary for the trial and purifying of their faith, that it may be more pure, like Gold that is tried. Yet there is this difference in this matter: Gold being never so well purified, will soon perish; but faithAurum usu, & attritu con∣sumitur; fides verò durat usuque augetur. Ut exploratio fidei, h. e. Ut explo∣rata fides vestra. (which is more precious than gold), being purified by afflictions and trials, will abide, and will be highly esteemed, commended, and gloriously rewarded by Jesus Christ at his appearing; which bles∣sed Saviour, though they never knew by face, yet they dearly love; and though they have not seen him here on earth, yet they be∣lieve on him, and in so doing have so great and glorious matter of rejoy∣cing in their souls, that it cannot be expressed by themselves, nor sufficiently valued by others. Yea, by believing in him, they shall certainly receiveV. 9. ] i. e. Certò reportaturi. Enaflage temporis He∣braica. Mercedem ] Meton. ad∣juncti. Nam merces datur in sine ope∣ris, unde Hebraei mercedem appel∣lant  i. e. finem. Prov. 23.18. Pisc. the fruit, reward, and end of their faith, which is the salvation of their souls. This is that salvation (through faith in Christ incarnate) of which the ancient Prophets so diligently enquired and searched after a fuller knowledg of, who (being in∣spired by the Spirit of God) prophesied of that grace by which this salvation is offered, as that which should be more clearly revealed and manifested in the days of the Gospel. Yea, they diligently enquired to what time or season the Spirit of Christ that was in them, did point, when it moved them to prophesie and testifie so long beforehand His sufferings and humiliation, which were to pre∣cede his exaltation and glory. And they received this revelation, that the things of which they prophesied, were not to be fulfilled in their own, but in after-times. The manifestation of the Messias in the flesh, they themselves were not to see [Luk. 10.24.], nor his sufferings, nor his ascension. But these things (he tells them) are now reported and clearly manifested unto them by the Apostles, who were endued with an extraordinary measure of the Holy Spirit, sent down upon them on the day of Pentecost, Act. 2. And this way of salvation, as 'tis now clearly manifested, is a matter so ravish∣ing and wonderful, that the Holy Angels themselves delight to lookAlludi ad Cherubim, qui erant su∣per Propitia∣torio. Piscator statuit. Fuit enim propitiatorium typus Christi. Rom 3.25. into it. And if so, surely Believers ought highly to prize this Gospel-revelation, and stedfastly to adhere to it, whatever they may suffer for so doing. From Ver. 1, to 13. 2. He comes now to give them several exhortations to the practice of such duties of holiness as their excellent estate did oblige them unto. And, 1. He exhorts them to vigilancy, to gird up the loins of their mind (as servants that wait for their Lord), to be sober and watchful, and to hope stedfastly and perseveringly for that gracePer gra∣tiam quae de∣fertur, salutem intelligit, quae ratione complementi nobis obtinget ultimo die, quo Christus secundò patefiet. Gomar. and salvation, for that per∣fection in holiness and glory, which God of his free grace will give them at the appearing of his Son Jesus Christ to judg the world. Ver. 13.
2. From their right of adoption, he exhorts them to be obedient to their heavenly Father, not fashioning themselves according to the instigation of their former lusts (which ruled in them in their ignorance), but to endeavour to answer their holy vocation: For there should be a conformity between the holy Lord, and all his ChildrenSee Lev. 11.44. and ch. 19.2. and ch. 20.7.. Ver. 14, 15, 16. 3. He tells them, the Father (whom they call upon, and who will judg every man impartially according to his work) strictly requires holiness from all those that draw nigh to him, and call him Father. Therefore they ought to pass the time of their sjourning here in this world, in the fear of God, walking awfully as in his sight. Ver. 17. 4. He presses them to the study of holiness, by a motive taken from their Redemption. He tells them, they cannot be insensible that they were redeemed from their vain conversation, and former sinful course of life (to which they had been captivated by the example of their fathers, and by tradition), not with silver and gold (which yet will ransm a King), but by the precious blood of Christ (whom the Pashal-Lamb typified), and who was from eternity fore-ordained unto the Office of the Mediator, though he was not manifested in the flsh till th se last days, and that with a special respect to the good and benefit of those lost sheep of the house of Israel who trust in God and firmly expect his pardoning mercy in and through his Son's Media∣tion: Ʋnto which they are the more encouraged seeing the Father is so fully satisfied with the ransom paid by his Son, that he hath raised him from the dead▪ and gloriously exalted him to his right hand in Heaven; upon which account their faith may now safely and comfortably rest on GodFides in Deum Pa∣trem non ex∣cludit fidem in Christum & Spiritum sanctum, sed includit; quia, unus sunt Deus. Gomar., as a reconciled Father to all that truly believe in him in and through his Son Jesus Christ. From Ver. 18, to 22. 5. He comes now to exhort them to brotherly love: That seeing by the power of Christ's Spirit enabling them to obey the Gospel, they had got their inward corruptions of pride and self-love, so far purged out, as to attain unto sme degrees of sincere affection to the people of God; therefore they shuld labour to grow in that grace, and to have such a love to them, as is not only fervent, but floweth from a sincere desire of their good, and doth prove it slf to be such, by real effects. Ver. 22. 6. Seeing they were regenerate, and born again, as he charitably judged; and had a new life and nature wrought in them, not by so fading a cause or principle as that which is the instrument of producing their natural sub∣stance; but by the word of God, which (in its effects upon the regenerate) liveth and abideth for ever: therefore the excellency of their new nature, and permanency of their spiritual estate, should move them to walk suitably to it; and particularly, to live in love with the rest of the people of God, who are children also of their heavenly Father. Ver. 23. Lastly, He sets before them the excellency of their spiritual estate, by com∣paring the same with the best estate of men naturally considered, with all their ornaments of Wit, Wealth, and Honour, wherein they use to glory, which are all (to allude to that of the Prophet Esay, ch. 40. v. 6.) like to the withering grass or fading flowers; but the word of the Lord (which by the Gospel is preached to them), as to its truth, and as to its effects upon the regenerate, abides for ever; and consequently so doth their estate who are begotten again by it. Ver. 24, 25. Seing therefore they were born again, they should lay aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisie, and envy, and detraction, which are so contrary to brotherly love (before prest as an evidence of their regeneration), and as
new-born babes, with great desire and appetite should receive the sound do∣ctrine of the Gospel, that spiritual, rational, h. e , q. d. Non cor∣poris sed ani∣mae lac., sincere, pure milk (free from all error; which can deceive no man, but is most convenient for the feeding of the soul), that they may make progress and growth in piety, and advance to a higher pitch of Christianity thereby. And this, he is confident, they will do, if they have tasted, and realy perceived and felt in their minds, by the preaching of the Gospel, the tender love of Christ to poor sinners. To whom, says he, coming by faithJoh. 6.35., as to a living-stone (that is, a lively and firm, not a dead foundation; having life in himself essentiallyJoh. 5.26., and communicating life spiritual and eternal to every soul that effectually closes with Him; chosen of God, and in his eyes precious and honourable, though disallowed and rejected of the carnal Jews and their Rulers), be ye ver∣bum hoc tam Imperativi quam Indica∣tivi modi esse potest. Calv. as lively stones, built up a spiritual House or Church; and an holy Priesthood, to offer up (not typical or expiatory, but) gratulatory sacrifices, viz. Prayers and Praises unto God, which are sacrifices very acceptable to him, through the intercession of his Son. Wherefore the Scripture saithVer. 6.  pro . Pisc., Isa. 28.16. (taking the words not in the li∣teral, but the sublimeSensus  apud Pro∣phetam est: Si qui salvi esse vellent ex decem Tribubus, illis confugien∣dum Hierosolymam, velut ad arcem; sublimior verò sensus in Christo, ad quem confugere debent omnes qui in aeternum servari cupiunt. Grot. Vix alius est V. T. locus, toties in N. T. citatus, & Christo adaptatus. Vide Mar. 12.10. Act. 4.11. Rom. 9.32. Eph. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.4, 6. sense) Christ is laid in the Church as the foundation, or chief corner-stone thereof (which supports and holds the Edifice toge∣ther), being chosen of God, and very precious in his sight, and was first to be manifested in SionIn Sione lapis ille positus est ubi inchoari oportuit spirituale Dei templum, quemadmodum & Esaias ait Esai. 2. v. 3., or the Church of the Jews [that from Sion might go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusa∣lem, Esa. 2.3. Mic. 4.2.], from whom the news of him was to go forth to the rest of the world. And they might assure themselves, that he that truly believes in Him, shall not be ashamed, or confounded, or deceived in his expectation. To them therefore that believe in Him, he shews Christ is very precious pro , abstractum pro concreto., or an ho∣nour, and they have a very high esteem of him. But as for others who slight and neglect him, they should con∣sider, that that stone whom the RulersSacerdotes, Scribae, & Phari∣saei, appellantur aedificantes; quia eorum erat, populum in fide & moribus aedi∣ficare. of his time st at nought, is now highly exalted by the Father (ac∣cording to the Psalmist's words, Psal. 118.22.), to be the glorious HeadCaput ponitur pro summitate alicujus rei conspicuâ, & pro eo quod in re qua{que} praecipuum est. of the Church; but he will prove a stone at which those persons will stumbleQui impingunt in sermonem re∣belles ad quod & positi sunt] Horum verborum prius designat proprie poe∣nam, posterius culpam. Pro nomen autem ad quod refertur ad prius, non ad posterius. Improbos enim destinavit Deus ad poenam, non ad culpam. Capel. In hoc increduli à Deo destinati sunt ut gravissime impingant, h. e. Du∣rissimas ferant incredulitatis suae poe∣nas. Grot. Sicut qui in lapidem impingit lae∣ditur, & dolorem sentit; sic qui ad Christum lapidem salutis, incredulitate impingit, laeditur insignitèr, & dolores aeternos incurrit. Et notetur benè quod versu 7 praecedenti,  ut antecedens à  ut con∣sequente, sejungatur. Ad hoc igitur judicium, & poenas, propriâ contu∣maciâ promeritas, increduli sunt positi a Deo, justissimo omnis  vindice, & judice, non antecedentis sed consequentis, & judiciariae voluntatis respectu. Glass. to their hurt; and a Rock, against whih they will split to their utter confusion; whose blind and carnal hearts do still find out something in the Gospel whence they take oc∣casion to quarrel at this Saviour, and so they will bring ruin upon themselves, as a mad man does that dashes himself against a stone in his way; God having in his just Decree appointed, That destruction and eternal per∣dition should be the punishment of such obstinate and disobedient persons. But though this be the woful state of those that slight Christ; yet he shews, true believers are highly blessed: for to them those honourable titles be∣long, and may justly be given, which the Lord vouch∣safed of old unto the visible Church of the Jews, Exod. 9.6. and Deut. 7.6, 7. viz. they are, 1. A chosen genera∣tion, by effectual vocation separated from the world for his service. 2. A Royal.Reges appellantur, 1. Quia vitiosis imperant affectibus, nec peccatis permittunt dominium. 2. Sunt membra Christi Regis, proinde in capite suo meritò Reges consentur. 3. Quià unguntur ut Reges oleo, non quidem externo, sed Spiritu Sancto, qui est oleum laetitiae. Psal. 45.7. Fridlib. Priesthood; being Kings
and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6, and having a new nature in some mea∣sure resembling the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4; being co-heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17; of a Kingdom that canvot be moved. Heb. 12.28; and being Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 3. A holy Nation, for they were all foederally holy: but the true blievers among them were endued with true sanctification. 4. A peculiar people; that is, a people that Christ had purchasd to hims lf by his own blood; and all for this end, that thy might publish the Wisdm, Power, Justice, Grace, and Mercy of Him, who called them out of darkness to light; and out of a state of sin, ignorance, and wrath, to a state of holinss, and the true know∣ledg of God, and of favour and reconciliation with him. So that he might say, that Hosa's prophecy, chap. 2.28This place Peter applies to the scatter'd Jews, who were converted unto Ch ist: And Rom. 9.25, Paul applies to the converted Gentiles, who are now both one in Christ, Eph. 2.3. conerning the restoring the Jewish Nation to the favour of God again, after their rejection for a time, had now a begun-accomplishment in them. From Ver. 1, to 11. He further exhorts them, that remembring they were but pilgrims and strangers here in this world, they should abstain from fulfil ing those flshly lusts which warr against▪ and are directly opposte to the good of their suls, Rom. 7.23. And that their conversation shuld be so holy and honst among the Gentiles (among whom they lived) that whereas they were rady to reproach them as evil-doers, they might by their good works whi h they shall behold, be brought to change their minds concerning them▪ and so their good conversation might be a preparative to their conversion, and occasion them to praise and glorifie God for it, when it shall please him to visit them by his Grace, and to draw them by his Gospel to belive in his Son [Luc. 19.44.] Ver. 11, 12. 1. He comes now to shew them how they should carry thems lves with re∣spect and submission to any form of lawful Government established in the se∣veral Countreys where they were scattered whether the sme were exs d by a King, or other Governours; which several forms of Civil Government, he calleth an human Ordinance. For though all Power in general is the Or∣dinance of God; yet the particular form of Government is not determined by him, but left to the choice of human prudence directed by the general rules of the word. And he tells them, they must submit to the Magistracy th y are under, for the Lord's sake; that is that they may bring honour to God thereby▪ who hath enjoined them that subjection. 2. Because those Mgistrates are appointed by God, and sent by him, that thy may punish and supprss evil doers, and commend, praise, and encourage those that do well. Rom. 13.3, 4, 5. For this, he tells them is the will of God, that by well-doing they should confute the calumnies of unreasonable men, who out of ignorance re∣proach Christianity. But it may be some might objct, Are not Christians free? He answers, thy are; yt so, as they are obliged to carry themselves as those that are made free by Christ from the dominion of sin, but not from a due subjection to lawful Magistrates; and therefore must not use their Chri∣stian liberty as a cloak or covering to any wickednss or maliciousness whatso∣ever; but as the true servants of God, must make conscience of all duties re∣quired of them, both towards God and man. And that they may perform this▪ he enjoins them to despise no man, but to give that respect to all men which is due to them, according to the station wherein God hath set them; That they bear an especial love to those who are of the houshold of faith; and, That they fear God, and honour the King. From Ver. 13, to 18. In the nxt place he exhorts servants to give subjection and obedience to their own Masters, fearing to give them any just occasion of offence; and that they carry themselves so, not only to those who are good and gentle, but to
those also who are austere and morose. For this is acceptable to God, if any man. upon account that he may please him, patiently suffers wrongs and in∣juries. But what great matter is it, says he, if men endure submissively those punishments which their own faults have justly brought upon them? But when they have done no ill, and are then abused and contumeliously used, if this be born patiently and humbly, this is that Christian vertue of meekness which God will certainly reward: and this, he tells them, is that which all Christians are called unto, and whereof Christ himself hath given us an eminent example to be imitated by us; who though he was perfectly innocent, yet he met with many bitter contumelies from men; but being reviled, he reviled not again; and when thy put him to death, he neither threaten'd nor menac'd; but, praying for his persecutors, committed himself and his cause to God, who judgeth righteously. And many excellent benefits accrue to us by his suffer∣ings. For, 1. He bare the punishment of our sins in his human nature on the Cross, and so made expiation f them. 2. By his death he purchased ver∣tue for the slying of sin in us, and for the quickning of us to the duties of holiness; thae we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness. And therefore Christian-servants should consider not so much what they suffer for Christ, as the benefits they receive by him. For though they may receive stripes and wounds unjustly from their Masters in their bodies; yet let them remember what healingSanati estis] h. e. Remissis pec∣catis, Deo reconciliati. Gom. they have for their souls by the woundsAlludit ad vibîces & livores ser∣vorum. Fridlib. and stripes of Christ. Lastly, He remembers them of the woful estate they were in bfore their conversion; wandring like straying sheep, in ignorance and sinful ways; but now by the powerful grace of Christ they were brought home to Him the good Shepherd, and to his Fold; who will take care for the salvation of their souls, though their bodies and outward man may oftentimes here meet with hard usage from their unjust Ma∣sters. From Ver. 18, to the end. He now gives Precepts to Wives, directing them how they should carry  themselves towards their Husbands, if it should so happen that they should be unbelievers. He enjoins thew to carry themselves with so winning a kindness and humility towards them, that if they be not converted to Christianity by the Gospel preached to them, they may by the sweet, obliging, and dutiful be∣haviour of their Wives (which they see the Christian Religion instructs them in) be without any further preaching wrought on, and converted to the faith; especially they seeing nothing but chastity and holiness, joined with the fear of God, and reverence towards themselves, shining in the conversation of their Wives. And for their Attire, he enjoyns they should not be too curious in a∣dorning their outward persons with plaited hair, gold chains, or gay clothes; but should especially take care of their hearts and spirits, that those be adorned with the graces of meekness and quietness (which ornaments will not wax old as the others do), and are in the sight of God himslf, of high value and esteem. For after this manner, he tells them, viz. with outward modest attire, and inward meekness, the holy women of ancient times (that were eminent for their piety and faith in God), did set out themselves, living in obedience to their own Husbands. He instances in Sarah, who eminently testified her obedience to Abraham her Husband, calling him by a title of honour, not of equality. To whom, he tells them, they will shew themselves to be like, as Children to a Mother, if they labour to discharge a good conscience in all the duties required of them; and if they be not by any fear, or terror, or oppo∣sition of their unbelieving Husbands, or any others, driven out of the way of their duty. From Ver. 1, to 7. In the next place, he exhorts believing Husbands to dwell with their be∣lieving Wives as men of knowledg (and as such as are well acquainted with their duty), carrying themselves wisely and discreetly towards them, gi∣ving
them meet and due respect; taking care of them, and bearing with them in their weaknessesVas seu organon infir∣mius vocat mulierem, quia tametsi uxor est na∣turâ viro infirmior; tamen insigne ejus organum est ad usus longè praestantissimos conditum. Igitur non id circo negligenda est, quoniam sit imbecillis, sed è contrario tanto magis solicitè habenda. Glass., and behaving themselves with tenderness towards them, as being fellow-heirs of eternal life (which is freely given of grace to all true believers, whether male or female); that so, through brawling and strife, their prayers and other religious exercises be not hindred. Ver. 7. He comes now to exhort all Christians in general, to concord and unity of judgment and affection among themselves, to sympathy and a fellow-feeling of one anothers afflictions, to brotherly love, to mercifulness, to affability, to courtesie, to patience, not rendring evil for evil, or railing for railing, unto them that injure them; but contrariwise, blessing and praying for them, and wishing all good unto them. And he urges his exhortation with these reasons: 1. Because Christians are called to the practise of these Vertues, especially Pa∣tience; that they may, by the exercise of them, attain the glorious inheri∣tance of everlasting bliss and happiness. 2. Because to be patient, and peacea∣ble, and watchful over their tongues, is the best way to make their lives com∣frtable. 3. 'Tis the best way to have the watchful Providence of God over them for good, and to have their prayers heard; whereas the face of God is against them that do evil, and he sets himself as an enemy against them, according to Psal. 34.12, 13, 14, 15. 4. 'Tis the probablest way to scape trouble and harm from evil men, to shew themselves constant pursuers of that which is good. But if (as sometimes it will fall out) they do suffer for righ∣teousness sake, they should count this no other than a blessing; and therefore whatsoever danger they are threatned with by the power of their persecutors, they should not be afraid or disturbed at it, but should sanctifie the Lord in that dispensation towards them [Isa. 8.12, 13.], and should furnish them∣selves with such a clear knowledg of the truth of the Gospel, that when they are asked, they may be able to shew the grounds and reasons of the faith they profess, and consequently of the hope of eternal life wrought in them thereby; and that with meekness of spirit, and a holy fear of miscarrying in giving their testimony. Lastly, They should labour to get their Consciences cleared from all guilt, by faith in the blood of Christ, and so guided by the light of his word, that they that accuse them as Malefactors, may be con∣vinc'd that their lives are very honest and inoffensive, being ordered accor∣ding to Christ's doctrine and command. But if it please God to permit them to suffer for well-doing, they should remember, there is no matter of sorrow in that; but if a man, to avoid suffering, fall into sin, and then suffer for it, they should consider, that that will be a sad thing indeed, without any allay or matter of comfort to him. And seeing the innocent Son of God, who was perfectly righteous, dyed for our sins (who are unrigh∣teous) that he might reconcile, hic, est idem quod , Rom 5.10. us (who were ene∣mies) unto God, being put to death in his huma∣nityCaro designat humanam Christi naturam; Spiritus, divinam, ut Rom. 1.3, 4. & 9.5., but raised up again by the power of his Spi∣rit, or Godhead; it doth therefore well become his fol∣lowers (for the purchasing of whose redemption he dyed) to undergo those sufferings chearfully for his sake, which they meet with in following their duty to him. And since there are many souls of men and wo∣men to whom Christ did once, by his Spirit, in the Ministry of Noah, and other of his servants, make known the way to life and salvationGen. 6 3., who are now imprisoned] lis qui nunc in carcere inferorum sunt, tunc autem vivebant. Scaliger. Petrus ostendit Christum Spiritu. h. e. Divinâ suâ naturâ hominibus primi mundi praedicâsse per os Noachi resipiscentiam, & ad eandem lenitate sua, & arcae constructione invitâsse. Quî tamen exceptis paucis, immorigeri per manserunt: Unde corporibus submersi, spiritibus verò, h. e. ani∣mabus in infernum detrusi, nunc in eo carcere, justo judicio asservantur. Gom. in Hell for evermore, because of their slighting so much patience
as the Lord did exercise towards them, especially during the time of Noah's preparing the Ark, wherein a few only escaped destruction (the water bear∣ing up the Ark); therefore it doth concern those who have the Gospel more clearly preached to them, to give obedience thereunto, whatever they may suffer for it. And since Believers have a spiritual priviledg answering to the Ark, sealing their safety from the deluge of God's wrath, namely, their Baptism (by which we mean not the external part of it alone, which can only re∣move the filth of the body; but the internal, viz. the application of Christ's blood to the conscience, which thereupon comfortably answers and witnesss for them before God, and answers all challenges to the contrary upon this ground, that our Surety is absolved from our debt which he took on himself, whereof his Resurrection is an evidence); therefore they have no reason to fint in doing their duty, or to fear in the midst of their sufferings. And lastly, Since their Mediator and Head is gone in their nature and name to possess Hea∣ven, since he is in highest dignity and power with God the Father, since he hath all the Heavenly Host of Angels at his command, therefore none of his followers need fear suffering in following their duty to him. From Ver. 8, to the end. He nw returns to his former argument,Chap. 4; to press them to the study of ho∣liness. He tells them, that forasmuch as Christ hath suffered for the expia∣tion of our sins in his human nature, they ought therefore to arm them∣selves with the same mind, and t be ready t imitate him in the mortify∣ing of the flesh. For he that hath mortifiedUsurpatur hic potius vox , quàm  quae extat Rom. 6. v. 2. quia Apostolus nos vult ad Christum Archetypum revo∣care, ac docere quod per mortifica∣tionem carnis passioni Christi con∣formes reddamur. In voce  est . Ea enim in priori mem∣bro accipiebatur substantialiter pro naturâ humanâ Christi, peccati labis experte. Hic verò accidentaliter pro carnali concupiscentià & vitiositate naturae ex Adamo derivatâ. Fridlib. his corrupt nature (in imitation of Christ's dying for our sins, and by grace received from him), that person hath ceased from living unto sin, or serving sin any longer, Rom. 6.7. And surely he doth arm himself with this consideration, That he ought not to give any of the re∣maining part of his time (that he is to live in this mortal life) to the obedience of those lusts, or to com∣ply with those sinful appetites that ordinarily are stir∣ring in men, but must endeavour in all things to live according to the will of God. And he tells them, theyLegendum hic videtur . Cui lectioni favet collatio versiculi sequentis. Pisc. had spent too much of their time pat in the days of their ignorance and unregeneray, in the srvice of their lusts, wallowing in all sorts of vilen ss against both Tables of the Law, after the manner, and according to the lusts of the Heathens among whom they were scattered; and 'twas now more than timeSufficere vobis debet praeteri∣tum tempus quo vos quauquam Judaei vixistis Gentium mòre corrupti à pra∣vis doctoribus. Est idololatriae quae∣dam species adesse Sodalitiorum , de quibus prosecta falsis Diis dantur. Et in hac maximè re credibile est Judaeos illos antequam Christianì essent, accommodasse se Gentium moribus. Grot. to break off that course, and to consecrate the remainder of their days to the practise of holiness. And thugh thse Hea∣then unbelievers may think strange, and be offended at their abstaining from their formr vices, and that they run not headlong with them into all dissoluteness and debauchery, and may reproach them and their Religion upon that account; yet they ought not to be thereby moved; for those prophane persons shall be brought (will they, nill they) to give an account to Christ of these their reproaches, who shall judgV. 5. Qui paratus est judicare] potest reddi qui judicaturus est . Drusius. the quick and dead. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached (viz. by Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5.) to the men of the old world, who are now dead, that those among them might beV. 6. Ad hoc enim & mortuis Evan∣gelizatum est, ut damnarentur secundum homines in carne vivant autem secundum Deum inspiritu, i. e. , quae vox praecessit versu tertio, & hoc loco resumenda, ut damnarentur qui incedunt secundum homines in carne; viverent vero qui incedunt secundum Deum in spiritu. Ne{que} aliter video quomodo potuit expediri sensus. Knatchul. judged and condemned by Christ; who notwithstanding the light thereof, walked according to men in
the flesh, being led away by their own carnal lusts; and that those of them might live, and be eternally happy, who walked according to God in the spirit, that is, according to the will of God, being led and guided by his holy Spirit. Therefore Christ will judg not only these who shall be found alive at his coming, but the dead also. From Ver. 1, to 7. Another argument whereby he presses the study of holiness, is, because the end of all things was at hand; that is, the end of the Jewish State and Polity. For that great fatal destruction threatned to the obdurate Jews, and often mentioned by Christ and his Apostles, drew nigh; see Mat. 24. Jam. 5.3, 9. Therefore he exhorts them, 1. To be sober, and moderate, and to be much in prayer with God; and to add to their prayers watchfulness, that that day do not surprize them unawares. 2. He presseth them to exercise a fer∣vent love and charity one towards another, as the sum and chief of all the duties we owe to our Neighbour: For Love or Charity, he tells them, will cover a multitude of sins and failings among Christians [Prov. 10.12.], and will hide them from the knowledg of the prophane. 3. They should be cheer∣fully hospitable to their poor brethren, without grudging or murmuring at the charge. 4. They should endeavour rightly to employ their spiritual gifts for the good of others, which they had received according to their respective places in the Church, as counting themselves stewards of those various gifts bestowed on them through the free grace and favour of God. He instances in two, 1. Preaching of the word; shewing, that he that teacheth and instructeth the people, ought to do it with that uprightness and reverence, as becomes one that is a steward or dispenser of the Oracles of God. 2. Ministration to the poor; which office the Deacons were faithfully to discharge; and private Christians were also to exercise their liberality according to the ability God had given them; that in the right use of all these gifts, God might receive glory (both by the Steward and dispenser of them, and by those also who are profited by them) through Jesus Christ, in whose strength only these gifts are rightly employed [Joh. 15.5.], and through whose merits and me∣diation, the intention to glorifie God by them is accepted [Heb. 13.5.]; to whom, as to God blessed for ever, all honour and dominion ought for ever to be ascribed. From Ver. 7, to 12. Moreover, he exhorts them not to be troubled or amazed at the sharpest persecutions or hottest trials they should meet with for the sake of Christ. For considering that in that furnace their graces will be tried, and their corrup∣tions purged away, they should count it matter of joy to them, because hereby they are made partakers of the afflictions appointed for the members of Christ, and are made like unto him in suffering, and shall share with him in his glory, and have matter of incomparable exultation and joy at his second com∣ing. In the mean time, if they be reproached for the Name of Christ, and for their Christian profession, they should esteem it the happiest thing that could befall them. For the glorious Spirit of God delighteth with his comfortable and supporting-operations, to reside in the hearts of such as suffer for righ∣teousness sake; which blessed Spirit, though he be blasphemed by persecutors, yet he is glorified by those who boldly confess the truth, which he teacheth and imparts unto them. But he advises them by all means to be careful, that not any of them suffer as an evil-doer in any kind; but if he suffer for Christ's sake, or because he is a Christian, he shews that he ought to rejoyce in it, and to glorifie God, who hath made him willing, and hath enabled him to suffer in so good a cause, and hath thereby honoured him with a certain degree of Martyrdom. He tells them, the time is at hand when the Christians must expect great sufferings. Judgment will begin at the House and Family of God, for the correction and trial of his own children. And if God thus begin with his own children, who embrace the Gospel of his
Son, what a dreadful endDe Judaeis agit & ejus gentis excidium praedicit:  pari sensu habes Mat. 24.14. Respicitur Danielis locus 9.27. ubi est . Grot. will he make with those that wilfully reject and despise it? And if the righ∣teous in this life do smart for their sins, and meet with so many afflictions, that they cannot but with great difficulty (considering their own weakness) enter into the Kingdom of God. Surely the wicked, who give up themselves to work iniquity with greediness, shall be wonderfully punished, sometimes here in this life, but most certainly hereafter: neither shall they find any place to shelter themselves from the everlasting wrath of God. Therefore there is no reason why the godly, to shun sufferings from them, should join with them in their evil ways, seeing their end will be so terrible. From all which he inferrs, that those who suffer according to the will of God, should hold on in their duty, and commit the keeping of themselves to him, exercising faith on his Omnipotence, who created the World, and so is able to preserve them from the fury and rage of men, if he please; and on his Faithfulness, who will certainly perform all his promises to every faithful servant of his, and therefore will certainly preserve them, if it be best for them; and if he do not, he will make their very sufferings tend to the enhaunsement and encrease of their glory. From Ver. 12, to the end. He now comes to exhort the Presbyters, the Pastors, and Spiritual Guides  of the Church, to discharge their duty faithfully in feeding the flock of God which was among them. And that he may press this exhortation the more effectually upon them, he tells them, he himself was an ElderPeter therefore doth not exalt himself above all, and as the Head of all Teachers., and one that had been a witness of the suf∣feringsVidit eum Petrus vinctum; de∣inde, quod historia non docet, sed cre∣dibile est audiens crucifixum iri, ejus quo{que} rei spectator esse voluit, sed eminus & in turba. Grot, of Christ [Mat. 26.37. Mat. 27.29. Act. 3.15.], and hoped to be a partaker supple futurus. Grot. of that glory which should hereafter be revealed and communicated to all true and sincere Pastors at Christ's second coming. He presses them therefore to feed the Lord's people with his truth, and to rule them according to his discipline (both which may be comprehended in the word ), and that they diligently attend the oversight of their flocks; not doing it by constraint, like Mercenaries; nor meerly for filthy lu∣cre's sake; but with a free and ready mind, designing faithfully to serve their Lord and Master, and to profit his people thereby; and further, that they should not impiously lord it over the Church (which is God's heritage and peculiar lot, chosen out of the common multitude for his own propriety), buc be ensamples to the flock in all holy walking; that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they may receive an eminent degree of bliss, a never-fading Crown of Glory. From Ver. 1, to 5. He then points out the duties of the flock, whom he calls the younger, either because they were generally younger in years than their spiritual guides, or because they ought to shew that reverence and obedience to them which is suitable in young ones towards their elders. He exhorts those younger ones to submit themselves to the guidance of their Elders and Teachers, enjoining and commanding them things right and just in the name of God. Next, as fellow-members in the Church, he enjoins them mutual subjection one to another, in all duties of love, and particularly in receiving private admoni∣tions. And in order hereunto, he advises them to adorn themselves with hu∣mility, and a mean and low esteem of themselves. For, as Solomon saith, Prov. 3.24,See Luk. 1.51, 52. Mat. 23.12. Luk. 14.11. and 18.14. Jam. 4.6. God opposeth himself against them that are high and haughty, and manifesteth his grace and favour to them that are humble. He advises them therefore to submit themselves with humility of mind to the guidance of God, and the directions of those he hath set over them, remem∣bring his Almighty Power, and how easily he can crush them, if they be dis∣obedient;
but if they be obedient, they should consider, that he is able to exalt them, and will certainly do it, either in this life (if he see it g d for them), or at the day of judgment. And if thy walked in ways of obedi∣dience to him, they need not be disquieted at any difficulties that they may meet with; but should, with serenity of mind, cast all their cares on him; for they might assure themselves, he hath a peculiar care of them, and of what concerns them, that no hurt shall accrue unto them. From Ver. 5, to 8. He further exhorts them, to be sober, and vigilant, and stedfast, in ad∣hering to the truth, and the profession of the faith of Christ; and so to re∣sist the Devil and his temptations (who is our cruel and restless Enemy), especially those solliciting them to Apostacy by reason of their sufferings; re∣membring, they had all the rest of the Lord's people in the world for their fellow-soldiers in this warfare, who have their several shares of affliction to suffer, and their several measures of hardship to endure, as well as they. And therefore they should not expect a better condition in the world than the rest of their brethren. Ver. 8.9. In conclusion, He solemnly prays for these suffering-Christians▪ that God (who is the Author of all Grace, and is freely ready to communicate the same to all humble and penitent sinners; and who hath call'd them, by the Gospel, to the possession of his everlasting glory through the merits and mediation of his Son) would please, after they have suffered a little while here in this world, to per∣fect the work of grace he hath begun in them, to establish, and strengthen, and settle them in the truth, that their union with Christ the Foundation, might be made more firm and strong. To this infinitely gracious God he desires glory and dominion should be for ever ascribed. Ver. 10, 11. He tells them, he had writtten this short Epistle to them (by Silvanus, whom he took for a very faithful friend unto them), wherein he had exhorted them to their duty, and had born his testimony to the Gospel; assuring them, that that contains the true Doctrine of Salvation, and a true manifestation of God's grace to all penitent sinners who by faith lay hold on Christ: Which Doctrine, as they had been taught, they did hitherto profess, and stand fast inV. 12.  pro .; and they would do well to do so to the end. For 'tis a Doctrine that would deceive none that embrace it. He sends them salutations from the Christians at BabylonThe Church at Babylon seems to be made up of the posterity of those Jews who stayed there after the ex∣piration of the seventy years capti∣vity, whom this Apostle (being a Minister to the Circumcision) went to visit, having planted, as it seems, a Church there., whom the Lord had chosen out of the world to be a Church to himself, and to share with others of his people in spiritual and eter∣nal mercies. He salutes them also from Mark, whom (being instructed by him in the Gospel) he calls his Son. Lastly, He exhorts them to express their hearty affe∣ction one to another by the kiss of Charity (which was the ordinary sign thereof in those times and those Countreys), and so wishing peace and all manner of prosperity to all among them that were converted to Christ, and professed faith in him, he shuts up his Epistle. From Ver. 12, to the end.
SECT. XIII. THE Apostle Peter, not long after this, seems to have re∣ceiv'd a revelation from the Lord of his approaching de∣parture out of this life; and therefore writes this his second Epistle to the dispersed Jews, intimating the same unto them, Chap. 1.14. Our Saviour had long before given him an inti∣mation that he should dye a Martyr, Joh. 21.18, 19. Verily I say unto thee, when thou wast young thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou wouldst; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldst not. This he spake, signifying by what death he should glorifie God. Our Saviour further told him, That this should be before His coming in judgment against Je∣rusalem, which John should live to see, Joh. 21. v. 22. It seems the Apostle was now more particularly warn'd thereof, and ac∣cordingly sends this his Epistle as his last farewel to the believing-Jews scattered at that time through many Nations. And this is the last we find in the Scripture of this great Apostle. In the Epistle there are these three parts,The Second Epi of Peter. 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface; which shews us to whom the Epistle is directed, viz. to the believing-Jews scattered up and down in the Roman Empire, who had obtained like precious faith, for quality and nature, with the Apostle himself, and which interessed them all in the same precious promises and priviledges which he himself had interest in, and whose object is the righteousness of Christ] Ex Grae∣co apparet, haec de uno & eodem dici, non autem de duobus diversis, vid. Tit. 2.13. Justitia illa quam fides in actu justificationis ample∣ctitur, non est justitia Dei essentialis, sed justitia activâ & passivâ obedientiâ Christi parta. Fridlib. our God and Saviour. To all these he heartily wishes an abundance of grace, and of that peace which does accompany it, together with all kind of prosperity; and that, in order hereunto, they may daily grow up in larger measures of the knowledg of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. Ver. 1, 2. 2. He comes to the Body of the Epistle, wherein he expresses the ground of his confidence, that God would encrease grace in them,
becauseV. 3.  inservit illationi; & significat idem, quod  postquam vel siquidem. Fridlib. he had of his own goodness, and the free ex∣ercise of his divine power, afforded them all the helps needful for the attaining of eternal life hereafter, and for the making them truly pious here; having brought them to a saving-knowledg of Christ▪ who had called them by his own glory and vertue hic aliqui positum putant po  vid. Bez. & Piscut. Alii per gloriam & virtutem intelligunt gloriosam virtu∣tem & potentiam Christi., that is, by his Gospel [which is the great power of God, Rom, 1.16.], to glory and eternal felicity, as the end; and to the practise of vertue (that is, of grace and holiness), as the means. By which Saviour (not ) as some Greek Copies read it. Sic Vatablus per quem. he tells them, are given unto us great and precious promises, as of justifica∣tion, sanctification, and eternal life. The fulfilling of which promises to believers, doth make them partakers (not of the infinite Essence of God, which can neither be divided nor communicated to any crea∣ture; but) of such heavenly qualities as make them in some measure to resemble their heavenly Father, they having escaped hereby the corrupt man∣ners and debauchedness whih the generality of the world run into, by fol∣lowing the sinful inclinations and lusts of their own hearts. And this same thingV. 5. .], that they have receeved such great benefits from God, shuld mind and excite them to give all diligence to grow in grace, and to add one ver∣tue to another; particularly to faith to add the Chri∣stian vertue of fortitudePer  hic recte puto posse accipi fortitudinem in fide. Grot. or courage; to Christian-courage, a greater measure of knowledg; to knowledg, temperance; to that, patience; to that, godliness, or religiousness (which consists in a due care rightly to worship God); to that, brotherly kindness, and an especial love to the houshold of faith; and to that chriy, or good-will to all sorts of persons. He tells them, that if these vertues and graces be in them (especially in any eminent degree), they will produce excellent fruits and effectsV. 8. Ista efficiunt ut cogni∣tio Christi & Evangelii quam ad∣epti estis ne{que} inutilis sit aliis ne{que} vobis infructuosa. Grot.; so that their knowledg of Christ and the Gospel, will neither be un∣profitable to themselves, nor useless to others. But that Christian-profssor who lacks these graces, whatever il∣luminaeion he may pretend to, is indeed blind as to spirituals, and cannot have any true sight or knowledg of the things of the other life, and hath forgotten (as it seems) the purification. Non meminit inquit baptismi in quo professus fuit se vitià omnia velle deserere. Vid. Eph. 5.26. Idem. of himself from his for∣mer sins, which he professed and obliged himself to in his Baptism. He exhorts them therefore earnestly to en∣deavour after these graces and vertues, that so they may prove and demon∣strate themselves to be effectually called and elected, and may make their cal∣ling and election sure and evident to themselves, and by this means they shall be kept from apostasie, and a total and final falling away; and God will with a larger and more copious affection, receive them into the everlasting king∣dom of his Son, and eternal life will (as it were) more largely open it self to receive them, and they shall have the sense and first-fruits of it in a more abundant measure. And seeing the hazzard of negligence, and the advantage of diligence, was so great, therefore he tells them, he would not be negligent to stir them to their duty, and to mind them of these things, though many of them he apprehended were both discerning and solid Christians. And he judged it meet so to do, whilst he was in the tabernacle of this body, knowing that shortly he must end his life by a glorious Martyrdom, as Christ had told him, Joh. 21.18, 19. And this exhortation which he had written, would be pro∣fitable to mind them of their duty after his departure. From Ver. 3, to 16. He comes now to exhort them to constancy in the faith, and stedfastly to adhere to the doctrine taught by himself and the other Apostles. And to assure them of the truth and certainty thereof, he tells them, that himself and his
fellow-Apostles had not followed artificially-devised fables, when they made known and testified unto them the first coming of Christ in the flesh, and how by his Doctrine and Miracles he powerfully shewed▪ himself to be the true promised Messias. For himself, James, and John, had been with him in his transfiguration on Mount TaborCalled here the holy Mountain, because it was hallowed by the evi∣dent presence of God, and the glori∣ous appearing of Christ upon it; as the City of Jerusalem is called the holy City, Mat. 4.5, because there God hath planted his Worship and San∣ctuary. Mat. 17, and had there seen the Majesty that was then instated on him, and heard the voice that came from the excel∣lent Glory (that is, from the Majesty of God the Fa∣ther out of the shining-Cloud), saying, This is my be∣loved Son in whom I am well pleased. But besides this, he tells them they had the Prophecies of the Old Testament, which fore-told these very things concerning the Messiah, which have been fulfill'd and accomplished in the Person of Jesus of Nazareth; which prophecies were a more sure word to them than the voice from Heaven. Not that there was any uncer∣tainty in the Lord's voice uttered from Heaven, but because a transient voice is more easily mistaken or forgotten, than a standing authentick Record. There∣fore seeing the written word was so sure a ground for their faith to rest upon, they did well to attend unto it, as to a light that shined in the dark and shadowy time of the Old Testament [see Rom. 13. v. 12.]. And they should continue so to do, tillVox donec antecedens tempus semper includit, sed consequens non necessriò excludit, ut Mat. 28.20, & alibi. Gousar. by considering those an∣cient prophecies, and comparing them with what Christ hath really done and suffer'd, they might find the day dawning upon them, and the morning-star arising in their hearts, that is, the Spirit of Christ himself (who is the Sun of Righteousness, and the Morning-star of the Church, Rev. 22.16.), so enlightning their minds, and so fully convincing their con∣sciences, that no more doubts or scruples should be left in them concerning this great Truth attested by the voice from Heaven, and confirmed by the writings of the Prophets [Acts 10.43.], namely, that Jesus is true Messias, the Son of God. This also he shews, they must hold as a first principle, and a thing especially to be believed, That none of the writings of the Prophets were of any private impulseOmnino assentior iis qui hic le∣gendam pu∣tant , Non est pro∣phetia res nostri impetus. Grot. Hammondus noster vocem  retinendam censet & sic interpretatur. No prophecy of Scripture is of their own incitation, motion, or letting loose; that is, is not without particular mission and appointment of God. Amiraut sic: Qu' aucune des propheties qui sont continues en l'Escriture, n'est de l'instinct parti∣culier d'aucun homme, ni ne doit sa revelation aux lumieres de son esprit. See his Paraphrase on this Epistle. or incitation, or sprang meerly out of their own brains; neither did prophecy come upon them according to the will of man; that is, they did not prophesie when they would, or what they would [see 2 King. 4.27.], but they spake by the instinct and impulse of the Holy Ghost. From Ver. 16, to the end. He now forewarns them of false TeachersHinc dis∣camus Sata∣nam semper veritati, Ec∣clesiae{que} insi∣diatum & in∣sidiaturum esse. Discamus etiam non propterea desinere aliquem caetum esse Ecclesiam, quia in eo tumul∣tuentur aliqui seductores. Nam Satan sua Zizania potissimùm in ipso culto agro Domini inter bonum triticum spargit, non in Sylvestribus ac saxosis spinetis. Et sicut Deus ipse olim tentavit po∣pulum suum an in semel acceptâ puritate religionis perseverare velint Deut. 13. Sic etiam Christus & Apostoli, constitutâ semel doctrinâ, jusserunt Christianos in eâ constantissimè perseverare, quià sint venturi pseudo-prophetae facientes magna miracula & signa Mat. 24. Hoc idem etiam hic Petrus agit. Fl. Illyricus., and Heretical Seducers that should arise among them. He tells them, that as there were true Pro∣phets among the people of Israel of old (who spake by the instinct and impulse of the Spirit of God); so there were some also false, and such as were meer Cheats and Deceivers, who slily crept in: And thus they must expect it will be with them now; there will arise some false Teachers among them, who
will privily bring in damnable Heresies, and by their false doctrines (either directly or implicitly) denyDominum suum à quo sunt re∣dempti negabunt] Si non ipsis verbis expressè, tamen ipso facto; si non di∣recte, tamen per ea quae ex impiâ eorum doctrinâ consequuntur. Fridlib. the Lord Christ and his benefits, who by his precious blood shed on the Cross, paid a sufficientMors Christi sufficiens remedi∣um pro omnibus sed non sufficiens me∣dium, sine Fide. Vid. Heb. 2.9. price for them (which would have been available for them, if they had truly believed in him), and so will bring upon them∣selves speedy destruction. And many, he foretells them, will be led away with their destructive carnal doctrines, whereby the glorious, pure Gospel of Christ will be evil-spoken of, whilst the very Gentiles shall take notice, that some that profess themselves Christians, teach impure doctrines, and live wicked lives. He further tells them, that thse Deceivers being acted by covetousness, will, with their cunning words and discourses, seek to circumvent them, and make advantage of them. However he suggests to them, they should not fear the being long expos'd to their temptations. For the judgment to which such Im∣postors were long since adjudged by God, is now approaching, and will cer∣tainly surprize them. And that he might the more clearly convince them of this, he sets before them a threefold instance: 1. Of the Angels that sinned, whom God did not spare, but upon their rebellion against him, cast them pre∣sently out of Heaven, and condemning them to the pains of Hell] ad poenas tartar∣reas damnavit. Mede., reserved them under the restraints of his irresistible power in a state of misery and horror (as condemned Malefactors are reserved in chins and darkness) to the day of judgment, the time of their execution, when they shall be cast into everlasting torments, Mat. 8.29. And if God spared not the Angels that sinned, they might easily imagine, he will not spare false pro∣phets and their followers. 2. He instances in the people of the old world, on whom God brought the Flood, and drowned them, only preserving Noah (with seven more of his Family) who often warned them to repent and amend their lives. Lastly, He instances in the wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, and their neighbouring villages or suburbs, which he adjudged to utter destru∣ction, and consum'd them by fire from heaven, and made them an exemplary spectacle and document to all that should ever live in the like sins. Yet at that time when he manifested so much severity towards those wicked Cities, he de∣livered Righteous Lot, and his Family, whose pious soul was daily vext with the unrighteous deeds of these impure Sodomites. From all th s examples he inferrs, That God knows how to preserve his own faithful srvants from the temptations and troubles wherewith they are here exercised, and he can reserve the wicked to the day of judgment, to be punished according to their deserts. From Ver. 1, to 10. Now among these wicked ones, he shews these Hereticks and Seducers are chiefly to be reckoned; whom he thus characterizeth. 1. They are impure and unclean persons. 2. They despise government, and speak evil of dignities. 3. They are presumptuous, audacious, and self-will'd. Their sin in despising lawful authority, he aggravates by setting before them the contrary example of good Angels [see Jude v. 9.], who are greater in power and might than any Magistrates here on earth; yet even these, though God employs them to protect his Church, and sometimes to withstand and punish the tyranny and rage of wicked RulersUt apparuit in Aegypto & Sennacheribo; yet they bring not a railing-accusation against them before the Lord (that we can find in all the Scripture); neither do they set out, with reviling words, what they have to say against them, that bear upon them a lawful authority. But the temper of these Seducers is far different from this: For as brute-beasts, following the brutish impetus and force of their ap∣petites, pursue after their prey till they run themselves into the net (and so seem madeQuae ad interitum fa∣cta sunt] h. e. dum escam bruto impetu persequuntur, ultro in retia & exitium suum ruunt. to be taken and destroyed of men); so these false Teachers
speaking vilely and reproachfully of Magistrates (the use and benefit of whom they understand not), shall perish by the destruction] Praepositiò  redundat: suo interitu interibunt. Pisc. which they justly bring upon them∣selves, and shall receive the reward of their wickedness and unrighteousness. He further shews them, That these are they who count daily pro  in die delicias, i. e. quotidianas delicias. Glass. voluptuousness their Hea∣ven, and in the day-time take pleasure in those villanies which are wont to need the night to cover their shame. He tells them, They are spots and blemishes to the Christian name. They are such as de∣liciously] legendum videtur  qui deliciantur in agapis vestris. vide Ep. Judae v. 12. Pisc. dicebantur convivia illa in quibus Christiani divites, & pau∣peres pari victu utebantur. Divitum enim sumptu pauperes isto quasi re∣frigerio juvabantur. Ea convivia claudi solebant sacramento Dominicae passionis. Grot. please themselves in the cunning artifices and fair pretences whereby they deceive others, insinuating themselves into them, both at their religious and ordi∣nary Feasts. And whereas at such Assemblies nothing but modesty and charity should be expressed; these Deceivers come thither with eyes full of adultery, and by their lascivious glances are continually solliciting others to sin. They also ensnare with their errors and vile pra∣ctises, such as are not well stled and grounded in Chri∣stianity. He further adds, That their hearts are a shop full of avaritious and covetous inventions and designs of extortion, whereby they ma∣nifest themslves children of perdition, and such as having forsaken the pure Christian Doctrine, are gone astray from the right path, following the example of the falseYet by the inspiration of God he prophesied the truth concerning the Messiah, Numb. 24.17. prophet Balaam, the son of BozorBeor fuit pater ejus Num. 22, unde binominis censendus est. Fridlib., who instead of obeying the com∣mandment of the Lord, was so tempted by that great reward which Balak King of Moab promised him, that he would for the hope of it (even against his Consci∣ence) have cursed Israel: but the madness of this Soothsayer was miracu∣lously rebuked by an Ass speaking with Man's voice. He further shews, that these Deceivers pretend to be deep Fountains of saving-knowledg; but they have no such thing in them. They pretend to be CloudsNubes quae à procellâ ferun∣tur. Loquitur de falsis Doctoribus, qui in doctrinâ & confessione suâ fluctuant; nec salutaris doctrinae & consolationis pluviam praebent. Jud. v. 12. that drop down the saving-doctrine, as rain, to make the Church fruitful; whereas they are only Clouds driven impetuously by every wind and tempest, from one vicious doctrine and practise to another; never affording the rain they promised, but only darkning the skie; to whom is reserved, by the just judgment of God, eternal darknessPoenae alterius seculi modò sub incendii, modò sub tenebrarum figurâ describuntur, ut Mat. 8.12, & 22.13. Augetur significatio cum non  tantum dicitur sed , ut & Judae v. 13. and blackness. He shews, that with a lofty and an affected stile they propound their vain and false doctrines, and thereby amuse the simple [Jude v. 16.], and allure to their party (by indulging a li∣berty to the lusts of the flesh, and to much wantonness) suc Novice-Christians who had left the heathenish bestiality, and had embraced the Christian profession; which they might do, and yet not be really regenerate. He tells them, They promise indeed to bring them into a state of liberty, when alas they draw them into the bondage of sin, and they themselves are the basest slaves to lust and corruption in the world. For those lusts by which they have been conquered and brought into bondage, the must needs be slaves unto. And they had need take heed of being thus in∣veagled by these Seducers, lest they prove flat Apostates from Christ, and then ther condition will be far worse than that of ignorant unconverted Heathens. For they that have been converted from their Heathenism, and the Paganish sin▪ wherein they lived, by being brought to the knowledg of Christ and his Gopel, and then relapse and return to them again; this later estate of theirs, thi Christian-Heathenism (as I may so call it) is far worse than their bare Heithenism at first was. For it had been better for them never to have known the way of righteousness and justification revealed in the Gospel, than ha∣ving
known it, to turn away from the holy Doctrine thereof, and the pure precepts it enjoins, and to fall back again into their former vicious and heathenish courses. But such as do so, plainly shew, that they were never truly and inwardly renewed by the Spirit, as the sheep of Christ are; but were only outwardly washed in Baptism; and by an external profession of Christianity only, had renounced that vileness whereunto now they are return'd; so that the old Pro∣verb mentioned Prov. 26.11, is verified of them; The dog is turned to lick up his vomit, which before, when it troubled his stomach, he vo∣mited up; and the sow that was washed, is returned to her wallowing in the mire. From Ver. 10 to the end. The Apostle having thus prest growth in grace and holiness, in the first part of his Epistle; and cautioned them against error in the second: He comes now, in this last, to clear up and defend the Doctrine of the last Judg∣ment, and to shew what use believers should make of it. He shews, the end intended by him in both his Epistles, was to be their Remembrancer, and to awaken and stir up the sincere-hearted among them, to obey the instructions which had been given them by the writings of the Prophets, and by the teaching of the Apostles. And in the first place he would have them to con∣sider this (and to arm themselves accordingly against it); That in these last daysThe last days are to be reckon∣ed from the time that Christ began to execute his Ministerial function, to the end of the world., viz. the times of the Mes∣sias, which were now arrived; certain scoffers will arise, who walking according to their own lusts, and desiring to sin securely, will question the second-coming of Christ, and plead that this present world shall always continue as it is; and they shall scoffingly say, How long will it be ere that promisePromissio per Metonym. pro complemento promissionis, vel po∣missio adventûs, i e. adventus pro∣missus. Intelligitur autem adventus Christi secundus, gloriosus & maje∣sticus. Fridlib. and prediction be fulfill'd, That Christ shall come to judg the quick and dead [see Mal. 2.17.]? We find this indeed long ago fore∣told in the prophecy of Enoch [Jude v. 14, 15.]; but yet we see no appearance of its accomplishment: for from the time subintellige : &  sume pro tempore. Grot. that the first men, that were known in the world, dyed, and their children after them; there has been no resur∣rection, or summoning men to judgment. And excepting this, that people have dyed in all ages, there has been no considerable change (say they) since the creation, but all things have gone on in a setled constant course. The Apostle replies to these scoffers, shewing them the ground of their vain reasoning to be their own voluntary and affected ignorance. For first, they seem'd not to understand how God created the world at first by his word; and how the earth, being the lowest and heaviest of the Elements, was yet by his power kept from being totally overflowed by the watersV. 5.  pro  ut 1 Pet. 3. v. 20. scil. tanquam na∣tans in illa, vel per aquam scil. tan∣quam per fundamentum cui incumbit. vid. Psal. 24.2. Pisc. that go about it, and cover it in many places. By which miracle they might have perceived, that Nature is governed by the will of God; and from the whole they might have ar∣gued, That if all things were made by God, they might also easily be destroyed by Him. 2. He shews, they seemed ignorant how God brought the Flood upon the old world in the days of Noah, and drowned them for their wickedness; HeavenV. 6.  per quae intelligit . and Earth, both contributing at His command their waters thereunto. And if hey had known this, they might have clearly seen, that all things have not coti∣nued since the Creation as they were at first. And he that made so grea an alteration in the world then, can easily do so again if it please him. 'Tis true, he acknowledges the world that now is (by the word and promis of God, Gen. 9.11.) is secured from being drowned again, it being reserv'd to be destroy'd by fireSeneca Natural. Ig∣nis, exitus mundi est. at the day of judgment, that day that will be so terrible to the ungodly, when they shall receive a full reward of all their wick∣edness. But these prophane scoffers will perhaps again reply, If Christ intend
to come to judgment, why does he so long defer his coming? The Apostle answers, That this delay ought not to be judged according to our sense and apprehension. For God doth not measure times as we do; but unto him (in regard of his Eternity and Omniscience, comprehending all things past, pre∣sent, and to come), these periods of time which seem so long to us, are but a moment, Psal. 90.4. 2. This delay doth not proceed from slackness in God, as some may imagine. For that person cannot be said to be slack who is long ere he comes; but he is slack that comes not at his due and appointed time. Now God will not put off his coming one hour beyond his own set and deter∣min'd time [see. Heb. 10.37,]. And they ought to consider, that God's de∣ferring his coming, proceeds not from any other reason than the abundance of his patience and long-suffering towards poor sinners, not willingVult autem hoc non planè & absolutè, sed quantum justitiae & bo∣nitati ejus sufficit. Confer Ezek. 18.32. & 33.11. 1 Tim. 2.4. Grot. See Harm. of the Four Evang. ch. 5. pag. 163. (as far forth as may consist with his Justice and Goodness) that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance; and accordingly, that time should be given them for that purpose. But though this great day of the LordDies illa ultima qua Christus homines judicabit: cujus arrhabo sunt judicia illa in Judaeos, Luc. 17.24. The day of the Lord] that is, of Christ, when he shall come to judg the world; or of God the Father, who shall the world by him, Act. 17.31. seem slow in coming, yet it will come, and that suddenly, as a thief in the night, and will surprize many secure and unprepared sinners▪ who shall then be found on the face of the earth. And when it shall come, there will be a great change and dissolution of the whole frame of Nature, the Hea∣vens will pass away with a great noise, and the ele∣ments shall melt with fervent heat; and the earth, and all the works therein, shall be burnt upNon quidem in nihilum reda∣cta sed in novam formam transmutata. Conser Psal, 102. v. 26. Rom 8. v. 19. Pisc.; yet so, as possibly out of this conflagration God will bring forth a new edition of Heaven and Earth, and of all or most of the Creatures in them contained, to be lasting monuments of His own Power and Glory, and objects of the Saints delight∣ful contemplation. From Ver. 1, to 11. The Apostle comes now to make a practical improvement of this Doctrine, exhorting them, from the certain, sudden, and terrible coming of Christ, to the practise of sundry duties. 1. If the whole Systeme and Frame of Hea∣ven and Earth must be so wonderfully alter'd to make it a fit habitation for the Saints, then they should consider how holy they ought to be, and how great a degree of purity they should labour to attain, who profess themselves the people of the Lord, and hope to live in this new world. 2. Such per∣sons, he tells them, ought not only to expect that day, and to look for it; but to hasten to it in their longing-desires; and by their prayers and other en∣deavours (in their places), o further, what they can, those works which must he done, before it come; and so, as much as lies in them, hastning that day, which will be so full of terror and majesty, and wherein (as he said before) the Heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. Yet this great change, he tells them, will not tend to the utter ruin and annihilation, but to the refiningEx reli∣quiis molis antiquae re∣surget melior. Grot. of the world. For according to the promise (says he) which God hath made unto us by his Pro∣phet Isa. 65.17, and 66.22.Ista pro∣missio Isa. 65.17, agit de regno gratiae, seu statu Ec∣clesiae Chri∣stianae in Novo Testamento. Solenne est Prophetis à descriptione regni gratiae transitum facere ad descriptionem regni gloriae, à statu regni Christi in hoc mundo, ad statum ipsius in altero seculo; quia regnum Christi hic duntaxat inchoatur, in futuro seculo consummabitur. Fridlib. we look for new heavens and a new earth (not for substance, but renewed in qualities) wherein only righteous and holy personsSee Mat. 13.43. and Mat. 25.34. shall dwell, Rev. 21.7. 3. From the consideration of that comfortable estate and everlasting blessedness which believers have ground to expect hereafter, he exhorts them to give all diligence, that they may be with∣out spot, and blamelessEph. 5.27. Jude v. 24. Col. 1.22., being washed in the blood of Christ, and sanctified
by his Spirit; and if it shall so happen that any of them should live to that day, that then they may be found of him (when he comes to judgment) in a state of peace and reconciliation with God, and in peace of mind and con∣science, not being affrighted at the coming of it. 4. He exhorts them to in∣terpret and account the Lord's delay in coming to judgment, and his patience and long-suffering exercis'd towards sinners, as intended by him (not as a con∣nivance at their sins, but) to bring them to repentance, and so to salvation, if they will make a right use of it. And agreeably hereunto, he tells them, his Brother and fellow-Apostle Paul (according to the great wisdom given him by God) had written unto them in his Epistle to the Romans (wherein there are many things that properly concern the Jews), and in his Epistle to the He∣brews, and so in several of his other Epistles. In which he acknowledges, there are some things hard to be understood, which unlearned and unstable∣minded-men do often-times wrest (as they do also other Scriptures) to their own ruin and destruction. And therefore they had need to labour after a clear understanding of those Scriptures, that they may not mistake about them. From Ver. 11, to 17. He comes now to the Conclusion of his Epistle; wherein he tells them, That seeing they were fore-warned of their danger, and acquainted how to prevent it, they should be more wary, lest they be drawn aside by the sedu∣ction of wicked men, from the way of Truth and Holiness wherein they had been in some measure established, and which they had hitherto professed. But on the contrary, they should labour daily to grow more and more in grace, and in a clear and distinct knowledg of our Lord and Saviour, and his Do∣ctrine. To this blessed Saviour he desires humbly and affectionately, that all honour and glory may be for ever ascribed. Amen. From Ver. 17, to the end.
SECT. XIV. THE Epistle of Jude was written probably about this this time, being very near of kin in style and matter to the second Epistle of Peter. This Jude, or Judas, was son of Alpheus and Mary (sister to the blessed Virgin), and brother to James the Less [see pag. 309.], and Cousin-german to our Sa∣viour, Mat. 13.55. He was called also Leb∣baeus and ThaddaeusThaddaeus signifies in Syriac the same thing which Judah doth in Hebrew, viz. praise and confession. Leb∣baeus signifies a wise and an under∣standing man. [Mat. 10.3.], to di∣stinguish him (as some think) from Judas Isca∣riot, whose very Name was now grown odi∣ous. Of this Jude's conversion and call to be an Apostle, the Scripture speaks not parti∣cularly. We find little more mentioned of him, besides his be∣ing numbred among the Twelve Apostles, and his writing this Epistle, save only this, That he propounded that Question to our Saviour, Joh. 14.22, Lord, how is it that thou wilt mani∣fest thy self to us, and not unto the world? This Apostle is re∣ported by the Ecclesiastick HistoriansSee Niceph. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 40, & 44. Hist. Eccles. Magd. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 10. to have preached the Gospel afterwards in many parts of the world, as particularly in Idumaea, Arabia, Syria, and a long time in Mesopotamia, as also in Pontus, and Egypt, and at last in Persia; where 'tis said, he was slain by the Magi for his free and faithful reproof of their Superstitions. In the Epistle there are these three parts,The Epistle of Iu 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface; wherein is declared, 1. Who was the Penman of the Epistle, viz. Jude the servant of Christ, and brother of James. 2. Who were the persons to whom it was directed, viz. to all the Christian-He∣brews, who were effectually calledThat word (called) both in the con∣struction of the words, and the order of nature, is to be read first. See Junius, Paraeus, and others., and sanctified by the Spirit of God the Father, and kept] est participium praeteritum pro praesenti. Grot. and preserved inSee 1 Joh. 2.27, 28. and by Christ, in their state of grace and holiness, unto salvation. To all whom he wishes that the mercy, fa∣vour, and good-will of God, may be more and more manifested, and that in∣ward peace of conscience, and love to God, and to one another, may be daily more and more encreased in them. Ver. 1, 2.
2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle, wherein he tells them, That seeing he gave himself with all diligence to write unto them of the common salvation (which he and they, and all the Saints, have interest in), he found it needful, in the first place, to exhort them, that they should earnestly contend for the faithEdem intelligit hic quae credi∣tur, i e. doctrinam fidei Act. 6, 7., that is, the sound doctrine of the Gospel, which is necessary to be owned and believed, in order to the obtaining salvati∣on, and was onceDicit semel quia de eâ doctri∣na nihil immutandum. Grot. Semel tradita, h. e. perfectè. Tridlib. and perfectly (never after to be altered) delivered to the Saints, that is, to the holy A∣postles, to be propagated; and to particular believers, to be faithfully kept and preserved by them, and trans∣mitted unto posterity. He inforces his exhortation with these reasons: 1. He tells them, certain wicked Seducers were slily crept into the Church, men long before written h. e. jam olim in, sacris literis a Prophetis & Apo∣stolis praedicti, ut apparet ex v. 14, 15, & 18. Non ergo dicit quod Deus illos ab aeterno in damnationem prae∣ordinaverit, & descripserit aut praede¦stinaverit, sed quod jam pridem in scriptura praedicti sint, sicut & Rom. 5. v. 4. haec ipsa vox usurpatur. H. Illyric. in loc. of, and prophesied of [see v. 14, 15. and 17, 18.], as those that would by their great sins and impieties fall into that condemnation which God hath ordain'd as a just reward to such trans∣gressions. Thse wicked and ungodly men, he shews, will pervert the doctrine of the free-grace of God, and of justification by faith in Christ, and make it patro∣nize loosness and lasciviousnessRevera Evangelium transfor∣mabant in doctrinam libidinosam. Grot, (as the Nicols, Gnosticks, and other impure Hereticks did) and will either openly or covertly deny Jesus Christ our only Master, God, and Lord, lessening the dignity of his Person, and invalidating (as much as lies in them) the benefits of his death and sufferings. That therefore those unto whom he wrote, might take heed of following their pernicious ways, he sets before them the examples of Gods vengeance inflicted in former times up in persons guilty of such transgressions as these seducers were guilty of. And, 1. He tells them, that he will onceDuae illae voces  cum verbo praecedente  congruè cohaerent, tanquam si hoc modo lege∣retu; , q. d. Etsi scio vos haec tenere cognita tamen semel adhuc (dum scil. in hoc tabernaculo sum) vos de eo commonefaciam. Frid∣lib. more be their Remembrancer while he is in this Tabernacle (though they knew this already) how God destroyedPerdidit, nempe per serpentes, per morbos, per Angelum, per manus Levitarum. Vid. 1 Cor. 10.5, 8, 9. the Israelits in the Wilderness for their unbelief, after they were brought out of Egypt. And so those now that fall into the like sin, are to expect the like distruction. 2. He sets before them the example of the Angels who kept not that first estate of blessedness in which they were created; but being for their sins and rebellion against God, thrown down from Heaven (where the good Angels have still their habitation, Mat. 24.36. Mar. 12.25.) they are now reserved under the restraint of his irresistible Power, in an estate of misery and horror (as condemned Malefactors are reserved in chains and dark∣ness to the judgment of the great day, when their condition shall be made much more miserable than now it is; see 2 Pet. 2.4. And if God spared not Apostate Angels, surely he will not spare Apostatizing Seducers. 3. He shews them how Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighbouring-Cities Adma and Zehoim, giving themselves up to prodigious lusts and uncleanness, were then most notoriously punished with utter destruction by fire and brimstone from hea∣ven; yet that was but as a fore-runner of those eternal flames of Hell which they now suffer, and so may well be a terrifying-example and warning to all that fall into the same sins at this time. And yet for all these dreadful examples, he shews, that in like manner did these Seducers (who ventStulta imaginantes ut ii qui som∣niant. Grot. their own dreams and phantasies instead of Gods truth, Jer. 23.25.) pollute and defile themselves with filthy libidinous practices. Nay further, they despise do∣minion, and shew themselves adversaries to Civil Government, and revile and speak contumeliously of those that are in Authority, see 2 Pet. 2.10. Now this their sin in despising lawful Authority, he aggravates, by setting before them
the contrary example of good Angels. He tells them, that Michael the Arch-Angel, though excellent in nature and high in office when he contended with the Devil about the Body of Moses (which God, knowing Israel's proneness to Idolatry, had buried no man knows where, lest they should commit Idola∣try with it, as they did with the brazen Serpent), and when he withstood him because he endeavoured to discover it, that he might thereby tempt the people to Idolatry; yet his holy nature would not permit him to deal with this impure Spirit in an indecent and contumelious manner; but he made his attempts fruitless by an holy and modest address to God, desiring the Lord to rebuke himThese circumstances the Apo∣stle might receive by divine revela∣tion; and here they are authorised and made authentick. [see Zach. 3.2.], and referr'd the whole judgment of the cause to him. But these Seducers, he shews, belch out their reproaches against Dignities and Magistrates (the usefulness of whom they know not), and possibly against the mysteries of the Christian faith it self, which they understand not, though they call themselves Gnosticks, and pretend to a greater and larger knowledg than others; see 2 Pet. 2.12. Nay, what they know naturally by the very light of Nature to be unlawful, in those things, as brute beasts, they corrupt and defile themselves. The Apostle also chargeth them with other sins; as, 1. With Envy, Malice, and Hatred against their Brethren and fellow-Christians. WoHe speaks it by way of pro∣phesie, not execration. unto them (saith he), they have gone in the way of Cain, who was a Murtherer, and slew his Brother, and they in like manner, by reason of their hatred to their bre∣thren, are no less than Murtherers, 1 Joh. 3.12, 15. 2. They have adultera∣ted the truth for base gain, and so have followed greedily the error of Ba∣laamNumb. 22. see his end, Numb. 31.8., who to get a reward, ensnared the Israelites in a great villany, Rev. 2.14. 3. He chargeth them with seditiousness against Magistracy and Ministry, and imitating Corah and his Accomplices, who rose up against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.31; and this he tells them will certainly bring ruin upon them, as it did upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. He further sets out their wickedness, by sundry resemblances: 1. He says they are spots and blemishes in their Love-feasts, 2 Pet. 2.12. (the infamy of their lives being a scandal to their Christian-Assemblies); and coming thither, they feed luxuriously, without any fear of offending either God or Man. 2. They are Clouds without water, promising rain, but giving none (2 Pet. 2.17.); ma∣king a shew of learning and knowledg, but not having any such thing really in them; they are indeed no more but empty Clouds, impetuously driven by winds and tempests from one vicious doctrine and practice to another; and be∣ing unstable, come to nothing in the end. 3. They are Trees that bring forth no good and wholsome fruit, but only such as presently withers and rots; they are twice deadBis mortuae] Sumpta Meta∣phora ab arboribus, quae bis mo∣riuntur, primum cum deficiunt ferrè fructus, secundò cum excisae traduntur ignibus. Zeger., 1. In re∣spect of their natural estate, upon which account they are dead in trespasses and sins: And then in respect of their apostacy, and falling off from their Christian profession: And thus having to their natural, drawn upon themselves a judicial hardness, if they so continue, as they are fit for nothing else, so they shall certainly be plucked up by the roots] Est hic Aori∣stus pro Futuro., and cast into the fire. 4. They are raging and furious waves of the sea [Isa. 57.20.], always turbulent, foaming out and discovering the filthiness of their hearts, which they ought to be ashamed of. 5. They are wandring-starrs; they take upon them the name of illuminated persons, but are indeed uncertain, unstable Tea∣chers, wandring and departing from the true faith once delivered to them: but though they profess themselves Starrs, yet to them blackness of darkness (that is, exceeding great darkness, call'd outward darkness, Mat. 8.12, as being furthest off from that region of light and glory wherein the Saints shall dwell)
is reserved as their just reward and punishment. He further shews that to these men the Prophecy of Enoch belongs, who at the beginning of the world (being the seventh from Adam), by the spirit of prophecy, foretold the sins of such persons, and their condemnation at the day of judgment, when Christ shall come in a glorious manner attended with Myriads of Saints and Angels to execute judgment upon all the ungodly, and especially upon such as have spo∣ken contumeliously against Himself and his holy Truth. And that these men are some of those ungodly ones whom this prophecy concerns, may appear by this; Thy are murmurers and complainers, never contented, but always quarrelling and complaining of their present condition; they love to walk after the lusts of their own hearts, without being restrained by any laws: their mouths are full of haughtyQui ont la bouche pléne de paroles enflées, hautanes, & insolen∣tes, qu'and ils ont afaire à ceux à qui ils s' estiment supericurs, mais qui flattent & cajolent, qui estiment & qui adm rent les personnes dont ils attendent quelque avantage, ou dont ils esperent quelque profit? Amiraut in his paraphrase on the place. and insolent spee∣ches, when they have to do with those whom they judg themselves superior unto; but they flatter, cajole, and seem to admire the persons and the actions of others from whom they expect any benefit or advantage. And besides this ancient Prophecy for the fortifying of them against these Seducers, he advises them to remem∣ber and consider the warningsIntellige autem, non tantum quae scriptis mandata, sed & quae voce dicta, per manus tradebantur. Crot. and advertisements given them by the Apostles Paul and Peter [see 2 Pet. 3.2.], who expresly speak of these wicked scoffers, sons of Belial, that should arise in the Church in the last timesCalled here the last days, ei∣ther with respect to the approaching judgment on the Jews; or because from the preaching of the Gospel, the last dispensation was begun, which God intended to continue without change to the end of the world., which were now come. These mockers and scoffers, he shews, were such, as without any just cause or warrant, separated themselves from the communion and society of faithful Christians, and sought to draw others also into the like separation, pretending to be more holy, and spiritual, and perfect, than they; whereas in∣deed they themselves were meer Sensualists, such in whom sense and the flesh do reign with full vogue and sway, and have no∣thing of that enlightning, sanctifying, quickning, comforting-Spirit, which Christ communicates to his faithful ones. From Ver. 2, to 20. He comes now in the close of his Epistle to give them some hortatory Directions, by way of Antidote, against these Seducers, and their Se∣ductions. 1. That they should labour to build up one another in holiness, being setled on tht holy and pure Doctrine of Faith (as on a firm foundation) which they had learned from the Apostles. 2. They should be earnest in prayer unto God, That by his Divine Grace and Power he would strengthem them therein; labouring to pray by the as∣sistance of the Holy GhostHe pray∣eth in us, by exciting the gifts and graces he hath given us. We pray in him by his assistance, when he helpeth us to stir up and exercise those gifts and graces.; and exciting in themselves the gifts and gra∣ces he hath given them. 3. That they should keep themselves continually in the exercise of love to God, labouring to encrease therein more and more; chearfully expecting and looking for that mercifulV. 21. Mer∣cy] the Cause is put for the Effect. sentence of Christ at the Day of Judgment, whereby he will bestow eternal life on them. 4. He gives them directions how to deal with those that are any way corrupted by these Seducers, viz. That they should deal with them af∣tr a different manner, according as their particular condition required; such as were wak and simple, and had been easily seduced, he advises they should deal with them with great tenderness and compassion: But as for those who were
further intangled, and corrupted, and hardned in their errors by these Sedu∣cers; they should endeavour to save them with fear, that is, they should ter∣rifie them with the fear of God's judgments and wrath, if they went on in these ways; and by sharp admonitions, and a due and solemn use of Church-censures (as occasion required) snatch them, as it were, out of the fire which will destroy them if they continue in it. And thus they would shew and de∣clare their great detestation of holding any co-partnership or fellowship with them in their errors; and that they not only hated all impiety and wicked∣nss of life, but all erroneous Doctrines that might infect men, or draw them into it; as when a man would avoid the infection of the Pestilence, he will flye from, and not dare to touch any garmentBy the garment spot∣ted with the flesh, the Apostle intends that which seems to have any affinity or nearness to the vices of those sinners which were among them. See Mr. Jenkins learned Commentary on this Epistle. of an infected person. He shuts up his Epistle, commending them to the Divine Grace of Christ, who is able to keep them from apostacy and falling away after the exam∣ple of these Seducers, and to cause to stand before his own most glorious Throne, such as shall be accounted blamelessEph. 5.27. in his sight, to their exceed∣ing great joy and triumph. To this only wise God, who is our Saviour, he desires all Glory, Mjsty, Dominion, and Power, may for ever be ascrib'd. Amen.
SECT. XV. ABOUT this time Paul seems to have written his Second Epistle to Timothy (now, as 'tis probable, at Ephesus) who had been imprisoned with him at Rome, but was at this present set at liberty: see Heb. 13.23. second Epistle to Timothy.In the Epistle there are these three parts: 1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface, in which he declares himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will and appointment of God the Father, that he might declare and make known the Gospel or PromiseSecundum promissionem] i.e. Ad annunciandum hominibus promissio∣nem illam Dei quâ is vitam aeternam promisit omnibus in Christum creden∣tibus. Simili significatione accipitur praepositio  Tit. 1.1. nempe ut notet finem sen causam sinalem, more Hebraeorum ל quae intedum valet , interdum . Piscat. o eter∣nal life, which is made to all who truly believe in Christ. He directs his Epistle to Timothy, calling him his dearly beloved son (because by him converted to the faith), to whom he wishes an encrease of grace, an a∣bundant sense of the mercy of God towards him, and much inward peace from God the Father, the Foun∣tain of all blessings; and from Jesus Christ the Media∣tor, who is the Conduit-pipe by whom they are con∣veyed. And in the first place he tells him, that he so∣lemnly gave thanksGratiam habeo Deo pro te. Testis enim mihi st Deus cui servio a ma∣joribus cum purâ conscientiâ, quod assidua tuî memoria teneam, &c. abs{que} hoc supplemento plane non li∣quet, unde pendet conjunctio  ubi dicitur , &c. Idem. to the Lord for the gifts and graces he had bestowed on him. And God (whom he served after the example of the holy Patriarchs of old, with an upright conscience) was his witness, how he was continually mindful of him in his prayers night and day. He tells him, he desired earnestly to see him again. For he remembred how passionately he wept at their parting, and he should be glad (if it so pleased God) that their meeting again might be as full of joy as their parting was of sorrow. He further tells him how much he plea∣sd himself with the contemplation of that sincere faith which he believed was in him; which grace eminently manifested it self before in his Grand∣mother Lois, and Mother Eunice: And as it dwelt and continued in them unto the end; so he was confident it would do in him also. From Ver. 1, to 6. 2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle; wherein, first, he tells him, That seeing he wish'd him so well, he would be his Monitor and Remem∣brancer, and would exhort him to excite and stir up the Ministerial git that was in him (by a diligent exercise thereof), viz. the faculty of tea∣ing the Gospel, which was conferred on him by his hands [1 Tim. 4.14.
see pag. 218.], when with the consent and concurrence of the Presbytery he ordained him to the Office of a Minister. Which gift he should not through cowardize or fear suffer to lye unprofitably by him. For the holyVox Spiritus significat aliquan∣do per Metonym. motus hominis à Spiritu excitatos, five bonos, five malos, ut hoc loco; ubi spiritus timo∣ris est trepidatio mentis; spiritus vir∣tutis est confirmatio & roboratio men∣tis: spiritus dilectionis est bonus animi motus quo diligimus Deum, & proxi∣mum; spiritus sobrietatis est bonus ani∣mi motus quo moderatè omnia agi∣mus. Fridlib. Spirit which God gives his faithful Ministers, is not a Spirit infusing fear and cowardize into them (which would hinder them in the discharge of their du∣ties); but a Spirit of Power, animating them with Christian courage, and a Spirit of love, working in them an holy love to God, and an ardent desire of the salvation of men; and lastly, a Spirit working in them a sound and composed mind, and giving them that pru∣dence and sobriety, that they neither through their own indiscretion bring troubles upon themselves; nor when they come upon them, break out into rage or impatience. Ver. 6, 7. 2. He exhorts him not to be asham'd of the Gospel which testifies of Christ, nor of his sufferings who was imprisoned for it; but to be a chearful part∣ner and co-sufferer with him, in bearing patiently his share of those afflicti∣ons which follow a sincere profession of the Gospel, according as God shall please to afford him power and strength. 3. He shews, that not only Timothy, but all true Christians, have great cause to dispose themselves to a willingness to suffer for the Gospel when called to it, because God hath saved them by his Son Jesus Christ from eternal mi∣sery; having called them with an holy calling, not for any works fore-seen in them, that could merit this calling, or move him thereunto; but according as it pleased and seemed good to himself, even according to his own free mercy and goodness, and the grace by him∣self given them, i. e. quam de∣crevit nobis dare Deus. M. subj. Reipsa, data est nobis ist haec grotia, per efficacem vocationem in tempore, non autem ante tempora secularia. Piscat., that is, which he purposed and decreed to give them in and through his Son, before the world beganAnte tempora secularia] Ante tempora seculorum quae praeterie∣unt à jactis mundi fundamentis. Drus. [see pag. 186.]. Which grace (he shews) God hath now manifested very clearly, and made them partakers of it, by Christs coming into the worldPostquam Christus mundo ap∣paruit, Dei gratia & charitas in ho∣mines apparuisse dicuntur. Tit. 2.11. & 3, 4., who hath by his death on the Cross taken away the sting of natural death to all true believers, and totally freed them from the punishment of eternal death; and hath shewed them, by the preaching of the Gospel, a clear way to attain a glorious everlasting life and immortality, which before was not so clearly re∣vealed. And for the preaching and teaching of this Gospel (especially to the Gentiles), he declares that God had given him the authority and commission of an Apostle. And this very thing, viz. his preach∣ing to the Gentiles (he tells him) had highly exasperated the Jews, and so had brought these troubles upon him which he now suffered. But he was not asha∣med of his sufferings in so good a cause, nor discouraged at them: For he knew in whose Power and Faithfulness he had put his trust, and was fully assur'd he was able to keep safe that great depositum or pledg he had com∣mitted to him (viz. his Soul and Body), to the day of Christ's glorious coming to judgment, at which time he expected a glorious reward for all his sufferings. From Ver. 8, to 13. 4. He exhorts him to hold fast thatExpres∣sam formam teneto  subaudi , qui sunt de fide & charitate, vel qui occupantur in fide & charitate Pisc. Notatur objectum, & materia doctrinae Pauli. form of sound words (or short sum∣mary of such things as were to be believed and practis'd by all) which he had receiv'd from him; which summary of sound doctrine, he shews, consisted principally in precepts and directions conerning faith in Christ, and love to
God and our Neighbour; which graces are required by Christ, and framed in the hearts of all his true members, by his Spirit; see 1 Tim. 1.14. Gal. 5.6. Eph. 6.23. He enjoins him also to keep inviolably that great treasure or depositum of the Gospel1 Tim. 6.20 (which was entrusted to him to be kept pure and uncorrupted by him, and transmitted to posterity), though the power and assistance of the Holy Ghost, who dwelleth in the hearts and souls of true believers. He tells him, he supposed he had heard that the Asian-Christians, who were then at Rome, had in the time of his distress, forsaken him; as par∣ticularly, Phigellus and Hermogenes. He desres the Lord to shew mery unto, and plentifully to reward the Family of Onsiphorus, who, being come to Rome, sought him out dilgently, and found him, and shewed great kind∣ness unto him, and oft refreshed him, and owned him without fear or shame in this time of his imprisonment, see Eph. 6.20. He desires he may find mercy of the Lord in that great day when he shall come to judg the quick and dead, and to distribute rewards and punishments. For, says he, besides what he hath done for me here at Rome, thou knowest also very well in how many things else he relieved me when I was at Ephesus. From Ver. 13, to the end. 5. He proceeds to direct Timothy in the right management of his Mini∣sterial Office. In order to which, 1. He exhorts him to strengthen and encourage himself through the grace derived to him from God the Father, as the Fountain; and in and by Je∣sus Christ as the Conduit-pipe. Ver. 1. 2. That the sacred Doctrine of the Gospel, and the precepts of holy living which he had heard him deliver in the presence of many the same he should impart and commit to persons of known ability and fidelity, who may be able to teach others. V. 2. 3. He should be ready to endure hardship, and encounter difficulties, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And therefore as Soldiers were not to entan∣gle themselves in the ordinary affairs of this life, such as Merchandize, Trades, or Husbandry, &c. but were to attend upon their Colours, and to observe the orders of their Commanders, so neithr must a faithful Teacher of the Gospel cumbr himself with such worldly matters as may hinder him from a faithful discharge of his Office, but must diligently attend upon his Ministry; and espcially that he may please Christ who hath called him to this warfare, and is his Commander and General, and is able abundantly to re∣ward him for all that he shall do or suffer for him. And as they that strive for Masteries in the Olympick-Games, are not to be crowned except they strive lawfully, that is, observe the Laws and Rules of the Games, be they never so difficult or painful to be observed; And as the Husbandman must firstSermonis ordo, paulo perturbatior, obscuritatem adduxit ora∣tioni. Ea tol∣letur si  sit prae∣teriti tempo∣ris & ab eo pendeat adverbium , prius & non ab insinitivo verbo quod sequitur  & sententiam ad hunc modum ordinemus, oportet agricolam accipere fructus, sed si prius labo∣ravit. Erasm Praestat verborum Metathesin agnoscre ut hoc dicatur . Scultet. toil and labour, before he can be partaker of the fruits of the earth: so a Teacher of the Gospel must first labour, and take pains, and endure hard∣ship, before he can hope to reap that great fruit and benefit, the gaining and converting of souls to Christ. He advises him therefore to consider of what he said, and desires the Lord to give him a right and sound judgment, that he may understand how to do all things right which belong unto him. From Ver. 3, to 8. 4. He advises him to inculcate the Doctrine of Christ's taking his hu∣mane nature of the seed of David according to the Scriptures, and the Doctrine of his Resurrection; this being the Doctrine which he himself had
every where preached; and for the preaching of thisV. 9.  cujus causâ. Grot., he was now im∣prisoned at Rome as if he were a Malefactor. But he acquaints him, that the word of the Lord, or the Gospel, was not bound; for he preached it feely, notwithstanding his bonds; yea, his imprisonment had been a means of divulging and spreading it very much in Rome. And he tells him, that the Elect were worthy, that for their edification and confirmation in the faith (in order that they may obtain salvation and eternal glory, which is freely given through the Merits and Mediation of Christ), himself, and other Mini∣sters of Christ, should suffer all sorts of afflictions; and they ought not in the least to be discouraged thereat: For this (says he) is a most true saying, If we be afflicted with him, and suffer as he suffered, for the defence of the truth [Rom. 8.17, 36. 2 Cor. 4.10.]; nay, if we be persecuted even to death for his sake, we shall also live together with him, and shall certainly be re∣warded with a participation of his glory. But on the contrary, if we deny him, he will deny us. And we may assure our selves of this, that though we may be unfaithful] Si nos in illum in∣fidi sumus;  in his libris modo credentem significat, modo fidelem. Grot. in not con∣fessing him stedfastly, or serving him with that fidelity we ought; yet he always abides faithful, and will ne∣ver fail of performing any of his promises; for he can∣not do any thing that is contrary to the perfection of his Divine Nature. From Ver. 8, to 14. 5. He directs him to inculcate these things into his Auditors upon all oc∣casions; and charge them strictly, as they will answer it before the Lord at his coming, That they fall not into those idle disputes and verbal-contentions, such as are mentioned 1 Tim. 6.4, which tend not to any real profit or good, but infuse uncharitableness and faction into mens minds, and tend to the draw∣ing them off from sound doctrine. As for Timothy himself, he exhorts him, That in his Ministry he should endeavour to approve himself unto God, an up∣right, sound, and faithful Teacher, a workman who (in respect of any un∣skilfulness▪ negligence, or unfaithfulness) hath no cause to be ashamed, and one that is a right dividerQui prudenter distribuat & accommodet usibus Auditorum. and distributr of the word of truth. But he should avoid pro Cavere habemus Tit. 3.9. quia circumcludere sole∣mus ea à quibus nobis metuimus. Grot. and take hed fr himself, and endeavour that his Flock should avoid also the prophane and vain bablings and discours s of proud Hereticks; for such discourses will tend to the promoting and encreasingAd incrementum impietatis proficient. Vatabil. of more and mre impiety in the hearers. And their false doctrine, if it be not stopt at first, will eat as doth a Gangrene, and spread far into the body of the Church. This he plainly evidenceth unto them, by instaning in the dangerous error of Hymenaeus [see 1 Tim. 1.20.] and Philetus, who affirmed, that the resurrection was past already, acknowleding no other but the spiritual resurrection of the soul from the death of sin; by which dangerous doctrine the Ortho∣dox FaithIntellige fidem temporariam, Nam vera fides subverti nequit. Pisc. of some concerning the resurrection of the bodyIn Evangelio  tam apertè & tot locis describitur, ut non possit alia intelligi quam quae erit post corporis ab animo sejun∣ctionem. Grot. at the last day, was overthrown. But he tells him, though some turn away from the truth, and the faith of some be overthrown; yet the foundation which God hath laid for tho salvation of true believers, stand∣eth sure and unmovable, having this seal to confirm it, God knoweth who are his, and discerns them from others, and loves them, and takes care of them, and will preserve them unto eternal life; yet such as have good ground to believe they belong to God, must not be secure and careless of their salvation, or indulge themselves in sin; but must know, that there is required on their part a conscientions care to please God, and that every one who names the name of Christ, and pro∣fesses to believe in him, must make conscience to depart from all iniquity. But
he shews it cannot be expected in the Church, any more than in a great Fa∣mily, that all should be equally good. In a great house there are Vessels of gold and silver, and some also of wood and earth; some for more creditable, some for less creditable uses (g; so it is not unsuitable to the state of the visible Church (God's great house) to have in it some Heretical,Huc tendit ; Non mirum, si Deus aliquos sinat se insi∣nuare in Ecclesiam, qui deinde malis factis se prodant. Deo nihil abscedit, quia novit & bonis & malis uti. Con∣fer quae sunt, Rom. 9.21, 22. Grot. as other Orthodox profes∣sors. Which thing should stir up every one of us to en∣deavour to be of the number of the best. For if a man (through the assistance of grace) do labour to purifie himself from all pollution of error, and sinfulness of life (which these Heretical Teachers he speaks of were s tainted with), he will then manifest himself to be a vessel unto honour, sanctified and consecra∣ted to the service of the Lord, and meet for the Master's use, and fitted and made ready to perform all manner of good works. From Ver. 14, to 22. 5. He admonishes him to keep himself from those carnal affections which young men are most apt to be led away with, such as are nt only love of pleasure, but rashness, contention, pride, vain-glory, which young Preachers too oft use to be infected with. And on the contrary, he advises him to pur∣sue after righteousness, fidelityVer. 22. ], h. e. fidem in ver∣bis. Grot., charity, and concord and agreement with all them that worship God sincerely. 6. That he shun those idle and unprofitable questions which tend not to the promoting true Piety or Christianity, but engender strifes and contentions. For the servant of the Lord (who serves him in the Office of Teaching) must not be of a boisterous contentious spirit, but must be mild, and gentle, and calm, and ready to instruct others, dealing with much patiene and meekness with those that oppose themselves against the truth, and are other∣wise perswaded than we are, and so tryingV. 25. Experiendo an det Deus illis poenitentiam;  pro  ut Luc. 3.15. ubi  habemus pro an. Grot. whether it may not please God to bring them to a sight and sense of their sins, and to repent of them, and to an acknowledgment of the truth, that so they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, by whom they were before captiva∣ted and enslav'd to do his will. From Ver. 22, to the end. He now prophetically admonishes and forewarns Timothy of those dangerous Seducers and enemies of the truth, that were even then arising, and should in after-times much more arise in the Church; charging him to have no com∣munion with such persons, but to avoid them. He tells him, that in the last days (viz. the time betwixt Christ's ascension and second-coming) many Monsters shall arise in the Church, who shall be guilty of many notorious vices and enormities. He particularizes no less than Nineteen. He says, they will be inordinate self-lovers, covetous, vain-glorious, boasters of their gifts and virtues, Rom. 1.30; proud, flying in the face of God himself with their wicked blasphemies, if he cross them. Rev. 16.9, 11, disobedient to Pa∣rents, unthankful, impure, and unholy; without natural affection, not re∣garding the very bonds of nature. Rom. 1.31. Truce-breakers, unfaithful in Covenants and Contracts; false accusers, loading the innocence of others with feigned calumnies; Incontinent, fierce, and bloodily di∣spos'd, haters and persecutors of all good men; TraitorsV. 4. ] Qui amicissi∣mos produnt: Qualis Judas Luc 6.16. Grot. Vide etiam Hammondum in loc., that is, betraying their fellow-Christians into the hands of persecutors, Mat. 10.21, and 24.9, 10. Heady and rash, high-minded and insolent persons, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form or shew of godliness, but no way manifesting the power or efficacy thereof in their lives. Of this sort he shews they are, who creep into houses, and seduce weak and unstable women, laden with sins, and transported with divers lusts and passions, who out of their curiosity are
always affecting something that is new, and accordingly seek after such Tea∣chers that may satisfie their curiosity; and though they give themselves up to be disciples to them, and pretend to be ever learning something of them; yet its impossible for them by such Teachers (who know it not themselves) ever to attain to the knowledg of the truth, or the right way of salvation. From Ver. 1, to 8. The Apostle proceeds in describing these Seducers: He shews, that as JannesTheir names are not found in the Old Testament. 'Tis possible the Apostle learnt them either from some ancient Record of the Jews then extant, or by the inspiration of the Spirit of God. and Jambres, the Egyp∣tian-Magicians, resisted Moses, and sought to render his miracles ineffectual, Exod. 7.11: so these resist the truth, and the saving-doctrine of the Gospel, and those that teach and maintain it; being men of corrupt minds, and such as have no right or sound judgment in the matters of faith, but such as ought to be rejected of all men. But he tells him, they shall not proceed much further to deceive, for their folly shall be made manifest, and they shall be dis∣covered to be Impostors, as those Egyptian-Magicians were. Ver. 8, 9. As for Timothy, he tells him, Thou hast another pattern quite contrary to theirs. For thou hast been present, and hast often heard the doctrine I have taught; thou hast seen the way and manner wherein I order my life; thou hast known] A principio us{que} ad finem adfuisti, & testis es om∣nium. Vatab. the scope and aim which I propounded to my self in my Ministry, and my faithfulness in the discharge of it; thou hast seen my enduring many neglects and affronts, before I would give over my endea∣vours to reduce impenitent sinners: thou hast seen my charity, and brotherly affection to all Christians, and my patience in bearing afflictions and perse∣secutions, as particularly those that came upon me at Antioch of Pisidia, Act. 13.45, at Iconium. Act. 14.2, at Lystra, Act. 14.19: I say, thou hast seen what great persecutions I have endur'd, yet out of them all the Lord hath de∣livered me. And therefore be not thou discouraged when thou meetest with such tribulations. For this I foretell thee, That all that will live godly accor∣ding to the rules of Christ, shall meet with persecution, and must accordingly arm themselves with patience and expectation of it. But though evil men and se∣ducers will wax worse and worse, deceiving others, and being themselves de∣ceived; yet continue thou stedfast in that doctrine thou hast learned of me, and whereof thou hast been assured that it is the true doctrine of Christ, be∣ing delivered to thee by my self, who am an Apostle of his, and called imme∣diately by him, and who was taken up into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. And thou oughtest the more firmly to adhere to this doctrine, because from a child thou hast been instructed in the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament; which if thou do well understand, they will make thee wise to discern the right way of attaining eternal life, which is by faith in Christ Jesus the pro∣mised Messias, Joh. 5.39. And all those Divine Writings both of the Old and New Testament, being given by the inspiration of God,V. 16. Omnis scriptura], i. e. tota scriptura Intelligitur totum scrip∣turae systema, cui, quae ante∣cedunt, & se∣quuntur, prae∣dicata augu∣sta competunt, non verò singulis vel libris, vel dictis. Glass. Non id vult Apostolus quòd unaquae{que} pars Scripturae sit utilis ad omnia ista; hic enim sensus liquidò falsus esset: sed, quòd in universâ Scripturâ hae quatuor utilitates reperiantur. Estius. should be diligently read and considered by thee, there being contained in them that which is pro∣fitable to teach the truth, to convince of error, to correct evil manners, to instruct in righteousness, and to make the man of God, the Pastor of the Church, perfectly meet and fit for every part of his Office, and to furnish him with directions for the performing of every good work required of him. From Ver. 10, to the end. He now gives Timothy a very solemn charge and exhortation, not know∣ing  but that it might be the last that ever he should give him. He charges him, as he will answer it before God, and Jesus Christ (who shall judg the quick and dead at that great and illustrious appearing of his, when he shall
come in the Clouds gloriously attended with all his holy Angels, and when there shall be a full manifestation of his Kingly Power) to preach the word faith∣fully, to be instant with an holy importunity in season and out of seasonSpartenda est manus: non potest fieri ut non aliquando succedat mulea tentanti. Sen. Ep. 29. (that is, at such times and sea∣sons as were proper and appointed for it, yea, and at some that were not) that he labour to convince evil∣doers of their wicked courses, to reduce by reprehension those that are fallen, though not so foully and scandalously to exhort others to go on that have begun well; and all this with lenity and gentleness joined with sound instru∣ction. For he tells him, such times were coming wherein many would not endure sound doctrine; but having ears itching after novelties, and such things as might please their lusts, would seek after such Teachers as would gratifie their humour, Isa. 30.10. (and they would find manyV. 3. Cumulabunt] Multos re∣perient tales doctores. such), and by them they would be tur∣ned from the truth, and brought to believe fables and meer lyes. He advises Timothy therefore in such dan∣gerous times, to be very wachful over himself in all respects, and diligently to watch over those also whom he was to instruct, to endure afflictions coura∣giously, to do what belongs to an Evangelist, or a person intrusted by the A∣postles of Christ with the propagating of the Gospel [Eph. 4.11.], to labour to fulfil] Imple. Grot. his Ministry, and to perform all the parts of it in such manner, that he may sufficiently evidnce and prove that he is a faithful Mi∣nister of Christ. As for himself (he tells him), he was shortly to be offered] immolor, h. e. mox immolabor, praesens pro paulo post futuro; alludit ad vini vel sanguinis libationem in sacri ficiis. Frid. Metonymia adjuncti metaphorica, nam sacrificiis libamina adjungeban∣tur. Vid. Phil. 2.17. Pisc. up as a sacrifice to God, his blood was to be shed and poured forth, the time of his departure out of this world was at handThis the Apostle knew, either by some special revelation, or by ob∣serving the condition and circum∣stances of his affairs.. And he could mention it with joy and comfort, that he had (through grace) behaved himself faithfully in his Chri∣stian warfare; he had run his Christian race diligently, and was now almost come to the end of it. He had been faithful to Christ in his Office, and had not fallen off, nor made defection at any time from the faith which he had taught and profess'd, and therefore he doubted not but there was a Crown of Righteousness reserved for him, such as God of his free-grace hath promised to give his faithful servants, as a just recompence of their righteous and holy walking before him. And such a reward, he doubted not but Christ the righteous Judg would give him, in part at the day of his dissolution, but more fully at the last JudgmentDistin∣guendum de diverso modo quo corona haec justitiae datur. Datur enim vel in spe nimirum in hac vita, vel reipsa: & quidem vel inchoate statim post mortem respectu animae, vel con∣summate & perfecte respectu animae simul ac corporis in die novissimi adventus. Fridlib.. And not only himself, but all other faithful Christians also, may expect the same, who joyfully look and long for Christ's second coming, that they may then see him in his glory, who suffered so muh for them in this world, and may receive from him their everlasting reward. From Ver. 1, to 9. In the Conclusion of his Epistle he desires Timothy to come to him with all the speed be could. And he should the rather hasten his coming, because Demas, who did assist him in preaching the Gospel, Philem. v. 24, and Col. 4.14, through worldliness had now forsaken him, and was gone to Thessalo∣nica. And as for Crescens, he had sent him to Galatia to preach the Go∣spel there; and on the same errand he had sent Titus to Dalmatia, and Ty∣chicas to Ephesus. By which means he was almost all alone at present, no body but Luke remaining with him, which made him the more to stand in need of his help and presence. And when he came, he should bring Mark (Barnabas's Kinsman) with him, who he knew would be very useful to him there
for the preaching and propagating of the Gospel. He orders him to bring him from Troas a CloakVide pau∣petatem tanti Aposto∣li qui rem tantillam, tam longè re∣lictam, inter damna censuerit. Grot. that he left there, as also some Books (possibly the Volumes of the Old Testament, with some Jewish Commentators on them); but especially the ParchmentsPer has  intelliguntur Schedae pelliceae in quibus Paulus quaedam scitu digna ad ju∣vandam memoriam annotaverat, unde de iis singulariter sollicitus, dicit, Et maximè membranas. Gerhard. in loc. Paulus Bibliothecam librorum Graecorum non habebat; attamen in membranis ad usum suum ex∣cerpserat alia ex Epimenide, alia ex Arato, alia ex Menandro. Grot., wherein possibly he had written many things for the help of his memory. He tells him, That Alexander the Copper-smith (probably that person mentioned Act. 19.33.) had done him a great deal of wrong at his being there; but God will one day rewardV. 14. Reddat ei Deus tam quae fecit, quam quae faciet. Hoc non est imprecantio, sed Deo judici∣um omne permittentis. M.S. & Syrus legit . him according to his works. He advises him especially to beware of him, and to avoid him as an Excommunicate person [see 1 Tim. 1.20.], and as one that hath violently and vehemently opposed the truth and sincere preaching of the Gospel. He tells him, that at his first-Hearing be∣fore Nero the Emperor, or his Officers; all of his acquaintants that were able to have stood him in any stead, either by their power at Rome, or by their testi∣mony in his defence, through infirmity and fear of suffering, forsook him. He desires God to pardon them for it. Yet notwithstanding, God stood by him, and strengthned him, that his boldness and constancy in defending Christia∣nity in the face of all dangers, might be a convincing argument, that the preaching of the GospelUt ex meâ omnium praesidio orbati constantià & mortis contemp∣tu, omnes intelligerent & quasi in animis suis convincerentur, praeconi∣um Evangelii non esse opus huma∣num, sed divinum. Scult. Erat non vulgaris Ministerii ejus confirmatio, quòd cum totus mundus furiosè in eum insaniret, & humana omnia praesidia ipsum desicerent, in∣victus tamen steterat. Calv. in loc. was not a thing carried on by man's power, but by divine assistance; and he was so wonderfully preserved, that the preaching of the Gospel might be more fulfilled by him, and that the doctrine of Christ might be spread into Nero's Court, and among all those Gentiles of several Nations that frequented Rome. And for this reason he supposes it was, that God at this time so wonderfully delivered him from the imminent danger of death, and the cruelty of Nero, as out of the mouth of the Lion. Yea, he was confident, that God would still deliver him from doing any thing unworthy of an Apostle and Servant of His, or that might blemish his holy profession; and would bring him safe at last unto his heavenly Kingdom. To this only wise and ever blessed God he desires all honour and glory may for ever be ascribed. Amen. He desires him to remember him kindly to Prisca and Aquilla, and the Family of Onesiphorus. As for Erastus and Trophimus, if he desires to know what is become of them, he tells him, That Erastus stay'd at Corinth, and did not come at all to Rome; but he left Trophimus sick at Mile∣tumOmnino assentior do∣ctissimo Bezae legenti  vid Act. 28.1. In iti∣nere Hieroso∣lymis Paulus Meliten atti∣git, non Miletum. Videmus hic obiter Deum qui dona sanationum Apostolis dederat. aliquas voluisse corporis infirmitates & in ipsis & in ipsorum amicis manere, ut appareret eos esse homines. Grot.. He desires him again to make haste to him, and to come to him, if possibly he could, before Winter. He sends him salutations from several Christians there at Rome. He shuts up his Epistle with this accustomed seal [see 2 Thes. 3.17.], wishing that the grace of Jesus Christ may (as to its effects and sense) reside in his soul and spirit, to enlighten, sanctifie, and comfort him more and more. And the same he wishes to all the faithful that were with him at Ephesus. From Ver. 9, to the end.
SECT. XVI. AND now we can trace this great Apostle Paul no further by any light the Scripture hath left us. Some learned men indeed hold, that (the two years being ended in which he was detained in Military custody, and taught the Doctrine of Christ at Rome) he preached the Gospel up and down in Italy; and from thence went into Spain and the Western parts. And some hold, that he went into Greece and Asia, where for five or six years he confirmed and established the Churches he had before planted in those Countreys, and then returned to Rome again; where, on the 29 of June, in the 13 year of Nero, he was beheaded. Chrysostom in his 26 Hom. on 2 Cor. says, The day of his death was more certainly known than that of Alexander the Great. Vid. Ʋsserii Annales. But others think, that after his writing his second Epistle to Timothy (about which time it seems he had warning that his departure was at hand, 2 Tim. 4.6, 7, 8.), 'tis impossible to find out by any Scripture-light, what became of him; and 'tis no fault to be ignorant of that which God hath not thought fit to have revealed to us. Indeed he mentions in his Epistle to the Romans, ch. 15.24, his desire and intent to go and preach in Spain. But it seems he saw cause to change his resolution. For it appears that when he wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews, he intended very shortly (if Timothy came to him from Ephesus) to go for Judea, Heb. 13.23; yea, to go to Philippi [Phil. ch. 2. v. 24.] and to Coloss [Philem. v. 22.]. Possibly the apostacy and wa∣vering he heard of in the Eastern Churches, caused him to think it more needful to go thither, than to go Westward. He expe∣cted indeed Timothy to come to him again to Rome; but whe∣ther they ever met and travelled together again, or what fur∣ther became of either of them, we cannot from any thing the Scripture hath left us, certainly determine.
SECT. XVII. THE Apostle and Evangelist John, the son of Zebedee, and Brother of James, the Disciple whom the Lord so intirely loved [Joh 13.23.], wrote, as 'tis probable, about this time, his first Epistle (which only is Catholick, the other two being particular), from Ephesus, not long before the destruction of Jerusalem, as seems to be intimated chap. 2. v. 18. The occa∣sion of writing it, seems to be this: 1. He saw that many He∣retical Teachers and Seducers were risen up in that Age, some of whom denied the Deity, others the Humanity of Christ, or that he was appointed to be the Saviour of Mankind: These he calls Antichrists, as fore-runners of the great Antichrist, and arms those to whom he writes, against their Seductions. 2. He saw that many that professed Christianity, neither lived piously toward God, nor charitably with their Brethren; and he thought it needful to reprove these scandalous enormities, and to strengthen all true believers in the Christian Faith, and in a stedfast profession thereof; and to press them to holiness of life, and sincere brotherly love. The parts of the Epistle are three:The first Epistle Iohn. 1. The Preface or Introduction. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. 1. THE Preface or Introduction; wherein he shews what was the sub∣ject-matter he intended principally to treat of in this Epistle, viz. the great Theme, Argument, and Matter of the Gospel, Jesus Christ. And, 1. He intends to speak of his Godhead, which he sets forth by these phra∣ses. That which was from the beginning—the word of life—the life— that eternal life which was with the Father— 2. He speaks of his Huma∣nity, which he sts forth by these expressions, Which we have heard, seen, look'd upon, and our hands have handled. He tells them therefore, that that PersonSermo hic est de filio Dei incarna∣to quem Apostoli viderunt, audiverunt, & manibus contrectaverunt. ] quod erat, pro qui erat à principio. Neutrum genus potest non solum de re quae non est persona intelligi, sed etiam de re quae est persona. Vide. c. 5. v. 4. Christum hic intelligi docent attributa, quia visio, & contre∣ctatio, Christi personae, non verò Evangelio possunt convenire. Gomar. Quod fuit ab initio] Si Christus a principio mundi, seu quum mundus inciperet jam erat, erat igitur ab aeterno, quia tempus cum mundo incepit.  autem nominatur Christus quia est aeternà illa sapientia per quam Deus Pater mundum condidit, & genus humanum inde à mundi principio al∣locutus est. Deni{que} vita nominatur, item{que} vita aeterna, quia est author vitae in omnibus creaturis quocun{que} illae vitae genere vivant. Pisc. who was in the beginning, and had a being before the beginning of the world, whom they (his Apo∣stles)
had heard preach in Judea, whom they had seen with their eyes, and familiarly convers'd with, and their hands had touched both before and af∣ter his resurrection; Him they did now declare unto them; yea, whatever was needful to be known of the Word of lifeDe verbo vitae] Idem sonat ac si diceret illud ipsum aeternum Dei verbum vivens, ac vivificans, quod incarnatum ac inter nos versatum est, de eo jam loquor., that is, of Christ Jesus, the Eternal Word of the Father, who hath life in himself, and communicates both na∣tural and spiritual life to all that partake of it. But here some might object, How could you see the Word of life? God is invisible; no man hath seen him at any time. He answers, they might see him: For that life, that eternal life which was with the FatherVta quae erat apud Patrem] h. e In sinu atris, ut silius unige∣nitus, unum cum patre naturâ, & gloriâ, non aliud; diversus verò & alius personâ, Joh. 1.1. Hîc distin∣guuntur duae personae nempe ver∣bum, & Pater apud quem verbum fuit. Non enim unum idem{que} apud seiptum fuisse dicitur. Gomar. from eter∣nity (being his Eternal only begotten Son, and a di∣stinct Person from him) was in the fulness of time manifested in the flesh; and we his Apostles saw him in his assumed human nature; and do now testifie, pub∣lish, and declare him unto you, that you may have com∣munion with us and other faithful Christians (and not with false Teachers), and that being in our communi∣on, you may partake with us of all those spiritual benefits and priviledges which Christ hath purchased for us; and you will have no cause to repent of coming into this sacred communion and fellowship. For we that have sincerely embraced the Doctrine of the Gospel, have communion with the Father, who in and through Christ is now our reconciled Father (having adopted us for his Children) and with his Son Jesus Christ; to whom being by faith uni∣ted, we are made partakers of his righteousness, and receive spiritual life and grace from him for the sanctifying of our natures. I write these things there∣fore unt you, to direct you into that way wherein you may have abundant matter of joy and comfort [Joh. 15.11.]; so that you will be no losers by following my directions. From Ver. 1, to 5. 2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle; wherein he exhorts them to the practice of holiness. He tells them, that this is the sum of the Gospel preached by Christ, which they his Apostles heard from him, and now testifie and publish, that God is light, that is, infinitely full of wisdom and pu∣rity; neither is there error, ignorance, falshood, or the least imaginable touch of impurity in him, neither can any impurity please him. Therefore whoever pretends to have communion with him (who is Light and Holiness), and yet walks in the dark ways of sin and impurity, he is a lyar, and deals not uprightly, but denies in his works what he professes with his mouth. For what communion can there be between light and darkness? But (says he) If we walk in the light, that is, in the clear knowledg and light of the Go∣spel, framing our lives and conversations according to the pure precepts there∣of, and conforming our selves to God, who is light and perfect purity, and dwells in light glorious and inaccessible [1 Tim. 6.16.], and whose acti∣ons are all holy and pure; then we shall have fellowship one with another, we with him, and He with us; and being by faith united unto Christ, his blood cleanseth us from the guilt of all our sins both original and actual. But if we shall say or imagine, that we are so free from sin, that we need not the blood of Christ, nor his intercession, for the purging our consciences from guilt, we miserably deceive our selves, and there is no true judgment or discerning of things in us, but we glory in that which is a meer lye and falshood. But if we penitently confess our sins, and by faith have recourse to the merits and intercession of Christ for the pardon of them, God is so faith∣ful, that he will forgive us all our sins, according to his own gracious promise; and he is also so just, that he will not exact the debt from those for whom his Son hath satisfied, but will for his sake forgive us all our unrighteousness. If we should say therefore, that we have not sinned, or have not made our
selves so guilty and so liable to eternal death, that we need such an expia∣tion as the death and passion of the Son of God, we should in effect give God the lye, and deny what he hath affirmed in his word, namely, That all men are sinners, and so need a Saviour; and thereby we shall shew, that the truth of God, as 'tis revealed in his word, is not received nor believed by us. From Ver. 5, to the end. Now lest any, from what he before said (of God's readiness to forgive  sin to those who confess their sins, and fly to Christ for their pardon), should encourage themselves to sin freely and boldly; he tells them (giving them from the abundance of his love and paternal affection, and in respect of his age, the loving compellation of little children)Vox est blandissime monentis, quâ & Christus ad discipulos suos usus est, Mar. 10. & Joh. 13. & Paulus ad Galatas cap. 4. Ipse vero Johannes in hac Epistola frequentissimè, octier adminimum., that his end and scope in writing these things, was to keep them off from sin, and to exhort them to use all pos∣sible care to avoid it. But if they have fallen, or shall fall through infirmity, or the violence of temptation, into any act of sin, then they should not despair, but consider (for their encouragement) that they have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous (whose perfect righte∣ousness renders him a fit and meet Intercessor for us, and who requires no∣thing of the Father in our behalf, but what is justly due to him upon the account of the merit of his death), and having offered up himself a Propitia∣tory Sacrifice for our sins on the Cross, his intercession now in Heaven must needs be of marvellous virtue. Nay, you may assure your selves, that his Sa∣crifice was of such infinite value and merit, that 'tis not only sufficient for the obtaining pardon for our sins who are Jews, but for the sins of the Gen∣tiles also, provided they repent and believe in him. Ver. 1, 2. 2. He comes now to shew, That 'tis not enough for them to profess they know Christ, except they yeild sincere obedience unto him. For this is the certainest mark and proof that we know Christ effectually, and have commu∣nion with him, If we so love him, that we sincerely endeavour to keep his Commandments. For he that boasts he knows him, and yet makes no consci∣ence to observe his commands, neither doth his knowledg work in him any en∣deavour to conform himself to Him in holiness and purity, that man is a great lyar, neither is there any truth or sincerity in him. But a conscientious en∣deavour to observe his word and commandments, is a great and sure argu∣ment, that in him that doth so, the love of God is grown to a high pitch, and a great evidence to himself that he is a true branch in Christ, and a true member of him. And whosoever professes to be one of his members, ought to imitate him in a holy life and conversation. From Ver. 3, to 7. 3. He exhorts them to sincere brotherly love. He tells them, 'tis no newVos Israelitae jam olim habu∣istis hoc praeceptum, Lev. 19.18. Non ergo novum vobis videri debet, quanquam protensum latiùs, & pro∣vectum sublimiùs. V. 7. Quod vos audictis] i. e. Ve∣stri Majores. Grot. matter which he now injoin'd them, but that which they were taught not only in the Old Testament, but at the first preaching of the Gospel among them [Mat. 5.44. Joh. 15.12.]; and what was so early taught them, may well be call'd an old Com∣mandment: I said (says he), it was an old Com∣mandment, and yet in some respects I may call it a new one, and so 'tis called by our Saviour himself, Joh. 13.34, because 'tis press'd in a new manner by Christ, and urged upon a new ground, and con∣firmed by his own example and special love, and imprinted in the hearts of believers by his own Spirit, according to the Promise of the New Covenant, Jer. 31.33. And there was in Christ a true and sincere love towards youSicut, in Christo est vera & sincera dilectio; similiter, sit etiam in vobis.; and therefore you ought to look that there be a true and sincere love in you towards him. And this ought the rather so to be, because the darkness of ig∣norance which was formerly in the world, is now past, and the true light of
the Gospel clearly shineth among you. He further presseth this duty from this reason, Because he that professeth himself to be in the light, and to know the truth, and yet hateth his brother, is in the darkness of ignorance and sin. For if the eyes of his understanding were clearly enlightned with Gospel-truth, his affections would be otherwise dispos'd. But on the contrary, he that truly loveth his brother, thereby eviden eth himself to abide in the light, and in the truth, and that the true light abideth in him. And whilst he thus walk∣eth in the light, he walketh inoffensively in a state of grace, and neither stumbleth himself, neither is there occasion given by him that others should stumble, or be drawn into any sin, or hardned in it. But he that hateth his brother, is in darkness, and walketh in darkness; he goes on in sin, swerving from the right way that leads to salvation, and knoweth not whither he goes, nor how near he is to a precipice, and utter ruin, because his mind is dark∣ned with sin. He now directs his speech to those who were sincere Christi∣ans among them, and walked in the light (and to these, from his paternal affection, he gives the endearing-compellation of little ChildrenV. 12. Filioli] Nondum incipit distributio in certas aetates, quae con∣tinetur v. seq. sed ista appellatio cunctas aetates complectitur. Pisc.), telling them, That he gave them these ex∣hortations to brotherly love, because God hath been so kind to them, as to forgive them all their sins for Christ's sake; and therefore they ought, upon that ac∣count, to be ready to forgive one another, and to love one another. From Ver. 7, to the 13. And now, says he, beloved Christians, suffer me to speak unto you as a Father doth to his Children, and distinguishing you according to your several ages, to address my exhortations and instructions particularly unto you. And first, Let me speak to you that are more advanced in age, and are, as it were, Fathers among the rest. 'Tis agreeable to your age to know ancient things; and seeing you have attain'd to a greater measure of knowledg than others, of the Ancient of days, the Eternal Son of God [Dan. 7.9, 13, 22.],Dat cui{que} ordini quae ipsi con∣veniunt. Senihus competit notiti, & congruum est ut Antiqui cognos∣cant Antiquum dierum. Estius. I think fit to exhort you to make a good improvement of it. Let it be an engage∣ment upon you to love him more ardently, and to imi∣tate him more carefully. 2. Let me speak to you young men, who are in the flower of your age, and the vigour of your strength; 'Tis agreeable to your age to be valiant Soldiers, and to be ambi∣tious of Victory and Conquest. Now seeing you have been enabled by God not only to fight valiantly against flesh and blood, but against the Devil and his temptations, and (through the assistance of grace) have overcome him, I exhort you to take especial care that he do not at any time surprize you, and so prevail over you. 3. Let me speak unto you little Children. The first know∣ledg young Children use to have, is of their Father. They know their Fa∣thers before other men, and are more fond of them than of others: Seeing there∣fore you know your heavenly Father, I exhort you that you endeavour to ex∣press a very ardent affection to him, and to labour to please him, and to be obedient to him in all things. Again, I reiterate and re-inforce my exhorta∣tion upon you ancient men, to imprint it the deeper upon you: And so like∣wise on you young men also, because Christ hath endued you with strength from above (which is far more excellent than your natural strength), and hath put his word into your minds (which is the Sword of the Spirit, Eph. 6.17.), whereby you have been inabled to overcome the evil one. Take you heed especially, lest at any time he prevail over you, and so deprive you of the glory of your victory. And seeing both old men, and those that are in their middle-age, are apt to love the world too much; let me exhort you all to take heed of all inordinate love of it, or of any of the things that are in it. For such a love of the world, and the true love of God, are inconsistent; because the one promotes corruption and sin, and the other sanctification and holiness. And you should consider, that all the things that are in the world (which
can invite us to love them), are reducible to these three heads: 1. The lust of the flesh, that is, all corporeal delights and pleasures. 2. The lust of the eye, that is, all visible possessions and riches, and outward estate. 3. The pride of life; that is, all honours, pomp, high places, and advancements. And an inordinate affecting or lusting after these things, comes from the corruption that prevails in the world, and in worldly men; and not from the Father, unto whose holiness they are no way agreeable. And besides this, they should consider, that the World, and the things therein (that are so lusted afterSo lust is to be taken here; as hope is put for the thing hoped for, Ro. 8.24. and faith for the thing believed, Jude 3.), are but transitory and fading things, and soon pass away; neither can they give to those that most love them, any durable feliity. But on the contrary, they that set themselves to do the will of God, and to mortifie those inordinate lusts and affections to the things of the world, shall obtain eter∣nal lifeSub tam magnâ spe nulli la∣bores duri videri debent. Grot.. Lastly, He addresses himself again to those whom he before call'd little children: He intimates to them, that though covetousness and the love of the world is not usually found in that age, as it is in the two former; yet the weakness of their understandings, and want of sound judgment and discerning, doth commonly expose them to a danger of ano∣ther kind, and that is, to be seduced and drawn away by erroneous Teachers. And though there were many Seducers in former ages, yet he tells them, that now they will be more rife than ever. For this is the last time; The destru∣ction of the City, and Temple, and Polity of the Jews was now at hand. Ye have heard (says he) of a great and notorious Antichrist (the Prince of all Seducers) that shall come and appear in the world [see 2 Thes. 2.3.]; I tell you, He is not yet come; but there are sundry fore-runners of him come, such as will endeavour to draw men off from believing in Christ the true Messias, and will perswade them to believe lyes. And our Saviour him∣self fore-told [Mat. 24.11, 24.], that such Seducers as these would come, and advertised us of the time of their coming; and according to his prediction, there are now many AntichristsQuod Johannes de Antichri∣stis jam exortis ait, illud verissimum esse ex Cerenithi, Ebionis, Simoniis Magi, Basilidis & Nicolaitarum hi∣storiâ constat. Gom. come into the world, viz. false prophets, who corrupt the Christian Doctrine; and being acted by such a Spirit of error as the grand Antichrist will be acted by, they may well partake of his name; and by their swarming now, you may know that the last time is come. And these Antichrists and false Teachers, he shews, once held external communion with Ortho∣dx and faithful Christians; but they departed from their communion, and thereby de∣clared, that they never were sound members of that Body. If they had been of the same Faith, and had really believed the same truth, they would not have departed from them. But as for them, he tells them, he need not write much about this matter; for they had an Unction from the Holy One; that is, they were furnished with the gifts and graces of the illuminating and san∣ctifying Spirit of Christ, teaching them all things ne∣cssaryVer. 20. ] scil. quae ad vitandos tales impostores sunt necessaria. Restringi debet vocum universalitas ex subjecta materiâ. Grot. for their salvation, and preservation from Seducers. Therefore his writing to them now, was not because he apprehended they were ignorant of the truth; but seeing they knew the truth, he was willing to con∣firm them in it; and he doubted not, but by their know∣ing the truth, they would be able to discern a lye, or a false doctrine from it, seeing it doth in no wise agree with it. A lye or falshood, he tells them, hath nothing of the nature of truth in it; therefore they will not easily receive the one for the other. Now he would have them consider, what Lye or Falshood can be equal to the denying of the great Truths of the Gospel? And who is a greater lyar and seducer, than he that denies Jesus to be the pro∣mised Messias? Whoever doth so, he tells them, is an Antichrist, and denies in effect both the Father and the Son. He denies the Son directly; he denies
the Father by consequence, who testifiedSee chap. 5.9, 10. of Christ by his voice from Heaven, and by Miracles; which testimony is not true, if Jesus be not the Christ. Therefore whosoever denieth the Son to be the Messias, or denieth his Person, Natures, Offices, or Merits, he is an AntichristNon quod eximius ille Anti∣christus primus id facturus sit, sed quod eximiè & impudentèr supra caeteros, ac majore cum effectu., and denies as well the testimony of the Father, as the Mes∣sias-ship of the Son. And whosoever denieth the Son, cannot have the Father for his God, or reconciled Fa∣ther, seeing there is no reconciliation for fallen man with God, but in and through Christ. He advises them therefore, that what∣ever their temptations should be, they should not forsake the Doctrine which from the beginning of their Christianity they had received. To which if they firmly adhered, they should continue in the favour and love, and in the communion of God the Father, and of Christ Jesus his Son. And whatsoe∣ver hazzards they should run by so doing, they might comfort themselves with this, That He hath promised eternal life to all that continue in the faith and obedience of his doctrine. These things he tells them he had written to them, to arm them against the Seducers that were now among them. But he need not give them any other armature than what they had already. For the an∣nointing which they had receiv'd from Christ (viz. the illumination of his Spirit) abiding in them, would teach them all things neessary to salvation. And they need not that any man should teach them any new doctrine, any new fundamental principles of Faith, as yet strange and unknown to them. They need no new Gospel or Doctrine for kind and substance, though they need more teaching in order to their growth and further improvement in real Piety and Christianity. Seeing therefore the Anointing which they had re∣ceived from the Spirit of Christ, instructed them concerning all things ne∣cessary to salvation, and seeing what it taught and suggested, was the very truth, and no lye; he was confident they would abide in Christ, and the pro∣fession of his truth. And now returning to speak to them all in general, he exhorts them to look to it, that they do abide in the faith of Christ, in his communion and doctrine, and thereby they shall have confidence to look him in the face, and not be ashamed to present themselves before him at the great and glorious day when he shall come to judg the world. From Ver. 13, to 29. 4. He exhorts them to the sincere practice of righteousness, and to aban∣don all manner of sin and unrighteousness. For if they know and be sen∣sible (as sure they must needs be), that GodTransit de Christo ad Deum; nec id mirum, cum utrius{que} mentio praecesserit. Grot. is a God infinitely righteous and holy, they may well know also, that whosoever is born of him, and hath received a new and divine life from him, doth endeavour to live righteously, and thereby declares himself to be a child of his, and like unto him; and, as a son, may expect protection, and an inheritance from him. V. 29. He shews what a great and high favour it is, that true believers and righteous persons should both be, and also be accounted and acknowledg∣ed for the children of God, and should have the priviledges belonging to that state. 'Tis true, the world doth not acknowledg them for such, but mocks and jeers at them, because they pretend to it: And this is not much to be mar∣velled at; for, not knowing the Father, of whose Spirit they are spiritually and supernaturally begotten; and being ignorant of the holy nature of God, no wonder they acknowledg not those for his children who resemble him in holiness. But, says he, let the world judg what it will, the state and condi∣tion of us▪ that are true believers, is the state and condition of the children of God. We have at present the right of children, but what we shall be hereafter, and what shall be the glory of that inheritance that shall be made over to us, is not fully manifested: but this we know, that when that blessed time shall arrive when Christ shall come to judg the world, we shall then be
made like unto him in holiness, in glory, and bliss (but with a different de∣gree from Him our Head), and he will enable us to see him in his transcendent glry, which will be a beatifying-vision to us, Mat. 5.8. And whosoever hath a well-grounded hope in him of this glory, will (through the assistance of grace) endeavour to purifie himself from all pollution both of flesh and spirit, set∣ting Christ before him as his Pattern and Copy; and labouring to imitate him, though he cannot reach or arise to his perfect purity. However this he knows, that all sin is contrary to this purity. And whosoever follows not after righte∣ousness, but gaveth himself up to the commission of sin, transgressethPeccatum, est actus quivis, quem scias & sentias pugnare cum aliqua lege Dei, i. e. cum aliquâ patefactione divinae voluntatis. Grot. the Law of God, and so is disloyal and rebellious against the King of Heaven, and hath no reason to expect from him that glory and bliss before spoken of. Yea, such a person is not only a transgressor of the law of God, but he sets himself against Christ also, and vilifies his redemption. For Christ (in whom there was no sin) was manifest in the flesh to take away sin; the guilt of it by his blood, the power of it by his Spirit. Therefore who∣soever abideth in him, being united to him by a lively faith, giveth not up himself to a trade of sinIn his & consimilibus sententiis  & , est o∣peram dare peccato, sceleratum esse. Sceleratus est non tantum qui scelus ali∣quod committit, sed qui sceleribus ope∣ram dat ac in iis patrandis assiduus est. Hoc regeneratis non contingit; quia Deus etsi patiatur eos peccata quaedam gravia patrare, non patitur tamen eos in eo luto diu volutari, ac veluti cum voluptate se totos immergere. Capel., nor liveth in a course of known sinNon peccat] Accipe non de eventu, sed de studio ac conatu non-peccandi. Illyr., deliberately and indulgently, walking after the flesh [Rom. 8.1.], and being a ser∣vant of sin, Rom. 6.17. Whosoever doth so, whatever he pretends, hath no right knowledgV. 6. Quisquis peccat, non vidit eum neque novit] h.e. (ut Joh. 17.3. per synecdochen generis pro specie) fidem vivam non habet, ideo{que} in Christo non manet. Gom. of Christ, nor any true faith in him. For, says he, let no man de∣ceive you, and make you believe that a true faith may consist with an unholy and impure life. He that leads a godly and righteous life, and diligently exercises himself in all good works, doth shew plainly, and manifest, that he is a righteous manNon dicit, quod exercendo ju∣stitiam justi fiamus; sed, quod exerci∣tium justitiae sit fructus justificati cordis, & signum evidentissimum. Illyr., justified by faith in Christ's blood, and sanctified by his Spirit, and one that is in some measure like unto Christ himself in righteousness and ho∣liness (though not equal to him), having in him a sincere love of righteousness. But on the contrary, he that com∣mitteth sin, that is, giveth himself up to a course of sin, is a child of the Devil, and resembles him, who sinned at the beginning, soon after the Creation, and from that time hath ever since been a Tempter, inspiring by his sug∣gestions and temptations an inclination to sin, into the minds and souls of men. But the Son of Man was not only perfectly free from sin himself, but came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, viz. to remove the guilt of sin to believers, and to free them from the punishment of it, by his merits and intercession, and to regenerate and sanctifie their natures by his Spirit, and so to destroy the do∣minion and power of sin in them. Therefore they that give themselves up to a course of sin, belong not to Christ, but to the Devil. For he that is born of God, and regenerated by his Spirit, doth not indulge himself in a course of sin, as carnal unregenerate persons do, because he hath a seed of grace re∣pugnant thereunto, remaining in him; and he cannot deliberately and freely allow himself in sin, because by the grace of regeneration the dominion of sin is broken in him. The new nature wrought in him by the word of GodSee 1 Pet. 1.23., ac∣companied with his Spirit, is a principle that abhors sin, and fights against it. Therefore a course of sin, or delighting in sin, is unreconcilable with this state. In the conclusion of this discourse, he tells them, that by these two marks the chil∣dren of God may be manifestly distinguished from the children of the Devil: They that live righteously, and holily, and sincerely love their brethren, are the children of God; and they that do not, are of the Devil. From Ver. 1, to 11.
5. He cometh now to inforce his former exhortation o brotherly love, and useth many pathetical arguments to provoke them to it. 1. He tells them, This precept concerning brotherly love, was given them by C and his Apostles, from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel. 2. The  Disciples of Christ must not be like wicked Cain, who was a child of the Devil, and a mur∣derer of his brother. And what mov d him to do this horrid wikdness, but meer envy and ill-will, because he saw that God gave to Abel (who lived pi∣ously) a testimony that he was accepted with him, whilst his own sacrifice dis∣pleas'd him, because he lived wickedly: see Heb. 11.4. Therefore those that are real, pious Christians, need not wonder if the world hate them, seeing it was so from the beginning; but ought so much the rather to love one another, be∣cause the world hates them. 3. Brotherly love is a good evidenceNon indicatur meritum dile∣ctionis, sed effectum fidei; per quam solam ex morte in vitam transimus, Pise. Particula , hîc non est causalis, sed ratiocinativa. Fridlib. we are regenerate, and passed from death to life. He that loveth not his brother, abideth in a state of sin and wrath, and is liable to eternal death. He that hatethQui odit fratrem suum] Occi∣dendi animo scilicet, Talis homicida est apud Deum, qui animum spectat. Drusius. Quod de adulterio dixit Christus, Mat. 5.28, pari jure ad alia crimina aptandum est. Grot. his brother in his heart, and hath a desire to destroy him if he durst, is, in the sight of God, a murtherer of him. And he that is such, hath no spiri∣tual life (which is the beginning of the eternal) abiding in him, nor any right to eternal life and happiness, but is in a state obnoxious to eternal misery. 4. He presses brotherly love from Christ's own example, who being God as well as Man, yet so loved us, that he laid down his life to redeem us. And we should, in imitation of him, be willing, in some cases, to hazzard our lives for the brethren [see Rom. 16.3, 4. Phil. 2.17.], yea, to be ready to lay them downHoc praeceptum egregiè im∣plevêre Apostoli & eorum Adjutores, & post eos tot Confessores & Martyres. Grot., if the glory of God, the edification of the Church, and the eternal salvation of our brethren, do require it. And if we ought to be ready to do thus much (in some cases) for them, surely we ought to do that which is much less, viz. to communicate to them of our worldly goods in their necessity, if we be able; and he that doth not so, how can he think there is any thing of that loveQuomodo esset in eo dilectio quam Deus exigit? Grot. in him, which God re∣quires. He tells them, real Christians should love in deed and truth, and not in word only. 5. Hereby they will evidence themselves to be true and sincere Christians, who rightly under∣stand, believe, and live according to the truth of the Gospel; and their sincere brotherly love, will give their hearts and consciences great assurance, and peace, and tranquillity before God. And this is a great matter. For, says he, if our own hearts and consciences witness against us, and condemn us, that we do not sincerely love God and our Neighbour; God, who knows all things, and is greater and mightier to condemn than our consciences, will much more condemn us. But if our consciences (though they may accuse us of imperfe∣ction) yet do not condemn us of hypocrisie, or want of charity, then we have boldness and confidence towards God, that he will own us for his children, and will hear our prayers, and that we shall obtain those good things of him which we ask according to his will, because we are such as do endeavour (through his grace) to obey and observe his commandments, and to do the things pleasing in his sight. And this is his great commandment, that we believe in his SonV. 23. Ʋt credamus nomini] i. e. filio ejus. Metonym. adjuncti. Pisc., and that we testifie the truth of our faith, by loving one another, according as he enjoined us when he was here upon the earth. He therefore that sincerely obeys these commands, hath such an intimate union with Christ, that he abides in Him as his Member, and Christ abides in him by the gracious operations of his holy Spirit. And the abiding of the Spirit of Christ in him by his gracious operations and assistance, is a plain and evident argument that Christ dwelleth in him. From Ver. 11, to the end.
6. Having mentioned the abiding of the Spirit of Christ in the hearts of  believers, in the last verse of the former Chapter; lest they should be deceived by such as pretended to be acted by this Spirit, but indeed were not; he exhorts them not to believe every TeacherSpiritui] i. e. Doctori revela∣tionem Spiritûs jactanti. 1 Tim. 4.1. Pisc. that pretends to be inspired, nor his Doctrines; but to exa∣mine and try them, whether they be of God, and such as agree with his Word. And he tells them, they had need so to do, for many false Prophets and Teachers were now gone out into the world. He directs them therefore how to try the spirits: By this they might know a Teacher that was acted and inspired by the Spirit of God, from one that was not; Whatsoever spirit or Teacher doth own and acknowledg the Person of Christ, according to his Divine Nature, wherein he did exist from eternity; and according to his Human Nature, which he truly assum'd in his incarnation; and doth also seriously own him in all his Offices and at∣tributeth to him alone the whole glory of a perfect Saviour, this spirit is of God. And whosoever doth not confess Christ after this manner, but derogates from his Person or Nature, or Offices or Merit, or the virtue and efficacy of his Sacrifice, that spirit is not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist; whih spirit, he tells them, is now abroad in the world, although it hath not yet so for prevailed, as to erect a Throne to it self openly in the Church. But as for them, he tells them, they being truly regenerated by the Spirit of God, and thereby enlightned with the knowledg of the true doctrine of the Gospel, need not fear being seduced by these false Teachers. For they had by their stedfastness in the true doctrine, already overcome the machinations and perswasions of such Impostors and Deceivers as have been among them, and have not been prevailed upon by them, as others have been. For Christ, who by his Spirit and Doctrine dwells in them, is greater and more powerful than the Devil (the Spirit of Error), who rules and domineers in worldly and unregenerate men, such as Seducers are. They commonly are worldly and sensual men, and their doctrineEx mundano affectu mundana loquuntur. Zeger. is agreeable to the corrupt humour and inclination of worldly-minded men, and therefore no wonder that the world readily bears them. But he tells them, Himself and the other Apostles were aught of God; they had their doctrine and call from him, and taught his truth; and those that truly know God as he hath revealed himself in his word, will hear them, and receive their doctrine; but those that are not taught of God, will not. And hereby me know (says he) in whom is the Spirit of Truth (namely, in such as hear us, and embrace our doctrine); and in whom is the Spirit of Error, namely, in those that refuse our Doctrine. So that by the Doctrine and Writings of the Apostles (as also of the Prophets and Evangelists), the truth or falshood of doctrines must be judged. From Ver. 1, to 7. 7. He resumes his exhortation to brotherly love, and urges it again with more arguments. 1. This is not only strictly commanded us by God, but exem∣plified to us by himself, and it is a Grace highly pleasing in his sight. 2. 'Tis a certain sign we are regenerate by his Spirit, if there be in us a true love to God and our Neighbour. 3. 'Tis an evidence we have a right know∣ledg of God, both of his Nature and Will, and what he requireth. He that hath not this grace in him, hath no true knowledg of God, whatever he pre∣tends. For God is love it selfTale illud, Tu quantus-quantus, nil nisi sapientia es., and full of loving-kindness and tender compassion to the children of men. And in this he highly manifested it towards us pro , Piscator., in sending his Son into the world, that we, and all those that believe in him, might obtain eternal life through him. And in this appeared the height of Gods love to us, not that we first loved him, and so by our loving him, moved him to love us (for we were by nature enemies to him); but he first loved us, even when there was nothing in us
to deserve his love, and freely sent his Son to offer up himself a propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins, and to deliver us from the punishment due to them. And if God so loved us, we ought to imitate his love in loving one another. 4. He shews, no man hath seen God at any time, or can see him with his bodily eyes; he is not so to be seen or convers'd with. But if we find this grace of love in our hearts, 'tis certain then that God abideth in us by his Spirit; and our love to our Brethren is a ertain evidence that love to God is perfectly formed in us, and brings forth effects agreeable to its nature; or 'tis a sign that our love to him is perfectedPerfection here is not opposed to imperfection, but hypocrisie. Our love is said to be perfected, when 'tis demonstrated to be in some height. As God's Power is said to be perfected in man's weakness, be∣cause then 'tis more remarkably ma∣nifested. Perfectam intellige, non omnibus numeris absolutam, in quâ nihil pror∣sus possit desiderari (talis enim in hac vitâ e in sanctissimos quidem cadit), sed veram at{que} sinceram, & quae ad perfectionem omni studio at{que} conatu tendit. Pisc., that is, manifests it self to be sincere [see chap. 2.5.], and to have all its essential and needful parts, though it be not perfect in all degrees. And hereby (says he) we know that we remain and abide in the savour, and love, and protection of God, and that He dwelleth in us, because he hath given us of the gifts and graces of his holy Spi∣rit, and particularly that of love. But (says he) though we that are Apostles have not seen God with our bo∣dily eyes, yet this we have seen, and do testifie to all men, That God the Father sent his Son to be the Sa∣viour of the world, that is, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also. Whoever therefore by a true and lively faith relying on Christ for eternal life, and wit∣nessing his faith by his love and other good fruitsFor otherwise the Devils con∣fessed this truth, Mat. 8.29., shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, 'tis certain that God dwelleth in him by his Spirit, and that he remaineth in the love and favour of God. And we Apostles having certainly known and firmly believed the great love that God hath manifested towards us, do with all assurance give our testimony thereof to the world. Nay we testifie, that God is loveSee V. 8. Deus suâ essentiâ est ipsissima beneficentia, misericordia & Charitas, etiam sons, & origo chari∣tatis.. He that abideth in the sincere exercises of love to God and his Neigh∣bour, abideth and continueth in the love and favour of God, and God dwelleth in him by the graces and com∣forts of his holy Spirit. And in this is our love known and manifested to be sincere, and to have attained to some excellent degree and heightSo Perfection is sometimes ta∣ken, viz. Comparatively, not for abso∣lute perfection. See Phil. 3.15. (so that we may think of appearing at the day of judgment with boldness), if, as Christ was in the world full of love, and holiness, and purity, so we labour to be also, imitating his holy example. And by this love, as by a certain sign, we may be perswaded, that we are of the number of those who shall escape condemnation at the day of judgment. For there is no ground for them to fear condemnation (which fear is joined with torment) who truly believe in Christ, and testifie their faith by their sincere love to God and their Neighbour. For such a perfect or sincere loveQui Deum & Proximum vere diligit, is non metuit sibi à judicio Dei, quia novit se esse praeditum Spi∣ritu Dei, ac proinde esse filium Dei per fidem in Christum. Perfect or sincere love doth not cast out a child-like reverential fear of offending God, but that whereby we question the favour of God. cast∣eth out this tormenting-fear, this fear of wrath and Hell. But he that is under those apprehensions and fears, cannot love God with such a perfect and sincere love as others do, whose hearts are delivered from those fears. And truly (says he) we that believe in Christ, have reason to loveV. 19. , Diligamus] Let us love him. So the Greek text will bear. God with our highest and best affections, for he loved us first, when we were enemies and sinners, and had deserved nothing but hatred and vengeance from him. But possibly every body will say, I love God. He answers, That whosoever saith, He lo∣veth God, and yet hateth his brother, is plainly a lyar. For 'tis impossible truly to love God, and not to do what God com∣mands; and one thing which he strictly commands, is, that we love our Bro∣ther. And if we do not exercise love to our brethren with whom we daily
converse, and whose persons, state, and condition, we see and know; what reason is there to imagine we do sincerely love God, when of our love to him, and the sincerity of it, we were never able to make this trial, because we never saw him, nor had opportunity offered us of shewing any real acts of love to him, otherwise than by obeying his commands, whereof this is one, That if we love him, we should testifie it by loving our brother also. From Ver. 7, to the end. He proceeds to shew, that the love of God, and of the children of God,  must needs go together, there being so near a relation between them. For they that are spiritually begotten of God, and brought seriously and savingly to be∣lieve in Jesus Christ as the true Messias, they so love God, that they love his children also. They cannot truly love the Father, but they must needs love the Children in whom they see his Image. And there is such an union and conjunction between these two, that if we would know whether we love our Brethren sincerely or no, we cannot better judg of it, than by examining whether we truly love God. For otherwise, we may do many acts of kind∣ness to our Brethren which may flow from other principles (as good nature, credit, &c.) and not from such a charity as manifests and expresses it self by endevouring to keep God's commandments. For this is the love that God requires of us, and hereby we shall evidence that we do indeed love him, if we faithfully endeavour to keep his Commandments. And his Commandments to the Regenerate are not grievous, because of the gracious assistance afforded to them by the Spirit of God. Love, and hope of reward, and the assist∣ance of the Spirit, will make things that are difficult to flesh and blood, easie and delightful. And he that is born of God, abideth constant in his Christian profession, notwithstanding all worldly allurements, temptations, or op∣positions to the contrary. And that which enables him thus to overcome the world (which is so apt to draw away the heart from God), is not any power of nature, but faith in Christ, from whom he receives strength to do it. So that faithFidem per Metonym. appellat victoriam, h. e. Causam victoriae, quòd ea Christum ejus{que} justitiam appre∣hendat, & per charitatem sit efficax, Gal. 5.6. Gom. is the instrumen∣tal Cause of this victory, and Christ (in whom he be∣lieves) is the Principal. And if they enquire what faith this is which is so victorious: He tells them, 'tis a lively and effectual faith, resting on Jesus Christ as the eternal Son of God. From Ver. 1, to 6. He comes now to prove, That Jesus is the Christ, that he is truly God and Man, and the true Messias that was to come into the world to be the Sa∣viour of mankind. This he proves by many arguments: 1. Because Christ is the substance of the ancient types, and by him was really fulfilled what was represented by the legal and ceremonial washings by water, and by the blood of the Expiatory Sacrifices. He came by his Spirit, as by water, to sanctifie those that believe in him, and by his blood to make a full atonement for their sins. An admirable symbol of both which, was the flowing of water and blood out of his side on the Cross. 2. He sheweth, the Spirit beareth witness to this in the Consciences of the Regenerate; and this testimony being the testimony of the Spirit of God, is authentick, and fit to be believed: For he is the Spirit of truthV. 6. , i. e. , quomodo  supra, cap. 4. v. 8., and cannot possibly bear witness to a lye. 3. There are three in HeavenTres sunt in coelo qui testi fican∣tur] Non hoc dicitur, Tres illos testari in coelo seu apud coelites, sed signifi∣catur, esse Testes coelestes, qui quidem testificati sunt in terrâ apud homines. Pisc. that bear record or witness to this, That Jesus is the Christ, viz. the three persons in the holy Trinity, who (being one in Essence) consent in bearing witness hereunto: 1. The Father at the Baptism of Christ [Mat. 3.17.], and his transfiguration [Mat. 17.], with an audible voice pronounced, that he was his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased. 2. The WordSee Joh. 5.24, 36, 37. and ch. 10.30, 33, 36, 38. bears record of himself, affirming it often,
plainly and directly, and making it manifest by his doctrine and miracles, that he came from the Father, and faithfuly delared his counsl concrning the true and only way wherein he would sve sinners, Joh. 5.6. and ch. 6.40. 3. The Spirit bears witness to this, partly by his d scending on Christ at his Baptism in the shape of a Dove, and partly by descnding on his Apostles and Disciples on the day of Pentecost [Act. 2. see also Heb. 2.4. Joh. 15.26.]. And as there are three in Heaven that br tstimony to this▪ so there are three on earth that likwis testifie the same. The Spirit, the Waer, and the BloodAliqui per Spiritum per Meto∣nym. Evangelium intelligunt ut 2 Cor. 3.6. per aquam & sanguinem duo ordinaria N.T. sacrament, Bap∣tismum à mateiá, & coenam Domini à re significatâ. Quia ut Evangelium testatur Jesum esse filium Di, Joh. 20.31, sic etiam Sacramenta tanquam Evangelii sigilla divina idem in terris nobis rpetuò testantur. Sed salvo aliorum judicio videtur Spiritùs di∣stinctè hic designare donum Spiritûs sancti quo per Evangelium exterius nobs testimonium perhibetur de Jesu Christo silio Dei, & interius in mente nostr per donationem fidei; de quâ re 1 oh. 5.. Deinde aqua videtur baptismum nostrum designare, quo btizamur in nomen Patris, ilii, & piritûs Sancti Daeni{que} sanguis videtur sigficare Aostolorum, & fidelium pro Christo caedem; unde Martyres h e Testes dicuntur, Apoc. 2.13. Gomar. See also the Notes upon 1 Cor. 1.6.: 1. The Spirit in the preaching of the Gspl, testiis▪ that Christ is the Son of God, and perswades the hearts of men to believe in him [see 1 Joh, 5.10.]. 2. The Water▪ or Sa ramnt of Baptism, testifies this also; for we are baptizd in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghos. 3. The Blood, or the Martyrdom of some of the Apostles, and other Confssrs of Christ, saled this truth. And so these three likwise agree in this testimony, That Jesus is the Son of God, and the Saviour of the world. Now, if for the believing of any thing, it be ordinarily thought suff cient to have the testimony of two or three creditable men [Deut. 17.6.], surely God's testimony from Heaven is much more worthy of belief. And this testimony now producd, That Christ is the Son of God, is evidently the testimony of God. He therefore that truly believes on Christ as the Son of God, and the true Mssias, need not fear any thing, having the testimony of the Father without him, and the in∣ward testimony of his Spirit within him, to secure him. And he that after all this, when God hath so plainly testi∣fied of his Son, that he is the tre Mssias, does still refuse to believe it, and consequently to have recourse to him f r life and sal∣vation, he does in effect accuse God of a lye, bcuse he rjcts his testimony as if it were not true. And the sum of God's testimony concerning his Son, is this, That he hath given a right to eternal life to all thse who truly believe in him, seeing he hath by his Merits procured it for themV 11. Et haec vita in filio ejus est] h e. Per filium suum est  pro per. Vatab., and by his Spirit sanctfying their natures, he sits them for it. So tht he that hath a real inte∣rest in the Son of God, and is by a lively faith uni∣ted unto himV. 12 Qui habet filium] Ha∣betur is per fidem, quippe per quam habitat in cordibus nostris, Eph. 3.7. Pisc., and hath his Spirit dwelling in him, hath eternal life bgun in him; he hath an earnest of it in his soul; he hath a right to it, and is as sure of attaining of it hereafter as if he were already pos∣sessed of it. But he that hath not embraced the Son of God by a true and lively faith, hath none of these. He tells them. He had written these things to those among them who were true believers, that they might know (to their comfort) that they had a right to eternal life, and that they might put forth stronger acts of fith and affiance in Christ, and might always persevere therein, and never be tempted to fall off for any perscu ions whatsoever. H further shews them, what a great advantage they have who truly be∣lieve in Christ; for they may have this confidence in their approaches to God by prayer, That whatsoever they shall ask according to his will (asking it in faith, Jam. 1.6.), they shall obtain it of him. And if this of God's hear∣ing our prayers (when they are thus qualified) be universally true, then in proportion it must needs be true of every partiular petition which we have or shall put up to him. We may be confident we shall obtainV. 15.  pro . prae∣sens pro fut. Deus statim exaudit, sed non statim dat thse petitions in his time, and in that manner and way that he ses best for us. H instances in one particular; If a man see his fellow-Christian sin a sin which is not
unto death, that is, which doth not certainly bring damnation (though it de∣serves it) as the sin against the Holy Ghost doth, but whereof remission may be obtained; and he pray to God for him (that God would please to give him repentance), he shall be heard in the thing he desires, and God will please (upon his repentance and faith in his Son to give him eternal life. But he tells them, There is a sin which certainly brings eternal death and dam∣nation along with it, and that is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, when any one denies the truth of the Christian Doctrine, concerning which he hath been enlightned and convined by the Holy Ghost, and maliciously blasphemeth and persecuteth the same, Mat. 12.31. For such sinners, he wuld not that they should pray, seeing God never intends to forgive them, but leaves them to a final impeniteny and hardnss of heart, by reason that they reject the only means of salvation, which is the Sacrifice of his Son. And though all unrigh∣teousness and transgression of the Law, be sin, and s dsrves death; yet eternal death and damnation doth not follow upon all sin, because all kind of sin is pardonable except this, to them that truly rpent and believe in Christ. But as for this sin unto death, he tells them, that he that is born of God doth not fall into it, nor so sin, that sin hath dominion over him, but he keepeth himself (through the assistance of grace) that the Devil (who seeketh to bring him to this) shall not be able to wound him with so deadly a stroke.Non tangis eum] h e. Non po∣test illum inducere in istam blasphe∣miam at{que} ita lethalitèr tangere. Pisc. Non tangit eum tactu qualittivo, saith Cajetan, so as to leave an impres∣sion of his own devillish spirit upon him. And as for us (says he) who believe in Christ, we know we are truly regene∣rate, and born of God; but the generality of the world disowning Christ, lyes in sin and wickedness, and under the power of the Devil. And we are assur'd, that the Son of God is come into the world, and hath sa∣vingly enlightned us to know the true and living God, the Father of our Lord Jesus, whilst he suffers a great part of the world to continue in their natural blindness, worshipping false Gods, and serving stocks and stones. And further, we have ground to believe, that we are in the favour and love of this only true God, being his adopted children,V. 20. ▪ hic, valet per Grot having obtained this great mercy in and by his Son Jesus Christ, who is the very true God, and the Author, Purchaser, and giver of eternal life to all that truly believe in him. From Ver. 6, to 21. He concludes his whole Epistle, giving them this srious caution and ad∣vice, That seeing the Church was environed on all sides with the Idolatry and Superstition of the Gentiles that owned not Christ, and some that had taken on them the name of Christins, did many times join with them in their Hea∣thenish Worships, and seduced others also to join with them therein; therefore they should take heed to themselves, and keep themselves from all Idolatry, Su∣perstition, Image-worship, sacrificing to Idols, frequenting Idol-feasts, &c. these things being inconsistent with the worship of the true God, and real Christianity. Ver. 21.
SECT. XVIII. THE Second Epistle of John was written to an eminent Religious MatronThis is the only Epistle in the Scrip∣ture directed to a Woman., and one (as it seems) of great Estate, and a great Reliever and Supporter of the Members of the Church in her days. The Second Epistle of Iohn.The Parts are, 1. The Preface. 2. The Contents of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion. IN the Preface he stiles himself the Elder, in respect of his great age and office in the Church. He addresses his Epistle to an eminent Gentlewo∣man (whom, for those eminent graces and virtues that shined in her, be judges elect of God); and to her children, who had been religiously educated by her, all whom he professes sincerely to love, as did all others also thereabout, who had been brought to a saving-knowledg of the Gospel, and had effectually en∣tertained it. And the ground of his sincere and cordial love to them, he shews was this, That they had embraced the same Gospel-truth with himself, and other faithful Christians; and he was confident they would always abide and remain in the sincere belief and profession thereof. To this Lady and her chil∣dren he heartily wishes an encrease of grace, and an abundance of mercy and peace from God the Father, the Fountain of all blessings, and from Je∣sus Christ his Son, the Conduit-pipe by which they are conveyed; and par∣ticularly, that they may continue constant in the profession of the Truth, and in the exercise of Love to one another. From Ver. 1, to 4. 2. He comes to the Contents of the Epistle; and in the first place he tells her, it was matter of great joy to him, that he had found of her chil∣dren that had not only taken on them a profession of the truth, but walked in it, so that their conversation was framed according to the commandment which they had received from the Father, by the Son [1 Joh. 15.15.]. And this is his command, That we believe in his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, 1 Joh. 3.23. He tells her, the main thing he had to request of her was, That with the profession of the Gospel she would constantly join the practice of Christian charity, that so they may all live in unity, peace, and concord. Which was no new'Twas an old Command∣ment ratione substantiae, Lev. 19.18. New, ratio∣ne circum∣stantiae. New, because purged from the corrupt glosses of the Pharises, and (as it were) made new by Christ, because by him further extended, and carried up to a higher pitch. 2. Because pressed by a new example, even his own, As I have loved you, &c. Joh. 18.34 3. New, because it was never to wax old, but to be always fresh in memory and practice. 4. New, because new-delivered, and more plainly and apertly set forth to the world; as a picture done over with new colours, may be call'd a new picture. commandment of his, but that which him∣self and the other Apostles had in charge from Christ strictly to enjoin, and to oblige all Christians unto, even from the beginning of their call to be Apostles and Preachers of the Gospel. And by this, says he, shall we make it appear that there is a true love of God in us, if we endeavour to frame our lives
according to his commandments ow this, he tels them, is the great com∣mandment, wh they rd fr the beginning, when the Gospl was first preached unto  sld believe in Christ, and love one ano∣ther, and should only pers in the prctise of these duties, walking in the truth, and  love. He shews he had reason to press them to con∣stancy herein; for may Imosors were come abroad [see 1 Joh. 4.3.], who will not own or knowldg that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and so subvert the very foundation of Chriianity: And whosver doth so, he tells them is a deceiver, and one of those Antichrists of whom he spake, 1 Joh. 2.18. Therefore he advises them to look to themselves, that they con∣stantly persevere i the true faith, and in sincere obe∣dience to the Gospel, that so they may not loseNe perdamus pro ne perdatis. Enallage personae per . Pisc. We may lawfully look at the re∣compence of reward, yet non tantum & praecipuè, but that God also may be glrified by our works. Mercedem intelligit non meritam, quia omnes samus peccatores, & debitores; & fides nostra ut & charitas imperfecta est, sed mercedem immeritam E ex gratiâ, propter Christum promissam, nobis{que} debitam ob gratuitam Dei promissionem, Gom. the fruit of the faith they have hitherto profssed, or of the affli∣ctions which for Christ's sake thy have suffered, or of the works of piety and charity which they have per∣formed; but continuing faithful to the end, may receive a competent reward and crown. He further declares, That whosoever transgresseth by teaching or receiving a doctrine contrary to the Gospel, or aposttizeth or fallth off from the Orthodox profssion, not abiding in the do∣ctrine of Christ, hath not the Spirit of God in him, nor is in his favour, nor shall partake of his glory. Whreas he that abideth stedfastly and constantly in the belief and profession of the doctrine of Christ, he hath the Spirit of the Father and the Son dwelling in him, and remaining in their savour and love; see 1 Joh. 2.24. He forbids them therefore all familiarity and fellow∣ship with such Seducers, and not to entertain them when they come to their houses under pretence to instruct them, nor so much as courteously to salute them, or shew them any respect; that so they may manifest a dislike and dis∣approving of their Errors. For he that doth not discountenance them in their errors (whereby others are seduced to their great pril, doth in a sort encourage them, and so partakes with them in their sins. From Ver. 4, to 12. In Conclusion, he excuses the shortness of his Epistle, telling this Lady, That he hoped to come shortly and se her. And though he had many things to write, yet all things were not fit to be written, and besides, a lively Voice affects more than a Letter. And he hoped at their meeting they should be fill'd with mutual joy at their seing one another, and c nferring together. And so with saluations from the Children of hr gracious Sister (who manifested her election by her holy conversation) he shuts up his Epistle. Ver. 12, 13.
SECT. XIX. THE Third Epistle of Johne Third Epistle of Iohn. was directed to his beloved Gaius. We find three persons of this name in the Scripture; 1. Gaius of Macedonia, Act. 19.29. 2. Gaius of Derbe, Act. 20.4. 3. Gaius of Corinth, whom Paul (writing from Corinth to the Romans) calls his Host, and the Host of the whole Church, Rom. 16.23. This man being eminent for his hospi∣tality (especially to the Ministers and Members of the Church of Corinth), seems to be the person to whom the Apostle now addresses this Epistle. And in the first place he assures him, That he loved him sincerely, and accordingly wished unto him, that as he had a healthful soul, endued with the knowledg of sound doctrine, and with the manifold graces of the Spirit of God; so he might also have a healthful body, and that all his outward concrns might suceed prosperously. He tells him, he had rceived a very coendble testimony of his sincerity and uprightness, and of the agreeable∣ness of his conversation to the Gospel which he professed from the Brethren w h came from him, and who had tasted of his liberality; which gave him grat se of rejoicing and blessing God in his behalf For there was nothing did more comfort or rejoyce him, than to hear that h Dis les (whom he had begotten to Christ through the Gos l) did walk in the Truth. He tells him, he did as became a faithful and sicere ps ssr kidly to enter∣tain poor Christians, and especially those strangers tat had  lately with him, who coming to Ephesus, had openly born witness of his charity in the publick Assemblies of the Church. These possibly mig be some faith∣ful Ministers, who came from beyond Corinth to the Apostle fr advice, and preached the Gospel by the way, whom Gaius had very kindly entertained, and the Apostle adviseth him to do so again at their return, and to accom∣pany them sme part of the way, and to furnish them with necessaries for their journey as became his Christian profession, and his great piety towards God. And there was great reason he should do it, because it was on Christ's errand (that is, to preach his Gospel) that they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles, to whom they preached, for their pains. 'Tis necessary therefore, he tells him, they should be received by some. And they that shall receive them, shall thereby have the comfort of having co-operated and contributed their part towards the propagating the Gospel of Christ. And to this purpse he had written to the Church there (whereof Gaius was a member), viz. to give relief and succour to such faithful servants of Christ; but Diotrephes (a PresbyterDiotrephes hic, suit aliquis ex Presbyteris ejus Ecclesiae in quâ erat Gaius, ex Gentili factus Christianus. Is vero ex illo erat hominum genere, qui Judaeos quanquam Christum pro∣fessos fi legis ritus observabant (quod multi faciebant ad haec us{que} tem∣pora) ad suos coetus non admitte∣ban Grot. in that Church), who exalted himself above his brethren, and lorded it over them, and sought to draw all respect to himself, regar∣ded neither him nor his Letters, nor acknowledged his Authority. For which contempt (he says) if God give him an opportunity to come thither, he will use some severity towards this ambitious Asector of Pre∣eminence (according to the authority God had given him), who was not content to slight the Apostle, and prat against him with malicious words, and to reject the Christian Jews himself that came thither; but he would not permit the Gentile-Christians to receive them to their communion. And if any among them, being mved with charity or respect to the Apostle or his Letters▪ have had a mind and
inclination to receive them, he prohibits them; and if they do it, he either rejects them, or threatens to reject and cast them out of the Church. He advises Gaius therefore, not to be an imitator of this evil example of Dio∣trephes, but to exercise kindness to the Jewish Christians. For he that sin∣cerely endeavours to do good, and to be merciful, shews himself to be of a Christian temper, and to be born of God; but he that is malicious, and proud, and uncharitable, hath no true saving-knowledg of God, whatever he pretends. He acknowledgeth, that Demetrius (a Gentile-Convert) hath a very good report for Piety and Charity, feom all the faithful that know him. Yea, he says he hath done many things that more fully testifie the same of him, than the report of men can do. And the same testimony the Apostle himself, with others, did give of him also. And thou knowest (says he) that I am not wont to affirm things which are not true. In conclusion, he excuses his writing so short an Epistle to him, seeing he hoped shortly to see him, and to speak much more to him than now he had written. And so concludes with his Apostolical Valediction and Salutation. The End of the Apostolical History.
SECT. XX. Containing a short History of the Destruction of JERUSALEM. HAVING thus, by the good Providence of God (to whom alone be all the glory and praise thereof in∣tirely rendred in and through Jesus Christ), finished my Apostolick History; I thought it requisite, for the clearing of many passages in this History, as also in the Gospels, to add a short Narration of the dreadful Destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem. And first, I will set down the prodigious and dreadful SightsSee Luc. 21.11. that preceded the Warr that brought on this fatal Desolation; and then shew the Occasion of it. The Prodigies related by Josephus were these: Not long be∣fore the Warr, on the day of Ʋnleavened bread, about nine of the clock at night, between the Altar and the Temple there shined such a light, that it might have been thought to be mid-day, which continued half an hour. In the same Feast also a Cow that was led to sacrifice, brought forth a Lamb in the middle of the Court of the Temple. The East gate of the Temple, which was Brass, and mighty heavy, and could scarce be shut with twenty men, and at evening was lock'd up, and barr'd with barrs of Iron, was seen (about six of the clock at night) to open of its own accord. On the 21 of May, before Sun-set, were seen in the air Iron Chariots, and Armies in battel-array passing along in the Clouds, and be∣gitting the City. And in the Feast of Pentecost, the Priests going into the inner Temple, according to custom, to celebrate the Worship of God, at first they found the place to move, and heard a noise; and afterwards they heard a voice, which said, Let us depart hence. A Blazing-star in fashion of a Sword, hung over the City for a year together: See Har. of the Four Evangelists, chap. 5. p. 168. And thus much of the Prodigies that preceded the Warr. I come now to shew the Occasion of it. The Occasion of the Warr that brought that fatal ruin and destruction upon the City of Jerusalem, and the Jewish State,
was this: Florus being sent by Nero to succeed Albinus in the Procuratorship of Judea, being a vile and wicked person, outra∣giously abused his Authority, and by all manner of Rapines and Insolencies vex'd and oppressed the Jews; insomuch, that by a publick Cryer he gave leave to Thieves and High way-men to rob and spoil throughout the whole Countrey, provided he himself might have part and share of the booty. The Jews not able to endure these Outrages, some of them abandoned their houses, and fled to strange Countreys. Others of them (being of themselves forward enough to revolt) were yet greatly provoked thereunto by the daily oppressions of Flo∣rus, who endeavoured to drive them to it, that his great and intolerable Oppressions and Villanies might be lessened by their Revolt. Another thing also that much dispos'd them thereunto, was this: There was a Pro∣phecySuetonius Vesp. c. 4. Pererebue∣rat oriente toto vetus & constans opinio, esse in fatis, ut eo tempore Ju∣dea profecti rerum potirentur. Id de Imperatore Romano (quantum eventu postea paruit) praedictum, Judaei ad se trahentes, rebellârunt. Ac similiter Cornel. Tacitus, Hist. lib. 5. passed among them [That there should come from Judaea those that should be Masters of all]. The event afterwards shewed, that this was a Prediction only of the Roman Emperor. But the Jews applying it to them∣selves, revolted; and so Christ's blood lying upon them, and crying for vengeance, they themselves hastened that vengeance by their own Madness. The Warr began in the Twelfth year of Nero, in the Month of May, who was then in Grecia, and stayed there till Winter. King Agrippa (who had under his government Galilee, Tibe∣rias, Tarichea, Julias beyond Jordan, with the neighbouring-Villages, and Chaleis), in a long Oration dehorts the Jews from warr, but in vain. For a little while after he was gone from Jerusalem, some of the Seditious possessed themselves, on a sudden, of the strong Castle Massada, and put to the sword all the Ro∣mans they found there. At Jerusalem also, Eleazer the son of Ananias the High-Priest, and Commander of the Soldiers of the Temple (a bold and factious young man) perswaded the Priests that they should not offer any more the Sacrifices that were wont to be offered for Caesar, and the welfare of the Romans. Which rash act, the Governours of the City (that were peaceable men) plainly saw tended to open rebellion. Whereupon, not being able to perswade the Seditious from this course, they sent Messengers to Florus at Caesarea, and to King Agrippa; desiring them; that they would presently send Forces and suppress the Rebellion in the beginning. Florus, who de∣sired there should be a Revolt, neglected it. But King Agrippa sent a thousand Horse-men, who together with the Rulers and Priests, and the rest of the people (that loved peace), seized upon and held the upper City against the Seditious, who kept the Temple, and the lower City. Between these two parties there were continual skirmishes for seven days together. After some ado the Rebels brake into the upper Quarters, burnt divers Palaces and publick Houses, and then besieged the Castle
Antonia, and after two days took it, and kill'd all the Roman Soldiers they found there, and set the Castle on fire. After this, they lay siege to the King's Palace, which they took and burnt; and upon the very Sabbath-day put to death the Romans who (after the Palace was won by assault) had retired into the Ca∣stles of Hippico, Phasaelus, and Mariamne; where, being besie∣ged, and yeelding upon composition, and delivering their arms, yet contrary to all faith they were put to death. On the day followingSic Mat∣thias, in Thea∣tro Historico., at Caesaria, most of the Jews that dwelt there, were masscred at the instigation of Florus, by the Roman Soldiers, to the number of Twenty thousand; at which the Jews through all the Countrey were so enraged, that they wasted the Villages of the Syrians and Neighbour-Cities. Then the Syrians fell upon the Jews, and executed their rage upon them; partly out of the old hatred against them and their Religion; and partly out of love of Plunder, and desire of revenge. Only they of Antiochia, Apanea, and Sidonia, spared the Jews that dwelt amongst them. But at Alexandria (the Me∣tropolis of Egypt) upon a Sedition that was raised there, in one day Fifty thousand Jews were killed by two Roman Legions that were let in upon them Cestius Gallus, President of Syria, having notice of these Commotions, comes from Antioch into Judea with twelve Legions, and takes with him also some of King Agrippa's Soldiers; and having taken some Towns, sate down at last before Jerusalem at the Feast of Tabernacles. The men of Jerusalem oppose him; but he forceth them into the City, into which also he brake, and held the lower part of it. Then he assaults the Temple, and the Upper-City, and had ea∣sily taken it if he had valiantly continued the assault, the soberer sort of the people favouring the Romans, and the Seditious only opposing him. But when he was near taking the Temple, without any sufficient reason he drew off, and retreated to An∣tipatrisAfter Ce∣stius's his rai∣sing his siege, many of the Christians that were in Jerusalem, got out of the City, and fled (s Eusebius says) to ella, being warn∣ed by our Sa∣viour so to do, Luk. 21.20. and Mat. 24.15. When ye shall see the abomination of deslation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the Holy place, then let them which be in Judea, slee to the Mountains. Illa abominatio desolationis, fuit Templi Hierosolymitani prosanatio abominanda, quae in signum data fuit futurae desolationis Ea Templi profanatio hoc ipso anno à seditiosis Judaeorum ducibus facta est, cum emplum more castrorum munissent, & inde adversus suos contribules Judaeos pro Romanis stantes, ferocius dimicarent. Non enim exteriorem tantum Templi partem ab is occupa∣tam fuiss; sed & obsidente civitatem Cestio, in interiorem partem se recopisse, testatur Josephu lib. 5. cap. 2., having lost in his March many both Romans and Auxiliaries, with a great part of his Baggage and Ammunition, by the Jews who pursued him. The Jews, puffed up with this Victory, being returned to Jerusalem, create Joseph the Son of Gorion, and Ananias the High-Priest, Governours of the City; and send away Commanders into the several Provinces, and among others they send Joseph (the Writer of this Warr) into Galilee; where after he had fortified many Towns, and ordered all things to endure a Warr, he expected the invasion of the Romans. In the mean time there are many Commotions and
Attempts of several of the Cities against him; and by the sub∣tilty and fraud of John the Son of a certain Levite (of whom more afterward), and by the envy of some of the Gover∣nours of Jerusalem, there were endeavours us'd to turn him out of his Government. But Joseph brake the neck of all these Endeavours and Counsels, and by his Prudence and Patience defeated them, and forced John to flee to Jerusalem. At Jeru∣salem, Ananias the Governour of the City prepares all things necessary for sustaining the Warr; He repairs the Walls, and takes order that warlike Instrumnts, viz. Darts and Arms, &c. be made through the whole City. He endeavours to reconcile those they call'd Zealots (because they boasted of their zeal for the Law of God, and the Customs of their Countrey) but in vain; he endeavours to apprehend Simon Son of Giora (who exercised Thievery, and affected Tyranny) by sending Soldi∣ers against him. But He with his Party fled to the Thieves that kpt Massada, from whence they infested all the Countreys of Judea and Idumea with their Robberies. Things going on in this manner, Cestius sends Mssengers to Nero who was thn in Achaia entertaining himself with Tra∣gedies and the Olympick Sports, declaring unto him the trou∣bled state of Judea. Nero being much moved with this News, sends Vespasian thither. Vespasian having received this Com∣mand snds his Son Titus to Alexandria in Egypt, to bring from thnce the Fifth and Tenth Legion into Judea; and he himself goes by land from Achaia into Asia, and from thence comes into Syria At Antioch he gathers together the Roman Forces, with other Aids from the Neighbouring-Princes, and to marches to Ptolemais where his Son Titus met him sooner than could have been expected by reason of the Winter season All their Forces, with their Auxiliaries, being now come together, made Threescore thousand Horse and Foot. Nero now returning to Rome in  mant manner, ater he had been two years in Greece; Julius Vindex, a Gaul by birth, but of Senatorian-de∣gree among the Romans, incensed his Countrey-men against him, representing what great and intolerable burdens they groaned under. Yet he designed not to advance himself to the Principality, but offered it to Galb an old Soldier, and now Govrnour of the Tarraconian-Province in Spain; who accep∣ted of it. Vespsian in the mean while invades Galilee, and burns and wastes the City of the Gadarens; then coming to Jotapata on the 21 of May, he lays siege to it; after forty days siege, he takes it by force, and burns it, after it had been valiantly defended by Joseph, who was Governour thereof. He also takes Joseph, who  y hid in a Cave, gives him his life, but keeps him PrisonerJoseph was taken▪ and is kept to be sent Prisoner to Nero; but desiring to speak with Vespasian, foretold that he should release hm out of Captivity, and that when he was Emperor. See Sueton. in Vitâ Vespasiani, cap. 5.. Jotapata being thus destroyed, Vepasian retires with his Army to Caesarea, and thre places Two Legions to refresh themselves after the siege; a Third he sends, for the same reason,
to Scythopolis. At Caesarea he is feasted by King Agrippa for twenty days together: There he prepares for the Sieges of Ti∣berias and Taricha. They of Tiberias immediately yeild, and at the entreaty of Agrippa 'tis granted to them, that the City shall not be razed. But Taricha, after it had suffered a siege, is taken by storm. These Cities being recovered, almost all Galilee en∣clin'd to the Romans, except Gamala and Gascala, which was kept by John, and the Mountain Itaburium. Gamala, after a Months siege, was taken; and not long after, the Mountain Itaburium. Titus sets upon Giscala, which was kept by John with his party of Zealots. John seems to like the Conditions of Peace offered him by Titus, but in the night with his party slips out of the City, and betakes himself to Jrusalem. Titus spares the City; and, putting a Garrison into it, goes to C∣sarea. In the mean time there was a great dissention throughout all Judea, some being for warr, others desirous to live in peace under the protection of the Romans. Whereupon Troops of Thieves gathered together, who plundered them that were de∣sirous of peace; and being loaded with their Plunder, they were received into Jerusalem, and there fill'd all things wih Murthers, Discords, and Rapines. And first, they cast Antipas and a great many Noble-men, and the chief of the City into prison, and shortly after put them to death without any rial; falsly accusing them, That they intended to deliver up t City to the Romans. Moreover they kept all the Passes, and seized those that endeavoured to get out of the City; and, killing them, let them lye unburied. During these troubles, the Zealots fell out among themselves: John (who came from Giscala to Jerusalem) affecting the Supremacy, and others not enduring him to be their Superior. But though they thus disagreed among themselves, yet they were unani∣mous enough in obbing the people; and all Judea, after the example of Jerusalem, was full of Thieves, and most miserably vexed. The Jews by these discords thus inhumanly destroying each other; Vespasian was entreated by the cryes of some of them (who fled to him) to take some course to preserve their Coun∣trey from ruin. Hereupon he prepares to go against Jerusalem. And that he might leave nohing behind him that might trou∣ble m when he was at that siege, he comes with his Army to Gadara to quench the tumults there, and presently takes the City, the Seditious flying away; which he understanding, he sends Placiaus with his Horse to pursue them, and to put them to the sword; and so he possess'd himself of the Countrey be∣yond the River, even to the Lake Asphaltis, except the Castle of Macherun; and so having appointed Garrisons for the seve∣ral Towns, and Winter-quarters for his Soldiers, he comes to Caesarea again, and there winters. Vespasian hears now of the stirrs raised in Gallia by Vindex,
who had armed the Gauls against Nero, and the Romans; which made him more earnest to finish this Warr against the Jews. Wherefore in the beginning of the Spring, he runs with his Army thorow all Judea and Idumea, and miserably wastes it. Then leads them thorow Samaria to Jericho, from whence the Inhabitants flye into the Mountain-Countrey opposite to Jerusa∣lem; but he pursues them and beats them from the Hills, and by placing Citadels at Jericho and other places, distresses the Jews on every side. Nero hearing that Galba, and Spain, had revolted from him, pronounced himself undone; and at last slew himself to escape publick and more shameful execution, on the 9th day of June, in the 13th year of his Reign. The Soldiers in Spain proclaim Galba Emperor, against whom rises up Otho, and cuts him off in his 7th Month. Otho was scarce set in the Throne, when Vitellius riseth up against him, and Otho is kill'd the 90th day of his Reign. Vitellius is now Lord of all, a luxurious and most intemperate person. But to return to Vespasian, who as he was now with his Ar∣my preparing to besiege Jerusalem, news is brought him of the death of Nero. Upon which tidings he defers the Warr against the Jews, and sends Titus his Son to Galba (who he heard was proclaimed Emperor), to know his pleasure concerning the Jewish Warr. Titus going by ship to Achaia, heard there that Galba was killed. Whereupon he presently returns to his Fa∣ther at Caesarea, they being in suspence (the Empire now totter∣ing) what to do, thinking it not convenient to invade a strange Countrey, when their own was in such apparent danger. In the mean time Simon the Son of Giora (of whom before) a bold young man, went from Massada, whither he had fled to the Murderers, in the Mountainous Countrey of Judea, and by promises of liberty to servants, and rewards to Free-men, in a short time got a band of Thieves, and by little and little en∣creasing his Forces, he came at last to that power, that he con∣quered all Idumea, and wasted Judea, and at length came be∣fore Jerusalem; where pitching his Tents, he became a terror both to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the Zealots also; and thus were the Citizens of Jerusalem grievously oppressed on both sides, within by the Zealots whom John commanded; and without by Simon. In the mean time the Idumeans, who were of John's party, and were among his forces, falling at variance with him, and the matter coming to blows, they kil∣led many of the Zealots; and then taking John's Palace, and burning it, forced him with his party into the Temple; but then they fearing (as also did the Citizens) lest by night he should make an excursion into the City, and burn it, they upon consultation send for Simon, and admit him into the City, that they might defend themselves against John. Vespasian, during these stirrs, hearing of Otho's death, began to think of freeing his Countrey from the Tyranny of Vitellius.
Many of his Commanders earnestly perswaded him to take the Government upon him. Tiberius Alexander the Governour of Egypt, was the first that swore the Legions to him on the Ca∣lends of July, which day was afterwards kept as a Festival. Shortly after, the Jewish Army swore Allegiance to him; so that there was but one year and twenty two days, between Nero's death, and the beginning of the Reign of Vespasian. Vespasian (the Armies in several Provinces declaring for him) now leaves Caesarea; and sending Mutianus with Forces into Italy, to oppose Vitellias, himself goes to Alexandria to make sure of Egypt. In Maesia, Antonius Primus who held for Vespasian, leads the third Legion into Italy against Vitellius, and in the fight at Cre∣mona against the Vitellians, he routs them, and puts them to flight. Then coming to Rome, and joining his Forces with Mutianus in the midst of the City, he overthrows Vitellius's Army; and taking Vitellius himself, and dragging him thorow the Market-place, there cuts his Throat, after he had held the Government eight Months and five days. Vespasian hearing these things at Alexandria, sends his Son Titus with Forces into Judea, to finish that Warr; but he him∣self saileth into Italy. The City of Jerusalem was at this time divided into a three∣fold Faction: For Simon, whom the Citizens had admitted in, kept the higher City; and John with his Zealots possessed the outward Courts of the Temple, and the lower City. And Elea∣zer, who was once Captain and Commander of the Zealots (envying John, who by his boldness and subtilty had got the power into his hands, and did all things at his own pleasure) withdrawing himself, and getting some Soldiers along with him, possessed himself of the inner part of the Temple, and from thence fights against John. And so John, who held the outward Circuit of the Temple, and the Porches, was forced to fight both against Eleazer and Simon. During these stirrs, many things about the Temple were burnt up, and the Provisions destroyed which might have served them a long time, and for want of which they were sorely oppressed with Famine after∣wards, when besieged by the Romans. Titus, in prosecution of his Father's Orders, comes from Alex∣andria to Caesarea, where gathering his Forces together (which were Four Legions, with the Aids and Auxiliaries of the Neigh∣bouring-Kings), marches towards Jerusalem accompanied with Tiberius Alexander (who was in principal favour with him), and Joseph the Jew, who for the truth of his prediction that Vespasian should be Emperor, was now released out of bonds. He sate down within six or seven furlongs of the City, a little before the Feast of the Passover, and by that means shut up an infinite number of men, who had (according to custom) come up to the Feast. And hereby all provisions were consumed in a very short time, and a most cruel Famine oppressed them On
the day of Ʋnleavened-bread (April 14.), Eleazar (who kept the inner part of the Temple) opened the Gates to the people who desired to sacrifice; but John taking hold of this opportu∣nity, treacherously sent many of his party in among them (with swords hid under their Garments), who killing Eleazar and many of his Faction, seized also on that part of the Temple; and hereby the Three Factions were reduced to Two; that under John consisted of 8400, and the other under Simon of 10000 fight∣ing-men, besides 5000 Idumeans. And notwithstanding the Ene∣my was at the Walls, they brake out, the one upon the other, and the poor people suffered miserably under both. The City being fortified with three Walls on every side, but where it was fenced with deep Valleys, Titus having with much opposition placed his Engines and Rams, battered the outermost of them, and made a breach in it; at which entring, and the Jews reti∣ring inwards, he possessed himself of the North-quarter of the City, even to the Castle Antonia, and the Valley of Cedron. Five days after, he brake with his Rams the Second Wall, and entred; but the Besieged making divers Salleys, repulsed him, and beat him out again. Four days after, he recovers the place again▪ and prepares for the bittering the Third Wall. He now sends Joseph the Historian to perswade them to yeild; but he is entertain'd only with scoffs and reproaches. Many of the peo∣ple thinking to escape out of the City, John and Simon stop up all passages. Yet the Famine encreasing, many made shift to get out, who being taken by Titus, he caused them to be cru∣cified On the 12th of May he began Four Mounts, wherein to place his Battering Rams; Two, near the Castle Antonia, by which he hoped to take the Temple; and the other Two near the Monument of John the High-Priest, where he thought he should with most ease break into the upper part of the City. John, who was to oppose the Romans in the former place, cast down the Mounts that were near his Quarter, and two days after Simon did as much by the other, though seventeen days had been spent in making of them. He destroyed also many Rams and Engines, and brake into the very Camp of the Ro∣mans, but was repell'd and forc'd into the City again. Titus now calling a Council of Warr, 'twas therein resolved to com∣pass the whole City with a Trench, which with incredible di∣ligence and celerity was finished in three day; they built also thirteen Forts to hinder the flight of the Besieged, and to hin∣der the conveyance of any relief into the City. The Seditious were nothing herewith moved, though Famine not only raged among the common sort, but themselves also were pressed by it A certain Noble Woman sod her Child to eat it; and such a Motaliy ensued, that from the 14 of April to the first of July, were carried out to be buried at the publick charge, an incredible number of Carkasses of the poorer sort, as Titus was told by one Mannaeus, who was appointed to pay the money. And some others certified him, that many thousands of the ordinary
sort were cast dead out of the Gates; and because they could not carry all out, they cast them in great heaps together into empty houses, others they threw over the Walls, filling up the Ditches with them. Simon, notwithstanding all these calamities, abstained not from Murthers and Rapines, but kill'd Mathias the High-Priest (by whom he had been let into the City) with his three Sons, and sixteen of the Noblest of the people, pretending that they purposed to flee to the Enemy. Judas, one of his own Cap∣tains, hating his cruelty, attempted to betray a certain Tower (whereof he had the charge) to the Romans; but his design being discovered, he was put to death, with ten other of his Complices. John also, in these extremities, converted to his own, and prophane uses, the holy things of the Temple, as Vessels of Gold, and Silver, and the Money of the Temple; nay, he was compell'd to distribute to his Soldiers the very Oil and Wine ordain'd for Sacrifices. Titus, in pursuit of his design, cut down all the Groves near the City, and brought in the Timber to make Forts and Engins for the siege, and causing more Mounts or Scaffolds to be made, on the fist day of July he began to batter the wall of the Castle Antonia, by which a breach being made on the fifth day after, they entred the Castle, and pursued the flying-Jews even unto the Temple. At this time many false Prophets (suborned by the Seditious) flattered the multitude with expectation of assistance from God; and therefore though Titus often exhorted them to yeeld, yet they flatly refused. The Romans now pressing hard towards the Temple, the Contest was earnest on both sides. After a long skirmish, the Romans breaking in by Antonia, sei∣zed upon the North and West Porches of the outward Range of the Temple; part of which Porches (especially that which was join'd to Antonia) was burnt and overthrown by the Jews; and two days after, the other part was burnt by the Romans, the Jews being so amaz'd, that they endeavour'd not to quench it. Titus had an intention to have sav'd the Temple; but on the tenth of August a certain Soldier without any command (nay, a∣gainst the command of his General), moved as by instinct from above, cast a flaming fire-brand into the Chambers and Build∣ings of the North-side of the Temple, which immediately taking fire, burnt the Temple also which joined to them, notwithstand∣ing all that Titus could do to prevent it. And this happened on the same day of the same Month on which the former Temple was set on fire by the command of Nebuchadnezzar. The Temple thus burning, Titus was saluted Emperor by his Soldiers, and the Zelots and Seditious fled into the Upper City call'd Sion. They now desire a parley with the General himself, who check'd them for their obstinacy, but promised them life if they would yeeld to him. They being unwilling to com∣mit themselves to his Mercy, requir'd to depart the City with their wives and children, and to go into the Wilderness.
Titus being enraged at these Proposals, threatens them with ut∣ter destruction, and forthwith commands all the lower City to be set on fire. Then he began to assault the Higher City, which was seated on a steep Rock. And beginning to raise his Mounts on the 20th of August, and perfecting them on the 7th of Sep∣tember, he brings his Engines to the Walls, wherein having made a breach, the Seditious through fear and amazement deserted their strong Towers, and so on the 8th of September the Romans brake in and destroyed all with fire and sword. Titus now com∣mands both the City and Temple to be utterly razed to the foun∣dation, and to be laid plain, and a Plough to be brought over it, according to custom, which was done by Turnus Rufus; and so the Prophesie was fulfilled, Zion shall be plowed as a field, Mic. 3.12. Only the West part of the Wall, with three Towers, for their strength and beauty were preserved, to bear witness of the state∣liness of the City to posterity. Of those which during the whole Warr were taken Captives, the number amounted to 97000: and of those that perished in the siege, to 1100000. So heavy was the guilt that lay on them for the death of Christ, and so horrid were the enormities com∣mitted by them, that Josephus says, If the Romans had delayed to come against them, he thought the City would either have been swal∣lowed up of the earth, or have perished by Thunder-bolts and Light∣ning from Heaven, and so have suffered like Sodom; the Inhabi∣tants whereof they exceeded in wickedness. See Josephus toward the end of his sixth Book. And thus fell this famous City on the 8th day of September, in the second year of Vespasian, He and Titus his Son being Con∣suls, 38 years after the death of Christ, whose blood cried for vengeance against these obdurate Jews. That this dismal destruction of Jerusalem is set out Mat. 24, as the destruction of the whole World, need not seem strange if we consider, that it was the destroying of the Lord's own Ha∣bitation, and the place chosen by Himself above all the places in the world, to put His Name there, and the destroying of the State and Polity of the Jews, who were his old peculiar peo∣ple; A people once highest in his favour, now deepest in his dis∣pleasure: formerly the people of his highest dignations; but now their casting off was sealed by the ruin of their City and Temple, their dispersion and scattering abroad among other Na∣tions, and their great obduration. Titus having thus ended the Warr, returns to Caesarea, and from thence to Antiochia in Syria, and then into Egypt, and thence sails to Rome, where he was welcomed home by all men, and (together with his Father) triumphed for the Conquest of Judea. The two Captains of the Seditious, John and Simon, who had hid themselves, were taken, and reserved to be led in triumph, and 700 other Jews that excelled in beauty and strength; of all whom only Simon suffered death. The LAW also of the
Jews was carried in this Triumph as the last of the spoils, which together with the Purple Veils of the Sanctuary, were laid up in the Palace. From this Victory both Father and Son got the Name of Em∣peror; yet neither of them had the Title of Judaicus, although many other Honours, especially Triumphal Arches, were decreed unto them. A year after, Lucilius Bassus was sent Lieutenant into Judea, who receiving the Army from Cerealis Vitellianus, took the Ca∣stle Herodian and Macharua beyond Jordan. Not long after, Vespasian wrote to Tiberius Maximus to sell all the Land of the Jews; upon whom, wheresoever they lived, he imposed a yearly Tribute to be paid into the Capitol, viz. the Didrachma or half Shekel, it being that they were wont to pay in former times unto the Temple at Jerusalem. A year after, Publius succeeds Bassus, and finishes the Warr, taking the strong Castle of Massada from Eleazar, the Nephew of Judas Galilaeus the Captain of the Thieves. All the Thieves in the Castle (to the number of 900, with their Wives and Children) at the perswasion of Eleazar, set fire on the Castle, and the Fur∣niture thereof, and then put each other to death, lest they should fall into the power of the Romans. And so the Warr in Judea ended. Many of the Thieves that escaped from Judea, fled into Egypt, to Alexandria, and there they sollicited the Jews to revolt; but the common people taking 600 of them, delivered them up to the Romans to be punished. Vespasian having notice of these things, commands Lupus the Governour of Alexandria, that he should pull down the Jewish Temple that was there built long ago by Onias the Brother of the High-Priest; which he neglect∣ed to do, but only spoiled it of some of its Consecrated things, and so shut it up. But Paulinus, his Successor, having spoiled it of all its gifts, made an Order that none should presume to come to it; and so he put an end to the exercise of the Jewish Religion there, 343 years (as some compute) after that Temple was first built by Onias. A certain Jew, a Weaver, Jonathan by name, escaping to Cy∣rene, drew 2000 Jews to follow him into the Wilderness, pro∣mising to shew them signs and wonders; but by the chiefest of the Jews the matter being discovered to Catullus, Governour of those parts, he sent Soldiers, who slew most of them; and not long after, Jonathan himself was taken, who accused the most wealthy of the Jews (unjustly) to have had a hand in this Insurrection. To whose accusations Catullus willingly giving ear, put 3000 of them to the sword. And this he did with the greater confidence, be∣cause he confiscated their Estates to Caesar's use. Jonathan he sent prisoner (with others that were taken) to Vespasian, that he might accuse the most honest of those Jews that lived at Rome and Alex∣andria, as if they had held correspondence with him; yea, he af∣firmed, That Joseph the Writer of the Jewish History, sent to him
both Arms and Money. But Vespasian looking upon this as a false accusation, upon Titus's entreaty acquitted these men, and deser∣vedly punished Jonathan, whom having whipped, he burnt alive. Catullus at present escaped through the mildness of the Emperor; but not long after, fell into grievous anguish of mind, and imagi∣ned he saw the Ghosts of those men he had so unjustly slain before his eyes. At last his guts and bowels issuing out of him, he died miserably. Here Josephus endeth his History of the Destruction of Judea. But his Jewish Antiquities he finished not till the Thirteenth of Domitian, when he was Fifty six years old, as himself testifieth at the end of his Work. I shall conclude all with an hearty Prayer to God for the Conversion of the Jews, and the Ʋnion of all Christians. O LORD, the Father of Mercies, let not thy indignation al∣ways burn against thy ancient people, nor cast them off for ever. Though the blood of thy dear Son, our blessed Saviour, lies heavy upon them, and hitherto thou hast justly hardned them; yet be pleased, of thy infinite mercy, to open their eyes, to unstop their ears, to mollifie their hearts, and to cause them to mourn over him whom their fore∣fathers pierced. Cause them to understand those Sacred Oracles which thou didst commit to their keeping; that our Saviour, who hath long since been a light to lighten the Gentiles, may, in thy due time, be the glory of thy people Israel; that so there may be but one Sheepfold, as there is but one Shepherd. For the speeding of their conversion, be pleased to compose the many differences that are among Christians; and so unite their disagreeing-affections, that our examples may no longer discourage, but may invite them to em∣brace our Lord and Saviour, and his blessed Doctrine. Cause thy Truth, O Lord, to shine forth gloriously and triumphantly, as the Sun at noon∣day; and let it dispel the thick mist of darkness and error that hath overspread so many Nations of the world; set up thy pure Worship, and thy own Institutions every where; and throw down Idolatry and false worship where-ever it prevails. Break the yokes of oppression and violence, and rebuke the spirit of profaness, impiety, intem∣perance, ungodliness; and let holiness, righteousness, brotherly-kindness, and charity, prevail where-ever the Gospel of Christ is owned and professed. Ʋnite all Christians in those things that are the main fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion; and give them charity and mutual forbearance of each other in less important matters. Let all that name the Name of Christ, make conscience to depart from all iniquity, and live as becomes his disciples and ser∣vants. Grant this, O Lord, for thy own great Mercies, and our dear Saviour's Merits sake; To Whom, with thy Self, and Holy Spirit, be all Honour, Glory, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Sincere Obedience, ren∣dred now and for evermore. Amen. Glory be to God in the Highest, on earth peace, good-will towards men. FINIS.
map of the ancient Mediterranean by Pieter van den Keere and Philip Holmes after that of Abraham Ortelius in Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, with inset representations of St Paul's conversion on the road to Damascus and of his shipwreck at Melita or Malta DESCRIPTIO PEREGRINATIONIS D PAULI APOSTOLI Exhibens Loca fere omnia tam in Novo Testamento quam in Actis Apostolorum memorata Operâ ABRAHAMI ORTELII. Phillip Holmes sculp Petrus Kaerius Caelavit
