D1512 12543123 63003
THE HISTORICAL LIBRARY OF Diodorus the Sicilian. In Fifteen BOOKS. The First FIVE, Contain the Antiquities of Egypt, Asia, Africa, Greece, the Islands, and Europe. The Last TEN, An Historical Account of the AFFAIRS of the Persians, Grecians, Macedonians, and other Parts of the World. To which are added, The FRAGMENTS of DIODORUS that are found in the BIBLIOTHECA of Photius: TOGETHER With those Publish'd by H. Valesius, L. Rhodomannus, and F. Ʋrsinus. Made English, By G. BOOTH, of the City of Chester, Esq; LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black-Swan in Pater-Noster-Row, and Edw. Castle next Scotland-Yard Gate. M D C C.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE GEORGE, Earl of Warrington. THIS Translation of Diodorus, (the Fruits of some vacant Hours,) when first attempted, was as early design'd by a Dedication to be shrowded under the Shelter and Protection of Your Lord∣ship's Honourable Father, whose Publick Spirit ever prompted him to those Generous and Worthy Actions, (with∣out Self-seeking,) that might any ways Advance and Fur∣ther the Publick Good, in the Preservation of the Peace and Happiness of his Country. Besides the Honour of his particular Respect to my self, his Noble Imitation of the Patterns of Virtue here presented, so far Encourag'd me, as not in the least to doubt of a Favourable Acceptance; espe∣cially from him who breath'd (as it were) the same Spirit and Soul with those Noble Hero's (that are long since gone) for the Defence of the Laws and Liberties of his own Coun∣try, as they in their several Generations did in theirs. As Your Lordship therefore is an Immediate Branch of that Honourable Stock, and next in Succession to his Estate; so I hope, and have great Reason to believe his Virtues, and Generous Qualifications, as well as his Honour and Lands, are Your Lordship's Inheritance: In Confidence therefore of the like Acceptance, as from him, I intreat Your Lord∣ship's Favourable Entertainment of this Greek Stranger, (now Cloath'd, as well as I could, in an English Dress.)
He'll be no Burthen, but a Diverting and Profitable Com∣panion, useful not only to the Expert General, and Honest Statesman, but to all Degrees for a Prudent Conduct of their Lives, by Examples of other Mens Harms. In all which Respects, that it may be Serviceable to the Publick, and, as such, Accepted and Approv'd by Your Lordship, is the Ambition of, MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Affectionate Kinsman, And Humble Servant, G. BOOTH.
TO THE READER. SO many are the Encomiums of History, both by Ancient and Modern Authors, that little or nothing can be fur∣ther added to what is already extant upon that Subject; and therefore I shall wave troubling my Self or the Reader with Discourses of that kind, but leave every Judicious Person to his own Experience, which is the best Judge, and will give the surest Testimony to the Truth of these Commendations. He that rests barely in the Matter of Fact related in History, pleases his Fancy for a Moment while he is Reading, but never Improves his Judgment to make it Usefull in Conversation, or in the Management of Publick Affairs. He gains no more than Children by hearing a Winter Tale, and Strange Stories of this brave Hero, and that mighty Giant, who did Wonders in the Land of Ʋtopia. The Profitable Reader is He that not only seeks to please his Fancy, but makes use of his Reason in observing chiefly the Wonderful Providence of God, in Ruling and Governing the World in all Ages to this day; His Setting up, and Pulling down of States, Kingdoms and Empires in cer∣tain Periods of Time; His Justice in punishing Wickedness, and therein the Confirmation of his Truth and Holiness; to see and consider his Wisdom, in Ordering and Disposing of one Event for the Effecting of his Purpose in another. To observe the Causes, Progress, and End of this or that Accident, this War, that Revolution, this Success and that miserable Disaster, are the main and chief Ends and Designs of Reading of Hi∣story; whereby the Understanding and Memory are not only furnish'd with Notions of Things done, and long since past; but the Judgment is improv'd with that Moral Prudence (and sometimes Religious too) as to be careful to avoid the Rocks others have before split upon; and to imitate the Virtue and honourable Actions of others, (at least for the sake of Repu∣tation that attends upon them in this World.) Here may be found Examples which may justly put Christians to the Blush, who come not up to the Moral Virtues of poor Heathens
heretofore famous (upon that account) in the Ages wherein they liv'd; as Themistocles for his Faithfulness to his Country, Aristides for his Justice, Scipio for his Chastity, Cato for his Sobriety, and several others for Eminent and Virtuous Quali∣fications. As to this present Author, and his History, he's well known among the Learned to be a Treasury of Ancient History. Amongst others, Henry Stephen, in his Tract of Dio∣dorus, gives him this honourable Encomium: Quantum Solis lumen inter Stellas, tantum inter Omnes, quotquot ad nostra tempora pervenerunt, Historicos (si utilitas potius, quam voluptatis aurium habenda est ratio) noster hic Diodorus eminere dici potest. And Justin Martyr, and some others, call him the most famous Au∣thor of all the Greek Historians. Amongst other Excellencies of this Author, he is peculiarly observable to have a Regard and Respect to the Providence of God in the Affairs of the World; and is the Only ancient Author that takes notice in the Course of his History of the Times, wherein the most fa∣mous Historians, Philosophers and Poets flourish'd. Our Au∣thor himself liv'd about Threescore Years before our Saviour's Birth, in the time of Julius Caesar, and the Reign of Augustus; and writ a General History from the beginning of the World to his own time, in Forty Books call'd the Historical Library, of which only Fifteen are extant, the rest lost by the Injury of Time. The Five first are properly the Mythological Part of the History, more incertain, and full of Egyptian and Grecian Fables; but very useful for the Understanding of Ancient Au∣thors, and the Knowledge of the Assyrian Monarchy. They give an Account of the Affairs of the World from the Begin∣ning of Time (known to the Heathens) to the Trojan War exclusively: The Five next in order are perish'd, which is the reason the Eleventh Book immediaelty follows, which begins with the Expedition of Xerxes into Greece, and from thence the History is continued in Five Books to the beginning of the Reign of Philip King of Macedon, Father of Alexander the Great; and from the Reign of Philip in Five more, to the Ex∣pedition of Seleucus Nicanor in Capadocia, containing an Ac∣count of Things done for the space of 179 Years. The Books are divided into Chapters, for the Ease of the Reader, who may thereby the better Pause and Breath when he thinks fit; and to supply a Chronological Table in the Ten last Books, the distinction of Times is observ'd in the Margin, both by the Olympiads, and the Christian Aera; for the Rela∣tions in the first Five Books, were long before the Olympiads
began, and the History is so ancient, that the certain Times of Persons and Things there related, are for the most part un∣known or very uncertain. To the present Translation, is added that of the Excerpts or Pragments of some of those Books of Diodorus Siculus that are lost, Collected by Photius in his Bibliotheca, and by others, an∣nexed at the end of the Edition of Diodorus Publish'd by Rho∣domannus. You have here likewise a further Addition of Va∣lesius his Excerpts, Publish'd by him in the Year of Our Lord 1634. After the Fragments, there's a Supplement taken out of Quintus Curtius and Arrianus, to fill up a great Chasm in Dio∣dorus, lib. 17. p. 557. where that part of his History is lost. As those Authors had their Materials from him, (as is not doubted among the Learned) so 'tis but a piece of common Gratitude to help him over the Ditch by a Staff made out of his own Pile. That the Matter contained in this Supplement is that which is wanting in Diodorus, is apparent not only from some Part of the broken History that is there, but from the Index immediately before the 17th Book in Rhodomannus's Edition, where the Heads of the Subject Matter are to be found in their Order together, but nothing of 'em in the Body of the History. The said Heads are placed over every distinct Subject in the said Supplement. But as to the Translation of the Whole, it may be very well expected some Apology should be made, or Reason given, for Translating the Five first Books, which appeared in the English Tongue above Forty Years ago. To give therefore Satisfaction in that Particular, we can truly and sincerely say, it was not undertaken without some Regret, not willing to seem a capti∣ous Censurer of other Mens Labours; therefore to obviate that Suspicion, we are willing to be an Advocate to excuse what was before done in this Kind, as to those Five Books; for the Er∣rors and Defects that appear in the former Translation, are chiefly occasion'd by an old Latin Edition of Diodorus, where∣unto the Translator wholly apply'd himself, having at that time (without doubt) no better an Edition to direct him. At the first it was design'd to have spar'd so much time, because they had been before Translated, but often hearing the former Cen∣sur'd, and a new Translation desir'd of those Five Books (which thro' a Mistake are divided by the old Latin Edition into Six, by taking the First Book to be two, because it's in two Parts) we were the more inclin'd, and at length resolv'd to endure the
Toil, tho' withal we might, perhaps, fall under Censure, in undertaking to Reform the Errors of another, and yet prove as much, if not more Faulty in the same Things our selves. But whatever it be, here we Present it to the Judgment of the Ingenuous Reader, together with the other Books, intrea∣ting him to accept what he Judges worthy his Approbation, and, with a Favourable Censure, to pass by the Errors and Mistakes he may espy in the Perusal. As for the Carping Mo∣mus, if the whole were in all respects Exact and Compleat, (which were a Vanity to pretend,) it were far more likely from such to meet with a Cavilling Sarcasm, than to be Indulg'd with any Favourable Acceptance. Note: The Pages plac'd in the Margin, are the same with Stephanus his Edition, to which Authors generally refer; and by these, any thing may be readily found in Rhodomannus his Edition. Note also: That from Page 1, to Page 69, and also from Page 508, to Page 640, there wants (by Mistake of the Press) the Pages in the Margin that refer to the Greek Copy. ERRATA. PReface, Book 1. Line 29. read the return of the Heraclides. Page 1. line 25. for is, read and. p. 2. l. 19. r. in∣credible. p. 8. l. ult. r. every place. p. 10. l. 12. r. Mysteries. p. 12. l. 36. r. at Nysa in Arabia. p. 54. l. 36. r. Success. p. 63. l. 45. for not, read hot. p. 70. l. 1. for Jupiters, r. Interpreter. p. 71. l. 34. add these words, and then followed Arsaeus, who reigned 40 years. p. 91. l. 3. r. along. p. 127. in the Margin, for 1688. r. 1288. p. 133. l. 5. r. lurrying. p. 147. l. 41. r. dropt him. p. 148. in the Margin, r. before Christ 1254. p. ibid. l. 49. r. Argo before he took her. p. 162. l. 12. r. Brothers. p. 169. l. 2. r. Teeth. p. 183. l. 1. for the Island, r. and. p. 206. l. 12. r. Themisteuein. p. 207. l. 28. r. God. p. 220. l. 45. dele they should. p. 234. l. penult. r. none of the. p. 246. l. 9. r. Some Authors say, that Xerxes. p. 255. l. 1. r. were freed. p. 260. l. 3. r. This Law. p. 267. l. 1. r. Wreaths. p. ibid. l. 10. dele had. p. 269. l. 17. r. in it much. p. 274. l. 29. r. second time. p. 282. l. 34. r. Creek Criseus. p. 293. l. last save 4, r. subjoin'd. p. 299. l. 10. r. premising. p. 312. l. 39. r. if we are. p. 314. l. 11. for trusts, r. suggests. p. ibid. l. 37. r. was here. p. 319. l. 17. dele his. p. 332. l. 46, 47. r. was new possessed. p. 336. l. 37. r. sent to by. p. 347. l. 17. r. the sole. p. 350. l. 13. r. and the taking up of the. p. 362. l. penul. dele with. p. 363. l. 9. for new, r. now. p. 364. l. 6. r. Etna. p. 366. l. 41. r. Chirosophus. p. 379. l. 1. r. Marius. p. 189. l. 19. aole because. p. 432. l. 1. r. this their Army. p. 474. l. 19. r. for he had. p. 481. l. antepenult. dele was by. p. 486. l. 40. r. straiten'd. p. 499. in the Contents, r. Hermias. p. ib. l. 45. dele of. p. 509. l. 19. r. set upon. p. 512. l. 3. r. baffling. p. 517. l. 42. r. Ariobarzanes. p. 517. l. 53. r. Cleomantis. p. 532. l. 2. r. Towers and two Flankers, p. 535. l. 50. r. Antixyes, and Rheomitres. p. 545. l. 39. r. encounter. p. 556. l. 9. r. sent against him. p. 562. the 7th l. from the bot∣tom, r. Four thousand. p. 568. l. 14. r. the River. p. ibid. l. 16. r. in a Line. p. 578. l. 12. r. by his Messengers. p. ibid. l. 36. r. when the Ambassadors. p. ibid. l. 37. dele yet. p. 588. l. 7. r. at stake. p. 624. in the Margin, r. ; and . p. 627. l. ult. dele the first and. p. 629. in the Margin, r. seven Quarts. p. 638. l 31. r. upon his. p. 652. l. 17. r. the return. p. 663. l. 4. dele of. p. 665. l. 27. add the. p. ibid. l. 34. r. settle. p. 666. l. 7. r. near his Quarters fortified his. p. 680. l. 25. r. into. p. 683. l. 47. for But, r. Out. p. 693. l. 13. r. by Cables. p. 700. l. 1. r. forc'd them. p. 702. l. 38. r. Co∣lophonians. p. 782. l. 3. r. Tryphon's Name. p. ibid. legat. 34. r. Saturninus. p. 784. line 31. r. too little to be. p. 785. l. 40. r. join'd with them. p. 786. l. 45. add above. p. 790. l. 34. add the. p. 794. l. 5. r. which were. p. 796. l. 21. dele the second his.
THE CONTENTS Of the First Five Books of Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK I. Chap. 1. OF the first Generation of Men. How the World first began. Mens first manner of Life, and who were the first Men. First Men in Egypt. Who were the most ancient Gods of Egypt. Of their Demi-Gods. Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, Juno, Vulcan, reign'd in Egypt. Of Osiris and Isis. the Acts of Osiris and Isis. Hermes his Inventions. Osiris prepares for his Ex∣pedition through the World, and to that end raises a great Army. Page 1 Chap. 2. The Continuation of Osiris his Expedition through Ethiopia; all Ara∣bia, India, and Europe: Bury'd by Isis and Mercury. How he was kill'd. His Death reveng'd by Isis and Orus. Two Bulls, Apis and Mnevis, worship'd in Egypt. Places discuss'd where Osiris and Isis were bury'd. Stories of the Egy∣ptian Priests. Their Tears, Lunar Tears, Giants, Laws about Marriage. Osiris and Isis, their Pillars and Inscriptions. Colonies out of Egypt. 7 Chap. 3. The Description of Egypt. Of the Lake of Serbon. The Nature of the River Nile. The Cataracts. The Mouths of Nile. The Fruits of Egypt. The Beasts, Crecodile, &c. Several Opinions concerning the Inundation of Nile. 14 Chap. 4. The first way of Living of the Egyptians: Gods and Demi-Gods, their Reigns in Egypt. The ancient Kings of Egypt, Moenis, &c. Their several Works. Thebes built by Busitis. The stately Sepulchres, Obelisks, and Temples there. A Description of Osymanduas his Sepulchre. Memphis built by Ucho∣reus. Moeris his Lake. Sesostris or Sesoosis, his famous Expedition, and great Works. 22 Chap. 5. The Acts of Sesostris the Second: Of Ammosis, Actisan, Mendes, Pro∣teus or Cetes, Remphis, Chemmis, (the great Pyramids built by him:) Cephres, Mycerinus Bocchoris, Sabach. The Reign of Twelve Kings in Egypt. Psam∣meticus Saites, one of the Kings, gain'd the whole; Two hundred thousand of his Army forsake him, and settle thmeselves in Ethiopia. Apries succeeds long after. Amasis rebels, and next succeeds; and Apries is strangled by the People. Amasis the last King, to the time of the Conquest of Egypt by Cambyses. 31 Chap. 6. The Customs of the Egyptians. Of their Kings: As their hourly Employ∣ment, Sacrifices, Diet, &c. Burials. Division of Egypt. Their Trades in Egypt. Courts of Justice; their Law-Proceedings. The several Laws of Egypt; Beasts and Birds ador'd as Gods in Egypt, as Lions, Wolves, Cats, the Bird Ibis, Kites, &c. Costs in their Burial of these Creatures. Reasons given of this Adoration. 36 Chap. 7. Why the Crocodile is worship'd? Some sorts of Herbs and Roots not eaten. Why other Creatures are worship'd? The manner of their Burials. The Law-makers
in Egypt. Learned Men of Greece made Journeys into Egypt, as Orpheus, Homer, Plato, Solon, Pythagoras, &c. Several Proofs of this, as their Reli∣gious Rites, Fables, &c. in Greece of Egyptian Extraction. The exquisite Art of the Stone-Carvers in Egypt. Page 46 BOOK II. Chap. 1. NInus, the first King of Assyria, his Acts; invades Babylonia, Media, and over-runs several other Countries. Nineveh built by him; the Description of it; Marries Semiramis; Her Descent. Derceta, the Philistines Dagon. His Expedition against Bactria; He dies. Semitamis builds Babylon, and several strange Works there, as a Passage under Water, Jupiter's Temple, &c. Hanging Gardens in Babylon. A vast Stone cut out. The strange Property of a Morass. Her several Expeditions. The wonderful Lake in Ethiopia; Their Bu∣rials there. Semiramis's Expedition into India; Her Mock-Elephants. Her Ex∣pedition proves fruitless. She surrenders her Kingdom to Ninyas her Son: Her End. 53 Chap. 2. Ninyas succeeds Semiramis: His close and slothful manner of Life. The Reign of Sardanapalus: His Luxury and Effeminacy: His Epitaph: Deposed by Arbaces the Mede: And the Assyrian Empire overturn'd. Nineveh raz'd. 64 Chap. 3. Of the ancient Chaldeans, and their Philosophy. The Planets, and their Course. The Empire of the Medes, and their Kings. A Description of India. The ancient Manners and Customs of the People. Their Laws; Tribes; Description of Scythia. Of the Amazons. Of the Hyperboreans. 69 Chap. 4. A Description of Atabia the Desart. Happy, &c. Metals, Precious Stones, Beasts, &c. AD scription of Taprobana in the Southern Ocean, now call'd Ceylon or Zeilan: The strange Things there: How discover'd by Iambulus. 78 BOOK III. Chap. 1. OF the Ethiopians: Their Letters, Laws, Arms, Religion, Funerals: The Description of several Parts of the Country. Manner of making of Gold. Of the Icthyophages, their several sorts and ways of Living. 85 Chap. 2. Chelonophages: The manner of taking Sea-Tortoises: The Cetivores, or Whale-Eaters. The Sea-Coasts over-against Babylon; Their manner of taking of Fish. The Rizophages, or Root-Eaters. Those call'd Spermaphages, and Hylo∣phages, Hylogones or Hunters, their taking of wild Beasts: The Elephant-Fighters; how they are taken: The Simoes, Struthophages, Acridophages or Locust Eaters; their miserable Deaths. Cynomolges. The Country of the Troglodites. Wild Beasts: The terrible wild Bull: Serpents; that great one brought alive to Alexan∣dria. 94 Chap. 3. A Description of the Coasts and Countries on both sides the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea. The Perfumes of Arabia the Happy. The Fortunate Islands. A Description of part of Lybia: The Spectras near the Syrtes. 102 Chap. 4. Of the Amazons of Africa: Their Acts: Rooted out by Hercules, and the Gorgonians by Perseus. The Atlantides, and the Gods among them. The Ori∣ginal of the Titanes. The Acts of Basilea, or Cybele, said to be born in Phry∣gia. The Original of Atlas and Saturn. A long Account given of Bacchus, and the several Bacchuses there were. The Description of the Grota in Nysa, where he was brought up. The building of the Temple of Hammon by him. The seve∣ral
Herculeses. The Monsters Aegides and Campes kill'd by Minerva and Bac∣chus. Page 110 BOOK IV. Chap. 1. WHat the Grecians say further of Bacchus. The Story of Priapus. Of Hermophroditus. Of the Muses. The Birth of Hercules; and his Twelve Labours injoin'd him by Eurystheus. His wandring Expeditions through Africk, Spain, France, Italy, Sicily; His setting up two Pillars at Gades, and his other Acts by the way. The Story of Orpheus. 127 Chap. 2. An Account of Atlas, and his Daughters call'd Atlantides and Hesperi∣des. Amazons routed by Theseus in Attica. The further Acts of Hercules; goes against Laomedon King of Troy, and other Acts. The Story of Meleager Son of King Oeneus. Amalthae's Horn. Hercules his further Acts: His Death by a poison'd Shirt. 141 Chap. 3. Of the Argonauts, Medea and the Daughters of Pileus. How the Ar∣gonauts gain'd the Golden Fleece. The Pranks of Medea. The Acts of Jason. The Cruelty of Pelias towards Jason's Kindred; How he was kill'd by his Daughters through Medea's Charms. Medea burns the King of Corinth's Palace, and him in it. The miserable End of Jason. Of the Heraclidae, and their return to Pelo∣ponnesus. 148 Chap. 4. The Acts of Theseus: The Minotaur in Crete: Androgeos, the Son of Minos murder'd by Aegeus. Ariadna, Daughter of Minos, in love with Theseus; Ariadna's Crown. Aegeus, King of Athens kills himself. Theseus his Death. The War of Thebes by the Seven Captains. The Epigoni renew the War. Pedi∣grees of the Heroes at Troy: Of the Centaurs, and Lapithae. The Pedigrees of Aesculapius, Aeacus, Ajax, Pelops, Tantalus, Oenomeus; Dardanus his Po∣sterity to Priam King of Troy. 159 Chap. 5. Of Daedalus and his Works in Crete, Sicily, and elsewhere. His Flight into Sicily; Minos invades Sicily; The manner of his Death there. The Famous Temple of the Curetes or Corybants in Sicily, built by the Posterity of the Cre∣tians that came there with Minos. The Pedigree of Aristaeus; his Acts; his Son Actaeon. Of Eryx: Venus her Temple in Eryx in Sicily; the Fame of it. Of Daphnis the Shepherd; a Description of the Herean Mountains. Of Orion. Of the Straight of Messina. 168 BOOK V. Chap. 1. A Description of Sicily: The Aeolide Islands, or Lipari Islands; Of Malta, Gaulus, Cercina, Corsica, Sardinia, Pityusa, and the Baleares. 176 Chap. 2. Of Madera, Britain, Gallia, Celtiberia, Iberia, and Tyrrhenia; and of the Inhabitants, and their Laws and Customs. 184 Chap. 3. Of Gredosia: Of the Isles of the Arabian Sea: Of the Holy Island: Of Panchaea: Of Samothracia: Of Naxus, Syme, Nausus, Calydna, Nisyrus, Carpathus. Of Rhodes, and of Chersonesus. 194 Chap. 4. Of Crete; The first Inhabitants: Of the Idaei Dactyli; Of Jupiter, Sa∣turn, Hyperion, Prometheus, Mnemosyne, Themis, Ceres, Neptune, Pallas: Jupiter's Race, as the Muses, Vulcan, Mars, &c. Of the ancient Hercules, Brito∣martis, Pluto, Rhadamanthus his Justice. Of Lesbos; Deucalion's Flood: Of the Blessed Islands; Of Tenedos, and the Cyclades. 204
THE CONTENTS Of the Last Ten Books of Diodorus the Sicilian, BOOK XI. Chap. 1. OF Xerxes his Expedition into Greece; and the Fight at Thermo∣pyle, and Sea-Fight at Salamis. Page 215 Chap. 2. How the Carthaginians invaded Sicily, and were routed by Gelon: And the time of Pindar the Poet. 226 Chap. 3. The Victory of the Greeks over Mardonius at Platea. 230 Chap. 4. Of the Fight with the Persians by the Grecians at Mycale in Ionia. He∣rodotus ends with this Fight, and taking of Sestos. 233 Chap. 5. The Death and Commendation of Gelo of Syracuse, and the Rebuilding of Athens by the Policy of Themistocles. 235 Chap. 6. The enlarging of the Haven at Athens by Themistocles. The Treason of Pausanias; And the Justice of Aristides. 237 Chap. 7. Hiero, King of Sicily, prepares to besiege Agrigentum; Discovers the Treason of them of Himera to Thero their Prince; Expels the Cataneans and Naxians. 240 Chap 8. The Lacedemonians quarrel with the Athenians for the Dominion of the Sea. 241 Chap. 9. Hiero breaks the Power of the Hetruscans by Sea. 242 Chap 10. The War between the Tarrentines and the Japigians. ibid. Chap. 11. The Death of Thero Prince of Agrigentum, and the Tyranny of his Son Thrasydeus, who abdicated the Government, and kill'd himself. Three hundred of the Family of the Fabii slain at one time. 243 Chap. 12. The Malice of the Lacedemonians against Themistocles, and his Banish∣ment: His Praise. 244 Chap. 13. Cymon, the Athenian General, gains many Places for the Athenians: Routs the Persians by a Stratagem at Eury medentum. 247 Chap. 14. A great Earthquake in Sparta; The War upon them by the Helots and Mycenians. 248 Chap. 15. The War between the Argives and the Mycenians. 249 Chap. 16. The Death of Hiero. 250 Chap. 17. Thrasybulus, King of Syracuse, depos'd by force of Arms for his Ty∣ranny. 250 Chap. 18. The Murder of Xerxes by Artabanus. 251 Chap. 19. The War between the Athenians and Aegineaus. 252 Chap 20. The Egyptians revolt from the Persians. New Troubles in Sicily. ibid. Chap. 21. Persians Expedition into Egypt. Wars in Sicily. 254
Chap. 22. The War between the Epidaurians and Athenians. Page 255 Chap. 23. The War between the Corinthians and Megareans. 256 Chap. 24. The War between the Athenians and Boetians. 257 Chap. 25. The Athenians invade the Spartans by Tolmides. 258 Chap. 26. The War in Sicily between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans. The Cu∣stom of Writing upon an Olive Leaf the Names of such as were to be banish'd in Sici∣ly, call'd Petalism. 259 Chap. 27. Pericles makes an Inrode into Peloponnesus: Besieg'd Sicyon. Phay∣lus in Sicily made Admiral against the Tyrrhenian Pirates: Is corrupted and ba∣nish'd. The Original of the Palici: And the Stories of the Temple, and Wonders of the Craters in Sicily. 260 Chap. 28. The Contests between Deucetius and the Agrigentines. His strange Submission to the Syracusians, who sent him to Corinth, with Promise to supply him with Necessaries. 262 BOOK XII. Chap. 1. CYmon the Athenian Admiral, his Expedition into Cyprus. Peace concluded between the Persians and Athenians. Cymon dies in Cyprus. 264 Chap. 2. Megarians revolt from the Athenians, and are beaten. The Athenians revolted at Cheronea by the Beotians. Many Cities revolt. Peace concluded. 265 Chap. 3. The War between the Agrigentines and Syracusians in Sicily. The War between them of Crotona and the Siberites. Sibaris raz'd. The building of Thurium: Charondas his good Laws in Thurium: His remarkable Death. The Laws of Zaleuchus of Locris. 266 Chap. 4. Of the Decemviri in Rome chosen to make Laws. War between the Thu∣rians and Tarentines. A sad Story of the Daughter of one Lucius Virginius in Rome, which caus'd a Disturbance and great Sedition. Law of the Twelve Tables. Peace all over the World. 272 Chap. 5. War between the Samians and Melesians. A Sedition in Samos, which revolts from the Athenians. War in Sicily by the Syracusians against the Trina∣crians 273 Chap. 6. Corinthian War against Corcyra. Potidea revolts from the Athenians. Quarrels in Thurium. Meton's Year. Heraclea in Italy built. Potidea be∣sieg'd by Phormio. 275 Chap. 7. Of the Peloponnesian War. Potidea revolts; besieg'd by the Athenians, and is surrendred upon Articles. Nicias made the Athenian Admiral. Gorgia, an excellent Orator, sent from Leontine in Sicily to Athens. A Peace concluded, after the War had continu'd ten Years. 278 Chap. 8. Continuation of the Peloponnesian War. War by the Romans against the Fidinates, for putting their Ambassadors to death. Quarrels between the Aegistines and the Selinuntines in Sicily. Expedition of the Athenians against Sicily under Nicias, being the 16th Year of the Peloponnesian War. 293 BOOK XIII. Chap. 1. THE Athenian Fleet equipp'd out for Sicily. Alcibiades accus'd: Flies: Is condemn'd: Goes to Sparta out of Italy. Syracusians send for Aid to Lacedemon: Gylippus is sent to them. Battel at Syracuse. 300
Chap. 2. The Lacedemonians invade Attica. Fight at Sea between the Syracusians and Athenians. Eurimedon and Demosthenes arrive in Sicily. A Plague in the Athenian Camp. Another Fight between the Syracusians and Athenians; the latter routed at Sea: The Athenians ruin'd in Sicily: Nicholaus his long Oration; Gylippus his Answer. Page 303 Chap. 3. Diocles instituted Laws for Sicily: Suffer'd by one of his own Laws. Three hundred appointed to Govern in Athens Athenians beaten at Sea by the Lacedemonians at Oropus. Alcibiades recall'd from Banishment. 315 Chap. 4. The Government by Four hundred abrogated in Athens: The Victory by the Athenians over the Lacedemonians at Sea, between Sestus and Abydos. The Persian Garrison driven out of Antandris by the help of the Lacedemonians. Twenty two years of the Peloponnesian War ended. Here Thucydides ends his History. 317 Chap. 5. Commotions in Sicily. Carthaginians invited thither by the Aegistines. A Sea-Fight at Dardanum between the Athenians and Lacedemonians. A Sedi∣tion in Corcyra. The Sea-Fight at Cyzicum; and at Cleros by Land, wherein the Athenians were Victors. 320 Chap. 6. The Spartans seek for Peace. The Speech of Endius. The Athenians refuse. 325 Chap. 7. Hannibal the Carthaginian invades Sicily. The miserable Destruction of Selinunte. The Ruin likewise of Himera. The Acts of Hermocrates in Si∣cily. 326 Chap. 8. Thrasybulus assaults Ephesus. The Lacedemonians besiege Pylus; and surrendred. Calcedon besieg'd by Theramenes; and afterwards Byzantium, which was betray'd to Alcibiades. 331 Chap. 9 Theramenes and Alcibiades return to Athens; are admir'd by the People. Lysander made General by the Lacedemonians. Antiochus, one of the Athenian Generals, beaten at Ephesus in a Sea-Fight. Agis surprizes part of the Walls at Athens, but was beaten off Alcibiades accus'd for assaulting Cuma, a Confederate City. Conon made Admiral in his Place. 333 Chap. 10. Hermocrates kill'd at Syracuse, attempting to surprize it. 336 Chap. 11. The Acts of Callicrates, the Lacedemonian General. The Fight at Sea in the Harbour at Mitylene, between Conon and Callicratides. 337 Chap. 12. Therma built in Sicily by the Carthaginians; They raise Forces to in∣vade Italy: They land in Sicily. The noble Temple in Agrigentum: The ancient Grandeur of that City: The Riches of Gellias, a Citizen there, and some others. Agrigentum besiege'd. The Syracusians under Daphneus rout the Carthagi∣nians near Agrigentum. Imilcar seizes the Syracusian Fleet, and takes all the Provision going to Agrigentum, which was afterwards quit by the Inhabitants: Their miserable Condition. The Phalarian Bull. 339 Chap. 13. The Syracusian Officers accus'd. Dionysius made General of the Sy∣racusians: He moves to have the Exiles recall'd: He's invested with the sole Com∣mand: At length by several Artifices gains the Sovereignty. 345 Chap. 14. The famous Battel of Argineuse at Sea, wherein the Athenians were Victors: The Officers accus'd for not burying the Dead. The Speech of Diomedon. The Death of Sophocles and Euripides. 348 Chap. 15. Lysander made sole Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet: He takes Ca∣ramium. The Ruin of the Athenian Fleet at Aegos Potamos. Athens taken by Lisander. The end of the Peloponnesian War. 352. Chap. 16. Agrigentum sack'd by Imilcar the Carthaginian. The Carthaginians besiege Gela. Dionysius goes to the Aid of Gela. The Skirmishes before Gela. Ca∣marina deserted by order of Dionysius. The Soldiers enrag'd at Dionysius: He hastens to Syracuse. Imilcar makes Peace with Dionysius, and returns to Car∣thage. The end of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius. 354
BOOK XIV. Chap. 1. A Peace between the Athenians and Lacedemonians. The Athenians disagree about the manner of their Government; The Government by 30; The Cruelty of the 30 Tyrants, and especially towards. Theramenes. Page 358 Chap. 2. Dionysius his Project to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty of Sicily. Syracusians revolt; are dispersed. 360 Chap. 3. Lacedemonians establish an Oligarchy in every City. Dionysius disarms the Syracusians. Alcibiades kill'd; manner of his Death. Clearchus his Tyranny in Bizantium; the Battel at Porus by him against his Countrymen the Lacedemo∣nians. Lysander's Project to out the Heraclidae of the Sovereign Power. 361 Chap. 4. Dionysius his Actions in Sicily. The Oropians subdu'd by the Thebans. The Lacedemonians quarrel with the Elians. Dionysius fortifies the Epipodae. 364 Chap. 5. The War between Cyrus and his Brother Artaxerxes King of Persia. Cyrus Routed. The Grecian Forces in Straits: their brave Behaviour: and long and troublesome March out of Persia into Greece. 366 Chap. 6. Thrasybulus opposes the 30 Tyrants. The cruelty of Psamnificus King of Aegypt, towards his old friend Tamos that fled to him for succour from the Persians. Darcyllidas sent General against the Persians into Asia. Conon made Admiral of the Persian Fleet. 373 Chap. 7. The War between the Rhegians and Dionysius. He prepares to make War upon the Carthaginians. Most of the Cities submit to Dionysius. He returns to the Siege of Motya: Taken. Forces sent from Carthage against Dionysius. A Sea-fight between the Carthaginians and the Sicilians. Syracuse besieg'd. The Speech of Theodorus against Dionysius. A greivous Plague in the Carthaginian Army. A great Destruction of the Carthaginian Fleet in the Harbour of Syracuse. The mi∣serable Condition of Imilco in his own Country. The Troubles of the Carthagi∣nians. 376 Chap. 8. Agesilaus made General against the Persians by the Lacedemonians, goes to Ephesus: They send to the King of Egypt for Assistance. The Persians routed at Sipylus by Agesilaus. Tissaphernes his head cut off in a Bath at Larissa. The War between the Phoceans and Boetians. 392 Chap. 9. The Confederate War by the Argives and others against the Lacedemonians. The Battel at Aricas The fight at Nemea. Pisander the Lacedemonian Admiral routed in a Sea-fight at Cnidus by the Persian Fleet, commanded by Conon the Athenian. The Corinthian War against the Lacedemonians, and the great Sedi∣tion there. 394 Chap. 10. The Quarrel between the Rhegians and Dionysius. Mago the Cartha∣ginian settles Affairs in Sicily. Routed at Abacena by Dionysius. Rhegium near surpriz'd by Dionysius. The Acts of Iphicrates at Corinth, Plias, and Si∣cyon. Amyntas lost his Kingdom of Macedonia, but was restor'd. The Romans take Veii: Dedicate a Golden Cup to Apollo. Their Ambassadors are taken by the Pyrats of the Lipari Islands, but discharg'd by Timastheus. 396 Chap. 11. The Acts of Thrasybulus the Athenian General. The Carthaginians under Mago begin a new War in Sicily against Dionysius. A Peace concluded. Rodes falls off from the Athenians. Evagoras becomes King of Salamis in Cyprus, makes War against the Persians. The Acts of Thimbro the Lacedemonian Gene∣ral in Asia. 398 Chap. 12. Dionysius his Expedition against Rhegium. The War between the Lu∣canians and Thurians in Italy. The Thurians cut off by their own Rashness. Lep∣tines generously sav'd those that swam to his ships, tho' he was a Friend to their Ene∣mies. Dionysius his second Expedition into Italy: besieges Caulonia, and routs
Heloris. Makes Peace with the Rhegians. Razes Caulonia to the ground, and transplants the Inhabitants to Syracuse. Watches an occasion to be reveng'd on them of Rhegium. Besieges it. He sends rich Chariots to the Olympick Games. His Poetry ridicul'd. 401 Chap. 13. The Peace of Antalcidas. The War by the Persians against Evagoras in Cyprus. The miserable Condition of Rhegium. Surrendred. The cruel Usage of Philo the Governor of Rhegium, and of his Son. The Expedition of the Galls against Italy. The Romans routed by the Galls at the river Allia. Rome taken by the Galls. Romans besieg'd in the Capitol. The Volsci revolt from the Romans. The Galls routed by Marcus Furius in their Return. All cut off afterwards in the Plains of Trausium. 404 BOOK XV. Chap. 1. THE Preface. Artaxerxes Expedition against Evagoras in Cyprus. The Actions there at Sea and Land. The Lacedemonians begin new Quarrels in Greece. As first with Mantinea. Dionysius gives himself to Poetry. Peace concluded with Evagoras by Orontes the Persian General. Terabazus brought to his Trial. Judgment upon corrupt Judges. Terabazus acquitted. 409, 410 Chap. 2. Mantinea besieg'd by the Lacedemonians. Dionysius aims to gain the Islands of the Adriatick Sea. The Parii built Pharos. Dionysius his Expedition into Hetruria. Prepares for War against the Carthaginians. The Sicilians routed at Cronion. The Quarrel between the Clazomenians, and them of Cuma about Leuca. The War between Amyntas and the Olynthians. The Lacedemo∣nians seize the Citadel. Cadmea at Thebes. Eudamidas breaks into the Olyn∣thians Country. 414 Chap. 3. Polypidas sent General by the Lacedemonians against the Olynthians. A great Plague in Carthage. The Boetian War. Cadmea retaken. A Confede∣racy of the Cities against the Lacedemonians. Cleombrotus attempts to surprize the Pyreum at Athens. The Athenians seize Actea in Eubaea. Agesilaus enters Boetia. The Sea-fight at Naxus. 418 Chap. 4. The Treballians make Incursions into Thrace. Chabrias the Athenian General assassinated. The Thebans rout the Spartans at Orchomena. Ar∣taxerxes seeks to make Peace among the Grecians. Peace concluded. Thebans only disagreed. The Commendation of Epaminondas. Seditions in several Cities of Greece. 423 Chap. 5. The Persians send an Army into Aegypt to reduce the Revolters. Iphicrates a skilful Commander. Sedition at Zacynthus. Platea raz'd by the Thebans. The Lacedemonians seize upon the Island Corcyra. The Siege of Corcyra rais'd by the Athenians under Cresides. Evagoras in Cyprus murther'd by an Eunuch. Dreadful Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus. A great Comet seen in Greece. 425 Chap. 6. Artaxerxes sends again to make Peace among the Grecians. All comply'd but the Thebans. The Spartans raise an Army against the Thebans. Epami∣nondas made the Theban General. The famous Battel of Leuctra. The terrible Seditions and Cruelites in Argos. Jason of Pherae stirs up the Thessalians to gain the Soveraignty of Greece. Polydore Prince of Pherea in Thessaly poyson'd by his Brother Alexander. Plots to depose Alexander. King of Macedonia treated with to that purpose. 429 Chap. 7. The Lacedemonians send Politropus into Arcadia: who is slain, and his Party routed by Lycomedes. An Invasion by Epaminondas and Pelopidas into Peloponnesus. Sparta besieg'd. The Antiquity and History of Messena in Greece.
Pallane taken by Arcadians. A wall drawn between Cenchrea and Lechcum to hinder the Thebans inroad into Peloponnesus. Epaminondas breaks through into Peloponnesus. Assaults Corinth. 434 Chap. 8. Dionysius sends Galls and Spaniards to the assistance of the Lacedemo∣nians. Pelopidas and Ismenias clapt up by Alexander Tyrant of Pherea. The Boetians pursu'd by the Phereans: brought off by Epaminondas then a private Soldier. The Fight between the Arcadians and Lacedemonians. Dionysius falls upon the Carthaginian Territories in Sicily. Dionysius dyes. The cause of his death. The cruelty of Alexander the Pherean at Schotusa. Epaminondas breaks again into Peloponnesus. Coos peopled and Wall'd. The end of the Laconick and Boetick War by the Mediation of the Persian King. 438 Chap. 9. New Stirs in Greece. The Battel between the Eleans and Arcadians near Lassion. The Quarrel between the Pisate and them of Elis about the Olympick Games. A Fight at the Time and Place of the Games. The Thebans prepare a Fleet in order to gain the Dominion at Sea. Rhodes, Chios, and Byzantium brought in to the Thebans by Epaminondas. The Thebans make War upon Orchome∣non. The Reason Orchomenon raz'd. The Thessalians War with Alexander the Pherean. Pelopidas kill'd. His Praises. 441 Chap. 10. The War between the Tegeans and Mantineans, Boetians side with the Tegeans. Epaminondas made General. The Battel at Mantinca, where Epami∣nondas was kill'd, but the Lacedemonians routed. The Commendation of Epami∣nondas. 443 Chap. 11. A Defection from the Persians in Asia. Tachos King of Aegypt declares War against the Persians. The War between Tachos, and his Son Nectabanus. The death of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Agesilaus routs the Aegyptians that pursu'd him: and restores Tachos to his Kingdom: Stirs again in Greece after the Battel of Mantinea between the Megalopolitans and the neighbouring Towns. Peparethos besieg'd by Alexander of Pherea, He routs Leostenes at Sea. Charietes the Athenian Admiral his Villanies. 473 BOOK XVI. Chap. 1. PHilip an Hostage at Thebes: makes his Escape; beats the Atheni∣ans, after makes Peace with them, subdues the Peons, and routs the Illyrians, and makes Peace with them. 477 Chap. 2. The Actions of Dionysius the younger, in Sicily and other parts. Dion's Flight to Corinth, and his Return to Sicily. Andromachus peoples Tauromenum. The Civil Wars in Eubea. The Social War between the Athenians and other Na∣tions. Philip takes Amphipolis and other Cities. His Policies to gain the Olyn∣thians and other Places in Greece. 479 Chap. 3. Dion's March, and Entring into Syracuse. Dionysius comes to the Island part of Syracuse. Assaults the Wall erected from Sea to Sea: is beaten by Dion. Alexander of Pherea murdered by his Wife and his two Brothers. Philip relieves the Thessalonians from the two Brothers. 481 Chap. 4. The first rise of the Brutii in Italy. Dionysius his Admiral invades the Leontines. A Fight at Sea between Heraclides and Philistus Admirals, one of Dionysius, the other of Dion. A Faction in Syracuse. Dion leaves the Syracu∣sians. Their sad Condition. Reliev'd by Dion. 484 Chap. 5. A Continuance of the Social War. Iphicrates and Timotheus join'd Admirals with Chrates by the Athenians. Iphicrates and Timotheus accus'd by Chrates, and fin'd and remov'd. Chrates joins with Pharnabasus and routs the Persians. The end of the Social War. Philip subdues the Confederates. 487
Chap. 6. The Beginning of the Sacred War, or Phocian War. Philomelus seizes the Temple at Delphos after he had routed the Locrians. How the Oracle at Delphos was first discover'd, and the beginning of the Tripode. The Athenians and others join with Philomelus. 488 Chap. 7. The Battel at Phoedra between Philomelus and the Locrians. The Parties ingag'd in the Phocian War. The Battel between the Beotians and Pho∣cians. Philomelus kill'd Onomarchus made General. His Dream, Successes and Death. 490 Chap 8. Phayllus continues the Phocian War, Aryca raz'd. Phayllus dyes of a Consumption. War between the Lacedemonians and Megapolitans. Chaeronea taken by Phalecus. War between the Persians Aegyptians and Phenicians. Sa∣lamis in Cyprus besieg'd. The cruelty of Artaxerxes Ochus towards the Si∣donians. The Calamity of Sidon. 494 Chap. 9. Evagoras beheaded in Cyprus. Artaxerxes marches against Aegypt; and gains all Aegypt by the Policy of Mentor. Lost many of his Men at the Lake Sorbonis. Mentor advanc'd. Mentor's Stratagem to subdue Hemias Prince of Atarne. Zena rais'd by Philip. The King of Aegypt abdicates his Kingdom and flyes to Aethiopia. 499 Chap. 10. Philip takes Olynthus and other Cities in the Hellespont. The Athe∣nians jealous of Philip and instigated by Demosthenes. Philip's Policies. The va∣lue of the Riches taken out of the Temple at Delphos. Dionysius sent presents to Delphos, and were taken by the Athenians. His Letter to the Athenians. The Temple burnt. The end of the Phocian War. The Punishments decreed by the Amphtyons against the Phocians. The Miseries of the Sacrilegers. Timoleon sent to Syracuse. 502 Chap. 11. Timoleons Expedition into Sicily. The Carthaginians Army in Sicily. Dionysius returns to Syracuse, is beaten by Hircelas; Hircelas gains Syracuse. Timoleon's escape from Rhegium. Timoleon routs Hircelas, and gains Syra∣cuse. Philip invades the Illyrians. Dionysius expell'd. Timoleon makes good Laws. Philip invades Thrace. 508 Chap. 12. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Preparations of the Carthagi∣nians against Timoleon. The remarkable Siege of Perinthus by Philip. Pexo∣dorus expells his Brother Adam from the Principality in Cana. Byzantium sud∣denly besieg'd by Philip. 510 Chap. 13. The Athenians aid Byzantium. Philip raises his Siege. The Cartha∣ginians transport Forces into Sicily. The remarkable Victory of Timoleon over the Carthaginians. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Works of Hiero in Sicily. 512 Chap. 14. Elata taken by Philip: great Consternation in Athens for fear of Philip. The Boetians join with the Athenians through the Solicitation of Demosthenes. Python a famous Orator. The Battel at Cheronea between Philip and the Athe∣nians; Lycides the Athenian General put to death. Philip rebuk'd by Demades; made General of Greece. Timoleon dyes. 515 Chap. 15. Philip consults the Oracle at Delphos. Philip Marries his Daughter Cleopatra to the King of Epirus. Encourag'd to the Persian War by Neoptole∣mus his Verses. Philip's Pride. His Murder. The Cause of it, and how it was done, and by whom. 517
BOOK XVII. Chap 1. COnspiracies of the Cities against Alexander. The Athenians send Ambassadors to Alexander to beg Pardon. He's made General by the Amphictyons. Attalus kill'd by Alexander's Command. The Wickedness of of Bagoas. Darius commended. Raises Forces. A Description of Mount Ida. Alexander invades the Illyrians and others. Thebes besieg'd by Alexander and raz'd. The Miseries of Thebes. Prodigies. Alexander demands Demost∣henes and others to be deliver'd up to him by the Athenians: their Answer. He returns into Macedonia: and Feasts his Soldiers. 521 Chap. 2. Alexander lands his Army in Asia. The Battel at Granicum. The Forces of the Persians and of Alexander. Alexander kills Spithrodates; near being kill'd by Rosaces. Miletus besieg'd and taken. Ada Queen of Caria meets Alex∣ander. Halicarnassus Besieg'd, Taken, and Sack'd. The strange Act of the Macedo∣nians. 528 Chap. 3. Mytelene taken by Memnon Darius his General; his Successes He dyes. Cha∣ridemus the Athenian unjustly put to Death by Darius. Alexander falls sick, recover'd by Philippus. Alexander seizes Alexander of Lyncestas upon his Mother's Letters. Alexander takes Issus. The Memorable Battel at Issus, where the Mother, Wife, two Daughters and Son of Darius were taken. Alexander's noble carriage towards them. Darius his Letters and Offers to Alexander. Darius prepares another Army. 533 Chap. 4. Alexander marches towards Aegypt; Besieges Tyre. Prodigies at Tyre. The Tyrians bind Apollo with golden chains. The Inventions of the Tyrians to defend themselves. The advancement of Ballomynus a poor Man to be King of Tyre. The Acts of Agis and Amyntas; Amyntas kill'd, and all his Soldiers. Alex∣ander takes Gaza by Storm; presented by the Grecians. 538 Chap. 5 Alexander makes a Journey to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon. He's presented by the Cyreneans. The Description of the place about the Temple. The wonderful Properties of the Fountain Solis. The Building of Alexandria. Alex∣ander's Answer to Darius his Ambassadors. Alexander passes over the River Tygris with great Hazard. The Preparations on both sides for Battel. The Per∣sians routed at that famous Battel at Arbela. 542 Chap. 6. The Grecians conspire to Revolt. Memnon rebels in Thrace. Anti∣pater marches against him. The Lacedemonians raise an Army; are routed by Antipater, and Agis their King kill'd. 547 Chap. 7. Alexander comes to Babylon. The wealth found there. Views his Troops at Sitacana. Enters Susa. The Riches there. Thence goes in the Country of the Uxians. Marches towards Persepolis. A Company of maim'd Greeks met Alex∣ander; His Bounty to them. He takes Persepolis; gives it up to the Plunder of the Soldiers. The Riches of the Citadel of Persepolis. Alexander his Feast at Persepolis. Persepolis burnt at the Instigation of Thais. Darius mur∣der'd. 548 Chap. 8. Bessus stirs up the Bactrians. Alexander discharges the Greek Auxilia∣ries with Rewards. The River Stidoetes. He enters Hircania; Its Richness: En∣ters the Mardis Country: Loses his brave Horse but is restor'd. Thalestris the Amazon Queen meets him. He falls into the Effeminacy of the Persians. Enters Drangina. A Plot against Alexander. Philotas and others put to Death. Marches against the Arimispi. Subdues Arachosia. 552 Chap. 9. Alexander marches against the Paromisades. His troublesom March. Comes to Mount Caucasus. A Battel in Area by Alexander's Officers against Sati∣barzanes, who is kill'd in a single Combat by Erigyus. Bessus brought to Alexander; his Punishment. Alexander kills some Barbarians unexpectedly after they had sur∣render'd
their City. He marches to the River Indus. Mophis his remarkable deli∣very up of himself and his Army. 556 Chap 10. Alexander overcomes Porus. How Apes are taken. Strange Serpents for Venom. Large Trees Marches against the Andrastians, Catheri, and against Sopithes. The Custom of them under Sopithes. Indian Dogs. Entertain'd by Phigeus. The Macedonians refuse to march against the Gandarides. Alexan∣der leaves Monuments behind him at the River Hyphasis. Nicaea built, and Bu∣cephalis. The Ibori present Alexander. Routs the Agalasians. In Danger in the River Indus by Whirlpools. Marches against the Oxidracans and Mallians. The King leaps off the Wall into the Town. A Duel between Coragus and Dioxip∣pus. The Sambestae submit to Alexander; and the Sodrans and Mastanians. Subdues Musicanus, Porticanus, and Sambus. Poison'd Weapons. The King's Dream. Comes into the Main Ocean. Comes into Gedrosia. The Savages of the People. His Army near perishing in Gedrosia. Comes into Carmania. Punishes the Bormcial Goremours. Nearchus returns. Islands cover'd at High-Tides. The strange Death of Calanus. Alexander marrieth Statira. Harpa∣lus his Luxury. He seizes with his own Hand them that mutiny'd. 561 Chap. 11. Alexander mixes Twenty thousand Persian Darters with his Army-Marches from Susa. Bagistames breeds abundance of Horses. Hephestion dies at Ecbatana. The Lamian War. He invades the Cosscans. Marches towards Babylon. The Caldean Astrologers disswade him from coming thither. He enters Babylon. 569 Chap. 12. Ambassadors come to Alexander from all Parts. He buries Hephestion with great State. The Prodigies before Alexander's Death. His Death. Darius his Mother starves her self. 570 BOOK XVIII. Chap. 1. QUarrels about a Successor to Alexander. Aridaus made King. The Provinces divided amongst the Chief Commanders. Matters con∣tain'd in Alexander's Note-Books. Meleager executed by Perdiccas. The Gre∣cians revolt. A Description of Asia. Pithon sent against the Revolting Gre∣cians, who were all cut off. The Lamian War: The Cause of it. Alexander's Epistle to the Exiles. Leosthenes the Athenian General. Lamia besieg'd. Leosthenes kill'd. Antiphilus plac'd in his room. 574 Chap. 2. Ptolemy gains Egypt: Leagues with Antipater. Lysimachus enters Thrace. Leonatus comes to Relieve Antipater, and is routed. The Grecians beaten at Sea. Perdiccas conquers Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia, Crucifies him, delivers the Province to Eumenes. The Grecians quite routed by Craterus and Antipater. The Athenians at length submit after all the rest but the Aeto∣lians. The End of the Lamian War. The War in Cyrene by Thimbro. O∣phellas routs Thimbro. Cyrene gain'd by Ptolemy. Larinda sack'd. The Destruction of the Isaurians by themselves. Perdiccas affects the Kingdom of Ma∣cedon. Is oppos'd by Antigonus. The Etolians block'd up by Craterus and Antipater. Antigonus discover Perdiccas his Design. Peace made with the Etolians. Perdiccas marches against Ptolemy into Egypt. 580 Chap. 3. The Description of Alexander's Funeral Charriot. Ptolemy honour'd in Egypt. Perdiccas prepares for Egypt against Ptolemy. Eumenes beats Neop∣tolimus, who deserted. The Battel between Eumenes and Craterus, who was kill'd with Neoptolemus. Combat between Neoptolemus and Eumenes. Perdiccas comes into Egypt: Assaults the Fort call'd the Camel's Wall: His miserable Loss in the River Nile: Is kill'd. Ptolemy makes Arrideus and Pytho Protectors of
the Kings. Eumenes condemn'd to die. The Etolians invade Thessaly. Po∣lysperchon routs the Etolians. The Provinces again divided by Arrideus. Anti∣gonus besieges Nora. Eumenes his Invention to Exercise the Horse. Ptolemy gains Syria and Phoenicia and Nicanor. 586 Chap. 4. Antigonus routs Alcitas in Pisidia, and takes Attalus. Alcitas receiv'd into Termessus, and there protected. He's murder'd there Treacherously; his Body inhumanly us'd by Antigonus. Antipater's Death. Antipater puts Demeas, one of the Athenian Ambassadors, to Death. Polysperchon made Chief in Ma∣cedonia. Cassander conspires to out him. Antigonus his Plots to be Sovereign of all. Arrideus secures himself in Phrygia: Besieges Cyzicum. Antigonus goes to raise it. Eumenes got out of Nora by Antigonus his Order. Antigonus his further Act. The various Fortunes of Eumenes. A Council in Macedonia call'd by Polysperchon against Cassander. The Decree of the Council. Polysper∣chon invites Olympias out of Epirus into Macedonia: Writes to Eumenes to join with the Kings. 593 Chap. 5. Polysperchon courts Eumenes to assist the Kings. Eumenes his Pru∣dence amongst the Macedonian Captains. Ptolemy sends to the Captains and others not to assist Eumenes. Antigonus contrives to kill Eumenes; who marches into Phoenicia. Nicanor deceives the Athenians, and still keeps Munychia, and subtilly gets the Pyreum: Order'd by Olympias to deliver the Pyreum and Mu∣nychia to the Athenians, but he shifts it off. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, enters Attica; secretly Corresponds with Nicanor, and displeases the Athenians. Phocion's hard Usage at his Trial in Athens, is Condemn'd, and Executed. Cas∣sander arrives at the Pyreum. Polysperchon comes against him, but returns. Besieges Megalopolis, but is there much Damnifi'd; his Elephants spoil'd by a Stratagem. A Sea-Fight between Clitus and Nicanor. Nicanor beaten. Cli∣tus afterwards routed by Nicanor, and is kill'd in his flight to Macedonia. An∣tigonus goes after Eumenes. Eumenes near losing his Army by the Breach of a Dyke in Babylonia. The Greek Cities revolt to Cassander. The Athenians make Peace with him. He kills Nicanor. 599 BOOK XIX. Chap. 1. A Gathocles his Parentage and Education. His Rise. His Stratagems. His bloody Massacre at Syracuse. He gains the Sovereign Power. The Affairs of Italy. Olympias returns into Macedonia by Polysperchon's Means. The Armies revolt to her. Her Cruelties. She murders Eurydice and Arideus her Husband. Affairs in Asia. Eumenes and Seleucus. Eumenes is join'd by many of the Captains. The number of their Forces. He comes to Susa. Attalus and others, Imprison'd by Antigonus in a strong Castle, seeks to escape. Are afterwards besieg'd, and taken. 608 Chap. 2. Antigonus marches after Eumenes to Tigris. Eumenes cuts off many of his Men at Pasitigris. Antigonus goes into Media. Eumenes comes to Perse∣polis. The Description of Persia. Pencestes his great Feast. Eumenes his Policy. His Tale of the Lion. Battel in Sareteceni between Antigonus and Eumenes. Antigonus returns into Media. The Story of Cereus his two Wives striving which should be burnt. Eumenes marches to Gabiene; Cassander to Macedonia. Olympias goes to Pydna, is there besieg'd. The Epirots forsake their King, and join with Cassander. Antigonus's design to surprize Eumenes, who stops his March by a Stratagem. The last Battel between them in Gabiene. Eu∣menes basely deliver'd up. Antigonus's return to Media. The dreadful Earth∣quakes in the Country of Rhages. 615
Chap 3. The Inundations at Rhodes: Antigonus kills Pitho, getting him into his Power by Dissimulation; then marches into Persia. Revolters from Anti∣gonus cut off in Media. He divides the Asian Provences; and continues to destroy all the Argyraspides. Gets great Treasure in Susa. Cassander besieges Olympias in Pydna: The great Distress to which it was reduc'd. Amphipolis surrender'd to Cassander: He kills Olympias: Marries Thessalonices: Builds Cassandra: Imprisons Rhoxana and her Son Alexander. His Expedition into Peloponnesus against Alexander the Son of Polysperchon. The History of Thebes. Cassander rebuilds Thebes. 627 Chap. 4. Antigonus his Army feasted by Seleucus in Babylon. Falls out with Seleucus, who flies to Ptolemy, and is kindly receiv'd. Ptolemy, Seleucus, Cas∣sander, and Lysimachus, join against Antigonus. They send Ambassadors to him, who Winters in Cilicia. He goes into Phoenicia, and there builds Ships: Besieges Tyre. The Praise of Phyla, Wife of Demetrius. Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in Peloponnesus. The Acts of Ptolemy, one of Antigonus his Captains. Antigonus his Policy Tyre deliver'd. The Agreement of Ptolemy's Captains, and the rest at Cyprus. The Acts of Seleucus. A Fleet comes to Antigonus from the Hellespont and Rhodes. Things done in Peloponnesus. Cassander's Acts there, and in Greece. The great Victory by Sea and Land, ob∣tain'd by Polyclitus, Seleucus his Lieutenant: He's Rewarded by Ptolemy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. The Romans War with the Samnites. 632 Chap. 5. The Acts of Aristodemus. Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus: The Dmeans in Achaia seek to free themselves from Cassander's Garrison: They take the Cittadel. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, Assassinated. The Praise of Cratesipolis his Wife. The Acts of Cassander in Etolia, and other Parts of Greece. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Cassander sends an Army into Caria; and Aristotle with a Fleet to Lemnos. The Acts of Cassander's Army in Caria. Antigonus leaves his Son Demetrius in Caria to watch Ptolemy. His trouble∣some March into Asia. The Affairs of Sicily. Acrotatus his Misgovernment and Cruelties in Sicily. The Acts of Agathocles. The Affairs of Italy. 637 Chap. 6. Several Cities revolt. Lysimachus comes against them. Philip, Cassan∣der's General, routs the Epirots and Etolians. Cassander agrees with Antigonus. Antigonus gains the Cities in Caria. Cassander's Acts in Greece. Samnites routed by the Romans. Polemon sent by Antigonus into Greece to set the Cities at liberty. The Acts of Antigonus and Cassander. Polemon's Acts in Greece for Antigonus. Ptolemy goes against Cyrene, and Cyprus; then against Deme∣trius. The Battel with Demetrius at Gaza. Ptolemy takes Tyre. The Acts of Antigonus his Commanders in Greece. The Epirots make Alcetas King, who is beaten by Lysiscus, Cassander's General, and he's beaten again by the other. Cas∣sander goes against the Apolloniats. Seleucus recovers Babylon with a small Army. Demetrius routs Cilles, Ptolemy's General. Ptolemy returns to Egypt, first wasts Samaria, Gaza, Joppa, &c. Athaneus sent against the Nabatheans by Antigonus. The Customs of the Arabians. Athaneus kill'd, and most of his Men. Demetrius sent against them. Description of the Asphaltes, or Lake of Sodom. Demetrius sent against Seleucus in Babylon. The Wars between the Romans and Samnites in Italy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. 641 Chap. 7. Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, make Peace with Antigonus. Cassander murders Rhoxana and her Son. The Governors take the Stile of Kings upon them. The Carthaginians raise Forces against Agathocles. Four thousand Geloans murder'd by Agathocles. The Battel between Agathocles and Amilcar the Carthaginian at Himera. Agathocles routed. Several Cities revolt from Agathocles. 654
BOOK XX. Chap. 1. AGathocles designs to invade Africa: His Cruelty: Pursu'd in his Voy∣age. An Eclipse of the Sun very great. Lands in Africa: Burns his Ships: His Successes in Africa. Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals in Africa. Battel between them and Agathocles, who routs them. Kills Hanno. His Strata∣gem by Owls. The cruel Superstition of the Carthaginians in sacrificing their Chil∣dren. The Actions at Syracuse. Actions of Agathocles in Africa. The Acts of Cassander in Macedonia. Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules, Alexander's Son. The miserable Destruction of Nichocles and his Family in Cyprus. The Wars of Parysidas his Sons, King of the Cimerean Bosphorus. The Valour of Sa∣tyrus, one of his Sons. His Death. The sad Death of Eumelus, another Son. Page 658 Chap. 2. The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia and elsewhere. Polysperchon murders Hercules, Alexander's Son, by Instigation of Cassander. Amilcar taken, and put to Death by the Syracusians: His Head sent to Agathocles in Africa. The things done in Sicily. Archagathus, Agathocles Son, kills Lysiscus; He and his Son in great Danger by the Army. Affairs of Italy. The Works of Appius Clau∣dius: The Appian way. Ptolemy comes to Corinth: His Acts there. Cleopa∣tra, Alexander's Sister, kill'd by the Governor of Sardis. The further Acts of Agathocles in Africa. Ophellas decoy'd, and cut off by Agathocles. Ophel∣las his troublesome March to Agathocles. Lamia's Cruelty, and Story of her. Bomilcar seeks to be Prince of Carthage, but is put to Death by the Citi∣zens. Agathocles sends the Spoils of the Cyrenians to Syracuse: Most lost in a Storm. Affairs in Italy. 668 Chap. 3. Demetrius frees all the Grecian Cities; takes the Pireum at Athens. Demetrius Phalerius flies to Ptolemy. Honours given to Demetrius in Athens. He sails to Cyprus: His Acts there: Besieges Salamis. His great Engines. Ptolemy sails to Cyprus. Sea-Fight between Ptolemy and Demetrius, wherein Ptolemy is routed. Antigonus takes the Title of King, and the like several other Captains. Agathocles his Acts at Utica in Africk: Ty'd Prisoners to a great Engine. The sorts of People in Africa. Xenodocus routed in Sicily by Agatho∣cles his Captains. Agathocles his Acts in Sicily. What was done by Archaga∣thus in Africa. Mascala inhabited by some Greeks that came from Troy. Apes, their Custom among the Pithecusae. The Carthaginians draw out Thirty thousand Men out of Carthage. Misfortunes to Agathocles his Captains in Africa. The Army block'd up, and almost starv'd. Agathocles beats the Carthaginians at Sea near Syracuse. His Captain Leptines Harrasses the Agrigentines. Aga∣thocles Feasts the Syracusians. His jocund Temper. His Cruelty. Routed in Africa. Carthaginian Camp burnt. The Misfortune afterwards to both Armies by one Cause. Agathocles in Chains by his own Men. Steals out of Africa. The Sol∣diers kill his two Sons. They make Peace with the Carthaginians. Agathocles his exceeding Cruelty at Aegista, and afterwards at Syracuse. 676 Chap. 4. Antigonus his March into Aegypt. A Tempest near Raphia, where he lost some of his Ships. He returns into Syria. Dinocrates prevails in Sicily. Agathocles is willing to resign his Government; but Dinocrates stands off. What was done in Italy. Antigonus his War with the Rhodians. Rhodes besieg'd by Demetrius. Agathocles routs Dinocrates his great Army with a few Men. His Cruelty to those that submitted upon Terms, where he But chers Seven thousand. Dinocrates in favour with Agathocles, and betrays all the Confederates. What was done in Italy. 688
Chap. 5. The Siege of Rhodes continu'd: The Acts of the Sea-Captains of the Rhodians. Peace made with the Rhodians. The Acts of Agathocles in the Li∣pari Islands. The Acts of Demetrius in Greece. The War between the Taren∣tines and Lucanians. The Acts of Cleonymus the Spartan: Cassander sends to Antigonus to make Peace, who refuses. Lysimachus joins with Cassander, and so does Ptolemy and Seleucus, against Antigonus: He marches against Lysima∣chus. Demetrius's further Acts in Greece. The Armies of Cassander and Deme∣trius. Demetrius leaves Greece, and goes with his Army to his Father in Asia, after Peace made with Cassander. The Misfortunes of Pleistarchus at Sea. Pto∣lemy besieges Sidon, but returns to Aegypt upon a false Report. Seleucus marches from Babylon with a great Army. Page 695
THE PREFACE. ALL Mankind are under a great Obligation of Gratitude to those that have written Universal Histories; forasmuch as there has been an honourable Contest amongst them by their Labours and Pains, to be helpful to others in the due Conduct and Management of the common Affairs and Concerns of this present Life. For whereas they usher in a sort of wholsom Instruction, without any hazard to the Person; so they thereby also procure to their Readers, Art and Skill in Politicks, above the ordinary Rate, with great Ease and Security. For Knowledge gain'd by Experience, though it brings a Man to an Aptness to be quick in discerning what is most advisable in every particular case, yet such Knowledge is attended with many Toyls and Hazards. And thus he that was Ulysses. the most experienc'd Man among the Heroes, view'd many Cities, and came well to understand and prie into the Minds and Tempers of Men; yet it was with many Troubles and Misfortunes: But Knowledge of what was well or ill done by others, gain'd by History, car∣ries along with it Instructions, freed from those Misfortunes that others have be∣fore experienc'd. Besides, these Historians have us'd their utmost Diligence to reduce all Men in their Consideration of them (who are united and related one to another in the same common Nature and Original, though far distant each from other as to Place and Time) under one and the same Head, and common Order, as if they were Servants herein to the Divine Providence. For as Providence ha∣ving marshall'd the Stars (visible to us) in a most beautiful Frame and Order, and likewise conjoyn'd the Natures of Men in a common Analogy and Likeness one to another, incessantly wheels about every Age, as in a Circle, imparting to each what is before by Fate shar'd out and allotted for them: So these Hi∣storians by committing to Writing the common Actions of Men through the whole World, as if they were the Affairs only of one City, represent their Labours as one intire Account, and common Repertory and Treasury of Human Trans∣actions. For it's a desirable thing to be in a capacity to make use of the Mi∣stakes of others, the better to order the course of our own Lives, and in the various Events and Accidents that may befal us, not to be then at a loss and seeking what is to be done, but rather to be able to imitate what has been well done. And certainly as to Councel and Advice, all prefer Ancient Men before those that are Young, because of their Prudence gain'd by a long Experience. But History goes as far beyond the Knowledge of Old Men, as we are sure it does surmount all their Experience in multitude of Examples. So that any Man may justly look upon it as a thing most profitable and advantageous, to make use of this upon all occasions and accidents of this Life. As for Young Men, it teaches them the Wisdom and Prudence of the Old, and increases and improves the Wisdom of the Aged: It fits Private Men for high Places; and stirs up Princes (for the sake of Honour and Glory) to these Exploits that may immortalize their Names. It incourages likewise Souldiers to Fight the more Couragiously for their Country, upon the hopes of Applause and Commen∣dation after their Deaths. And as a Curb to the Impious and Prophane, it re∣strains them in some measure, upon the account of being noted to Posterity, with a perpetual Brand of Infamy and Disgrace.
What shall I say? In hopes of having the Memory of their good Acts re∣corded to Posterity by Historians, some have built Cities; others have apply'd themselves to the Promulgation of good and wholsom Laws: Many also upon this account, have set their Wits at work to invent Arts and Sciences for the good of Mankind. And whereas compleat Happiness is made up of all Perfections centring in one; History consequently is to bear away the Prize, which is the Cause of all those commendable and glorious effects: For it's most certain, She is the Preserver of the Virtues of Worthy Men to Posterity, and an eternal Witness to the Cowardize and Impiety of others; and a Benefactor to all Man∣kind in general. For if a fine spun Story consisting meerly of Fictions told of things done among the Spirits In Hell. below, tends much to the promoting of Piety and Justice; how much more then may we conclude that History, the most noble Assertrix of Truth, and very Metropolis (as it were) of all Philosophy, may adorn the Manners of Men with Principles of Justice and Honesty? For there is not a Man (through the Infirmity of Human Nature) that lives scarce a moment of an entire Eternity, but is extinguish'd and gone for ever after this Life; and with those who never did any thing commendable in their Life-time, all their Injoyments and Comforts perish with them. But those who have sig∣nalized themselves by virtuous Actions, are made famous in every Age, their praises being proclaim'd as it were by Or by a Di∣vine Mouth of History. a Divine Voice from History. I judge it therefore honourable and commendable, and a piece of admirable Wisdom and Prudence, to purchase that Glory which is immortal, with Labours and Sufferings that are but short and temporal. It's confess'd by all concerning Hercules, that while he was here upon Earth, he voluntarily undertook great and continual Labours, and ran through many Dangers, that by doing good to Mankind, he might gain the Reward of an Immortal Fame. And as to other Men, some are honour'd as Heroes, others Deify'd as Gods, and all by the help and advantage of History, which has transmitted their Virtues to Posterity, and caus'd the Remembrance of them to be immortal. Other Monuments indure but for a little time, and are often ruin'd and destroy'd by various Accidents; but the force and vigour of History, pierces through the whole World, and Time it self (which consumes all other things) is its Keeper, handing it down to Posterity for ever. History likewise conduces much to make a Man Eloquent, than which nothing is more commendable; for by this Grecians excel Barbarians, and the Learn'd those that are Ignorant: And by this Art alone it is, that one single Person many times prevails over Multitudes. To conclude; Whatever is done, appears to be such either as to Quantity or Quality, as the Eloquent Rhetorician is pleas'd to make it. And such we call Good Men, Men of . Worthy Men of Language. high Esteem for excellent Language, as those that by that Qualification have attain'd to the highest pitch of Virtue. But this Art of Speaking well, is divided into several Parts: That part which is Poetical, seems to delight more than to profit the Auditor; that which relates to making of Laws, tends more to Coertion than Instruction; and the other parts either contribute nothing at all to our well-being; or they are as hurtful one way, as they are useful and profitable another; and some of them even oppose the Truth with downright Lyes. But History only (wherein Words and Things agree) comprehends in Wri∣ting, what is both pleasant and profitable; For who cannot discern, but that it perswades to Justice; condemns the wicked and vicious; praises the good, and greatly improves the Understanding of the Those that meet with it. Readers? And therefore when we saw these sort of Writers deservedly in great Esteem, we were stir'd up to an earnest study of prosecuting the same Subject. But when we seriously consider the Authors that have been before us, though we highly approve of their Method and Design, as far as we may justly; yet we
conceive their Writings are not altogether compos'd to the due Measure of Pro∣fit and Advantage as they ought to be. For whereas to profit the Reader, it's necessarily requisite, that many and various Circumstances of Affairs be related; many set forth the Wars only of one Nation, or one single City; for very few have begun their Histories from Antient Times, or have made it their Bu∣siness to write of the Affairs of all Nations in General, to these our Days. And those that do, some of them fix no certain Time to the several Transactions they write of; and others altogether pass over the Affairs of the Barbarians. And some there are that never mention the Ancient Mythologies, but slip them by, because of the Difficulty of the Subject. Some that have begun to write, have been prevented by Death, and so have left their Works imperfect. And none who have hitherto set themselves to this Business, have brought down their History below the Times of the Macedonians: For some have broke off at Philip, others at the Acts of Alexander, and others at his Successors or Po∣sterity. And although many great and considerable Actions since those Times, to these our Days, have been upon the Stage; yet no Historian has hitherto undertaken to set them forth in one intire Tract, by reason of the Tediousness of the Work. And in regard that in those Writings which we have, the Times and Actions that have been comprehended in them, are hudled together in several Volumes, writ by various and several Authors, it's a very difficult matter either to understand, or remember them. Having therefore diligently perus'd and examin'd the Tracts of the several Authors, I determin'd to compose one intire History, from which the Reader might reap much Advantage, with little Labour and Pains: For he who en∣deavours to the utmost of his power, to comprehend in his Writings, the me∣morable Affairs and Actions of the whole World (as of one single City,) bring∣ing down his History from the most ancient Times to his own Age, though he set upon a Work certainly very Laborious, yet he'll perform that which, when finish'd, will be undoubtedly most useful and profitable. For hence, every Man may, as out of a common Fountain, draw what is convenient and serviceable for his own private use. For as to them that have a desire to imploy themselves in tumbling and turning over so many Authors; first such cannot easily get so many Books together as are necessary for their use; and then again by reason of the differing Relations and multitude of Authors, they can scarcely understand the Matters related. But one General History, in one intire Tract, as it may be quickly and rea∣dily perus'd, so the understanding of the subject matter, with far more ease goes along with the Reading. Yea, this sort of History excels all others, as far as the Whole is more useful than the Part; as the intire thing is more de∣sirable than that which is divided; and that which fixes the exact Periods of Time, more than that which leaves the Time uncertain and unknown, when things related were done. Perceiving therefore that such a Work would be of mighty use and advan∣tage; but that it would require both a long Time, and a great deal of Labour and Pains, we spent Thirty Years time in the Composing of it; and for that purpose travell'd through a great part of Asia and Europe, with many Ha∣zards and Difficulties, that we our selves might be Eye-Witnesses of most of the Parts and Places that were necessary for the carrying on of our Design in this Work. For through the Ignorance of Places, not only common Writers, but e∣ven those who are reputed the most Eminent, have committed many Errors and Mistakes. The chief cause, and that which most helpt forward the Design, (which, though thought impossible, is now fully compleated and perfected) was the strong and constant desire we had of Composing such a Work. Many Helps likewise were afforded to us at Rome, for the Carrying on of what we had un∣dertaken in this Kind. For that noble City, whose Power is stretcht out as far as
to the utmost Corners of the Earth (being that we had been there a long time an Inhabitant) furnished us with many things ready at hand for our purpose. For being born in Agyrus in Sicily, and having in a great measure learnt the Roman Language, by means of the frequent Commerce of Romans in that Island, I diligently collected out of their Ancient Records, what I found concerning the memorable Actions of this Empire. We have begun our History with the Mythologies handed down to us, as well those of the Grecians, as of the Barbarians, seriously weighing and conside∣ring, as far as we were able, what every one of them have related of things done in Ancient Times. Having now finish'd what was design'd, though not yet ex∣pos'd to publick view, before that be done, we shall declare something briefly concerning the whole Work. Our First Six Books, comprehend the Affairs and Mythologies of the Ages be∣fore the Trojan War, of which the Three First, contain the Barbarian, and the next following almost all the Grecian Antiquities. In the Eleven next after these, we have given an Account of what has been done in every Place from the Time of the Trojan War, till the Death of Alexander. In the Three and Twenty Books following, we have set forth all other Things and Affairs, till the beginning of the War the Romans made upon the Galls; at which time Ju∣lius Caesar the Emperor (who upon the Account of his great Atchievements, was surnam'd A Divine Per∣son, or a God. Divus) having subdu'd the Warlike Nations of the Galls, inlarg'd the Roman Empire, as far as to the British Isles; whose First Acts fall in with the First Year of the Hundred and Eightieth Olympiad, when Herodes A. M. 3896. Isaacson. was chief Magistrate at Athens. But as to the Limitation of Times contain'd in this Work, we have not bound those things that happen'd before the Trojan War, within any certain Limits; because we could not find any Foundation whereon to rely with any Certainty. According to Appollodorus, we have accounted Fourscore Years from the Trojan War, to the Return of Heraclides: From thence to the First Olympiad, A. M. 2848. Three Hundred and Twenty Eight Years, computing the Times from the La∣cedemonian Kings. From the First Olympiad, to the beginning of the Gal∣lick War (where our History ends) are Seven Hundred and Thirty Years: So that our whole Work (comprehended in Forty Books) is an History which takes in the Affairs of Eleven Hundred Thirty Eight Years, besides those Times that preceded the Trojan War. We have been the more careful to premise these things, that the Reader might have the clearer Prospect into the nature of the whole Tract; and that those who commonly take upon them to polish and amend Books, may be at least prevail'd with not to corrupt other Mens Works. Whatever therefore through the whole History is writ well, let no Man envy: What Slips there are (through Ignorance) they that are more knowing, are very free to amend. And now having finish'd what we thought fit to premise, we shall endeavour actually to perform what we before promis'd, as to the Writing of the History.
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK I. CHAP. I. Of the first Generation of Men. How the World first began. Mens first man∣ner of Life, and who were the first Men. First Men in Egypt. Who were the most antient Gods of Egypt. Of their Demy-Gods. Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, Juno, Vulcan reign'd in Egypt. Of Osiris and Isis. The Acts of Osiris and Isis. Hermes his Inventions. Osiris prepares for his Expedition through the World, and to that end raises a great Army. WHAT Notions they had of the Gods who first instituted Divine Worship, and what is fabulously related of every one of the Deities (because the Subject requires much to be said) we shall distinctly set forth: And whatever we conceive to be pertinent to the present History, we shall discourse of severally and distinct, that nothing worth Observation may be omitted And we shall here give an accurate Account (as far as the Antiquity of the matters will admit) of the Generation and Original of Mankind, and of the Affairs and Transactions of all Parts of the Known World, drawing down our History from the most ancient Times. Of the Origen therefore of Men, there are Two Opinions amongst the most Of the Opi∣nions of the first Genera∣tion of Men. famous and authentick Naturalists and Historians. Some of these are of Opinion, that the World had neither Gr. Without Generation or Corruption. Beginning, nor ever shall have End; and likewise say, that Mankind was from Eternity, and that there never was a Time when he first began to be. Others on the contrary, con∣ceive both the World to be made, and to be corruptible, and that there was a cer∣tain Time when Man had first a Being. For whereas all things at the first were jumbled together, Heaven and Earth, Of the Begin∣ning of the World. were in one Mass, and had one and the same Form: But afterwards (they say) when Corporeal Beings appear'd one after another, the World at length pre∣sented it self in the Order we now see; and that the Air was in continual agitation, whose fiery part ascended together to the highest Place, its nature (by reason of its Levity) tending always upwards; for which reason, both the Sun, and that vast number of the Stars, are contain'd within that Orb. That the gross and earthy Matter (clotted together by Moisture) by reason of its Weight sunk down below into one Place, is continually whirling about; the Sea was made of the Humid Parts; and the muddy Earth of the more Solid, as yet very meorish and soft; which by degrees at first was made crusty by the Heat of the Sun; and then after the Face of the Earth was parcht, and as it were firmented, the Moisture afterwards in many Places bubled up, and appear'd as so many Pustles wrapt up in thin and slender Coats and Skins; which may be even seen in standing Ponds, and Marish Places, when after the Earth has been pierc'd with
Cold, the Air grows hot on a sudden, without a gradual Alteration. And whereas Moisture generates Creatures from Heat, as from a Seminal Principle, things so generated, by being inwrapt in the dewy Mists of the Night, grew and increas'd, and in the Day solidated, and were made hard by the Heat of the Sun; and when the Births included in those Ventricles had received their due propor∣tion, then those slender Skins being burst asunder by the Heat, the Forms of all sorts of Living Creatures were brought forth into the Light; of which those that had most of Heat mounted aloft, Gr. . and were Fowl, and Birds of the Air; but those that were drossy, and had more of Earth, were number'd in the order of Creeping things, and other Creatures altogether us'd to the Earth. Then those Beasts that were naturally watery and moist (call'd Fishes) presently hasten'd to the place connatural to them; and when the Earth afterwards became more dry and solid by the Heat of the Sun, and the drying Winds, it had not power at length to produce any more of the greater living Creatures; but each that had an Animal Life, began to increase their Kind by mutual Copulation. And Euripides the Scholar of Anaxagoras, seems to be of the same Opinion, concerning the first Generation of all things; for in his Monalippe he has these Verses. . . A Mass confus'd, Heaven and Earth once were Of one Form; but after Separation, Then Men, Trees, Beasts of th' Earth, with Fowls of th' Air First sprang up in their Generation. But if this Power of the Earth to produce living Creatures at the first Origen of all things seem credible to any; the Aegyptians do bring Testimonies of this Energy of the Earth, by the same things done there at this day. For they say, that about Thebes in Egypt, after the overflowing of the River Nile, the Earth Mice bred of Mud in Egypt. thereby being covered with Mud and Slime, many Places putrify through the heat of the Sun, and thence are bred multitudes of Mice. It is certain therefore, that out of the Earth when it's hardn'd, and the Air chang'd from its due and natural Temperament, Animals are generated. By which means it came to pass, that in the first beginning of all things, various living Creatures proceeded from the Earth. And these are the Opinions touching the Original of Things. But Men, they say, at first, led a rude and brutish sort of Life, and wandered Mens first manner of Life. up and down in the Fields, and fed upon Herbs, and the natural Fruit of the Trees. Their Words were confus'd, without any certain signification; but by degrees they spoke articulately, and making Signs, and giving proper Terms to every thing upon occasion; at length their Discourse became intelligible one to another: But being dispers'd into several parts of the World, they spoke not all the same Language, every one using that Dialect proper to the Place, as his Lot fell: Upon which account there were various and all sorts of Languages in the World; and these Associations of Men, first planted all the Nations of the World. But forasmuch as what was useful for Mans Life, was not at the beginning found out, this first Race of Mankind liv'd a laborious and troublesom Life, as being as yet naked, not inur'd to Houses, nor acquainted with the use of Fire, and alto∣gether destitute of Delicacies for their Food. For not knowing as yet how to house and lay up their Food, they had no Barns or Granaries where to deposite the Fruits of the Earth; and therefore many through Hunger and Cold perisht in the Winter: But being at length taught by experience, they fled into Caves in the Winter, and laid up such Fruits as were fit to keep; and coming by degrees to the Knowledge of the usefulness of Fire, and of other Conveniences, they be∣gan to invent many Arts, and other things beneficial for Man's Life. What shall we say? Necessity was Man's Instructor, which made him skilful in every thing, being an Ingenious Creature, assisted (as with so many Servants) with Hands, Speech, and a Rational Soul, ready to put every thing in execution. But what
we have here said concerning the first Generation of Mankind, and his way of living in old time may suffice, . designing to keep within due Bounds. And now we shall apply our selves to recount those things that have been done in all the known Parts of the World, whereof there is any Memorial handed down to us. Who were the First Kings, we our selves can neither assert nor agree with Who were the First Kings. those Historians who affirm they know; for it's not possible that the Account given of Affairs, should be so ancient as to be contemporary with the first Kings; and if any should admit any such thing, yet it's apparent, that all the Historians ex∣tant liv'd long after those Times. For the Greeks themselves are not only in the dark concerning the Antiquity of Nations, but many of the Barbarians also, who call themselves Natural Inhabitants, and boast themselves to be the first of all other Men who have found out things beneficial to Mankind, and to have committed to writing, things done among them many Ages before. And as for us, we deter∣mine nothing certainly of the Antiquity of particular Nations, nor which Nation is antienter than another, or how many Years one was before another. But that we may attain the Scope and End we have before design'd, we shall distinctly set forth in these Chapters, what is reported concerning things done in the se∣veral Nations, and the Antiquity of them. We shall first speak of the Barbarians; not that we judge them more ancient than the Grecians (as Ephorus affirms) but that we are willing in the First place to relate many considerable things of them, that when we come afterwards to the History of the Greeks, we may not confound their Antiquity with the other which are of a foreign nature to them. And because the Gods are fabulously reported to be born in Egypt, and the first Observation of the Motion of the Stars is at∣tributed to them, and that there are many remarkable and famous Actions of renown'd Men recorded to be done amongst them, we shall begin with the Affairs of Egypt. The Egyptians report, that at the beginning of the World, the first Men were The first Men in Egypt. created in Egypt, both by reason of the happy Climate of the Country, and the nature of the River Nile. For this River being very Fruitful, and apt to bring forth many Animals, yields of it self likewise Food and Nourishment for the things produc'd. For it yields the Roots of Canes, the Fruit of the . A Tree yield∣ing most sweet and de∣licious Fruit. See Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 13. c. 17. Lote-Tree, the Egyptian Bean, that which they call Corchorum, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 21. c. . Corson, and such like Rarities for Man's Food, always ready at hand. And that all living Creatures were first produc'd among them, they use this Argument, that even at this day, about Thebes at certain Times, such vast Mice are bred, that it causes admiration to the Beholders; some of which to the Breast and Fore-feet are animated and begin to move, and the rest of the Body (which yet retains the nature of the Soyl) appears without Form. Whence it's manifest, that in the beginning of the World, through the Fertileness of the Soyl the first Men were form'd in Egypt, being that in no other parts of the World any of these Creatures are produc'd; only in Egypt these supernatural Births may be seen. And that we may sum up all in a word: If in the time of Deucalion's Flood, the greatest part only of all living Creatures were destroy'd, then of such as were so preserv'd, its very probable that those in Egypt, especially, were of the number, whose Inhabitants lye under the South Pole, and the Country for the most part without Rain: Or if all that had Life generally perisht (as some affirm) and that the Earth produc'd Animals anew; yet they say, that notwithstanding this, the chief production of things animated, is to be ascribed to this Country. For they affirm, that if the Showers which fall in any other Places, were warm'd with the same Heat that is in Egypt, the Air would be of that Temperature, as that it would aptly conduce to the Generation of Animals, as at first, in the beginning of the World. For even at this day, such Births may be seen (in the Waters that have lain long) over all the water'd Country of Egypt. For they affirm, that when the River returns into its Channel, and the Sun dries the Mud, living Crea∣tures are generated, some perfect, others half form'd, even cleaving to the Soyl whence they are produc'd. Osiris, Isis, Ce∣res, Oceanus and Minerva, the most an∣tient Egyp∣tian Gods. The first Generation of Men in Egypt, therefore contemplating the Beauty of the Superior World, and admiring with astonishment the frame and order of the Universe, judg'd there were Two chief Gods that were Eternal, that is to
say, The Sun and the Moon, the first of which they call'd Osiris, and the other Isis, both Names having proper Etymologies; for Osiris in the Greek Language, signifies a Thing with many Eyes, which may be very properly apply'd to the Sun darting his Rays into every Corner, and as it were with so many Eyes view∣ing and surveying the whole Land and Sea, with which agrees the Poet, .  Odys.  Ver. . The Sun from's lofty Sphear all sees and hears. Some also of the antient Greek Mythologists call Osiris Dionysus, and sirname him Sirius, amongst whom Eumolphus in his Bacchanal Verses, . Dionysus darts his Fiery Rays. And Orpheus; . He's call'd Phanetes and Dionysus. Some likewise set him forth cloath'd with the spotted Skin of a Fawn (call'd Nebris) from the variety of Stars that surround him. Isis likewise being interpreted, signifies Antient, that Name being ascrib'd to the Moon from Eternal Generations. They add likewise to her, Horns, because her Aspect is such in her Increase and in her Decrease, representing a Sickle; and because an Ox among the Egyptians is offer'd to her in Sacrifice. They hold that these Gods govern the whole World, cherishing and increasing all things; and divide the Year into Three Parts (that is to say, Spring, Summer and Au∣tumn) by an invisible Motion perfecting their constant Course in that time: And though they are in their Natures very differing one from another, yet they com∣pleat the whole Year with a most excellent Harmony and Consent. They say that these Gods in their Natures do contribute much to the Generation of all things, the one being of a hot and active Nature, the other moist and , Cold. cold, but both having something of the Air; and that by these, all things are both brought forth and nourish'd: And therefore that every particular Being in the Universe is perfected and compleated by the Sun and Moon, whose Qualities, as before de∣clar'd, are Five; A Spirit or quickning Efficacy, Heat or Fire, Dryness or Earth, Moisture or Water, and Air, of which the World does consist, as a Man made up of Head, Hands, Feet, and other parts. These Five they reputed for Gods, and the People of Egypt who were the first that spoke articulately, gave Names proper to their several Natures, according to the Language they then spake. And therefore they call'd the Spirit Jupiter, which is such by Interpretation, because Jupiter, Spirit. a quickning Influence is deriv'd from this into all Living Creatures, as from the original Principle; and upon that account he is esteem'd the common Parent of all things. And to this the most famous Poet of the Greeks gives Testimony, where speaking of this God he says— . Hom. d. 8. Ver. 54. Of Men and Gods the Father. Fire they call'd by Interpretation Vulcan, and him they had in Veneration as a Great God, as he that greatly contributed to the Generation and Perfection of Vulcan, Fire. all Beings whatsoever. The Earth, as the Common Womb of all Productions, they call'd Metera, as Metera, The Earth. the Greeks in process of time, by a small alteration of one Letter, and an omis∣sion of Two Letters, call'd the Earth Demetra, which was antiently call'd Gen Me∣tera, or the Mother Earth, as Orpheus attests in this Verse. . The Mother Earth Demeter also call'd, Brings forth most richly—
Water or Moisture, the Antients call'd Oceanus; which by Interpretation is a Oceanus, Wa∣ter. nourishing Mother, and so taken by some of the Grecians, of which the Poet says thus, . Hom. Ilia. 14. Ver. 302. The Father of the Gods the Ocean is Tethys the Mother call'd— But the Egyptians account their Nile to be Oceanus, at which all the Gods were Born. For in Egypt, only among all the Countries in the World, are many Ci∣ties built by the ancient Gods, as by Jupiter, Sol, Mercury, Apollo, Pan, Elithia, and many others. To the Air they gave the Name of Minerva, signifying something proper Minerva, Air. to the nature thereof, and call'd her the Daughter of Jupiter, and counted a Vir∣gin, because the Air naturally is not subject to Corruption, and is in the highest part of the Universe; whence rises the Fable, that she was the Issue of Jupiter's Brain: They say she's call'd also Tritogeneia, or Thrice Begotten, because she changes her natural Qualities thrice in the Year, the Spring, Summer and Win∣ter; and that she was call'd Glaucopis, not that she hath Grey Eyes (as some of the Greeks have suppos'd, for that's a weak Conceit) but because the Air seems to be of a Grey Colour, to the view. They report likewise, that these Five Gods travel through the whole World, representing themselves to Men sometimes in the shapes of Sacred living Creatures, and sometimes in the Form of Men, or some other Representation. And this is not a Fable, but very possible, if it be true, that these generate all things; and the Homer. Poet who travell'd into Egypt, in some part of his Works, affirms this Appearance, as he learnt it from their Priests, . The Gods also like Strangers come from far, In divers Shapes within the Towns appear, Viewing Mens good and wicked Acts:— And these are the Stories told by the Egyptians of the Heavenly and Immor∣tal The Earthly Gods of E∣gypt. Gods. And besides these, they say there are others that are Terrestrial, which were begotten of these former Gods, and were Originally Mortal Men, but by reason of their Wisdom and Beneficence to all Mankind, have obtain'd Immorta∣lity, of which some have been Kings of Egypt. Some of whom by Interpreta∣tion, have had the same Names with the Celestial Gods, others have kept their own proper Names. For they report that Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, (surnam'd by some Ammon) Juno, Vulcan, Vesta, and lastly, Mercury, reign'd in Egypt; and that Sol was the first King of Egypt, whose Name was the same with the Ce∣lestial Planet call'd Sol. But there are some of the Priests who affirm Vulcan to be the first of their Vulcan the first Inventer of Fire. Kings, and that he was advanc'd to that Dignity upon the account of being the first that sound out the use of Fire, which was so beneficial to all Mankind. For a Tree in the Mountains hapning to be set on Fire by Lightning, the Wood next adjoyning was presently all in a Flame; and Vulcan thereupon coming to the Place, was mightily refresht by the heat of it, being then Winter Season; and when the Fire began to fail, he added more combustible Matter to it, and by that means preserving it, call'd in other Men to enjoy the Benefit of that which he himself was the first Inventer, as he gave out. Afterwards they say Saturn reign'd, and marry'd his Sister This Saturn is judg'd upon good grounds to be Naoh. Boccard. Pha∣leg. lib. 1. c. 1. f. 1. Stilling. Orig. Sacr. lib. 5. c. 5. Sect. 8. Rhea, and that he begat of her Osiris and Isis; but others say, Jupiter and Juno, who for their great Virtues, rul'd over all the World. That of Jupiter and Juno were born Five Gods, one upon every day of the Five Egyptian These were Five Days added to the end of every Year, to make up their former Year to consist of 365 Days. See the Reason, Orig. Sacr. 9, 91. intercalary Days. The Names of these Gods are Osiris, Isis, Typhon, Apollo and Venus. That Osiris was interpreted Bacchus, and Isis plainly Ceres. That Osiris marry'd Isis, and after he came to the
Kingdom, did much, and perform'd many things for the com∣mon This Osiris was call'd Apis, and was King of Argos, and afterwards of Egypt. Vid. Strab. Plin. about the time of Jacob's leaving Laban, Anno Mund. 2205, before Christ 1744. Hely. Cron. but by Isaacson, Ann. Mund. 2778. Benefit and Advantage of Mankind. For he was the first that forbad Men eating one another; and at the same time Isis found out the way of making of Bread of Wheat and Barley, which before grew here and there in the Fields amongst other common Herbs and Grass, and the use of it unknown: And O∣siris teaching the way and manner of Tillage, and well ma∣nagement of the Fruits of the Earth, this change of Food became grateful; both because it was naturally sweet and delicious, and Men were thereby restrain'd from the mutual Butcheries one of another: For an evidence of this first finding out the use of these Fruits, they alledge an antient Custom amongst them: For even at this day, in the time of Harvest, the Inhabitants offer the first Fruits of the Ears of Corn, howling and wailing about the Handfuls they offer, and in∣voking this Goddess Isis: And this they do in return of due Honour to her for that Invention at the first. In some Cities also, when they celebrate the Feast of Isis in a Pompous Procession, they carry about Vessels of Wheat and Barley, in memory of the first Invention, by the care and industry of this Goddess. They say likewise, that Isis made many Laws for the good of Human Society, where∣by Men were restrain'd from lawless Force and Violence one upon another, out of fear of Punishment. And therefore Ceres was call'd by the ancient Greeks, The∣mophorus (that is) Lawgiver, being the Princess that first constituted Laws for the better Government of her People. Osiris moreover built Thebes in Egypt, with an Hundred Gates, and call'd it Osiris built Thebes. after his Mother's Name: But in following Times, it was call'd Diospolis, and Thebes; of whose first Founder not only Historians, but the Priests of Egypt themselves, are much in doubt. For some say that it was not built by Osiris, but many Years after by a King of Egypt, whose History we shall treat of hereafter in its proper place. They report likewise, that he built Two magnificent Temples, and De∣dicated them to his Parents, Jupiter and Juno; and likewise Two Golden . Golden Tem∣ples. Altars, the greater to the great God Jupiter; the other to his Father Jupiter, who had formerly reign'd there, whom they call Ammon. That he also erected Golden Altars to other Gods, and instituted their several Rites of Worship, and ap∣pointed Priests to have the Oversight and Care of the Holy things. In the time of Osiris and Isis, Projectors and ingenious Artists were in great Honour and E∣steem; and therefore in Thebes there were then Goldsmiths and Braziers, who made Arms and Weapons for the Killing of Wild Beasts, and other Instruments for the husbanding of the Ground, and improvement of Tillage; besides Images of the Gods, and Altars in Gold. They say that Osiris was much given to Hus∣bandry, that he was the Son of Jupiter, brought up in Nisa, a Town of Arabia the Happy, near to Egypt, call'd by the Greeks Dionysus, from his Father, and the Place of his Education. Homer. The Poet in his Hymns makes mention of Nysa, as bordering upon Egypt, where he says, . Far off from Phenice stands the Sacred Nyse, Where Streams of Eygypt's Nile begin to rise, On Mountain high with pleasant Woods adorn'd. Here near unto Nyse, (they say) he found out the use of the Vine, and there planting it, was the first that drank Wine; and taught others how to plant it and use it, and to gather in their Vintage, and to keep and preserve it. Above all o∣thers, he most honoured Mercury, or Hermes his In∣ventions. This Mercury is supposed to be Joseph, by Bochart. Vid. Crale, Court of the Gent. Part 1. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 45. Hermes, one of an admirable Ingenuity, and quick Invention, in finding out what might be useful to Mankind. This Hermes was the first (as they report) that taught how to speak distinctly and articulately, and gave Names to many things that had none before. He found out Letters, and instituted the Worship of the Gods; and was the first that observ'd the Motion of the Stars, and invented Musick; and taught the manner of Wrestling; and in∣vented Arithmetick, and the Art of curious Of the exact framing of a Body. Graving and Cutting of Statues. He first found out the Harp with Three Strings, in resemblance of the Three Seasons of the Year, causing Three several Sounds, the Treble, Base and Mean. The Treble,
to represent the Summer; The Base, the Winter; and the Mean, the Spring. He was the first that taught the Greeks Eloquence; thence he's call'd Hermes, a Speaker or Interpreter. To conclude, he was Osiris's . Sacred Scribe, to whom he communicated all his Secrets, and was chiefly steer'd by his Advice in every thing. He (not Minerva, as the Greeks affirm) found out the use of the Olive-tree, for the making of Oyl. It's moreover reported, that Osiris being a Prince of a publick Spirit, and very ambitious of Glory, rais'd a great Army, with which he resolv'd to go through all parts of the World that were inhabited, and to teach Men how to plant Vines, and to sow Wheat and Barly. For he hop'd that if he could civilize Men, and take them off from their rude and Beast-like Course of Lives, by such a publick good and advantage, he should raise a Foun∣dation amongst all Mankind, for his immortal Praise and Honour, which happen'd accordingly. For not only that Age, but Posterity ever after honour'd those among the chiefest of their Gods, that first found out their proper and ordinary Food. Having therefore settl'd his Affairs in Egypt, and committed the Government of his whole Kingdom to his Wife Isis, he join'd with her Mercury, as her chief Councellor of State, because he far excell'd all others in Wisdom and Prudence. But Hercules his near Kinsman, he left General of all his Forces within his Do∣minions, a Man admir'd by all for his Valour and Strength of Body. As to those parts which lay near Phaenicia, and upon the Sea-Coasts of them, he made Busiris Lord Lieutenant, and of Ethiopia and Lybia, Anteus. Then marching out of Egypt, he began his Expedition, taking along with him his Brother, whom the Greeks call'd Apollo. This Apollo is reported to have dis∣cover'd the Laurel-Tree, which all Dedicate especially to this God. To Osiris they attribute the finding out of the Ivy-Tree, and dedicate it to him, as the Greeks do to Bacchus: And therefore in the Egyptian Tongue, they call Ivy Osiris's Plant, which they prefer before the Vine in all their Sacrifices, because this loses its Leaves, and the other always continues fresh and green: Which Rule the An∣cients have observ'd in other Plants, that are always green, dedicating Mirtle to Venus, Laurel to Apollo, and the Olive-Tree to Pallas. It's said, that Two of his Sons accompany'd their Father Osiris in this Expedi∣tion, one call'd Anubis, and the other Macedo, both valiant Men: Both of them wore Coats of Mail, that were extraordinary remarkable, cover'd with the Skins of such Creatures as resembled them in Stoutness and Valour. Anubis was cover'd with a Dog's, and Macedon with the Skin of a Wolf; and for this reason these Beasts are religiously ador'd by the Egyptians. He had likewise for his Companion, The same with Cham. Pan, whom the Egyptians have in great Veneration; for they not only set up I∣mages and Statues up and down in every Temple, but built a City in Thebides after his Name, call'd by the Inhabitants † Chemmin, which by interpretation is * Cham call'd Pan. Pan's City. There went along with them likewise those that were skilful in Hus∣bandry, as Maro in the planting of Vines, and Triptolemus in sowing of Corn, and gathering in the Harvest. CHAP. II. The Continuance of Osiris's Expedition through Ethiopia, all Arabia, India and Europe. Buried by Isis and Mercury. How he was kill'd. His Death reveng'd by Isis and Orus. Two Bulls, Apis and Mnevis, worshipp'd in Egypt. Places discuss'd where Osiris and Isis were Buried. Histories of the Egyptian Priests. Their Tears, Lunar Tears. Giants. Laws about Marriage. Osiris and Isis, their Pillars and Inscriptions. Colonies out of Egypt. ALL things being now prepar'd, Osiris having vow'd to the Gods to let his Hair grow till he return'd into Egypt, marcht away through Aethiopia; and for that very Reason it's a piece of Religion, and practis'd among the Egyp∣tians at this Day, that those that travel Abroad, suffer their Hair to grow, till they return Home. As he pass'd through Ethiopia, a Company of Satyrs were
presented to him, who (as it's reported) were all Hairy down to their Loyns: For Osiris was a Man given to Mirth and Jollity, and took great pleasure in Mu∣sick and Dancing; and therefore carry'd along with him a Train of Musicians, of whom Nine were Virgins, most Excellent Singers, and expert in many other things (whom the Greeks call Muses) of whom Apollo was the Captain; and thence call'd the . Leader of the Muses: Upon this account the Satyrs, who are natu∣turally inclin'd to skipping, dancing and singing, and all other sorts of Mirth, were taken in as part of the Army: For Osiris was not for War, nor came to fight Battels, and to decide Controversies by the Sword, every Country receiving him for his Merits and Virtues, as a God. In Ethiopia having instructed the In∣habitants in Husbandry, and Tillage of the Ground, and built several stately Ci∣ties among them, he left there behind him some to be Governors of the Coun∣try, and others to be Gatherers of his Tribute. While they were thus imploy'd 'tis said that the River Nile, about the Dog-days Inundation of Nile. (at which time it uses to be the highest) broke down its Banks, and over-flow'd the greatest part of Egypt, and that part especially where Prometheus go∣vern'd, insomuch as almost all the Inhabitants were drown'd; so that Prometheus was near unto Killing of himself for very grief of heart; and from the sudden and violent Eruption of the Waters, the River was call'd Aetos in Greek, because an Eagle is quick, lively and swift. Eagle. Hercules, who was always for high and difficult Enterprizes, and ever of a stout Spirit, presently made up the Breaches, and turn'd the River into its Chan∣nel, and kept in within its ancient Banks; and therefore some of the Greek Poets from this fact have forg'd a Fable, That Hercules Shot through. kill'd the Eagle that fed upon Prometheus his Heart. The most ancient Name of this River was Oceames, which in the Greek pronunciation is Oceanus; afterwards call'd Eagle, upon the violent Eruption. Lastly, it was call'd Egyptus, from the Name of a King that there reign'd; which the Poet attests, who says, . In th' River of Egyptus then I plac'd The Gallies swift— For near Thonis (as it's call'd) an ancient Mart Town of Egypt, this River empties it self into the Sea. The last Name which it still retains, it derives from Nileus, a King of those Parts. Osiris being come to the Borders of Ethiopia, rais'd high Banks on either side of the River, lest in the time of its Inundation it should overflow the Country more than was convenient, and make it marish and boggy; and made Floodgates to let in the Water by degrees, as far as was necessary. Thence he pass'd through Arabia, bordering upon the Red Sea as far as to India, and the utmost Coasts that were inhabited: He built likewise many Cities in India, one of which he call'd Nysa, willing to have a remembrance of that in Egypt where he was brought up. At this Nysa in India, he planted Ivy, which grows and remains here only of Nysa in India. all other Places in India, or the Parts adjacent. He left likewise many other Marks of his being in those Parts, by which the latter Inhabitants are induc'd to believe, and do affirm that this God was born in India. He likewise addicted himself much to hunting of Elephants; and took care to have Statues of himself in every place, as lasting Monuments of his Expedition. Thence passing to the rest of Asia, he transported his Army through the Hellespont into Europe; and in Thrace he kill'd Lycurgus King of the Barbarians, who op∣pos'd him in his Designs. Then he order'd Maro (at that time an Old Man) to take care of the Planters in that Country, and to build a City, and call it Maronea, after his own Name. Macedon his Son he made King of Macedonia, so calling it after him. To Triptolemus he appointed the Culture and Tillage of the Land in Attica. To conclude, Osiris having travell'd through the whole World, by finding out Food fit and convenient for Man's Body, was a Benefactor to all Man∣kind. Where Vines would not grow and be fruitful, he taught the Inhabitants to make Drink of Barley, little interiour in strength and pleasant Flavour to Wine it self. He brought back with him into Egypt the most pretious and richest things Beer ancient∣ly. that ever place did afford; and for the many Benefits and Advantages that he was
the Author of, by the common Consent of all Men, he gain'd the Reward of Im∣mortality and Honour equal to the Heavenly Deities. After his Death, Isis and Mercury celebrated his Funeral with Sacrifices and o∣ther Divine Honours, as to one of the Gods, and instituted many Sacred Rites mystical Ceremonies in Memory of the mighty Works wrought by this Hero, now Deify'd. Antiently the Egyptian Priests kept the manner of the Death of Osiris secret in their own Registers among themselves; but in after-times it fell out, that some that could not hold, blurted it out, and so it came Abroad. For they say that Osiris, while he govern'd in Egypt with all Justice imagi∣nable, was Murder'd by his wicked Brother Typhon; and that This Osiris was murher'd about the time Jacob with his whole Fa∣mily came into Egypt: As  Hl∣vicus Cro. An. Mund. 2239. Vid. Sir Walter Rawl. History, lib. 2. part 1. cap. 2. sect. 5. That this Osiris was Misraim, the Son of Cham. he mangled his dead Body into Six and Twenty Pieces, and gave to each of his Confederates in the Treason a Piece, by that means to bring them all within the same horrid Guilt, and thereby the more to ingage them to advance him to the Throne, and to defend and preserve him in the Possession. But Isis, the Sister and Wife likewise of Osiris, with the as∣sistance In the time of this Orus, Jacob is said to come into Egypt. Sir Walter Rawl. lib. 2. part 1. c. 2. sect. 5. Helvicus says in the time of Osiris, An. Mun. 2239. of her Son Orus, reveng'd his Death upon Typhon and his Complices, and posses'd her self of the Kingdom of E∣gypt. It's said the Battel was fought near a River not far off a Town now call'd Antaea in Arabia, so call'd from Anteus, whom Hercules slew in the time of Osiris. She found all the Pieces of his Body, save his Privy Members; and having a desire to conceal her Husband's Burial, yet to have him honour'd as a God by all the Egyptians, she thus contriv'd it. She clos'd all the Pieces together, cementing them with Wax and Aromatick Spices, and so brought it to the shape of a Man of the bigness of Osiris; then she sent for the Priests to her, one by one, and swore them all that they should not dis∣cover what she should then intrust them with. Then she told them privately, that they only should have the Burial of the King's Body; and recounting the many good Works he had done, charg'd them to bury the Body in a proper place among themselves, and to pay unto him all Divine Honour, as to a God. That they should Dedicate to him one of the Beasts bred among them, which of them they pleas'd, and that while it was alive, they should pay it the same Veneration as they did before to Osiris himself; and when it was dead, that they should Wor∣ship it with the same Adoration and Worship given to Osiris. But being willing to incourage the Priests to these Divine Offices by Profit and Advantage, she gave them the Third part of the Country for the Maintenance of the Service of the Gods and their Attendance at the Altars. In memory therefore of Osiris's good Deeds, being incited thereunto by the Commands of the Queen, and in expectation of their own Profit and Advantage, the Priests exactly perform'd every thing that Isis injoin'd them; and therefore every Order of the Priests at this Day are of opinion that Osiris is bury'd among them. And they have those Beasts in great Veneration, that were so long since thus consecrated; and renew their Mournings for Osiris over the Graves of those Beasts. There are Two sacred Bulls especially, the one call'd Apis, and the other Apis and Mne¦vis. Mnevis, that are Consecrated to Osiris, and reputed as Gods generally by all the Egyptians. For this Creature of all others was extraordinarily serviceable to the first Inventers of Husbandry, both as to the Sowing Corn, and other Advantages concerning Tillage, of which all reapt the Benefit. Lastly, they say, that after the Death of Osiris, Isis made a Vow never to Marry any other Man, and spent the rest of her Days in an exact Administration of Justice among her Subjects, excelling all other Princes in her Acts of Grace and Bounty towards her own People; and therefore after her Death, she was numbred among the Gods, and as such had Divine Honour and Veneration, and was buri'd at Memphis, where they shew her Sepulchre at this day in the Grove of Vulcan. Yet there are some that deny that these Gods are Buri'd at Memphis; but near the Mountains of Ethiopia and Egypt, in the Isle of Nile, lying near to a place call'd Philas, and upon that account also nam'd the Holy Field. They confirm this by undoubted Signs and Marks left in this Island, as by a Sepulchre built and erected to Osiris, religiously Reverenc'd by all the Priests of Egypt, wherein are laid up Three Hundred and Threescore . Bowls, which certain Priests appointed for that purpose, fill every Day with Milk, and call upon the Gods by Name, with Mourn∣ing and Lamentation. For that cause none go into the Island but Priests. The
Inhabitants of Or of The∣bais the higher Egypt. Thebes (which is the most ancient City of Egypt) account it a great Oath, and by no means to be violated, if a Man swear by Osiris that lies bury'd at Philas. The several parts therefore of Osiris being found, they report were bury'd in this manner before related; but his Privy-Members (they say) were thrown into the River by Typhon, because none of his Partners would receive them; and yet that they were divinely honour'd by Isis; for she commanded an Image . of this very part to be set up in the Temples, and to be religiously ador'd; and in all their Ceremonies and Sacrifices to this God, she ordered that part to be held in divine Veneration and Honour. And therefore the Grecians, after they had learn'd the Rites and Ceremonies of the Feasts of Bacchus, and the Noise and rude Shoutings at the Feasts of Bacchus. Orgian Solemnities from the Egyptians in all their Myteries and Sacrifices to this God, they ador'd that Member by the Name of Phallus. From Mizraim the Son of Cham. Osiris and Isis, to the Reign of Alexander the Great, who built a City after his own Name, the Egyptian Priests reckon above These must be understood Lu∣nary Years of Thirty Days, as the Egyptians us'd to account. Vid. Plut. Numa, Lact. lib. 2. c. 12. p. 118. Orus the Son of Osiris, was Born An. Mund. 1778. Alexander's Con∣quest of Egypt, An. Mun. 3661. which is 1889 Years after, which makes up 22996 Lunar Years, and 15 Days, which comes near to this Account of Diodorus. Orig. Sacr. c. 5. Ten Thousand Years, or (as some write) little less than Three and Twenty Thousand Years. They affirm, that those that say this God Osiris was born at Thebes in Boe∣tia of Jupiter and Semele, relate that which is false. For they say that Orpheus, after he came into Egypt, was initiated into the Sacred Mysteries of Bacchus or Dionysus, and being a spe∣cial Friend to the Thebans in Boetia, and of great esteem a∣mong them, to manifest his Gratitude, transferr'd the Birth of Bacchus or Osiris over into Greece. And that the Common People, partly out of Ignorance, and partly out of a desire they had that this God should be a Grecian, readily re∣ceiv'd these Mysteries and Sacred Rites among them; and that Orpheus took the occasion following to fix the Birth of the God and his Rites and Ceremonies a∣mong the Greeks: As thus, Cadmus (they say) was born at Thebes in Egypt, and amongst other Children begat Semele: That she was got with Child by one un∣known, and was deliver'd at Seven Months end of a Child very like to Osiris, as the Egyptians describe him. But such Births are not us'd to live, either because it is not the pleasure of the Gods it should be so, or that the Law of Nature will not admit it. The Matter coming to Cadmus his Ear, being before warn'd by the Oracle to protect the Laws of his Country, he wrapt the Infant in Gold, and instituted Sacrifices to be offer'd to him, as if Osiris had appear'd again in this shape; and caus'd it to be spread abroad, that it was begotten of Jupiter, thereby both to honour Osiris, and to cover his Daughter's Shame. And there∣fore it is a common Report among the Grecians, that Semele, the Daughter of Cadmus, was got with Child by Jupiter, and by him had Osiris. In After-times, Orpheus, by reason of his excellent Art and Skill in Musick, Orpheus. and his Knowledge in Theology, and Institution of Sacred Rites and Sacrifices to the Gods, was greatly esteem'd among the Grecians, and especially was receiv'd and entertain'd by the Thebans, and by them highly honour'd above all others; who being excellently learn'd in the Egyptian Theology, brought down the Birth of the ancient Osiris, to a far later time, and to gratifie the Cadmeans or Thebans, instituted new Rites and Ceremonies, at which he ordered that it should be de∣clared to all that were admitted to those Mysteries, that Osiris was call'd Dionysus or Bacchus. Dionysus or Osiris was begotten of Semele by Jupiter. The People therefore partly through Ignorance, and partly by being deceived with the dazling Luster of Orpheus his Reputation, and with their good Opinion of his Truth and Faithfulness in this matter (espe∣cially to have this God reputed a Grecian, being a thing that humour'd them) began to use these Rites, as is before declared. And with these Stories the My∣thologists and Poets have fill'd all the Theaters, and now it's generally received as a Truth not in the least to be questioned. To conclude, The Priests say, that the Grecians have arrogated to themselves both their Gods and Demy-Gods (or The Stories of the Heroes and Gods the Grecians de∣riv'd from the Egyptians. Heroes,) and say that divers Colonies were transported over to them out of E∣gypt: For Hercules was an Egyptian, and by his Valour made his way into most parts of the World, and set up a Pillar in Africa; and of this they endeavour to make proof from the Grecians themselves. For whereas it is own'd by all, that Hercules assisted the Gods in the Giants War, it's plain that at that time when
the Grecians say Hercules was born, the Earth had not then strength to produce Giants, neither were there any in those Days, that is to say, in the Age next before the Trojan War; but rather (as the Egyptians affirm) at the first Genera∣tion and Beginning of Mankind; from which Time the Egyptians account above Ten Thousand Years; but from the Trojan War, not Twelve Hundred: And ac∣cording to this Computation of the Egyptians, a Club and Lion's Skin may agree well enough with the ancient Hercules; for the use of Arms not being at that time found out, Men fought with Clubs and Staves, and cover'd their Bodies with Beasts Skins. This ancient Hercules they say was the Son of Jupiter, but know not who was his Mother: But he who was the Son of Alemena, they affirm was born above Ten Thousand Years after the other, and was call'd at first Alceus; but afterwards Hercules, not that he had that honourable Surname from Juno is cal∣led by the Greeks, Heras, and Hercules, Heracles. Juno (as Matris says) but assum'd to himself the Name out of emulation, desirous to do as great things as the ancient Hercules, and so to inherit as well his Fame and Glory as his Name. Moreover, the Grecians have a very antient Tradition, which agrees with the Egyptians, that Hercules freed the Earth from wild Beasts; which cannot possibly be apply'd to him who flourish'd about the Times of the Trojans, when most Parts of the World were free from such annoyances, by improvement of Lands and Multitudes of Populous Cities. But the reduction of the World to a more civil course of Living, agrees best with the ancient Hercules, when Men were as yet vext and plagu'd with wild Beasts; and especially in Egypt, whose upper part is a Wilderness, and full of Wild Beasts at this very Day. And 'tis but very reasonable to think that Hercules should mind the Prosperity and Welfare of E∣gypt, his own Country, and free the Land from Beasts, and so deliver it into the Hands of the Husbandman, to be improv'd by Tillage; and that upon this account he was Honour'd as a God. They report likewise, that Perseus was born in Egypt, and that the Grecians have transferr'd from thence the Birth of Isis into Argos, inventing a Story that she was the same with Io, who was metamorphosed into a Bull. And indeed there are great Differences and Disputes concerning these Gods: For some call the same Goddess Isis, others call her Ceres; some A Lawgiver. Thesmophorus, others Luna, others Juno, and some by all these Names. They term Osiris sometimes Serapis, sometimes Dionysus, and sometimes Pluto; then again Ammon; sometimes Jupiter, and often Pan. There are some likewise that say, Serapis is the same, whom the Grecians call Pluto. The Egyptians report that Isis found out many Medicines for the Recovery of Mens Health, being very expert in the Art of Physick, and contriv'd many Re∣medies for that purpose; and therefore even now when she is advanc'd to an im∣mortal State, she takes pleasure in curing Mens Bodies, and to those that desire her assistance, in their sleep she clearly manifests her presence, and affords ready and effectual Relief to them that stand in need of it. For clear proof of all this, they say, they have not only the usual Fables of the Greeks, but the undoubted Evidence of the fact to confirm it; and that almost the whole World bears Testimony to this, by the Respect and Honour they pay to this Goddess upon the account of her great Fame in curing of Diseases: For in Sleep she's present with Persons, and applies Remedies to the Sick, and wonder∣fully cures those that are her Votaries. That many that have been given off by the Physitians as incurable, have been restor'd by her; and that many that have been blind and lame, who have sought to her for help, have been perfectly re∣stor'd to their former Sight, and Soundness of Body. They say she found out a Medicine that would raise the Dead to Life, with Orus the last of the Gods, King of E∣gypt. which she not only rais'd her Son Orus, that was kill'd by the Titans, and found dead in the Water, but by that Application made him Immortal. This Orus was the last of the Gods that reign'd in, Egypt, after the . Translation of Osiris his Father. This Orus, they say, by interpretation is Apollo, who being taught by his Mother Isis, the Art of Physick and Divination, was very beneficial to Mankind in these respects. The Egyptian Priests in their Computation of Time do reckon above Three and Twenty Thousand Years from the Reign of Sol, to the passage of Alexander the Great into Asia.
In their fabulous Stories they say, that the most ancient of their God's reign'd Twelve Hundred Years, and the latter no less than Three Hundred Years apiece. Whereas this great number of Years seems incredible, some have not stuck to af∣firm that the motion of the Sun not being then known, the Year was reckon'd according to the Course of the Moon; and therefore the Solar Year, consisting Lunary Years, 30 Days a Month. then but of Three Hundred Days, some of them were sure to live Twelve Hun∣dred Lunary Years; and even at this Day now that there are Twelve Months in the Year, many live a Hundred Solar Years. The like they say of them that reign'd Three Hundred Years: For in their Time (they say) the Year was made up of So that there was Three Years in one Solar Year. Four Months, every Four applicable to each of the Three , Times or Sea∣sons. Seasons of the Solar Year, that is to say, Spring, Summer and Winter; which is the reason that some of the Grecians call Years, Horas, Seasons; and Historical Annals, Horography. The Egyptians moreover among their Fables report, that in the Time of Isis, there were Men of vast Bodies, whom the Grecians call Giants, and whom they place in their Temples in prodigious Shapes, who are whipt and scourg'd by them that Sacrifice to Osiris. Some idly give forth, that they sprang from the Earth, when at first it gave Being to Living Creatures. Others report, that from many extraordinary things done by Men of strong Bodies, the Fables and Stories of Giants arose. But in this most agree, that for the War they rais'd against the Gods, Jupiter and Osiris, they were all destroy'd. It was a Law likewise (they say) in Egypt, against the Custom of all other Na∣tions, that Brothers and Sisters might Marry one with another, which according∣ly was prosperous and successful in the Marriage of Isis, who marry'd her Bro∣ther Osiris, and after his Death made a Vow never to marry any other Man; and after she had reveng'd her Husbands Death upon his Murderers, she govern'd the Kingdom, and reign'd justly all her Days; and did good universally to all sorts of People, obliging them with many and extraordinary Benefits and Advan∣tages. And for her sake it is a Custom among them, that they honour a Queen, and allow her more Power and Authority than a King: And in their Contracts of Marriage Authority is given to the Wife over her Husband, at which time the Husbands promise to be obedient to their Wives in all things. Obedience to Wives in E∣gypt. Isis was Buri'd at Memphis, where at this day her Shrine is to be seen in the Grove of Vulcan: Although some affirm, that these Gods lie Bury'd in the Isle of Nile, at Philas, as is before said. Neither am I ignorant that some Writers say, their Sepulchers are at Arabia; whence Dionysus is call'd Nysaeus; there they say is a Pillar erected to each of the Deities with Inscriptions of Sacred Letters upon them; in one of which, that belonging to Isis, are these Words— I am Isis, Queen of all this Country, the Scholar of Mercury: What Laws I have made, none ought to disannul. I am the Eldest Daughter of the Youngest God, Saturn. I am the Wife and Sister of King Osiris. I am she that first found out Corn for Man's use. I am the Mother of King Orus. I am she that a∣rises in the Dog-Star. The City Bubastus was built in memory of me. Farewel, rejoyce O Egypt that was my Nurse, that brought me up. Upon Osiris's Pillar are these that follow. My Father was Saturn, the Youngest of all the God's. I am Osiris, that led an Ar∣my through all the Nations, as far as to the Deserts of India, and in the Coun∣tries lying to the North, as far as to the Head Springs of the River Ister; and to other Parts, as far as to the Ocean. I am the Eldest Son of Saturn, a Branch of a famous noble Stock, Cosin German to the Day. There's not a Place in the World where I have not been; and what I have discover'd, I have im∣parted to all. So much of the Inscriptions on the Pillars (they say) may be read, the rest is defac'd and worn out through length of Time. Thus therefore many disagree concerning the Sepulchres of these Gods, because the Priests, who were secretly instructed in the perfect Knowledge of these matters, would not suffer them to be spread abroad, out of fear of those Punishments that such were liable unto, who reveal'd the Secrets of the Gods.
They report, that afterwards many Colonies out of Egypt were dispers'd over Colonies out of Egypt. all parts of the World: That Belus (who was taken to be the Son of Neptune and Lybra) led a Colony into the Province of Babylon, and fixing his Seat at the River Euphrates, Consecrated Priests, and according to the custom of the Egyptians, freed Babylonians. them from all publick Taxes and Impositions. These Priests the Babylonians call Caldeans, who observe the Motions of the Stars, in imitation of the Priests, Na∣turalists and Astrologers of Egypt. That Danaus likewise took from thence ano∣ther Colony, and planted them in Argos, the most ancient City almost of all Greece. And that the People of Cholchos, in Pontus, and the Cholchians, Jews. . Circumcision. Jews lying between Arabia and Syria, were Colonies out of Egypt; and that therefore it is an ancient Custom among these Nations, to Circumcise all their Male Children after the Rites and Customs receiv'd from the Egyptians. That the Athenians likewise are a Colony of the Athenians, The Saits of the City Sais near one of the Mouths of Nile in Delta, in the lower Egypt. Saits, which came out of Egypt, and are their Kindred, they endeavour to prove by these Arguments; (That is to say) That they only of all the Greeks call the City Astu, from Astu a City among those People of the Saits: And that for the better Government of the Commonwealth, they divide their People into the same Ranks and Degrees as they in Egypt do, to wit, into Three Orders; the first of which are call'd The Nobi∣lity. Eupatride, imploy'd for the most part in studying the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and are advanc'd to the highest Offices and Places of Preferment in the State, as the Priests of Egypt are. The Second Order of Men are the Rustick and Country People, who are to be Souldiers, and take up Arms upon all occasions for the Defence of their Country, like to those who are call'd Tillers of the Ground. Husbandmen in Egypt, who furnish out Soldiers there. In the Third Rank are reckon'd Tradesmen and Artificers, who commonly bore all the necessary and publick Offices, which agrees exactly with the Orders and Usage among the E∣gyptians. They say likewise, that there were some of the Athenian Generals that came Captains out of Egypt. Vid. Plutarch Theseus. out of Egypt. For they affirm, that Peteos the Father of Menestheus, who was a Captain in the Trojan War, was an Egyptian, and afterwards was King of Athens. That the Athenians had not Wit enough to find out the true reason why Two Natures were ascrib'd to him; for every Man knows that he was call'd Half a Beast, that is, half a Man, and half a Beast; and the true ground was, because he was a Member of Two several Commonwealths, a Grecian and a Barbarian. The Fourth King of A∣thens, time of the Exodus of the Children of Israel. Erechtheus likewise, one of the Kings of Athens, they say was an Egyptian, which they prove by these Arguments, viz. That whereas there was a great Drought (as all confess) almost over all the World, This seems to be the Se∣ven Years Fa∣mine. Scarcity all over the World but in Egypt. except Egypt only (because of the pe∣culiar property of the Place) which destroy'd both Men and the Fruits of the Earth together, Erechtheus transported a great quantity of Corn to Athens out of Egypt, because they and the Egyptians were of the same Kindred; with which Kindness the Citizens were so affected, that they advanc'd him to the Kingdom. After which, he instituted the Festivals, and taught the Egyptian Rites and My∣steries of Ceres in Eleusina. They say moreover, that it's reported upon good ground, that the Goddess her self came into Attica at that time when Corn and other goodly Fruit in her Name were transported thither; and that therefore it seem'd as if she had again renew'd the Invention of Seed, as she did at the beginning. Likewise that the Athenians themselves confess, that in the Reign of Erichtheus, when the Drought had burnt up all the Fruits of the Earth, Ceres came thither and gave them Corn. And that the Rites and Mysteries of this Goddess, were then begun in Eleusina, and that the Sacrifices and ancient Ceremonies, both of the Athenians and Egyp∣tians, are one and the same: And that they took the original of their Priests or Magistrates of Athens. Eumol∣phide from the Egyptian Priests, and their Heralds from their Pastaphori, Egyptian Priests, who carry'd the Coat of Venus, whose Name was Pastos. Pastophori. Further, that only the Grecians swear by the Name of Isis, and that in all their Manners and Customs, they are altogether like the Egyptians. These and many other such like Arguments they bring to maintain this Colony, more (I think) out of Am∣bition, because of the Glory and Renown of that City, than any ground of Truth they have for their Assertion. To conclude, the Egyptians say, that many Parts of the World were planted by their Ancestors, by Colonies sent from thence, by means of the State and Grandure of their Kings, and the vast number of their People. Which Reports not being supported with sufficient Arguments, nor at∣tested by credible Authors, we think 'em not worthy of any further Account. But thus much we thought fit to say of the Egyptian Theology.
CHAP. III. The Description of Egypt. Of the Lake of Serbon. The Nature of the River Nile. The Cataracts; the Mouths of Nile. The Fruits of Egypt. The Beasts, Crocodile, &c. Several Opinions concerning the Inundation of Nile. AND now we shall endeavour to treat distinctly of the Country it self, and the River Nile, and other things worthy of Remark. The Land of Egypt almost all lies wholly to the South, and is naturally fortify'd, and the most plea∣sant Country of any of the Kingdoms round about it. For on the West it's de∣fended by the Desarts of Libya, full of Wild Beasts, running out a vast way in Length; where the Passage is both difficult, and extreamly hazardous, through want of Water, and other Provision. On the South it's inviron'd with the Ca∣taracts of Nile, and the Mountains adjoyning. For from the Country of the Troglodites, and the higher Parts of Ethiopia, for the space of Five Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs, there's no passing either by Land or Water, without such a measure of Provision as a King himself could only be furnish'd with. Those Parts towards the East, are partly secur'd by the River, and partly surrounded by the Deserts and by the Marishes call'd the Lake of Ser∣bon, Plin. Na. Hist. lib. 5. c. 1. In his time but a small Lake, said to be once 50 Miles in compass. Barathra. For there's a Lake be∣tween Coelo-Syria and Egypt, very narrow, but exceeding deep, even to a Won∣der, two Hundred Furlongs in length, call'd Serbon: If any through Ignorance approach it, they are lost irrecoverably; for the Channel being very narrow, like a Swadling-band, and compass'd round with vast heaps of Sand, great quantities of it are cast into the Lake, by the continu'd Southern Winds, which so cover the Surface of the Water, and make it to the view so like unto Dry Land, that it cannot possibly be distinguish'd; and therefore many unacquainted with the na∣ture of the Place, by missing their way, have been there swallow'd up, together with whole Armies. For the Sand being trod upon, sinks down and gives way by degrees, and like a malicious Cheat, deludes and decoys them that come upon it, till too late when they see the mischief they are likely to fall into, they begin to support and help one another, but without any possibility either of returning back, or escaping certain Ruin; for sinking into the Gulf, they are neither able to swim (the Mud preventing all motion of the Body) nor in a capacity to wade out, having nothing firm to support them for that purpose; for Sand and Wa∣ter being mixt together, the Nature of both is thereby so chang'd, that there's neither fording, nor passing over it by Boat. Being brought therefore to this pass, without the least possibility of help to be afforded 'em, they go together with the Sand to the Bottom of the Gulf, at the very Brink of the Bog; and so the Place agreeable to its nature is call'd Barathrum, a deep Gulf. Barathrum. Having spoken of the Three Boundaries of Egypt, by which it is distinguish'd from the rest of the Continent, we now proceed to the next. The Fourth side is near surrounded with a The Mede∣terranean. vast Sea, without any Harbours, being a very long and tedious Voyage, and very difficult to find any place of Landing. For from Parcetonium in Africa, to Joppa in Coelo-Syria, for the space almost of Five Thou∣sand Furlongs. Eight Hun∣dred Miles. Five Thousand Furlongs, there's not one safe Harbour to be found, except Pharus. Then again all along the Coasts of Egypt, the Sea is full of Rocks and Sands, not discernible by Mariners unacquainted with the Places; so that when they look upon themselves as safe, and to have escaped the danger of the Seas, and make with great joy to Land (wanting skill to steer aright) they are on a sudden and unexpectedly shipwrackt. Others inconsiderately, because they cannot see the Land, in regard it lies so low, are carried either into the Bogs, or to the Deserts. And in this manner is Egypt naturally guarded on every side. It's of a long Form or Shape; that part that lies along to the Sea-Coast stretches forth it self in length 320 Miles. Two Thousand Furlongs; but to the South it runs al∣most 960 Miles. Six Thousand Furlongs. It was anciently the most Populous Country in the World, and at this day not inferior to any. It was formerly full of Famous Towns, and had in it above Eighteen Thousand Cities, as is to be seen registred in their Sacred Records: And in the time of Ptolemy Lagus, there were reckon'd above
Three Thousand, which remain still to this day. Once they say in a General Account taken of all the Inhabitants, they amounted to Seven Millions; and at this time are no less than Three Millions of People. And therefore they say that their Kings by the help of such a Multitude, left behind them in their great and wonderful Works, eternal Monuments of their state and grandure; which we shall by and by distinctly treat of: But at present we shall speak of the nature of Nile, and of the property of the Soyl. Nile runs from the South towards the North from Spring-heads hitherto un∣known, The nature of Nile. for they are in the utmost Borders of Ethiopia, where by reason of the vast Deserts, and Extremity of Heat, there's no coming. It's the greatest of all other Rivers, and runs through many Countries, and therefore has many large Turnings and Windings, sometimes making its Way to the East and Arabia, and then again to the West and Lybia. For it runs down from the Mountains of E∣thiopia, till it empties it self into the Sea, at least 1920 Miles. Twelve Thousand Furlongs, accounting the several Windings it makes in the way. In its Course it makes many Islands; amongst many others in Ethiopia, one remarkable for its Greatness, call'd Meroes, About 3 Miles. Two and Twenty Furlongs broad. But in the lower Places its swelling Waves grow narrower, and the Current divides it self into Two Chan∣nels towards the Continents that lye on either side the Island. One of the Cur∣rents bends towards Africa, and is at length swallow'd up in a Bed of Sand of an incredible Depth: The other makes its Course towards Arabia, on the other side, and falls into deep Guts and vast Bogs, inhabited round by divers Nations; en∣tring at last into Egypt, it keeps no direct Course, but turns and winds here and there in some Places Ten Furlongs in breadth, in others less, sometimes running towards the East, then to the West, and sometimes back again to the South. For Mountains stand on both sides the River, and take up a large Tract of Ground; and the River forcing it self with great violence against strait and narrow Pre∣cipices, the Water is driven back, and flows over the Neighbouring Fields; and after it has run a considerable way towards the South, it returns at length to its natural Course. And though this River is thus remarkable above all others, yet this is especially observable in it, that its Stream runs calm and smooth, without any violent Surges, or tempestuous Waves, except at the Cataracts; a Place of Cataracts. Ten Furlongs being so call'd, running down in a Precipice, in a straight and nar∣row Passage amongst steep Rocks; the whole is a rugged shelvy Gulf, where there lye many great Stones, like huge Rocks. The Water dashing violently against these Rocks, is beaten back, and rebounds the contrary way, by which are made wonderful Whirlpools, and by the repeated Influx, the whole Place is cover'd with Froth and Foam, to the no small amazement of the Beholders: For the River there runs down with as quick and violent a Current, as an Arrow out of a Bow. Sometimes it happens that (these Rocks, and the whole Gulf being cover'd with the vast quantity of Waters of the Nile) some Ships driven with contrary Winds are hurried down the Cataract, but there's no possibility of Sailing up against it, the force of the Stream baffling all the Art of Man. There are many Cataracts of this kind, but the greatest is that in the Confines of Ethiopia and Egypt. How the River Nile makes several Islands near Ethiopia (amongst which Me∣roe Meroe. is the chief) is before declar'd. In this Island is a Famous City of the same Name, which Cambyses built, and call'd it after the Name of his Mother Meroe. This Island is said to be of the shape of a Shield, and for Greatness exceeding all the rest of the Islands in those Parts, being 3000 Furlongs is about 360 Miles. Three Thou∣sand Furlongs in Length, and a Note, Above he says it was but 22 Furlongs broad; now 1000, which is about 120 Miles. Thousand in Breadth, ha∣ving in it many Cities, of which Meroe is the Noblest. The Island is surrounded towards the Coasts of Lybia with vast Heaps of Sand, all along close to the River, and towards A∣rabia run along steep rocky Mountains. It's said there are in it Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron and Brass, a great number of Ebony Trees, and all sorts of precious Stones. To conclude, there are so many Islands made by this River, that it's scarce credible. For besides those Islands in that part of Egypt call'd Delta, there are (they say) Seven Hun∣dred, some of which the Ethiopians inhabit, and sow with Millet; others are so pester'd with Serpents, , Cynocephales, Monkies that have Heads like Dogs, are fierce and cruel, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 8. c. 54. Baboons, and all Kinds of hurtful Beasts, that it's dangerous to come into them.
The River Nile parting it self into several Channels in Egypt, makes that part call'd Delta, so call'd from the shape resembling that δ. Greek Letter. The Two Sides of this Delta are fashion'd by the Two extream Branches of the River; the Foot of this Letter is the Sea, where the Seven Mouths of Nile disgorge them∣selves. The Mouths of Nile. For there are Seven Places call'd Mouths, through which it empties it∣self into the Ocean. The first lying to the most Eastward Channel, is at Pelusium, call'd Now Damiata. 1. Pelusian. 2. Ta∣nitian. 3. Mendesian. 4. Pathmetian, or Fatnian, by Strabo. 5. Sebinnitian, 6. Bolbinitian. 7. Canopian. Pelusaicum; the Second Tani∣ticum; the Third Mendesium; the Fourth Phatniticum; the Fifth Sebenyticum; the Sixth Bolbitinum, and the last Canopicum or Herculeum, as some call it. There are some other Mouths made by Art, of which it's not material to write. At every of the Mouths is a City built on either side of the River, defended with strong Guards and Bridges on each Bank. From Pelusaicum as far as to the Arabian Gulf, and the Red Sea, is a Canal cut out. Necos the Son of Psameticus, was the First that began this Work, Attempt to cut through the Isthmus to the Red Sea. and after him Darius the Persian carry'd it on, but left it unfinish'd, being told by some that if he cut it through the Isthmus, all Egypt would be drown'd, for that the Red Sea lay higher than Egypt. The last Attempt was made by Ptolemy the Second, who cut a Sluce cross over the Isthmus in a more convenient Place, which Ptolemy's Ri∣ver. he open'd when he had a mind to Sail down that way, and then presently after shut up again; which Contrivance prov'd very useful and serviceable. The River which runs through this Cut is call'd Ptolemy, after the Name of the Maker. Where it falls into the The Red Sea. Sea, there's a City built call'd Asinoe, now Azirus. Arsinoe. Delta is of the shape of Sicily: Both sides are Seven Hundred and Fifty Furlongs in length, and the Foot which lies along the Sea-Coast, is Thirteen Hundred Furlongs. This Island has in it many Dikes and Sluces cut by Art, and is the most sweet and pleasantest part of Egypt; for being inricht and water'd by the River, it produces all sorts of Grain and other Fruits; and by the Yearly overflowing of the River, the Face of the Ground is still continually renew'd, and the Inhabitants have an easie way to water it by means of a certain Engin, invented by Archi∣medes the Syracusian, which from its Form is call'd A Snail's Shell. Choclia. And whereas the Nile flows gently over it, it brings along with it much Soyl, which resting in low and hollow Grounds, makes very rich Marishes. For in these Places grow Roots of several Tasts and Savours, and Fruits and Herbs of a singular nature and qua∣lity, which are very useful both to the Poor, and those that are Sick; for they do not only afford plentifully in every Place things for Food, but all other things necessary and useful for the Life of Man. There grows in great Plenty Lotus, of Lotus, Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 13. c. 17. Ciborium. which the Egyptians make Bread for the nourishment of Man's Body. Here's like∣wise produc'd in plenty Ciborium, call'd the Egyptian Bean. Here are divers sorts of Trees, amongst which those call'd Persica, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 13. c. 9. Sycamore, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 13. c. 7. Bates. Persica, whose Fruit is of wonderful sweet∣ness: This Plant was brought out of Ethiopia by the Persians, when Cambyses con∣quer'd these Places. The Sycamore (or Egyptian Fig-tree) some of them bear Mul∣berries, others a Fruit like unto Figs, and bear all the Year long; so that a Man may satisfie his Hunger at any time. After the falling of the Waters of the River, they gather the Fruits call'd Bates, which for their sweet and delightful Taste are at Entertainments served up at last Course as delicious Deserts. The Egyptians make a Drink of Barley, call'd Zythus, for smell and sweetness Zythus. of Taste not much inferior to Wine. They make a Liquor like Oyl for the feed∣ing of their Lamps, of the Juice of a Plant which they call Cici. There are Cici. many other Plants which grow in Egypt of admirable use, which would be too tedious here to enumerate. The River Nile breeds many Creatures of several Forms and Shapes, amongst The Beasts of Nile. Crocodile, Vid. Plin. lib. 8. c. 25. which, Two are especially remarkable, the Crocodile and the Horse as it's call'd: Amongst these the Crocodile of the least Creature becomes the greatest; for it lays an Egg much of the bigness of that of a Goose, and after the young is hatcht, it grows to the length of Sixteen Cubits, and lives to the Age of a Man: It wants a Tongue, but has a Body naturally arm'd in a wonderful manner. For its Skin is cover'd all over with Scales of an extraordinary hardness; many sharp Teeth are rang'd on both sides its Jaws, and Two of them are much bigger than the rest. This Monster does not only devour Men, but other Creatures that come near the River. His Bites are sharp and destructive, and with his Claws he tears his Prey cruelly in Pieces, and what Wounds he makes, no Medicine or Application can heal. The Egyptians formerly catcht these Monsters with Hooks, baited with
raw Flesh; but of later times, they have us'd to take 'em with strong Nets like Fishes; sometimes they strike them on the Head with Forks of Iron, and so kill them. There's an infinite Multitude of these Creatures in the River and the Neighbouring Pools, in regard they are great Breeders, and are seldom kill'd. For the Crocodile is ador'd as a God by some of the Inhabitants; and for Strangers to hunt and destroy them is to no purpose, for their Flesh is not eatable. But Na∣ture has provided relief against the increase of this destructive Monster; for the Ichneumon, as it's call'd (of the Bigness of a little Dog) running up and down Ichneumon; near the Water-side, breaks all the Eggs laid by this Beast, whereever he finds them; and that which is most to be admir'd, is, that he does this not for Food or any other Advantage, but out of a natural Instinct for the meer Benefit of Mankind. The Beast call'd the Hippopota∣mus, or Sea-Horse, Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 8. c. 25. River Horse, is Five Cubits long, Four Footed, and cloven Hoof'd like to an Ox. He has Three Teeth or Tushes on either side his Jaw, ap∣pearing outwards larger than those of a Wild-Boar; as to his Ears, Tayl and his Neighing, he's like to a Horse. The whole Bulk of his Body is not much un∣like an Elephant; his Skin is firmer and thicker almost than any other Beast. He lives both on Land and Water; in the Day time he lies at the Bottom of the River, and in the Night time comes forth to Land, and feeds upon the Grass and Corn. If this Beast were so fruitful as to bring forth Young every Year, he would undo the Husbandman, and destroy a great part of the Corn of Egypt. He's likewise by the help of many Hands often caught, being struck with Instru∣ments of Iron; for when he is found, they hem him round with their Boats, and those on Board wound him with forked Instruments of Iron, cast at him as so many Darts; and having strong Ropes to the Irons, they fix in him, they let him go till he loses his Blood, and so dies: His Flesh is extraordinary hard, and of ill digestion. There's nothing in his inner Parts that can be eaten, neither his Bowels, nor any other of his Intrails. Besides these before mention'd, Nile abounds with multitudes of all sorts of Abundance of Fish in Nile. Fish; not only such as are fresh taken to supply the Inhabitants at hand, but an innumerable Number likewise which they salt up to send Abroad. To conclude, no River in the World is more Beneficial and Serviceable to Mankind, than Nile. Its Inundation begins at the Summer June 10th. Solstice, and increases till the Sept. 10th. Equi∣noctial in Autumn; during which time he brings in along with him new Soyl, and waters as well the Till'd and Improv'd Ground, as that which lies waste and untill'd, as long as it pleases the Husbandman; for the Water flowing gently and by degrees, they easily divert its Course, by casting up small Banks of Earth; and then by opening a Passage for it, as easily turn it over their Land again, if they see it needful. It's so very advantageous to the Inhabitants, and done with so little pains, that most of the Country People turn in their Cattel into the sow'd Ground to eat, and tread down the Corn, and Four or Five Months after they reap it. Some lightly run over the Surface of the Earth with a Plow, after the Water is fallen, and gain a mighty Crop without any great Cost or Pains: But Husbandry amongst all other Nations, is very laborious and chargable, only the Egyptians gather their Fruits with little Cost or Labour. That part of the Country likewise where Vines are planted after this watering by the Nile, yields a most plentiful Vintage. The Fields that after the Inundation are pastur'd by their Flocks, yield them this advantage, that the Sheep Yean twice in a Year, and are shorn as often. This Increase of the Nile is wonderful to Beholders, and altogether incredible to them that only hear the Report; for when other Rivers about the Solstice fall and grow lower all Summer long, this begins to increase, and con∣tinues to rise every day, till it comes to that height that it overflows almost all Egypt; and on the contrary in the same manner in the Winter Solstice, it falls by degrees till it wholly return into its proper Channel. And in regard the Land of Egypt lies low and Champain, the Towns, Cities and Country Villages that are built upon rising-ground (cast up by Art) look like the Islands of the Cyclades: Many of the Cattel sometimes are by the River intercepted, and so are drown'd; but those that fly to the higher Grounds are preserv'd. During the time of the Inundation, the Cattel are kept in the Country Towns and small Cottages, where they have Food and Fodder before laid up and prepar'd for them. But the com∣mon People now at liberty from all Imployments in the Field, indulge themselves
in Idleness, feasting every day, and giving themselves up to all sorts of Sports and Pleasures. Yet out of fear of the Inundation, a Watch Tower is built in Now Grand Cairo. Mem∣phis, by the Kings of Egypt, where those that are imploy'd to take care of this concern, observing to what height the River rises, send Letters from one City to another, acquainting them how many Cubits and Fingers the River rises, and when it begins to decrease; and so the People coming to understand the Fall of the Waters, are freed from their fears, and all presently have a foresight what plenty of Corn they are like to have; and this Observation has been Registred from time to time by the Egyptians for many Generations. There are great Controversies concerning the Reasons of the overflowing of Controversies about the o∣verflowing of Nile. Nile, and many both Philosophers and Historians have endeavour'd to declare the Causes of it, which we shall distinctly relate, neither making too long a Digres∣sion, nor omitting that which is so much banded and controverted. Of the In∣crease and Spring-heads of Nile, and of its emptying of it self at length into the Sea, and other properties peculiar to this River above all others, though it be the greatest in the World, yet some Authors have not dar'd to say the least thing: Some who have attempted to give their Reasons, have been very wide from the Mark. For as for Hellanicus, Cadmus, Hecataeus, and such like ancient Authors, they have told little but frothy Stories, and meer Fables. Herodotus a∣bove all other Writers very industrious, and well acquainted with General Hi∣story, made it his Business to find out the Causes of these things, but what he says, is notwithstanding very doubtful, and some things seem to be repugnant and contradictory one to another. Thucydides and Xenophon, who have the repu∣tation of faithful Historians, never so much as touch upon the Description of any Place in Egypt. But Ephorus and Theopompus, though they are very earnest in this matter, yet they have not in the least discover'd the Truth. But it was through Ignorance of the Places, and not through Negligence, that they were all led into Error. For anciently none of the Grecians, till the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, ever went into Ethiopia, or so much as to the utmost Bounds of Egypt. For those Places were never frequented by Travellers, they were so hazardous, till that King marcht with a Grecian Army into those Parts, and so made a more perfect Discovery of the Country. No Writer hitherto has pretended that he himself ever saw or heard of any one else that affirm'd he had seen the Spring-heads of Nile: All therefore amount∣ing to no more but Opinion and Conjecture, the Priests of Egypt affirm that it comes from the Ocean, which flows round the whole Earth: But nothing that they say is upon any solid grounds, and they resolve Doubts by things that are more doubtful; and to prove what they say, they bring Arguments that have need to be proved themselves. But the Troglodites (otherways call'd Molgii) whom the scorching Heat forc'd † Bolgii. to remove from the higher Parts into those lower Places, say, that there are some Signs whence a Man may rationally conclude, that the River Nile rises from Streams which run from many Fountains or Spring-heads, and meet at last in one Chan∣nel, and therefore to be the most fruitful and richest River of any that is known in the World. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Meroe (who are most to be credited upon this account) are far from inventing so much as any probable Arguments; and though they live near to the Place in controversy, are so far from giving any certain ac∣count of this matter, that they call Nile, Astapus, which in the Greek Language, signifies Water that issues out of a Place of Darkness; so that they give a Name to the River to denote their Ignorance of the Place whence it springs: But that seems the truest Reason to me, that looks to be furthest from Fiction and study'd Contrivance. Yet I am not ignorant, that Herodotus who bounds Lybia both on the East and West with this River, does ascribe the exact Knowledge of it to the Africans, call'd Nasamones, and says, that Nile rises from a certain Lake, and runs through a large Tract of Ground down all along through Ethiopia: But neither are the Sayings of the Africans in this behalf (as not altogether agree∣able to Truth,) nor the affirmation of the Writer (who proves not what he says) to be of absolute credit. But enough concerning the Spring-heads and Course of Nile, let us now venture to treat of the Causes of the Risings of this River.
Thales, who is reckon'd one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, is of Opinion that the Etesean Winds that beat fiercely upon the Mouth of the River, give a Yearly Winds. check and stop to the Current, and so hinder it from falling into the Sea, upon which the River swelling, and its Channel fill'd with Water, at length overflows the Country of Egypt, which lies flat and low. Though this seem a plausible Reason, yet it may be easily disprov'd. For if it were true what he says, then all the Rivers which run into the Sea against the Etesean Winds would overflow in like manner; which being never known in any other part of the World, some other Reason and more agreeable to Truth must of necessity be sought for. Anaxa∣goras the Philosopher ascribes the Cause to the melting of the Snow in Ethiopia, whom the Poet Euripides (who was his Scholar) follows, saying thus— The pleasant Streams of th'River Nile forsakes, Which flowing from the Negro's parched Land, Swells big when th' melting Snow to th'River takes, Comes furling down and overflows the Strand. Neither is it any hard Task to confute this Opinion, since it's apparent to all, that by reason of the parching Heats, there's no Snow in Ethiopia at that time of the Year. For in these Countries there's not the least Sign either of Frost, Cold or any other effects of Winter, especially at the time of the overflowing of Nile. And suppose there be abundance of Snow in the higher Parts of Ethiopia, yet what is affirm'd is certainly false: For every River that is swell'd with Snow, fumes up in cold Fogs, and thickens the Air; but about Nile, only above all other Rivers, neither Mists gather, nor are there any cold Breezes, nor is the Air gross and thick. Herodotus says, that Nile is such in its own nature, as it seems to be in the time of its Increase; for that in Our Win∣ter. Winter, when the Sun moves to the South, and runs its daily Course directly over Africa, it exhales so much Water out of Nile, that it decreases against Nature; and in Summer when the Sun returns to the North, the Rivers of Greece, and the Rivers of all other Northern Countries fall and decrease; and therefore that it is not so strange for Nile about Summer time to increase, and in Winter to fall and grow lower. But to this it may be an∣swer'd, that if the Sun exhale so much moisture out of Nile in Winter time, it would do the like in other Rivers in Africa, and so they must fall as well as Nile, which no where happens throughout all Africa, and therefore this Author's Reason is frivolous; for the Rivers of Greece rise not in the Winter, by reason of the remoteness of the Sun, but by reason of the great Rains that fall at that time. Democritus the Abderite says, that the Northern Countries, and not those to∣wards Democritus. the South (as Anaxagoras and Euripides say) are subject to Snow; for that it's clear and evident to every Body, that in the Northern Parts, Drifts and Heaps of Snow lye congeal'd at the time of the Winter Solstice; but in Summer, the Ice being melted by the heat of the Sun, the Land becomes very wet, which causes many thick Mists to appear upon the Hills from the Vapours rising from the Earth. These Vapours, he says, are driven about by the Etesean Winds, till they fall upon the highest Mountains, which are (as he affirms in Ethiopia) and by the violent impression they make upon the Tops of these Mountains, great Storms and Showers of Rain are occasion'd, which about the time of the Etesean Winds cause the Ri∣ver to rise. But if any will diligently observe the time and season of the Year when this falls out, he may easily answer this Argument; for Nile begins to swell at the time of the Summer Solstice, when there are no Etesean Winds; and after the Autumnal Equinox, when those Winds are past, it falls again. Inasmuch therefore as certain Experience to the contrary, answers all Arguments be they never so probable, the Mans diligence and ingenuity is to be commended, but his Affirmations and Opinions by no means to be rely'd upon: And I wave this, that it's evident that the Etesean Winds come as often from the West, as from the North. For not only the North-East Winds call'd Aparctie, but those of the North-West Plin. Nat. His. lib. 2. c. 47. call'd Argeste, go under the name of the Etesean Winds. And whereas he
affirms that the greatest Mountains are in Ethiopia, as it wants proof, so likewise all grounds for credit and belief, as is evident from the thing itself. Ephorus, who gives the last account of the thing, endeavours to ascertain the Ephorus. Reason, but seems not to find out the Truth. The whole Land of Egypt (says he) is cast up from the River, and the Soyl is of a loose and spungy nature, and has in it many large Clifts and hollow Places, wherein are abundance of Water, which in the Winter-time is frozen up, and in the Summer issues out on every side, like Sweat from the Pores, which occasions the River Nile to rise. This Writer does not only betray his own Ignorance of the nature of Places in Egypt, that he never saw them himself, but likewise that he ne∣ver was rightly inform'd by any that was acquainted with them. For if the overflow∣ing of Nile should proceed from Egypt it self, it could not flow above the Land of E∣gypt, where it passes through Rocks and Mountainous Places. For as it takes its Course through Ethiopia for above the space of Six Thousand Furlongs, it is at its full height before ever it reach Egypt, and therefore if the River Nile lye lower than the Caverns of congested Earth, those Clefts and hollow Places must be above, towards the Superficies of the Earth, in which it is impossible so much Water should be contain'd. And if the River lye higher than those spongy Caverns, it is not possible that from hollow Places, much lower than the River, the Water should rise higher than the River. Lastly, who can imagin that Waters issuing out of Holes and hollow Parts of the Earth, should raise the River to such a height, as to overflow almost all the Land of Egypt? But I let pass this vain Imagination of Casting up the Soyl, and lodging of Waters in the Bowels of the Earth, being so easily to be confuted. The River Meander hath cast up a great Tract of Land in Asia, whereas at the time of the Rising of Nile, nothing of that kind in the least can be seen. In the same manner the River Archelous in Arcadia, and Cephesus in Beotia, which runs down from Phocea, have cast up great quantities of Earth, by both which the Writer is convicted of falsity: And indeed no Man is to expect any certainty from Ephorus, who may be palpably discern'd not to make it his business in many things to declare the Truth. The Philosophers indeed in Memphis have urg'd strong Reasons of the Increase of Nile, which are hard to be confuted; and though they are improbable, yet many agree to them. For they divide the Earth into Three Parts, one of which is that wherein we inhabit; another quite contrary to these Places in the Seasons of the Year; the Third lying between these Two, which they say is uninhabitable by reason of the scorching heat of the Sun; and therefore if Nile should overflow in the Winter-time, it would be clear and evident, that its Source would arise out of our Zone, because then we have the most Rain: But on the contrary being that it rises in Summer, it's very probable that in the Country opposite to us it's Winter-time, where then there's much Rain, and that those Floods of Water are brought down thence to us: And therefore that none can ever find out the Head-Springs of Nile, because the River has its Course through the opposite Zone; which is uninhabited. And the exceeding sweetness of the Water, they say, is the Confirmation of this Opinion; for passing through the Torrid Zone, the Water is boil'd, and therefore this River is sweeter than any other in the World; for Heat does naturally dulcorate Water. But this Reason is easily refuted; for its plainly impossible that the River should rise to that height, and come down to us from the opposite Zone; especially if it be granted that the Earth is round. But if any yet shall be so obstinate as to affirm it is so as the Philosophers have said, I must in short say it's against and contrary to the Laws of Nature. For being they hold Opinions that in the nature of the things can hardly be disprov'd, and place an inhabitable part of the World between us and them that are opposite to us; they conclude, that by this device, they have made it impos∣sible, and out of the reach of the Wit of Man to confute them. But it is but just and equal, that those who affirm any thing positively, should prove what they say, either by good Authority or strength of Reason. How comes it about that only the River Nile should come down to us from the other opposite Zone? Have we not other Rivers that this may be as well apply'd to? As to the Causes alledg'd for the sweetness of the Water, they are absur'd: For if the Water be boyl'd with the parching Heat, and thereupon becomes sweet, it would have no pro∣ductive
quality, either of Fish or other Kinds of Creatures and Beasts; for all Wa∣ter whose Nature is chang'd by Fire, is altogether incapable to breed any living thing, and therefore being that the Nature of Nile contradicts this decoction and boyling of the Water, we conclude that the Causes alledg'd of its increase are false. The Opinion of Oenopides of Chios is this: The Waters (say he) that are under the Earth in Summer-time, are cold, and warm in the Winter, as we see by ex∣perience in deep Wells; for in a sharp Winter they are the least cold, but in Summer they are the coldest of any other time; and therefore, saith he, there's good reason that Nile in the Winter should grow low and contracted, because the Heat in the Bowels of the Earth exhales much of the Water, which cannot be supply'd, in regard no Rains fall in Egypt. But in Summer-time, when the Wa∣ters that lye deep in the Earth are no longer exhal'd, then the Channel of the Ri∣ver, according to the order of Nature, fills without any obstruction. But to this it may be answer'd, that many Rivers in Africa, whose Mouths lye parallel with this River, and run the like Course, yet overflow not like Nile. For on the con∣trary they rise in Winter, and fall in Summer, which clearly evinces his Falsity, who endeavours with a shew of Reason to oppose the Truth. But to the true cause, This is now found to be the true Rea∣son at this day. Agartharchides of Cnidus comes nearest. For he says, that in the Moun∣tainous parts of Ethiopia, there are Yearly continual Rains From the 10th of June to the 10th of September. from the Summer Solstice to the Equinox in Autumn, and therefore there's just cause for Nile to be low in the Winter, which then flows only from its own natural Spring-heads, and to overflow in Summer through the abundance of Rains. And though none hi∣therto have been able to give a Reason of these Inundations, yet he says his O∣pinion is not altogether to be rejected; for there are many things that are con∣trary to the Rules of Nature, for which none are able to give any substantial Rea∣son. That which happens in some parts of Asia, he says, gives some confirmation to his Opinion. For in the Confines of Scythia, near Mount Caucasus, after the Winter is over, he affirms, that abundance of Snow falls every Year for many Days together: And that in the Northern Parts of India, at certain Times, there falls abundance of Hail, and of an incredible Bigness: And that near the River Hydas∣pis; in Summer-time, it rains continually; and the same happens in Ethiopia for many Days together; and that this disorder of the Air whirling about, occa∣sions many Storms of Rain in Places near adjoyning; and that therefore it's no wonder if the Mountainous Parts of Ethiopia, which lies much higher than Egypt, are soakt with continual Rains, wherewith the River being fill'd, overflows; es∣pecially since the natural Inhabitants of the Place affirm, that thus it is in their Country. And though these things now related, are in their nature contrary to those in our own Climates, yet we are not for that Reason to disbelieve them. For with us the South Wind is cloudy and boysterous, whereas in Ethiopia it's calm and clear; and that the North Winds in Europe are fierce and violent, but in those Regions low and almost insensible. But however (after all) though we could heap up variety of Arguments against all these Authors concerning the Inundation of Nile, yet those which we have before alledg'd shall suffice, lest we should transgress those Bounds of Brevity which at the first we propos'd to our selves. Having therefore divided this Book, be∣cause of the Largeness of it, into Two Parts (having before determin'd to keep within moderate Bounds) we shall now end the first part of this Treatise, and continue in the other, those things that are further remarkable in Egypt coherent with those before, beginning with the Actions of the Kings of Egypt, and the antient way of Living among the Egyptians.
THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK OF Diodorus the Sicilian. CHAP. IV. The First way of Living of the Egyptians: Gods and Demy-Gods their Reigns in Egypt. The antient Kings of Egypt, Menis, &c. Their several Works. Thebes built by Busiris. The stately Sepulchers, Oblisks and Temples there. A Description of Osimanduas's Sepulcher. Memphis built by Uchoreus. Meris's Lake. Sesostris or Sesoosis his famous Expedition, and great Works. THE First Book of Diodorus is divided into Two Parts by reason of the Greatness of it; the First whereof is as a Preface to the whole Work, and in which an Account is given of what the Egyptians say concerning the Beginning of the World, of the first Creation of the Universe, and of those Gods that built Cities in Egypt, and call'd them after their own Names; of the First Men, and their antient way of Living; of the Worship of the Gods, and the building of Temples by the Egyptians. Moreover of the Situation of Egypt, and what strange things are related of Nile; the Causes of its Inundation, and the various Opinions of Philosophers and Historians concerning it: Wherein likewise is set down the Confutations of the several Writers. In this we shall handle and go through those matters that have a dependance upon the former. After we have distinctly set forth the antient way of Living among the Egyptians, we shall then begin with their first Kings, and declare the Acts of every one of them successively down to Amasis. They say the Egyptians in antient Times fed upon nothing but Roots and Herbs, Their first way of Li∣ving. and Colewort Leaves, which grew in the Fens and Bogs, having first try'd the Taste of them: But above all and most commonly, they fed upon the Herb call'd Agrostis, because it was sweeter than any other, and was very nourishing to Mens Bodies: And it's very certain, that the Cattel much covet it, and grow very fat with it. At this Day therefore Superstitious Persons in memory of its usefulness when they Sacrifice to the Gods, they worship them with their Hands full of this Herb: For they conceive Man from the frame of his Nature and , from his light∣ness. frothy Consti∣tution, to be a watery Creature, something resembling the Fenny and Marish Ground, and that he hath more need of moist than of dry Food. They say the Egyptians afterwards fell to another Course of Diet, and that was eating of Fish, wherewith they were plentifully supply'd by the River, especially after the Inun∣dation; when it was return'd within its former Bounds: And they eat likewise the Flesh of some Cattel, and cloath'd themselves with their Skins. That they
made their Houses of Reeds, of which there are some Marks amongst the Shepherds of Egypt at this day, who care for no other Houses, but such like, which they say, serves their turn well enough. Afterwards in process of time, after many Ages, they fell to those Fruits which were made more apt and fit for Mans Food, amongst which was Bread made of Lotus, which invention some attribute to Isis, others to Menas, one of the antient Kings: The Priests indeed do make Mercury. Hermes the Inventer of all Arts and Sciences, but say, that their Kings found out all things necessary for the Support of Mens lives; and therefore that Kingdoms antiently were not inheritable, but given to such as had been most useful and serviceable to the People, thereby either to induce their Kings to be kind and beneficial to all their Subjects, or for that (as most agreeable to the Truth) it was a Law re∣gistred in their Sacred Records commanding them so to do. At the first (as some of them, i. e. the Priests have fabulously reported) the The Kings of Egypt. Gods and Heroes. Demy-Gods reign'd in Egypt for the space almost of Eighteen Thou∣sand Years, the last of which was Orus, the Son of Isis. Afterwards they say that Men reign'd there for the space of Fifteen Thousand Years, to the Hundred and Eightieth Ant. Ch. 58. Olympiad, at which time I my self came into Egypt in the Reign of Ptolemy Dio∣nysius the Younger, be∣fore Christ, 58, reign'd with Cleopatra the Year before Christ, 49. Ptolemy, who took upon him the Name of Dionysius the Younger. Most of their Kings were Natives of the Country. There were a few in the mean time that were Ethiopians, Persians and Macedonians. Four of them that were Ethiopians, reign'd not in a continued Line, but at several times, for the space of Thirty Six Years or thereabouts: From the time that Cambyses conquer'd the Nation, the Per∣sians reign'd for the space of a Hundred Thirty Five Years, reckoning the De∣fections of the Egyptians within the time occasion'd by the intolerable Cruelty of the Governours, and their Impiety against the Egyptian Gods. Last of all, the Macedonians tul'd there for the space of Two Hundred Seventy Six Years. The rest of the Princes were Egyptians, to the number of Four Hundred and Seventy Men, and Five Women. The Egyptian Priests keep Registers in their Temples of all their Kings successively from many Generations past; to what Greatness and Majesty every one of them arriv'd; what were their particular Tempers and In∣clinations, and their Actions in their several times. To write particularly of every one of them, as it would be tedious, so it would be altogether superfluous, in∣as much as many things concerning them are insignificant, and of no use; and therefore we have limited our selves to treat only of those Matters that are most remarkable and worthy remembrance. After the Gods (they say) Menas was the First King of Egypt. He taught the 1. Menas the First King af∣ter the Gods. People the Adoration of the Gods, and the manner of Divine Worship; how to adorn their Beds and Tables with rich Cloaths and Coverings, and was the first that brought in a delicate and sumptuous way of Living. Many Ages after, reign'd Gnephachthus, Father of Bocchoris the Wise; who leading 2. Gnephach∣thus. an Army into Arabia, through many barren and desert Places, his Provision fail'd, so that for the space of one day he was forc'd to take up with such mean Food as the common People, among whom he happen'd then to be, could supply him with, which he eat so heartily, and relisht with so much delight, as for the fu∣ture he forbad all Excess and Luxury, and curs'd that King who first brought in that Sumptuous and Luxurious way of Living; and this change and altera∣tion of Meat and Drink and Bedding was so delightful to him, that he order'd the Curse before mention'd, to be enter'd in the Sacred Records in the Temple of Jupiter at Thebes; which was the chief Reason why the Fame and Reputation of Menas became to be clouded in future Generations. They say, the Posterity of Gnephachthus, to the number of Fifty Two, reign'd for the space of Fourteen Hundred Years; in which time there's found nothing worthy of Remark. Afterwards reign'd Busiris, and Eight of his Posterity after him; the last of 3. Busiris. which (of the same Name with the First) built that great City which the Egyp∣tians call The City of the Sun. Heliopolis, the Greeks Thebes; it was in Circuit a About 20 Miles. Thebes built. Hundred and Forty Furlongs, adorn'd with stately publick Buildings, magnificent Temples, and rich Donations and Revenues to Admiration; and that he built all the Private Houses, some Four, and others Five Stories high. And to sum up all in a word, made it not only the most beautiful and stateliest City of Egypt, but of all others in the World. The Fame therefore of the Riches and Grandure of this City was so nois'd abroad in every Place, that the Poet Homer takes notice of it in these Words—
—Nor Thebes so much renown'd, Hom. Illiad. lib. 9. Whose Courts with unexhausted Wealth abound, Where through a Hundred Gates with Marble Arch, To Battel Twenty Thousand Chariots march. Although there are some that say it had not a Hundred Gates; but that there were many large Porches to the Temples, whence the City was call'd Hecatom∣pylus, a Hundred Gates, for many Gates: Yet that it was certain they had in it Twenty Thousand Chariots of War; for there were a Hundred Stables all along the River from Memphis to Thebes towards Lybia, each of which were capable to hold Two Hundred Horses, the Marks and Signs of which are visible at this day: And we have it related, that not only this King, but the succeeding Princes from time to time, made it their Business to beautify this City; for that there was no City under the Sun so adorn'd with so many and stately Monuments of Gold, Silver and Ivory, and multitudes of Colossus's and Obelisks, cut out of one entire Stone. For there were there Four Temples built, for Beauty and Greatness to be admir'd, the most ancient of which was in Circuit Almost Two Miles. Thirteen Furlongs, and Five and Forty Cubits high, and had a Wall Four and Twenty Foot broad. The Orna∣ments of this Temple were suitable to its Magnificence, both for Cost and Work∣manship. The Fabrick hath continu'd to our Time, but the Silver and the Gold, and Ornaments of Ivory and Precious Stones were carry'd away by the Persians, when Cambyses burnt the Temples of Egypt. At which time they say those Palaces at Persepolis and Susa, and other Parts of Media (famous all the World over) were built by the Persians, who brought over these rich Spoils into Asia, and sent for Workmen out of Egypt for that purpose. And it is reported, that the Riches of Egypt were then so great, that in the Rubbish and Cynders there were found and gather'd up above Three Hundred Talents of Gold, and of Silver no less than Two Thousand and Three Hundred. There, they say, are the wonderful Sepulchers of the ancient Kings, which for Sepulchres. State and Grandure far exceed all that Posterity can attain unto at this Day. The Egyptian Priests say that in their Sacred Registers, there are enter'd Seven and Forty of these Sepulchers; but in the Reign of Ptolemy Lagus, there remain'd only Se∣venteen, many of which were ruin'd and destroy'd when I my self came into those Parts, which was in the Hundred and Eightieth Olympiad. And these things are not only reported by the Egyptian Priests out of their Sacred Records, but many of the Grcians who travel'd to Thebes in the time of Ptolemy Lagus, and writ Histories of Egypt (among whom was Hecateus) agree with what we have related. Of the First Sepulchers (wherein they say the Women of Jupiter were buri'd) that of King Osymanduas was Ten Furlongs in Circuit, at the entrance of which they say, was a Portico of various colour'd Marble, in length Two Hundred Foot, and in height 67 Foot. . 16 Cubits high; i. e. 44 Foot. Five and Forty Cubits; thence going forward, you come into a foursquare Stone Gallery, every Square being Four Hundred Foot, supported in∣stead of Pillars, with Beasts, each of one intire Stone, Sixteen Cubits high, carv'd after the antique manner. The Roof was intirely of Stone, each Stone Twelve Foot Eight Cubits broad, with an Azure Sky, bespangl'd with Stars. Passing out of this Pe∣rystilion, you enter into another Portico much like the former, but more curious∣ly carv'd, and with more variety. At the Entrance stand Three Statues, each of one intire Stone, the Workmanship of Memnon of Sienitas. One of these made in a fitting posture, is the greatest in all Egypt, the measure of his Foot exceeding Seven Cubits; the other Two much less than the former, reaching but to his Knees, the one standing on the right, and the other on the left, being his Daughter and Mother. This Piece is not only commendable for its greatness, but admirable for its Cut and Workmanship, and the Excellency of the Stone; in so great a Work there's not to be discern'd the least Flaw, or any other Blemish. Upon it there is this Inscription—
I am Osimanduas King of Kings; if any would know how great I am, and where I lye, let him excel me in any of my Works. There was likewise at this Second Gate, another Statue of his Mother, by her self, of one Stone, Twenty Cubits in height; upon her Head were plac'd Three Crowns, to denote she was both the Daughter, Wife and Mother of a King. Near to this Portico they say there was another Gallery or Piazzo, more remarkable than the former, in which were various Sculptures representing his Wars with the Bactrians, who had revolted from him, against whom (it's said) he march'd with Four Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twenty Thousand Horse; which Army he divided into Four Bodies, and appointed his Sons Generals of the whole. In the first Wall might be seen the King assaulting a Bulwark, inviron'd with the River, and fighting at the Head of his Men against some that make up a∣gainst him, assisted with a Lion in a terrible manner, which some affirm is to be taken of a true and real Lion, which the King bred up tame, which went along with him in all his Wars, and by his great strength ever put the Enemy to flight. Others make this Construction of it, that the King being a Man of ex∣traordinary Courage and strength, he was willing to trumpet forth his own praises, setting forth the Bravery of his own Spirit, by the representation of a Lion. In the Second Wall was carv'd the Captives dragg'd after the King, repre∣sented without Hands and Privy Members; which was to signifie that they were of effeminate Spirits, and had no Hands when they came to fight. The Third Wall represented all sorts of Sculptures and curious Images, in which were set forth the King's sacrificing of Oxen, and his Triumphs in that War. In the middle of the Peristylion, open to the Air at the top, was rear'd an Altar of shining Marble, of excellent Workmanship, and for largeness to be ad∣mir'd. In the last Wall were Two Statues, each of one intire Stone, Forty Foot. Seven and Twenty Cubits high: Near to which Three Passages open'd out of the The Galle∣ry or Cloy∣ster. Peri∣stylion, into a stately Room supported with Pillars like to a Theater for Musick; every side of the Theater was Two Hundred Foot Square. In this there were many Statues of Wood, representing the Pleaders and Spectators looking upon the Judges that gave Judgment. Of these there were Thirty carv'd upon one of the Walls. In the middle sat the Chief Justice, with the Image of Truth hanging about his Neck, with his Eyes clos'd, having many Books lying before him: This signify'd that a Judge ought not to take any Bribes, but ought only to regard the Truth and Merits of the Cause. Next adjoyning was a Gallery full of divers Apartments, in which were all sorts of Delicate Meats ready drest up. Near hereunto is represented the King himself, curiously carv'd and painted in glorious Colours, offering Gold and Sil∣ver to the Gods; as much as he yearly receiv'd out of the Gold and Silver Mines. The Sum was there inscrib'd (according to the Rate of Silver) to amount unto Thirty Two Millions of Three Thou∣sand and Two Hundred times Ten Thousand of Mina's, every Mina 3l. 2s. 6d. That is, Ninety Six Millions of Pounds Sterl, and Sixteen Thousand Millions of Crowns. Minas. Next hereunto was the Sacred Library, where∣on was inscrib'd these Words, viz. The Cure of the Mind. Adjoyning to this were the Images of all the Gods of Egypt, to every one of whom the King was making Offerings peculiarly belonging to each of them, that Osiris and all his Associates who were plac'd at his Feet, might understand his Piety towards the Gods, and his Righteousness towards Men. Next to the Library was a stately Room, where∣in were Twenty Beds to eat upon, richly adorn'd; in this House were the Images of Jupiter and Juno, together with the Kings: And here it's suppos'd the King's Body lies inter'd: Round the Room are many Apartments, wherein are to be seen in curious Painting, all the Beasts that are accounted Sacred in Egypt. Thence are Ascents to the top of the whole Monument of the Sepulcher, which being mounted, appears a Border of Gold round the Tomb of Three Hundred Sixty Five Cubits in Compass, and a Cubit thick; within the Division of every Cubit, were the se∣veral Days of the Year ingraven, with the natural rising and setting of the Stars and their Significations, according to the Observations of the Egyptian Astrologers. This Border, they say, was carry'd away by Cambyses and the Persians, when he conquer'd Egypt. In this manner they describe the Sepulcher of King Osimanduas,
which seems far to exceed all others both for Magnificence and Curiosity of Work∣manship. The Thebans boast they were the most antient Philosophers and Astrologers of Astrology of the Thebans. any People of the World, and the first that found out exact Rules for the im∣provement both of Philosophy and Astrology, the Situation of their Country be∣ing such as gave them an Advantage above others, more clearly to discern the rising and setting of the Stars: And that the Months and Years are best and most properly order'd and dispos'd by them; for they measure their Days according to the Motion of the Sun, and not of the Moon; and account Thirty Days to every Month, and add Five Days and a quarter to every Twelve Months; and by this means they compleat the whole Year; but they add no intercalary Months, nor substract any Days, as it is the Custom of many of the Greeks. But these of Thebes seem most accurately to have observ'd the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and from them do so manage their Prognostications, that they certainly foretel eve∣ry particular Event. The Eighth of this King's Race, call'd after the Name of his Father Ʋchoreus, Ʋchoreus, the Builder of Memphis. built Memphis, the most Famous City of Egypt. For he chose the most convenient Place for it in all the Country, where Nile divides it self into several Branches, and makes that part of the Country call'd Delta, so nam'd from the shape of the Greek Letter δ Delta. Delta, which it resembles. The City being thus conveniently si∣tuated at the Head of the River, commands all the Shipping that sail up it. He built it in Circuit a Hundred and Fifty Furlongs, and made it exceeding strong and commodious in this manner: For Nile flowing round the City, and at the time of its inundation covering all round on the South Side, he casts up a mighty Rampart of Earth, both for a Defence to the City against the raging of the River, and as a Bulwark against an Enemy at Land; on every other side likewise he dug a broad and deep Trench, which received the violent Surges of the River, and fill'd every Place round the Rampart with Water, which fortify'd the City to Ad∣miration. This Place was so commodiously pitcht upon by the Builder, that most of the Kings after him prefer'd it before Thebes, and remov'd the Court thence to this Place: From that time therefore the Magnificence of Thebes began to decrease, and Memphis to increase to the Times of Alexander King of Macedon, who built a City call'd after his own Name, near the Sea, and planted it with Inhabitants, Alexandria. which all the succeeding Kings of Egypt still made it their business to inlarge: For some so beautify'd it with Royal Palaces, some with Ports and Arsenals, and others with magnificent Buildings and rich Donations, that it's judg'd by most to be Second, if not the first City of the whole World. But we shall treat of this particularly in its proper Time and Place. But the Builder of Memphis after he had finish'd the Rampart and Trench, built Palaces not infe∣rior to others, built elsewhere; yet much below the state and grandure of the for∣mer Kings. For the Inhabitants of this Country little value the short time of this present Life; but put an high esteem upon the Name and Reputation of a Vir∣tuous Life after Death; and they call the Houses of the Living, Inns, because they stay in them but a little while; but the Sepulchers of the Dead they call Everlasting Habitations, because they abide in the Graves to infinite Generations. Therefore they are not very curious in the building of their Houses; but in beau∣tifying their Sepulchers they leave nothing undone that can be thought of. Some have thought that the City of which we have but just now spoken, was The Name of Egypt. so call'd from the Daughter of the Founder, and tell a Fabulous Story, that the River Nile, in the shape of a Bull fell in love with her, and begat Egyptus, fa∣mous among the Inhabitants for his admirable Vertue, from whom the whole Country was call'd Egypt; for coming to the Crown by Descent, he was exceeding kind to his Subjects, just and diligent in all his Affairs, and therefore was judg'd justly to merit Honour and Esteem from all, and for his gracious Disposition ge∣nerally applauded. After the Death of this King, and Twelve Descents, Miris came to the Crown of Egypt, and built a Portico in Memphis to∣wards Miris or Maris his Lake. See Herodotus, Euterpe, lib. 2. c. 149. the North, more stately and magnificent than any of the rest. And a little above the City, he cut a Dyke for a Pond, bringing it down in length from the City Three Hundred and Five and Twenty Ten Schaenes, every Schaene 32 Furlongs, is about 48 Miles, but some say a Schaene is 60 Furlongs, then it's 90 Miles and upwards. Furlongs, whose use was admirable, and
the Greatness of the Work incredible. They say it was in Circuit Three Thou∣sand and Six Hundred Furlongs; and in many Places Three Hundred Foot in depth. Who is he therefore that considers the greatness of this Work, that may not justly ask the Question, How many Ten Thousand Men were imploy'd, and how many Years were spent in finishing it? Considering the Benefit and Advan∣tage (by this great Work) brought to the Government, none ever sufficiently could extol it, according to what the Truth of the thing deserv'd. For being that Nile never kept to a certain and constant height in its Inundation, and the fruit∣fulness of the Country ever depended upon its just proportion, he dug this Lake to receive such Water as was superfluous, that it might neither immoderately overflow the Land, and so cause Fenns and standing Ponds, nor by flowing too little, prejudice the Fruits of the Earth for want of Water. To this end he cut a Trench all along from the River into the Lake, Fourscore Furlongs in length, and  Three Ple∣thras. Three Hundred Foot broad; into this he let the Water of the River some∣times run, and at other times diverted it, and turn'd it over the Fields of the Husbandmen, at seasonable times, by means of Sluces which he sometimes open'd, and at other times shut up, not without great labour and cost; for these Sluces could not be open'd or shut at a less Charge than Fifty Talents. This Lake con∣tinues to the Benefit of the Egyptians for these purposes to our very Days, and is Now in being, Eight Leagues in compass on∣ly. call'd the Lake of Myris or Meris to this Day. The King left a place in the middle of the Lake, where he built a Sepulcher and Two Pyramids, one for himself, and another for his Queen, a Furlong in Height; upon the Top of which he plac'd Two Marble Statues seated in a Throne, designing by these Monuments to perpetuate the Fame and Glory of his Name to all succeeding Generations. The Revenue arising from the Fish taken in this Lake, he gave to his Wife to buy her Sweet Oint∣ments, and o∣ther fine things. Pins, which amounted to a Talent of Silver every Day. For there were in it Two and Twenty sorts of Fish, and so vast a number were taken, that those who were imploy'd continually to salt them up (though they were multitudes of People) could hardly perform it. And these are the things which the Egyptians relate of Myris. Seven Descents after (they say) Sesostris in the time the Israelites were in Egypt. Sir Walter Rawl. Sesoosis reign'd, who ex∣cell'd all his Ancestors in great and famous Actions. But not only the Greek Writers differ among themselves about this King, but likewise the Egyptian Priests and Bards. Ʋsh. Ann. says he was the Son of Amenophis, that was drown'd in the Red Sea, in the Year of the World 2513, and this Expedition was the Nine First Years of the Children of Israel's being in the Wilderness, Ʋsh. Ann. p. 20. Poets relate va∣rious and different Stories concerning him: We shall relate such as are most probable and agreeable to those Signs and Marks that are yet remaining in Egypt to confirm them. After his Birth his Father perform'd a noble Act, and becoming a King; he caus'd all throughout Egypt, that were born the same Day with his Son, to be brought together; and toge∣ther with his Son to be bred up with the same Education, and instructed in the same Discipline and Exercises, conceiving that by being thus familiarly brought up together, and conversing one with another, they would be always most loving and faithful Friends, and the best Fellow-Souldiers in all the Wars. Providing there∣fore every thing for the purpose, he caus'd the Boys to be exercised daily in the Schools with hard and difficult Labours; as that none should eat till he had run a 27 Miles. Hundred and Fourscore Furlongs: And by this means when they came to be at Mens Estate, they were fit either to be Commanders, or undertake any brave or noble Action, both in respect of the vigour and strength of their Bodies, and the excellent Endowments of their Minds. Sesostris in the first Place being sent with an Army into Arabia, by his Father, (with whom went his Companions that were bred up with him) toil'd and troubl'd himself with the hunting and killing of Wild Beasts; and then having at last overmaster'd all his Fatigues and wants of Water and Provision, he con∣quer'd all that barbarous Nation, which was never before that time subdu'd. Af∣terwards being sent into the Western Parts, he conquer'd the greatest part of Lybia, being as yet but a Youth. Coming to the Crown after the Death of his Father, incourag'd by his former Successes, he design'd to subdue and conquer the whole World. Some report that he was stirr'd up by his Daughter Athyrte to un∣dertake the gaining of the Empire of the World; for being a Woman of an ex∣traordinary Understanding, she made it out to her Father, that the Conquest was easie: Others incourag'd him by their Divinations, foretelling his Successes
by the Intrals of the Sacrifices, by their Dreams in the Temples, and Prodigies seen in the Air. There are some also that write that when Sesoosis was born, Vulcan appear'd to his Father in his Sleep, and told him that the Child then born should be Con∣queror of the Universe; and that that was the reason why his Father assembled all of the like Age, and bred them up together with his Son, to make way for him with more ease to rise to that height of Imperial Dignity: And that when he was grown to Mans Estate, fully believing what the God had foretold, he under∣took at length this Expedition. To this purpose he first made it his chief Concern, to gain the love and good will of all the Egyptians, judging it necessary in order to effect what he design'd, so far to ingage his Souldiers, as that they should willingly and readily venture, nay lose their Lives for their Generals, and that those whom he should leave behind him, should not contrive or hatch any Rebellion in his Absence: To this end therefore he oblig'd every one to the utmost of his power, working upon some by Mony, others by giving them Lands, and many by free Pardons, and upon all by fair Words, and affable and courteous Behaviour. He pardon'd those that were condemn'd for High Treason, and freed all that were in Prison for Debt, by paying what they ow'd, of whom there was a vast Multitude in the Goals. He divided the whole Country into Thirty Six Parts, which the Egyptians call Provinces. Nomi; over every one of which he appointed a Nomarchus. Governor, who should take care of the King's Revenue, and manage all other Affairs relating to their several and respective Provinces. Out of these he chose the strongest and ablest Men, and rais'd an Army answerable to the greatness of his Design, to the number of Six Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twenty Four Thousand Horse, and Seven and Twenty Thousand Chariots of War: And over all the several Regiments and Battalions, he made those that had been brought up with him Commanders, be∣ing such as had been us'd to Martial Exercises, and from their Childhood hot and zealous after that which was brave and virtuous, and that were knit together as Brothers in Love and Affection, both to the King and one to another; the number of whom were above Seventeen Hundred. Upon these Companions of his, he bestow'd large Estates in Lands, in the richest Parts of Egypt, that they might not be in the least want of any thing, re∣serving only their Attendance upon him in the Wars. Having therefore rendezvouz'd his Army, he march'd first against the Ethio∣pians, Sesostris's Ex∣pedition. inhabiting the South, and having conquer'd them, forc'd them to pay him Tribute of Ebony, Gold, and Elephant's Teeth. Then he sent forth a Navy of Four Hundred Sail into the Red Sea, and was the first Egyptian that built long Ships. By the help of this Fleet, he gain'd all the Islands in this Sea, and subdu'd the bordering Nations as far as to India. But he himself marching forward with his Land-Army, conquer'd all Asia: For he not only invaded those Nations which Alexander the Macedonian afterwards sub∣du'd, but likewise those which he never set foot upon. For he both pass'd over the River Ganges, and likewise pierc'd through all India to the main Ocean. Then he subdu'd the Scythians as far as to the River Tanais, which divides Europe from Asia; where they say he left some of his Egyptians at the Lake Meotis, and gave Original to the Nations of Colchis; and to prove that they were originally Egyp∣tians, they bring this Argument, that they are circumcis'd after the manner of the Egyptians, which Custom continu'd in this Colony as it did amongst the Jews. In the same manner he brought into his Subjection all the rest of Asia, and most of the Islands of the Cyclades. Thence passing over into Europe, he was in danger of losing his whole Army, through the difficulty of the Passages, and want of Pro∣vision. And therefore putting a stop to his Expedition in Thrace, up and down in all his Conquests, he erected Pillars, whereon were inscrib'd in Egyptian Letters, call'd Hieroglifics, these Words— Sesoosis, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, subdu'd this Country by his Arms. Among those Nations that were stout and warlike, he carv'd upon those Pil∣lars the Privy Members of a Man: Amongst them that were cowardly and faint∣hearted, the secret Parts of a Woman; conceiving that the chief and principal
Member of a Man would be a clear Evidence to Posterity of the Courage of e∣very one of them. In some Places he set up his own Statue, carv'd in Stone (arm'd with a Bow and a Lance) above Four Cubits and Four Hands in height, of which stature he himself was. Having now spent Nine Years in this Expedition, (carrying himself courteously and familiarly towards all his Subjects in the mean time) he ordered the Nations he had conquer'd, to bring their Presents and Tributes every Year into Egypt, e∣very one proportionable to their several Abilities: And he himself with the Cap∣tives and the rest of the Spoils (of which there was a vast quantity) return'd into Egypt, far surpassing all the Kings before him in the greatness of his Actions and Atchievements. He adorn'd all the Temples of Egypt with rich Presents, and the Spoils of his Enemies. Then he rewarded his Souldiers that had serv'd him in the War, every one according to their Desert. It's most certain that the Army not only return'd loaded with Riches, and receiv'd the Glory and Honour of their approv'd Valour, but the whole Country of Egypt reapt many Advantages by this Expedition. Sesoosis having now disbanded his Army, gave leave to his Companions in Arms, and Fellow Victors, to take their ease, and injoy the Fruits of their Conquest. But he himself fir'd with an earnest desire of Glory, and ambitious to leave behind him eternal Monuments of his Memory, made many fair and stately Works, admirable both for their Cost and Contrivance, by which he both advanc'd his own Immor∣tal Praise, and procur'd unspeakable Advantages to the Egyptians, with perfect Peace and Security for the time to come. For beginning first with what concern'd the Gods, he built a Temple in all the Cities of Egypt, to that God whom every particular place most ador'd; and he imploy'd none of the Egyptians in his Works, but finish'd all by the labours of the Captives; and therefore he caus'd an Inscrip∣tion to be made upon all the Temples thus, None of the Natives were put to la∣bour here. It's reported that some of the Babylonian Captives, because they were not able to bear the fatigue of the Work, rebell'd against the King; and having possess'd themselves of a Fort near the River, they took up Arms against the E∣gyptians, and wasted the Country thereabouts: but at length having got a Pardon, they chose a Place for their Habitation, and call'd it after the Name of that in their own Country, Babylon. Upon the like occasion they say that Troy situated near the River Nile, was so call'd: For Menelaus, when he return'd from Ilium with many Prisoners, arriv'd in Egypt, where the Trojans deserting the King, seiz'd upon a certain strong place, and took up Arms against the Greeks, till they had gain'd their Liberty, and then built a famous City after the name of their own. But I am not ignorant how Ctesias the Cretian gives a far different account of these Cities, when he says, that some of those who came in former times with Semira∣mis into Egypt, call'd the Cities which they built, after the Names of those in their own Country. But it's no easie matter to know the certain truth of these things: Yet it's necessary to observe the different Opinions concerning them, that the Ju∣dicious Reader may have an occasion to inquire, in order to pick out the real Truth. Sesoosis moreover rais'd many Mounts and Banks of Earth, to which he re∣mov'd all the Cities that lay low and in the plain, that both Man and Beast might be safe and secure at the time of the Inundation of the River. He cut likewise many deep Dykes from the River, all along as far as from Memphis to the Sea, for the ready and quick conveying of Corn and other Provision and Merchandize by short Cuts thither, both for the support of Trade and Commerce and main∣tenance of Peace and Plenty all over the Country: And that which was of greatest moment and concern of all, was, that he fortify'd all Parts of the Country a∣gainst Incursions of Enemies, and made it difficult of access; whereas before the greatest part of Egypt lay open and expos'd either for Chariots or Horsemen to enter. But now by reason of the multitude of Canals drawn all along from the River, the Entrance was very difficult, and the Country not so easily to be invaded. He defended likewise the East side of Egypt against the Irruptions of the Syrians and Arabians, with a Wall drawn from Ielusium through the Deserts, as far as to Heliopolis, for the space of a Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs. He caus'd likewise a Ship to be made of Cedar, Two Hundred and Fourscore Cubits in length, guilded over with Gold on the outside, and with Silver within; and this he dedi∣cated to the God that was most ador'd by the Thebans. He erected likewise Two
Obelisks of Polish'd Marble, a Hundred and Twenty Cubits high, on which were inscrib'd a Description of the large Extent of his Empire, the great value of his Revenue, and the number of the Nations by him conquer'd. He plac'd likewise at Memphis, in the Temple of Vulcan, his and his Wives Statues, each of one intire Stone, Thirty Cubits in height, and those of his Sons, Twenty Cubits high, upon this occasion. After his return from his great Expedition into Egypt, being at Pe∣lusium, his Brother at a Feast having invited him, together with his Wife and Children, plotted against his Life; for being all overcome by Wine, and gone to rest, he caus'd a great quantity of dry Reeds (long before prepar'd for the pur∣pose) to be plac'd round the King's Pavilion in the Night, and set them all on Fire; upon which the Flame suddenly mounted aloft; and little assistance the King had either from his Servants or Life-guard, who were all still overloaden with Wine: Upon which Sesostris with his Hands lift up to Heaven, calling upon the Gods for help for his Wife and Children, rusht through the Flames and escap'd; and so being thus unexpectedly preserv'd, he made Oblations as to other of the Gods (as is before said) so especially to Vulcan, as he by whose Favour he was so remarkably deliver'd. Although Sesostris was eminent in many great and worthy Actions, yet the most stately and magnificent of all, was that relating to the Princes in his Progresses. For those Kings of the conquer'd Nations, who through his Favour still held their Kingdoms, and such as had receiv'd large Principalities of his free Gift and Do∣nation, came with their Presents and Tributes into Egypt, at the times appointed, whom he receiv'd with all the Marks of Honour and Respect; save that when he went into the Temple or the City, his Custom was to cause the Horses to be un∣harnest out of his Chariot, and in their Room Four Kings, and other Princes to draw it; hereby thinking to make it evident to all, that there was none compa∣rable to him for Valour, who had conquer'd the most potent and famous Princes in the World. This King seems to have excell'd all others that ever were emi∣nent for Power and Greatness, both as to his Warlike Atchievements, the num∣ber of his Gifts and Oblations, and his wonderful Works in Egypt. After he had reign'd Three and Thirty Years, he fell blind, and wilfully put an end to his own Life; for which he was admir'd not only by Priests, but by all Sesostris his Death. the rest of the Egyptians; for that as he had before manifested the Greatness of his Mind by his Actions, so now his End was agreeable (by a voluntary Death) to the Glory of his Life. The Fame and Renown of this King continu'd so fresh down to Posterity, that many Ages after, when Egypt was conquer'd by the Persians, and Darius the Fa∣ther of Xerxes would set up his Statue at Memphis above that of Sesoosis, the Chief Priest in the debating of the matter in the Conclave boldly spoke against it, de∣claring that Darius had not yet exceeded the noble Acts of Sesoosis. The King was so far from resenting this, that on the contrary he was so pleas'd and taken with this freedom of Speech, that he said he would endeavour (if he liv'd as long as the other did) to be nothing inferiour to him; and wisht them to compare things done proportionable to the time, for that this was the justest examination and trial of Valour. And thus much shall suffice to be said of Sesoosis.
CHAP V. The Acts of Sesostris the Second. Of Ammosis, Actisanes, Mendes, Proteus or Cetes, Remphis, Chemmis (the great Pyramids built by him) Ce∣phres, Mycerinus, Bocchoris, Sabach. The Reign of Twelve Kings in Egypt. Psammetichus Saites, one of the Kings, gain'd the whole; Two Hundred Thousand of his Army forsook him, and settle themselves in E∣thiopia. Apries succeeds long after. Amasis rebels, and next succeeds; and Apries is strangled by the People. Amasis the last King, to the time of the Conquest of Egypt by Cambyses. THE Son of Sesostris succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, and took upon him Sesostris the Second, call'd Phero, by He∣rodotus. the same Name, yet perform'd nothing remarkable by his Arms; but the Affliction and Misery that befel him was observable; for he became blind, as his Father did before him, deriving the Malady either from his Father in his Birth, or as a Judgment upon him for his Impiety against the River, against which (as its fabulously reported) he threw his Javelin; whereupon falling under this Misfortune, he was forc'd to apply himself for help to the Gods, whom he sought to appease with many Offerings and Sacrifices for a long time together, yet could find no Relief, till at the end of Ten Years he was directed by the Oracle to go and worship the God of Heliopolis, and wash his Face in the Urin of a Woman that Herodot. lib. 2. c. 11. never had known any other Man besides her own Husband. Hereupon he began with his own Wife, and made trial of many others, but found none honest ex∣cept a Gardener's Wife, whom he afterwards marry'd when he was recover'd. All the Adulteresses he caus'd to be burnt in a little Village, which from this Execu∣tion the Egyptians call'd the Holy Field, to testify his Gratitude to the God of He∣liopolis for this great Benefit. At the Command of the Oracle he erected Two O∣belisks, each of one entire Stone, Eight Cubits in breadth, and a hundred in height, and dedicated them to the Deity. After this Sesostris the Second, were many Successions of Kings in Egypt, of whom there's nothing worth remark to be found. But many Ages after, Ammosis came Ammosis. to the Crown, who carry'd it Tyrannically towards his Subjects. For he put many to Death against all Law and Justice, and as many he stript of all they had, and turn'd them out of their Estates, and carry'd himself haughtily and proudly in every thing towards all Persons he had to deal with. This the poor oppress'd People indur'd for a time, while they had no power to resist those that overpower'd them. But as soon as Actisanes King of Ethiopia invaded him (having now an op∣portunity to discover their Hatred, and to revenge themselves) most of his Sub∣jects revolted from him, so that he was easily conquer'd, and Egypt became sub∣ject to the Kings of Ethiopia. Actisanes bore his Prosperity with great Moderation, and carried himself kind∣ly Actisanes. and obligingly towards all his Subjects. Against Robbers he contriv'd a no∣table Device, neither putting them that were guilty to Death, nor wholly ac∣quitting or discharging them from Punishment. For he caus'd all that were guilty, to be brought together from all parts of the Country, and after a just and strict inquiry, and certain Knowledge of their Guilt, he order'd all their Noses to be cut off, and banisht them into the utmost parts of the Desart; and built a City for them, call'd from the cutting off of the Noses of the Inhabitants, Rhinocorura, which is situated in the Confines of Egypt and Syria, in a barren Place, destitute of all manner of Provision. All the Country round about is full of Salt and brackish Ponds, and the Wells within the Walls, afford but very little Water, and that stinking and very bitter. And he sent them to this Place on purpose that they might not for the future do any more hurt, nor lye lurking and unknown among other Men. But being banished to such a barren Place, void almost of all things necessary for the support of Man's Life (Men naturally Contriving all manner of Arts to prevent starving) they wittily found out a way to supply their Wants. For they cut up out of the Neighbouring Fields, Reeds, and flit them in several pieces, and made long Nets of them, and plac'd them several Furlongs all along
upon the Shoar, with which they catcht the Quails (which came flying over Sea Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 10. c. 23. the De∣scription of these Quails. in great Flocks) and by that means sufficiently provided for themselves. After this King's Death the Egyptians recover'd their Liberty, and set up a King of their own Nation to rule over them, Mendes. Mendes (whom some call Marus) who never undertook any Warlike Design, but made a Sepulcher for himself call'd a Labyrinth, not to be admir'd so much for Its greatness, as it was unimitable for its Workmanship. For he that went in, could not easily come out again, without a very skilful Guide. Some say that Dedalus, who came into Egypt, admir'd the Curiosity of this Work, and made a Labyrinth for Minos King of Creet, like to this in Egypt, in which they fabulously relate the Minotaur was kept. But that in Creet was either ruin'd by some of their Kings, or came to nothing through length of Time, but that in Egypt continu'd whole and entire to our Days. After the Death of this Mendes, and Five Generations spent (during which time there was an Interregnum) the Egyptians chose one Cetes, of an ignoble Extraction, Proteus, Cetes. to be their King, whom the Grecians call Proteus; this fell out in the time of the Trojan War. This Prince, they say, was a To have knowledge of the Winds. Magician, and could transform him∣self sometimes into the shape of a Beast, other times into a Tree, or Appearance of Fire, or any other Form and Shape whatsoever. And this agrees with the Ac∣count the Priests of Egypt give of him; from his daily Converse with the Astro∣logers, they say, he learnt this Art. The Greeks rais'd this Story of Transforma∣tion, from a Custom amongst the Kings; for the Egyptian Princes us'd to wear upon their Heads (as Badges of their Royal Authority) the shapes of Lions, Bulls and Dragons; and sometimes to fix upon their Heads Sprouts of Trees, Fire and strong Perfumes of Frankincense, and other sweet Odours. And with these they both adorn'd themselves, and struck a Terror and Superstitious Awe into the Hearts of their Subjects at one and the same time. After the Death of Proteus, his Son Remphis succeeded him, who spent all his Remphis. Time in filling his Coffers, and heaping up Wealth. The poorness of his Spirit, and his sordid Covetousness was such, that they would not suffer him to part with any thing, either for the worship of the Gods, or the good of Mankind; and therefore more like a good Steward than a King, instead of a Name for Va∣lour, and noble Acts, he left vast Heaps of Treasure behind him, greater than any of the Kings that ever were before him: For it's said he had a Treasure of Four Hundred Thousand Talents of Gold and Silver. After this King's Death, for Seven Generations together, there reign'd succes∣sively a Company of Kings, who gave themselves up to Sloath and Idleness, and did nothing but wallow in Pleasures and Luxury; and therefore there's no Re∣cord of any great Work, or other thing worthy to be remembred that ever any of them did, except Nile, who call'd the River after his own Name, which was before call'd Egyptus. For being that he cut many Canals and Dikes in convenient Places, and us'd his utmost endeavour to make the River more useful and serviceable, it was therefore call'd Nile. Chembes. Chemmis the Eighth King from Remphis, was of Memphis, and reign'd Fifty Years. He built the greatest of the Three Pyramids, which were accounted a∣mongst the Seven Wonders of the World. They stand towards Lybia About 20 Miles. Pyramids. Hundred and Twenty Furlongs from Memphis, and Five and Forty from Nile. The Great∣ness of these Works, and the excessive Labour of the Workmen seen in them, do even strike the Beholders with Admiration and Astonishment. The greatest being Four-square, took up on every Square Seven Ple∣thras. Seven Hundred Foot of Ground in the Basis, and above Six Hundred Foot in height, spiring up narrower by little and little, till it come up to the Point, the Top of which was Three Yards. Six Cubits Square. It's built of solid Marble throughout, of rough Work, but of perpetual Dura∣tion: For though it be now a Thousand Years since it was built (some say above Three Thousand and Four Hundred) yet the Stones are as firmly joynted, and the whole Building as intire and without the least decay, as they were at the first laying and Erection. The Stone, they say, was brought a long way off, out of Arabia, and that the Work was rais'd by making Mounts of Earth; Cranes and other Engines being not known at that time. And that which is most to be ad∣mir'd at, is to see such a Foundation so imprudently laid, as it seems to be, in a Sandy Place, where there's not the least Sign of any Earth cast up, nor Marks where any Stone was cut and polish'd; so that the whole Pile seems to be rear'd all at once, and fixt in the midst of Heaps of Sand by some God, and not built by
degrees by the Hands of Men. Some of the Egyptians tell wonderful things, and invent strange Fables concerning these Works, affirming that the Mounts were made of Salt and Salt-Peter, and that they were melted by the Inundation of the Ri∣ver, and being so dissolv'd, every thing was washt away but the Building it self. But this is not the Truth of the thing; but the great multitude of Hands that rais'd the Mounts, the same carry'd back the Earth to the Place whence they dug it; for they say there were Three Hundred and Sixty Thousand Men imploy'd in this Work, and the Whole was scarce compleated in Twenty Years time. When this King was dead, his Brother Cephres succeeded him, and reign'd Six Cephres, Cha∣bryis. Suppos'd to Reign in the time of David, and the beginning of Solomon's Reign, Helv-Chron. 42. and Fifty Years: Some say it was not his Brother, but his Son Chabryis that came to the Crown: But all agree in this, that the Successor, in imitation of his Pre∣decessor, erected another Pyramid like to the former, both in Structure and Ar∣tificial Workmanship, but not near so large, every square of the Basis being only a Furlong in Breadth. Upon the greater Pyramid was inscrib'd the value of the Herbs and Onions that were spent upon the Labourers during the Works, which amounted to above Sixteen Hundred Talents. There's nothing writ upon the lesser: The Entrance and Ascent is only on one side, cut by steps into the main Stone. Although the Kings design'd these Two for their Sepulchers, yet it hapen'd that neither of them were there buri'd. For the People being incens'd at them by the reason of the Toyl and Labour they were put to, and the cruelty and oppression of their Kings, threatned to drag their Car∣kases out of their Graves, and pull them by piece-meal, and cast them to the Dogs; and therefore both of them upon their Beds commanded their Servants to bury them in some obscure place. After him reign'd Mycerinus (otherwise call'd Cherinus) the Son of him who Mycerinus. built the first Pyramid. This Prince began a Third, but died before it was fi∣nish'd; every square of the Basis was  Three Ple∣thras. Three Hundred Foot. The Walls for fif∣teen Stories high were of black Marble like that of Thebes, the rest was of the same Stone with the other Pyramids. Though the other Pyramids went beyond this in greatness, yet this far excell'd the rest in the Curiosity of the Structure, and the largeness of the Stones. On that side of the Pyramid towards the North, was inscrib'd the Name of the Founder Mycerinus. This King they say detesting the severity of the former Kings, carried himself all his Days gently and gra∣ciously towards all his Subjects, and did all that possibly he could to gain their Love and Good Will towards him; besides other things, he expended vast Sums of Money upon the Oracles and Worship of the Gods; and bestowing large Gifts upon honest Men whom he judg'd to be injur'd, and to be hardly dealt with in the Courts of Justice. There are other Pyramids, every Square of which are Two Hundred Foot in the Basis; and in all things like unto the other, except in bigness. It's said that these Three last Kings built them for their Wives. It is not in the least to be doubted, but that these Pyramids far excel all the o∣ther Works throughout all Egypt, not only in the Greatness and Costs of the Building, but in the Excellency of the Workmanship: For the Architects (they say) are much more to be admir'd than the Kings themselves that were at the Cost. For those perform'd all by their own Ingenuity, but these did nothing but by the Wealth handed to them by descent from their Predecessors, and by the Toyl and Labour of other Men. Yet concerning the first Builders of these Pyramids, there's no Consent, either Uncertain who built the Pyramids. amongst the Inhabitants or Historians. For some say they were built by the Kings before mention'd, some by others. As that the greatest was built by Armeus, the Second by Ammosis. Amasis, and the Third by Maronas. Inaronas: But some say that this last was the Sepulcher of one Rhodopides, a Curtesan, and was built in remembrance of her, at the common Charge of some of the Governors of the Provinces, who were her Amours. Bocchoris was the next who succeeded in the Kingdom, a Bocchoris, in the Reign of Ʋzziab King of Judah, An. Mun. 3283, be∣fore Christ 766. Helv. Cron. very little Man for Body, and of a mean and contemptible Pre∣sence; but as to his Wisdom and Prudence far excelling all the Kings that ever were before him in Egypt.
A long time after him, one Sabach an Ethiopian came to the Sabacon, or Sabaco, taken to be so, who joyn'd with Hoshea King of Is∣real. Throne, going beyond all his Predecessors in his Worship of the Gods, and kindness to his Subjects. Any Man may judge and have a clear Evidence of his gentle Disposition in this, that when the Laws pronounc'd the severest Judgment (I mean Sentence of Death) he chang'd the Punishment, and made an Edict that the Condemn'd Persons should Persons to work in Chains, in∣stead of being put to Death. be kept to work in the Towns in Chains, by whose Labour he rais'd many Mounts, and made many Commodious Canals; conceiving by this means he should not only moderate the severity of the Punishment, but instead of that which was un∣profitable, advance the publick Good, by the Service and Labours of the Con∣demn'd. A Man may likewise judge of his extraordinary Piety from his Dream, and his Abdication of the Government; for the Tutelar God of Thebes, seem'd to speak to him in his Sleep, and told him that he could not long reign happily and prosperously in Egypt, except he cut all the Priests in Pieces, when he pass'd through the midst of them with his Guards and Servants; which Advice being often repeated, he at length sent for the Priests from all parts, and told them that if he staid in Egypt any longer, he found that he should displease God, who never at any time before by Dreams or Visions commanded any such thing. And that he would rather be gone and lose his Life, being pure and innocent, than displease  The Lord. Anarchy. God, or injoy the Crown of Egypt, by staining his Life with the horrid Murder of the Innocent. And so at length giving up the Kingdom into the Hands of the People, he return'd into Ethiopia. Upon this there was an A∣narchy for the space of Two Years; but the People falling into Tumults and in∣testine Broyls and Slaughters one of another, Twelve of the chief Nobility of the Kingdom joyn'd in a Solemn Oath, and then calling a Senate at Memphis, and making some Laws for the better directing and cementing of them in mutual peace and fidelity, they took upon them the Regal Power and Authority. After Twelve Kings reign loving∣ly in Egypt. Herodot. lib. 2. c. 147. they had govern'd the Kingdom very amicably for the space of Fifteen Years, (ac∣cording to the Agreement which they had mutually sworn to observe) they ap∣ply'd themselves to the building of a Sepulcher, where they might all lye toge∣ther; that as in their Life-time they had been equal in their Power and Autho∣rity, and had always carried it with love and respect one towards another; so after Death (being all bury'd together in one Place) they might continue the Glory of their Names in one and the same Monument. To this end they made it their business to excel all their Predecessors in the greatness of their Works: For near the Lake of Myris in Lybia, they built a Four-square Monument of Polish'd Mar∣ble, every square a Furlong in length, for curious Carvings and other pieces of Art, not to be equall'd by any that should come after them. When you are enter'd within the Wall, there's presented a stately Fabrick, supported round with Pil∣lars, Forty on every side: The Roof was of one intire Stone, whereon was cu∣riously carv'd Racks and Mangers for Horses, and other excellent pieces of Work∣manship, and painted and adorn'd with divers sorts of Pictures and Images; where likewise were portray'd the Resemblances of the Kings, the Temples, and the Sacrifices in most beautiful Colours. And such was the Cost and Stateliness of this Sepulcher, begun by these Kings, that (if they had not been dethron'd be∣fore it was perfected) none ever after could have exceeded them in the state and magnificence of their Works. But after they had reign'd over Egypt Fifteen Years, all of them but one lost their Sovereignty in the manner following. Psammeticus Saites, one of the Kings, whose Province was upon the Sea Coasts, Psammeticus. An. Mu. 3288. Ant. Ch. 669. 29 Year of Manasseth King of Judah. traffickt with all sorts of Merchants, and especially with the Phenicians and Gre∣cians; by this means inriching his Province, by vending his own Commodities, and the importation of those that came from Greece, he not only grew very wealthy, but gain'd an interest in the Nations and Princes abroad; upon which account he was envy'd by the rest of the Kings, who for that reason made War upon him. Some antient Historians tell a Story, That these Princes were told by Herodotus, lib. 2. c. 151. the Oracle, That which of them should first pour Wine out of a brazen Viol to the God ador'd at Memphis, should be sole Lord of all Egypt. Whereupon Psam∣meticus when the Priest brought out of the Temple Twelve Golden Viols, pluckt off his Helmet, and pour'd out a Wine Offering from thence; which when his Collegues took notice of, they forbore putting him to death, but depos'd him, and banish'd him into the Fenns, bordering upon the Sea-Coasts. Whether there∣fore it were this, or Envy as is said before, that gave Birth to this Dissention and
Difference amongst them, it's certain Psammeticus hir'd Souldiers out of Arabia, Caria and Ionia, and in a Field-Fight near the City Moniemphis, he got the day. Some of the Kings of the other side were slain, and the rest fled into Africa, and were not able further to contend for the Kingdom. Psammeticus having now gain'd possession of the whole, built a Portico to the East Gate of the Temple at Memphis, in honour of that God, and incompass'd the Temple with a Wall, supporting it with Colosses of Twelve Cubits high in the room of Pillars. He bestow'd likewise upon his Mercenary Souldiers many large Rewards over and above their Pay promis'd them. He gave them also a Place call'd Stratopedon to inhabit, and divided amongst them by Lot a large piece of Land, a little above the Mouth of Pelusium, whom Amasis (who reign'd many Years after) transplanted to Memphis. Being therefore that he had gain'd the Kingdom by the help of his stipendary Souldiers, he in∣trusted them chiefly in the concerns of the Government, and entertain'd great numbers of Strangers and Foreigners. Afterwards undertaking an Expedition into Syria (to honour the Foreigners) he plac'd them in the right Wing of his Army; but out of slight and disregard to the natural Egyptians, he drew up them in the Left; with which Affront the E∣gyptians were so incens'd, that above Two Hundred Thousand of them revolted, and marcht away towards Ethiopia, there to settle themselves in new Habitations. At first the King sent some of his Captives after them, to make an Apology for the Dishonour done them; but these not being hearken'd unto, the King him∣self with some of his Nobility follow'd them by Water. But they marcht on, and entred Egypt, near the River Nile, where he earnestly entreated them to alter their purpose, and to remember their Gods, their Country, Wives and Children: Psammeticu's Army revolt. They all cry'd out (beating upon their Shields, and shaking their Spears) that as long as they had Arms in their Hands, they could easily gain another Country; and then turning aside the Flaps of their Coats, they shew'd their Privy Members, bawling out, That as long as they were so furnish'd, they should never want Wives or Children. Possess'd with this Resolution and Magnanimity of Mind, they de∣spis'd every thing that by all others are highly priz'd and valu'd, and setled them∣selves in a rich and fruitful Soyl in Ethiopia, dividing the Land amongst them∣selves by lot. Psammeticus laid this greatly to heart, and made it his Business to settle the Af∣fairs of Egypt, and to increase his Revenues, and enter'd into League with the Athenians and other Grecians, and was very kind and liberal to all Strangers that came into Egypt. He was so taken with the Grecians, that he caus'd his Son to be instructed in the Grecian Learning. He was certainly the first of all the Kings of Egypt that incourag'd Foreigners to traffick in his Country, giving safe Con∣duct to all Strangers that sail'd thither. For the former Kings allow'd no Strangers to come into Egypt, and if any did arrive, they either put them to death, or made them Slaves: And it was the Churlishness of this Nation, which caus'd all that noise among the Greeks concerning the Cruelty and Wickedness of Busiris, though all was not true as it was related, but the extraordinary Severity of the Coun∣try gave occasion to the raising of those Fables. After Psammticeus and Four Generations past, Apries reign'd Two and Twen∣ty Apries. Years. He invaded with mighty Forces, Cyprus and Phenicia, and took Sidon by Storm; and through Fear and Terror of him, brought other Cities of Phe∣nicia into Subjection. And having routed the Cyprians and Phenicians in a great Sea-Fight, he return'd into Egypt, loaden with the Spoils of his Enemies. But af∣terwards sending an Army against Cyrene and Barca, he lost most of them; at which those that escap'd, were extraordinarily inrag'd; and suspecting that he imploy'd them in this Expedition on purpose to have them all cut off, that he might reign the more securely over the rest, they all revolted. For Amasis, a Amasis. Nobleman of Egypt, being sent against them by the King, not only slighted the King's Commands in endeavouring to make all whole again, but on the contra∣ry incited the Rebels to a higher degree of Rage and Indignation against him, and turn'd Rebel himself, and was created King. And not long after, when the rest of the People all went over to him, the King not knowing what to do, was  to fly for Aid to the stipendiary Souldiers, who were about Thirty Thou∣sand; but being routed in a Field-Fight near to a Town call'd Marius, he was there taken Prisoner and strangl'd.
Amasis having setl'd his Affairs in Egypt, so as he judg'd most conducing to the publick good, govern'd the Egyptians with all Justice and Moderation, and by this gain'd the good Will of all the People. He conquer'd also the Cities of Cy∣prus, and adorn'd the Temples of the Gods with many rich Gifts and Offerings. Having reign'd Five and Fifty Years, he died about the time Cambyses King of Persia first invaded Egypt, in the Third Year of the Sixty Third Olympiad, in which Olymp. 63. Ant. Ch. 523. Parmenides of Camarina was Victor. CHAP. VI. The Customs of the Egyptians: Of their Kings. Of their Hourly Imploy∣ment, Sacrifices, Diet, &c. Their Burials. The division of Egypt. Their Trades in Egypt. Courts of Justice. Their Law Proceedings. The several Laws of Egypt. Beasts and Birds ador'd in Egypt, as Lions, Wolves, Cats, the Bird Ibis, Kites, &c. Costs in their Burial of these Creatures. Reasons given of this Adoration. SInce sufficient hath been said of the Egyptian Kings from the most ancient The Customs of the Egyp∣tians. Times, to the Death of Amasis, (leaving for a while what remains till a more proper time) we shall now give a brief account of those Laws and Customs of the Egyptians that are most to be admir'd, and may especially delight and profit the Reader. For many of the ancient Customs of the Egyptians were not only allow'd by the natural Inhabitants, but were greatly admir'd by the Grecians, so that every Learn'd Man earnestly coveted to travel into Egypt to learn the Knowledge of their Laws and Customs, as things of great weight and moment: And though the Country anciently forbad all reception to Strangers (for the Reasons before alledg'd) yet some of the Ancients, as Orpheus and Homer, and many of latter times, as Pythagoras the Samian, and Solon the Lawgiver, adventur'd to travel thither. And therefore the Egyptians assirm that Letters, Astronomy, Geometry, and many other Arts were first found out by them; and that the best Laws were made and instituted by them. To confirm which, they alledge this as an unde∣niable Argument, that the Native Kings of Egypt have reign'd there for the space of above Four Thousand and Seven Hundred Years, and that their Country for all that time has been the most prosperous and flourishing Kingdom in the World, which could never have been so, if the Inhabitants had not been civilized, and brought up under good Laws, and Liberal Education in all sorts of Arts and Sciences. But we shall omit what Herodotus and other Writers of the Egyptian History relate, who wilfully pursue and prefer prodigious Stories before Truth, and relate a company of Fictions meerly for Sport and Diversion sake, and shall give an Ac∣count of such things as we have carefully perus'd and examin'd recorded in their Books by the Egyptian Priests. The First Kings of Egypt liv'd not after the way and manner of other Mo∣narchs, The way of Living of the First Kings of Egypt. to do what they list, without Controul; but in every thing con∣form'd themselves to their Laws, not only in the publick Administration of the Government, but in their daily private Conversation, and their very Meals and Diet. For among their Attendants, they had neither Slaves for Servants, nor such as were born in their Houses; but the Sons of the chiefest of the Priests (after they attain'd to the Age of Twenty Years) brought up and educated more nobly than any other of the rest of the Egyptians; that having such noble Atten∣dants upon his Person (of the best and highest Rank in the Kingdom) to be al∣ways with him night and day, he might not do any thing that was base and blame-worthy. For no Prince is apt to be very wicked, except he have some ready at Hand to incourage him in his Lusts. There were Hours set apart in the Night as well as the Day, wherein the King Hours set a∣part. was to do something injoyn'd him by the Laws, and not to indulge himself in his Pleasures.
When he rose in the Morning, the first thing he was to do, was to peruse all the publick Letters and Advices sent from all Parts, that he might order his Concerns the better, by having perfect knowledge of all the Affairs of the King∣dom. Then Washing himself, and putting on his Splendid Robes, and the En∣signs and Badges of his Royal Authority, he went to Sacrifice to the Gods. When the Victims were brought to the Altar, it was the Custom for the High The Priests Prayers for the King. Priest in the presence of the King and People standing round about him, to pray with a loud Voice for the Health and Prosperity of the King, who righteously rul'd and govern'd his Subjects, wherein he recounted all the Virtues of the Prince, his Piety towards the Gods, his kindness to his People; how Continent, Just, Magnanimous and Faithful he was; how Bountiful, and what a Master he was over all inordinate Appetites and Passions; how he was Mild and Gentle in inflicing Punishments upon Offenders, less than their Deserts, and Bountiful in distributing of his Rewards. When the Priest had utter'd these and such like Commenda∣tions, he at last pronounc'd a Curse upon all such Offences and Miscarriages as had been ignorantly committed; yet withal, clearing the King, and laying all the Blame and Guilt upon his Ministers and Advisers. And this the Priest did that he might thereby induce and persuade the King to an Awe of the Gods, and to live so as might be pleasing to them; and likewise by Praise and Commendation rather gently to win upon him, than by harsh and rugged Rebukes to drive him to the practice of Virtuous Actions. Afterwards when the King had view'd the Intrals and Atton'd the Gods by Sa∣crifice. History read. finish'd his Sacrifices, the Priests read out of the Sacred Records, the Edicts, Laws and most useful and remarkable Actions of such as were most famous in their Generations, that the Prince might seriously consider and pon∣der upon what was most commendable in those Examples, and imitate them ac∣cording to the Rules there prescrib'd. For there were not only set Times allotted for dispatch of publick Business, and Administration of Justice, but likewise for taking of the Air, Bathing, lying with the Queen, and almost every action of their Lives. The Custom was likewise for the Kings to feed upon plain and ordinary Meat, Diet. as Veal and Goose, and to drink Wine according to a stinted measure, which might neither overcharge their Stomacks, nor make them drunk. Such a moderate Diet was prescrib'd, as that it seem'd rather to be order'd by a Skilful Physitian for Health sake, than by a Law-maker. It is indeed to be admir'd and very strange, that the King should not be left to his liberty for his daily Food; but much more is it to be admir'd, that he could not do any publick Business, Condemn or Pu∣nish any Man to gratify his own Humour or Revenge, or for any other unjust Judgment not to be given to gratify the King's Passion. Cause; but was bound to do according as the Laws had ordered in every par∣ticular case. The Kings observing those Rules according to the ancient Custom, were so far from thinking it dishonourable, or being uneasy under it, that they lookt upon themselves to live most desirable and happy Lives; and judg'd that all other Men who inconsiderately indulg'd their natural Appetites, did many things that were attended with great Losses, or apparent Hazards at the least; yea, that some, though they know beforehand that what they were about to do was ill and unjustifiable, yet overcome either with Love or Hatred, or some other unruly Passion, committed the wicked act notwithstanding; and therefore they were resolv'd to follow the Rules of living, before approv'd by wise and pru∣dent Men, and not to fall into the least Irregularity. The Kings therefore carry∣ing this even Hand towards ail their Subjects, were more beloved by them than by their own Kindred and Relations: For not only all the Orders of the Priests, but the whole Nation together were more concern'd for the Health and Prospe∣rity of their Kings, than they were for their Wives and Children, or their pri∣vate Interests in their Goods and Estates; and therefore as long as these whol∣som Laws were observ'd amongst 'em, they preserv'd their Government without stain or blemish for many Ages under the Kings before-mention'd, living in the height of all Worldly Happiness: And besides all this, were Conquerors of many Nations, and grew exceeding rich, and their Provinces were beautify'd with many stately magnificent Works, and their Cities adorn'd with many rich Gifts of all sorts. What the Egyptians perform'd after the Deaths of every of their Kings, clear∣ly evidences the great Love they bore to them. For Honour done him that can∣not possibly know it (in a grateful return of a former Benefit) carries along with
it a Testimony of Sincerity, without the least colour of Dissimulation. For upon Burial of the Kings. the Death of every King, the Egyptians generally lament with an universal Mourn∣ing, rend their Garments, shut up their Temples, inhibit Sacrifices and all Feasts and Solemnities for the space of Seventy Two Days: They cast , Dirt Dust likewise upon their Heads, and gird themselves under their Breasts with a Linnen Girdle; and thus Men and Women Two Hundred or Three Hundred sometimes in a Com∣pany, twice a Day go about singing mournful Songs in praise of the deceas'd King, recalling his Virtues (as it were) from the very Grave. During that time, they neither eat Flesh, nor any thing bak'd or heated by the Fire, and abstain from Wine and all Sumptuous Fare: Neither dare any use Baths or Oyntments, Beds trim'd up, or indulge themselves with Women. But every one (as if they had lost their dearest beloved Child) is in mourning and sadness, and spends all these Days in Lamentation. In the mean time all things are prepar'd in a stately manner for the Funeral, and the last day the Coffin with the Body inclos'd, is set at the Entrance into the Sepulcher: And there, according to the Law, in honour of the Deceased, all the Actions of his Life are rehears'd, where every one that will, has free liberty to accuse him. But all the Priests set forth his Praise, men∣tioning all the noble Actions of his Life; and many Thousands of People met to∣gether at the bringing forth of the Body (if the King have rul'd well) second the Priests with a tumultuous Cry and Noise of Approbation: But if he have govern'd otherwise, they are hush and still: And therefore many of the Kings (through the dislike of the People) have not been honour'd with any Funeral Pomp or solemn Burial; upon which account the succeeding Kings (not only for the Rea∣sons before-mention'd, but because they fear the abuse of their Bodies after Death, and everlasting disgrace and dishonour) have study'd how to acquit themselves by just and Virtuous Actions. These are the most remarkable Manners and Customs of the ancient Kings of Egypt. The whole Land of Egypt is divided into several Parts, which the Greeks call The Division of Egypt into Three Parts. Nomoi, over every one of which is appointed a Lord Lieutenant or Provincial Governor, who is intrusted with Administration of publick Affairs in the Pro∣vince. The whole Country likewise is divided into Three Parts, whereof the First is allotted to the Priests, who are highly reverenc'd, and are in great Au∣thority among the People, both for their Piety towards the Gods, and their great Wisdom and Learning wherein they instruct the People. And out of their Re∣venues, they provide Sacrifices throughout all Egypt, and maintain their Families and Servants, and procure all other things necessary for themselves: For they judge it not lawful by any means that the Worship of the Gods should be al∣tered (but always perform'd by them after the same manner) nor that those who are the publick Ministers of State should want any thing that is necessary. For these are always at the King's Elbow, as the Chief of his Privy Counsel, who as∣sist, advise and instruct him upon all occasions. By the help of Astrology, and viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices, they Divine and foretel future Events, and out of the Records in the sacred Registers from things done in former times, they read profitable Lectures for present use and practice. For it is not (as among the Grecians) that one Man or one Woman only executes the Priest's Office, but in E∣gypt many are imploy'd in the Sacrifices and Worship of the Gods, who teach the same way and manner of Service to their Children and Posterity. They are free from all publick Taxes and Impositions, and are in the Second place to the King in Honour and Authority. The Second Portion belongs to the King, as his Re∣venue to support his Royal State and Dignity, and maintain the Charge of his Wars, and to inable him to reward those that have been eminent for their Vir∣tue and publick Service, with Gifts according to their Deserts; and inasmuch as this Portion brings in a plentiful Provision for all these purposes, the People are not , do not drown them. oppress'd with Taxes and heavy Impositions. The last Portion belongs to the Soldiers, who at a word are ready at the King's Commands for every Expedition; that they who venture their Lives in the Wars, being indear'd to their Country by that plentiful share and proportion allotted them, may more chearfully under∣go the hazards of War. For it would be an irrational thing to intrust the safety and preservation of the whole, with them who have nothing in their Country that's dear or valuable to them to sight for. And the chief Reason why so large a share is allotted to them, is that they might more readily marry, and by that means make the Nation more populous; and so there might be no need of Foreign Aids
and Assistances. Besides, that Children descended from Soldiers, would be apt to imitate the valour of their Ancestors, and minding Arms from their very Child∣hood, would at length (through their natural Courage and Skill in their Arms) become unconquerable. The Nation likewise is distinguish'd into Three other Classes and Orders of Men, Shepherds, Husbandmen and Artificers. The Husbandmen take the Land (fit for Tillage and bearing of other Fruits) of the King, the Priests and the Sword∣men, upon an easie Rent, and take up all their Time in this Business; and because they are bred up from their very Infancy in Country Affairs, they are the most Skilful Husbandmen of any other Nation in the World. For they know exactly the Nature of the Land, the Inundation of the Waters, Seed-time and Harvest, and the gathering in of the other Fruits of the Earth, partly from the know∣ledge gain'd from their Ancestors, and partly from their own particular Expe∣rience. The way and manner of the Shepherds is the same, who being us'd to look af∣ter the Flocks and Herds from Father to Son, make it their whole Imployment to feed and pasture them. They have indeed learnt many things from their An∣cestors concerning the best way of governing and feeding their Flocks, but not a few by their own Study and Invention. And that which is chiefly to be admir'd, is that their Industry is such in these matters, that they that keep Poultry and Geese, not content with the ordinary way of breeding these Creatures (as a∣mongst other People) but by their Wit and Ingenuity cause them to increase to an infinite number, for they do not suffer them to hatch, but to admiration force out the Young with their Hands with so much Art and Skill, that it's done as ef∣fectually as by Nature it self. Arts and Trades likewise among the Egyptians are greatly improv'd and brought All to follow their own Trades and no other. to their highest perfection. For it's a Rule only among the Egyptians, that no Me∣chanick or other Artificer is to be of any other Trade or Imployment, or to be reckon'd up among any other Orders or Classes of the Commonwealth, than such as by the Law is allow'd, and taught them by their Parents; to the end that nei∣ther Envy attending Magistracy, nor publick Business of the State, or any thing else might interrupt them in the diligent improvement of their Trades. In other Places we see Artificers and Tradesmen busy'd about many other things, and (to gratify their Covetousness) not to stick to any one Imployment. For some ap∣ply themselves to Husbandry, others to Merchandize, and some follow Two or Three Trades at once. And many who run to the publick Assemblies in Cities, under a Democratical Government, by Bribes and Rewards inrich themselves, to the damage and prejudice of the Commonwealth. But in Egypt if any Tradesman meddle in Civil Affairs, or exercise any more than one Trade at once, he is grie∣vously punish'd. And in this manner the antient Egyptians divided their Com∣monwealth, and every Order took care to preserve themselves intire, as that which they had learnt, and had been handed down to them from their Ancestors. They Courts of Ju∣stice. were likewise extraordinary careful concerning their Courts of Justice, for they lookt upon just Sentences and Decrees pronounc'd from the Seats of Justice on both sides, to be of great weight and moment to the advancement of the publick good. For they knew very well, that Mens miscarriages would be best reform'd, if Offenders were duly punish'd, and the Injur'd and Oppress'd reliev'd: And on the contrary they foresaw, that if the Punishment due by the Law to Malefactors could be bought off for Mony, Favour or Affection, then nothing but Disorder and Confusion would enter into all Orders and Societies of Men among them: And therefore to prevent this (with good effect) they chose Men of the greatest Reputation out of the Chiefest Cities to be their Judges: As out of Heliopolis, Thebes and Memphis; which Assembly of the Judges was nothing inferior to the Arcopagites in Athens, or the Senate at Sparta. Out of these (being Thirty in number) they chose one the most eminent among them to be President, and in his Room the City sent another. The Judges receiv'd their Salaries from the King, but the President had the greatest Allowance; about his Neck he wore a golden Chain, at which hung a Picture representing Truth, set with precious Stones. When the President put on his Chain, it was a Sign then he was about to hear Causes. And when the Eight Books wherein the Laws were written were laid be∣fore The Law pro∣ceedings. the Judges, it was the Custom that the Plaintiff exhibited his Complaint in writing distinctly and particularly; setting forth wherein he was injur'd, and
how, and the value of his damage sustain'd. On the other side the Defendant or the Party accus'd, after a Copy had of his Adversaries Libel, answered in Writing to every particular, either by denying or justifying, or pleading something in mi∣tigation of Damages. Then the Plaintiff reply'd in Writing, and the Defendant rejoyn'd. After the Litigants had thus twice exhibited their Libels, it was then the part of the Thirty Judges to consider amongst themselves of the Judgment to be pronounc'd, and incumbent upon the President To shew that Truth was on his side. to turn the Essigies of Truth towards one of the Litigants. And this was the usual manner of Proceedings in their Courts of Justice among the Egyptians. For it was judg'd, that by the Ha∣rangues of Lawyers, a Cloud was cast upon the Truth and Justice of the Cause; inasmuch as the Arts of Rhetoricians, the jugling Tricks of Dissemblers, and the Fears of them that are like to be overthrown in their Cause, have wrought up∣on many to wave the strictness of the Law, and to turn aside from the Rule of Justice and Truth: And indeed its often found by experience, that Offenders brought to the Bar of Justice by the help of a cunning Orator, or their own Rhetorical Flourishes (either through a Fallacy put upon the Court, or taking In∣sinuations, or melting Compassions wrought by the Speaker in the Judge) have escap'd: Therefore the Egyptians concluded, that if all the Accusation was put in∣to Writing, and consideration had barely of what was there set down, the Sen∣tence would be more exact and just. And so by that means crafty and ingenious Fellows would be no more favour'd, than those that were more dull, nor the ex∣perienc'd Artist more than those that were ignorant and unskilful, nor the au∣dacious Liar more than those that are modest and sincere; but all would have e∣qual Justice, in regard sufficient time was allow'd by the Law, both for the Par∣ties to answer each other, and for the Judges to consider and give Judgment upon the Allegations of both sides. And since now we are come to mention the Laws, we conceive it will not be Laws of E∣gypt. foreign from our History to give an account of such Laws of the Egyptians as are either remarkable for their Antiquity, or strange and different from all other, or that may be any way useful and profitable to the studious Readers. 1. And in the first place, those were to dye who were guilty of Perjury, being such as committed the Two greatest Crimes; that is, Impiety towards the Gods, and Violation of Faith and Truth, the strongest Band of Humane Society. 2. If any upon the Road saw a Man likely to be kill'd, or to be violently assaulted, and did not rescue him if he were able, he was to dye for it. And if in truth he were not able to defend him, yet he was bound to discover the Thieves, and to prosecute them in a due Course of Law. If he neglected this, he was accord∣ing to the Law to be scourg'd with a certain number of Stripes, and to be kept without Food for Three Days together. 3. False Accusers were to suffer the same Punishment as those whom they falsly accus'd were to have undergone, if they had afterwards been convicted of the Offence. 4. All the Egyptians were injoyn'd to give in their Names in Writing, to the Go∣vernors of the Provinces, shewing how and by what means, they got their Liveli∣hood. He that gave a false Account in such case, or if it appear'd he liv'd by Rob∣bery, or any other unjust course, he was to dye; which Law it's said Solon brought over out of Egypt into Athens. 5. He that wilfully kill'd a Freeman; nay, a very Bondslave, was by the Law to dye; thereby designing to restrain Men from wicked Actions, as having no respect to the state and condition of the Person suffering, but to the advis'd act of the Offender; and by this care of Slaves, Men learnt that Freemen were much less to be destroy'd. 6. Parents that kill'd their Children, were not to dye, but were forc'd for Three Days and Nights together to hug them continually in their Arms, and had a Guard all the while over them, to see they did it; for they thought it not fit that they should dye, who gave Life to their Children; but rather that Men should be deterr'd from such Attempts by a Punishment that seem'd attended with Sorrow and Repentance. 7. But for Patricides, they provided a most severe kind of Punishment: For those that were convicted of this Offence, were laid upon Thorns, and burnt a∣live after that they had, first mangl'd the Members of their Bodies with sharp Canes, Piece-meal about the bigness of a Man's Thumb. For they counted it
the most wicked Act that Men could be guilty of, to take away the Lives of them from whom they had their own. 8. Those that were with Child, were not to be executed till they were delivered, which Law was receiv'd by many of the Grecians, judging it very unjust for the Innocent to suffer with the Offender, and Two to dye for the Offence of one only. Besides, in as much as the Crime was maliciously and advisedly committed, it was unreasonable that the Child that understood not what was done, should undergo the same Punishment. And that which is of the greatest Consideration, is, that it was altogether unjust (being the Mother was only accus'd and condemn'd as guilty) the Child (Common both to Father and Mother) should lose its Life; for that Judge is as unjust that destroys the Innocent, as he that spares him that is guilty of Murther. 9. These are the Capital Laws which are chiefly worthy of Praise and Commen∣dation; Laws Military as to others, those concerning military Affairs, provided that Souldiers who ran away from their Colours or mutined, though they should not dye, yet should be otherwise punish'd with the utmost Disgrace imaginable; but if they after wipe off their Disgrace by their Valour, they are restor'd to their former Post and Trust. By this inflicting of a Punishment more grievous than Death, the Lawgiver design'd that all should look upon Disgrace and Infamy as the greatest of Evils: Besides it was judg'd, that those who were put to Death, could never be further serviceable to the Commonwealth; but such as were degraded only (through a desire to repair their Reputation) might be very useful, and do much good ser∣vice in time to come. 10. Such as reveal'd the Secrets of the Army to the Enemy, were to have their Secrets re∣veal'd to E∣nemies Coyning, For∣gery, &c. Tongues cut out. 11. They that coyn'd false and adulterated Mony, or contriv'd false Weights, or Counterfeited Seals; and Scriveners or Clerks that forg'd Deeds, or raz'd publick Records, or produc'd any forg'd Contracts, were to have both their Hands cut off, that every one might suffer in that part wherewith he had offended in such a manner as not to be repaired during their Life; and that others warn'd by so severe a Punishment, might be deter'd from the Commission of the like Of∣fence. 12. In Relation to Women the Laws were very severe: For he that committed Rape. a Rape upon a Free Woman, was to have his Privy Members cut off; for they judg'd that Three most hainous Offences were included in that one vile Act, that is, Wrong, Defilement and Bastardy. 13. In case of Adultery, the Man was to have a Thousand Lashes with Rods, and Adultery. the Woman her Nose cut off. For it was lookt upon very sit, that the Adulteress that trickt up her self to allure Men to Wantonness, should be punish'd in that part where her Charms chiefly lay. 14. They say that Bocchoris made the Laws concerning Merchandize. As to these, it was a Law, That if a Man borrow'd Mony, and the lender had no Wri∣ting to shew for it, and the other deny'd it upon his Oath, he should be quit of the Debt; to that end therefore in the First Place, they were to sacrifice to the Gods, as Men making Conscience, and tender and Scrupulous in taking of an Oath. For it being clear and evident that he that swears often again and again, at last loses his Credit, every Man to prevent that Mischief, will be very cautions of being brought to an Oath. Moreover, the Lawgiver had this Design, that by ground∣ing a Man's Credit and Reputation wholly upon the Integrity of his Life and Conversation, every one would be induc'd to honest and virtuous Actions, lest he should be despis'd as a Man of no Credit or Worth. Besides, it was judg'd a most unjust thing not to believe him upon his Oath in that matter relating to his Contract, to whom Credit was given in the self same thing without an Oath before. 15. For those that lent Mony by Contract in Writing, it was not lawful to Deb Usury. take Usury above what would double the Stock; and that Payment should be made only out of the Debtors Goods; but his Body was not to be liable in any wise to Imprisonment: And those were counted the Debtors Goods, which he had either earn'd by his Labour, or had been bestow'd upon him by the just Pro∣prietors. But as for their Bodies, they belong'd to the Cities where they inhabited, who had an Interest in them for the publick Services, both in Times of Peace and War; for that it was an absurd thing for him who was to venture his Life for
his Country, to be carried to Goal for a Debt by his Creditor (if it should so hap∣pen) and that the publick safety should be hazarded to gratify the Covetousness of some Private Men. This Law seems to have been established in Athens by Solon, which he call'd  Moderation of Usery. Sisachthy, freeing all the Citizens from being imprison'd by their Creditors for debt. And some do justly blame many of the Law-makers of Greece, that they forbad Arms, Plows and other things absolutely necessary for Labours, to be taken as Pawns, and yet permitted them that should use them to be impri∣son'd. 16. There's a very remarkable Law among the Egyptians concerning Theft.  Those that enter into the List of Thieves, are to give in their Names to one that is their Chief and Head, and whatever they steal, they ingage to bring to him. They that have lost any thing, are to set down in writing every particular, and bring it to him, and set forth the Day, and Hour and Place, when and where they lost their Goods. Every thing being thus readily found out, after the things stolen are valu'd, the true Owner is to pay a Fourth part of the value, and so re∣ceives his Goods again. For being it was not possible to restrain all from Thieving, the Law-maker found out a way that all might be restor'd, except a small Propor∣tion for Redemption. The Egyptian Priests only Marry one Wife, but all others may have as many Marriage. Wives as they please; and all are bound to bring up as many Children as they can for the further increase of the Inhabitants, which tends much to the Well-being either of a City or Country. None of the Sons are ever reputed Bastards, though they be begotten of a Bond-Maid, for they conceive that the Father only begets the Child, and that the Mother contributes nothing but Place and Nourishment. And they call Trees that bear Fruit Males, and those that bear none Females, contrary to what the Grecians name them. They bring up their Children with very little Cost, and are sparing upon that account to admiration. For they pro∣vide for them Broth made of any mean and poor Stuff that may easily be had; and feed those that are of strength able to eat it, with the Pith of Flags call'd Papyre, with which they made Books, and therefore sometimes call'd , a Book. Bulrushes rosted in the Embers, and with Roots and Herbs got in the Fenns; sometimes raw, and sometimes boyl'd, and at other times fry'd and boyl'd. Most of their Children go bare-footed and naked, the Climate is so warm and temperate. It costs not the Parent to bring up a Child to Man's Estate, above Twenty Twenty Drachma's a∣mount to 12s. 6. Drachma's; which is the chief Reason why Egypt is so Populous, and excels all other Places in magnificent Structures. The Priests instruct the Youth in Two sorts of Learning; that which they call Sacred, and the other which is more com∣mon and Ordinary. In Arithmetick and Geometry they keep them a long time: For in regard the River every Year changes the Face of the Soyl, the Neigh∣bouring Inhabitants are at great difference among themselves concerning the Boun∣daries of their Land, which cannot be easily known but by the help of Geome∣try. And as for Arithmetick, as it's useful upon other occasions, so its very help∣ful to the Study of Geometry, and no small advantage to the Students of Astro∣logy; for the Egyptians (as well as some others) are diligent Observers of the Course and Motions of the Stars, and preserve Remarks of every one of them for an incredible number of Years, being us'd to this Study, and to endeavour to outvy one another therein from the most antient Times. They have with great Cost and Care observ'd the Motions of the Planets; their , Periodical Motions from West to East, by force of the Primum Mobile. Periodical Motions, and their , Sterigmus, their stops, and then return like the Tropicks. stated Stops, and the Influ∣ences of every one of them, in the Nativity of Living Crea∣tures, and what good or ill they foreshew; and very often they so clearly discover what is to come in the Course of Mens Lives, as if they pointed at the thing with the point of a Needle. They frequently presage both Famine and Plenty; grievous Diseases likely to seize both upon Man and Beast; Earthquakes, Inun∣dations and Comets; and through long Experience they come to the fore-know∣ledge of such things as are commonly judg'd impossible for the Wit of Man to attain unto. They affirm that the Chaldeans in Babylon are Egyptian Colonies, and that their Astrologers have attain'd to that degree of Reputation, by the Knowledge they have learnt of the Egyptian Priests. The rest of the common People of Egypt (as we have before declar'd) are Arts. train'd up from their very Childhood either by their Parents or Kindred in all man∣ner of Arts and Trades whereby to get their Livelyhood.
They teach but a very few to write and read; but Tradesmen especially learn both. It's not the Custom there to learn the Art of Wrestling or Musick; for they think that by the Exercise of daily Wrestling, the Youth improve in their Strength but for a little time, and that with a great deal of Hazard, but gain no Advantage at all as to the Health of their Bodies. And as for Musick, they look upon it not only unprofitable, but that it also makes Men soft and effemi∣nate. To prevent Diseases they make use of Clysters and purging Potions, Abstinence Physicians. and Vomits, and this they repeat sometimes for several days together, and other times every third or fourth day. For in all manner of Food (they say) the great∣est Part of it is superfluous, which breeds Diseases, and therefore the aforesaid Method whereby the Root of the Disease is pluckt up (they say) is a mighty Help both to the Preservation and Recovery of Health. For the Physicians have a pub∣lick Stipend, and make  of Receipts prescrib'd by the Law, made up by the Ancient Physicians; and if they cannot cure the Patient by them, they are never blam'd; but if they use other Medicines, they are to suffer Death, in as much as the Law-maker appointed such Receipts for Cure, as were approved by the most learned Doctors, such as by long Experience had been found effectual. The Adoration and Worshipping of Beasts among the Egyptians seems justly to Beasts ador'd by the Egyp∣tians. many a most strange and unaccountable thing, and worthy Enquiry; for they wor∣ship some Creatures even above measure, when they are dead as well as when they are living; as Cats, Ichneumon, the Indian Rat, Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 29. c. 4. and lib. 8. c. 24. He kills Asps, and the Crocodile. Ichneumons, Dogs, Kites, the Bird Ibis, a Bird the Egyptians pray unto when they are troubled with Serpents, Plin. lib. 10. c. 28. Ibis, Wolves and Crocodiles, and many other such like. The Cause of which I shall endeavour to give, having first premis'd some∣thing briefly concerning them. And first of all, they dedicate a piece of Land to every kind of Creature they adore, as∣signing the Profits for feeding and taking care of them. To some of these Deities the Egyptians give Thanks for recovering their Children from Sickness, as by shaving their Heads, and weighing the Hair, with the like Weight of Gold or Silver, and then giving that Mony to them that have the Care of the Beasts. To the Kites, while they are fly∣ing they cry out with a loud Voice, and throw pieces of Flesh for them upon the Ground till such time as they take it. To the Cats and Ichneumons they give Bread soakt in Milk, stroaking and making much of them, or feed them with pie∣ces of Fish taken in the River Nile. In the same manner they provide for the other Beasts Food according to their several kinds. They are so far from not pay∣ing this. Homage to their Creatures, or being asham'd of them, that on the con∣trary they glory in them, as in the highest Adoration of the Gods, and carry about special Marks and Ensigns of Honour for them through City and Country; upon which Account those that have the Care of the Beasts (being seen after off) are ho∣nour'd and worshipp'd by all by falling down upon their Knees. When any one of them dye they wrap it in fine Linnen, and with Howling beat upon their Breasts, and so carry it forth to be salted, and then after they have anointed it with the Oyl of Cedar and other things, which both give the Body a fragrant Smell and preserve it a long time from Putrefaction, they bury it in a secret place. He that wilfully kills any of these Beasts, is to suffer Death; but if any kill a Cat or the Bird Ibis, whether wilfully or otherwise, he's certainly drag'd away to Death by the Multi∣tude, and sometimes most cruelly without any formal Tryal or Judgment of Law. For fear of this, if any by chance find any of these Creatures dead, they stand aloof, and with lamentable Cries and Protestations tell every body that they found it dead. And such is the . religious Veneration imprest upon the Hearts of Men towards these Creatures, and so obstinately is every one bent to adore and worship them, that even at the time when the Romans were about making a League with Ptolomy, and all the People made it their great Business to caress and shew all Civi∣lity and Kindness imaginable to them that came out of Italy, and through Fear strove all they could that no Occasion might in the least be given to disoblige them or be the Cause of a War, yet it so happ'ned that upon a Cat being kill'd by a Ro∣man, the People in a Tumult ran to his Lodging, and neither the Princes sent by the King to dissuade them, nor the Fear of the Romans could deliver the Person from the Rage of the People, tho' he did it against his Will; and this I relate not by Hear-say, but was my self an Eye-witness of it at the time of my Travels into Egypt. If these things seem incredible and like to Fables, those that we shall hereafter relate will look more strange. For it's reported, that at a time when
there was a Famine in Egypt, many were driven to that strait, that by turns they fed one upon another; but not a Man was accused to have in the least tasted of any of these sacred Creatures. Nay, if a Dog be found dead in a House, the whole Family shave their Bodies all over, and make great Lamentation; and that which is most wonderful, is, That if any Wine, Bread or any other Victuals be in the House where any of these Creatures die, it's a part of their Superstition, not to make use of any of them for any purpose whatsoever. And when they have been abroad in the Wars in foreign Countries, they have with great Lamentation brought with them dead Cats and Kites into Egypt, when in the mean time they have been ready to starve for want of Provision. Moreover what Acts of Religious Worship they perform'd towards Apis in Memphis, Or Mneus, an Ox dedica∣ted to the Sun. Strabo, lib. 17. Mnevis in Heliopolis, the Goat in Mendes, the Crocodile in the Lake of Myris, and the Lyon kept in , in Leon∣topolis. Leontopolis, and many other such like, is easie to describe, but very difficult to believe, except a Man saw it. For these Creatures are kept and fed in consecrated Ground inclos'd, and many great Men provide Food for them at great Cost and Charge; for they constantly give them fine Wheat-Flower, Frumenty, Sweet-meats of all sorts made up with Ho∣ney, and Geese sometimes rosted, and sometimes boyl'd; and for such as fed upon raw Flesh, they provide Birds. To say no more, they are excessive in their Costs and Charges in feeding of these Creatures; and forbear not to wash them in hot Baths, to anoint them with the most precious Unguents, and per∣fume them with the sweetest Odours. They provide likewise for them most rich Beds to lye upon, with decent Furniture, and are extraordinary careful a∣bout their generating and coition one with another, according to the Law of Nature. They breed up for every one of the Males (according to their Kinds) the most beautiful She-mate, and call them their Concubines or Sweet-hearts, and are at great Costs and Charges in looking to them. When any of them dye, they are as much concern'd as at the Deaths of their Costs of Bu∣rial of Sacred Beasts. own Children, and lay out in Burying of them as much as all their Goods are worth, and far more. For when Apis through Old Age dy'd at Memphis after the Death of Alexander, and in the Reign of Ptolomy Lagus, his Keeper not on∣ly spent all that vast Provision he had made, in burying of him, but borrow'd of Ptolomy Fifty Talents of Silver for the same purpose. And in our time some of the Keepers of these Creatures have lavisht away no less than a Hundred Ta∣lents in the maintaining of them. To this may be further added, what is in use among them concerning the sacred Ox, which they call Apis. After the splen∣did Funeral of Apis is over, those Priests that have the Charge of the Business, seek out another Calf, as like the former as possibly they can find; and when they have found one, an end is put to all further Mourning and Lamentation; and such Priests as are appointed for that purpose, lead the young * Ox through † Or Bull. the City of Nile, and feed him Forty Days. Then they put him into a Barge, wherein is a Colden Cabbin, and so transport him as a God to Memphis, and place him in Vulcan's Grove. During the Forty Days before mention'd, none but Women are admitted to see him, who being plac'd full in his view, pluck up their Coats, and shew their Privy Parts: After they are forbad to come into the Sight of this New God. For the Adoration of this Ox, they give this Rea∣son. They say that the Soul of Osiris pass'd into an Ox; and therefore whenever the Ox is Dedicated, to this very Day the Spirit of Osiris is infus'd into one Ox after another to Posterity. But some say, that the Members of Osiris (who was kill'd by Typhon) were thrown by Isis into an Ox made of Wood, cover'd with Ox-Hides, and from thence the City Busiris was so call'd. Many other things they fabulously report of Apis, which would be too tedious particularly to re∣late. But in as much as all that relate to this Adoration of Beasts are wonderful and indeed incredible, its very difficult to find out the true Causes and Grounds of this Superstition. We have before related, that the Priests have a private and secret account of these things in the History of the Gods; but the Common People give these Three Reasons for what they do. The First of which is altogether Fabulous, and agrees with the old Dotage: For they say, that the First Gods were so very few, and Men so many above them in number, and so wicked and Reasons given for this Ado∣ration. impious, that they were too weak for them, and therefore transform'd themselves into Beasts, and by that means avoided their Assaults and Cruelty. But afterwards they say that the Kings and Princes of the Earth (in gratitude to them that were the first Authors of their well-being) directed how carefully those Creatures
whose Shapes they had assum'd) should be fed while they were alive, and how they were to be Buried when they were dead. Another Reason they give is this: The antient Egyptians, they say, being often defeated by the Neighbouring Nations, by reason of the disorder and confusion that was among them in drawing up of their Battalions, found out at last the way of Carrying Standards or Ensigns before their Several Regiments; and therefore they painted the Images of these Beasts, which now they adore, and fixt 'em at the end of a Spear, which the Offi∣cers carry'd before them, and by this means every Man perfectly knew the Re∣giment he belong'd unto; and being that by the Observation of this good Or∣der and Discipline, they were often Victorious, they afcrib'd their Deliverance to these Creatures; and to make to them a grateful Return, it was ordain'd for a Law, that none of these Creatures, whose Representations were formerly thus carry'd, should be kill'd, but religiously and carefully ador'd, as is before related. The Third Reason alledg'd by them, is the Profit and Advantage these Crea∣tures bring to the common support and maintenance of Humane Life. For the Cow is both serviceable to the Plow, and for breeding others for the same use. The Sheep yeans twice a Year, and yields Wool for Cloathing and Ornament, and of her Milk and Cream are made large and pleasant Cheefes. The Dog is useful both for the Guard of the House, and the pleasure of Hunting in the Field, and therefore their God whom they call Anubis, they represent with a Dog's Head, signifying thereby that a Dog was the Guard both to Osiris and Isis. Others say, that when they sought for Osiris, Dogs guided Isis, and by their barking and yelling (as kind and faithful Associates with the Inquisitors) drove away the wild Beasts, and diverted others that were in their way; and therefore in celebra∣ting the Feast of Isis, Dogs lead the way in the Procession. Those that first insti∣tuted this Custom, signifying thereby the ancient kindness and good Service of this Creature. The Cat likewise is very serviceable against the Venemous Stings of Serpents, and the deadly Bite of the Asp. The Ichneumenon secretly watches where the Crocodile lays her Eggs, and breaks them in pieces, and that he does with a great deal of eagerness, by natural instinct, without any necessity for his own support; and if this Creature were not thus serviceable, Crocodiles would abound to that degree, that there were no Sailing in Nile: Yea, the Crocodiles themselves are destroy'd by this Creature in a wonderful and incredible manner. For the Ichneumenon rouls himself in the Mud, and then observing the Crocodile sleeping upon the Bank of the River with his Mouth wide open, suddenly whips down through his Throat into his very Bowels, and presently gnaws his way through his Belly, and so escapes himself, with the Death of his Enemy. Among the Birds, the Ibis is serviceable for the destroying of Snakes, Locusts and the Pal∣mer Worm. The Kite is an Enemy to the Scorpions, horn'd Serpents, and other little Creatures, that both bite and sting Men to Death. Others say, that this Bird is Deify'd, because the Augurs make use of the swift flight of these Birds in their Divinations. Others say, that in ancient Time, a Book bound about with a Scarlet Thred (wherein were written all the Rites and Customs of Wor∣shipping of the Gods) was carry'd by a Kite, and brought to the Priests at Thebes: For which Reason the Sacred Scribes wore a red Cap with a Kite's Fea∣ther in it. The Thebans worship the Eagle, because she seems to be a Royal Bird, and to deserve the Adoration due to Jupiter himself. They say, the Goat was accounted amongst the number of the Gods, for the sake of his Genitals, as Priapus is ho∣nour'd among the Grecians: For this Creature is exceeding Lustful, and therefore they say that Member (the Instrument of Generation) is to be highly honour'd, as that from which all living Creatures derive their Original. They say that these Privy Parts are not only accounted Sacred among the Egyptians, but among many others, are religiously ador'd in the time of their Solemn Rites of reli∣gious Worship, as those Parts that are the Causes of Generation. And the Priests, who succeed in the Office, descended to them from their Fathers in Egypt, are first initiated into the Service of this God. For this Reason the Hobgoblins. Panes and Sa∣tyrs are greatly ador'd among them, and therefore they have Images of them set up in their Temples, with their Privy Parts erected like to the Goat, which they say, is the most lustful Creature in the World. By this Representation they would signify their Gratitude to the Gods, for the Populousness of their Coun∣try.
The Sacred Bulls Apis and Mnevis (they say) they honour as Gods by the Com∣mand of Osiris, both for their Usefulness in Husbandry, and likewise to keep up an honourable and lasting Memory of those that first found out Bread-corn and other Fruits of the EARTH. But however, its lawful to sacrifice red Oxen, because Typhon seem'd to be of that Colour, who treacherously murder'd Osiris, and was himself put to Death by Isis for the Murther of her Husband. They report likewise, that anciently Men that had red Hair, like Typhon, were sacrifis'd by the Kings at the Sepulcher of Osiris. And indeed, there are very few Egyptians that are red, but many that are Strangers: And hence arose the Fable of Busiris his Cruelty towards Strangers a∣mongst the Greeks, not that there ever was any King call'd Busiris; but Osiris his Sepul∣cher was so call'd in the Egyptian Language. They say they pay divine Honour to Wolves, because they come so near in their Nature to Dogs, for they are very little different, and mutually ingender and bring forth Whelps. They give likewise another Reason for their Adoration, but most fabulous of all other; for they say, that when Isis and her Son Orus were ready to joyn Battle with Typhon, Osiris came up from the Shades below in the form of a Wolf, and assisted them, and therefore when Typhon was kill'd, the Conquerors commanded that Beast to be worshipp'd, because the Day was won presently upon his Appear∣ing. Some affirm, that at the time of the Irruption of the Ethiopians into Egypt, a great Number of Wolves flockt together, and drove the invading Enemy beyond the City Elaphantina, and therefore that Province is call'd Of the City of Wolves. Lycopolitana; and for these Reasons came these Beasts before mention'd, to be thus ador'd and worship∣ped. CHAP. VII. Why the Crocodile is Worship'd. Some sorts of Herbs and Roots not Eaten. Why other Creatures are Worship'd. The manner of their Burials. The Lawmakers in Egypt. Learned Men of Greece made Journeys into Egypt, as Orpheus, Homer, Plato, Solon, Pythagoras, &c. Several Proofs of this, as their Religious Rites, Fables, &c. in Greece, of Egyptian Ex∣traction. The exquisit Art of the Stone-Carvers in Egypt. NOW it remains, that we speak of the Deifying the Crocodile, of which many Crocodil's why ador'd. have inquir'd what might be the Reason; being that these Beasts devour Men, and yet are ador'd as Gods, who in the mean time are pernicious Instruments of many cruel Accidents. To this they answer, that their Country is not only de∣fended by the River, but much more by the Crocodiles; and therefore the Theeves out of Arabia and Africa being affraid of the great number of these Creatures, dare not pass over the River Nile, which protection they should be depriv'd of, if these Beasts should be fallen upon; and utterly destroy'd by the Hunters. But there's another Account given of these Things: For one of the Ancient Menas pursu'd by his own Dogs, sav'd by a Crocodile. Kings, call'd Menas, being set upon and pursu'd by his own Dogs, was forc'd into the Lake of Miris, where a Crocodile (a Wonder to be told) took him up and car∣ri'd him over to the other side, where in Gratitude to the Beast he built a City, and call'd it Crocodile; and commanded Crocodiles to be Ador'd as Gods, and Dedi∣cated the Lake to them for a place to Feed and Breed in. Where he built a Sepul∣cher for himself with a foursquare Pyramid, and a Labyrinth greatly admir'd by e∣very Body. In the same manner they relate Stories of other Things, which would be too tedious here to recite. For some conceive it to be very clear and evi∣dent (by several of them not Eating many of the Fruits of the Earth) that Gain and Profit by sparing has infected them with this Superstition: for some never Taste Lentils, nor other Beans; and some never eat either Cheese or Onions or such like Food, although Egypt abounds with these Things. Thereby signifying that all should learn to be temperate; and whatsoever any feed upon, they should not
give themselves to Gluttony. But others give another Reason; for they say that in the Time of the Ancient Kings, the People being prone to Sedition, and Plotting to Rebel, one of their wise and prudent Princes divided Egypt into several Parts, and appointed the Worship of some Beast or other in every Part, or forbad some sort of Food, that by that means every one Adoring their own Creature, and slighting that which was Worship'd in another Province, the Egyptians might never agree amongst themselves. And this is evident from the Effects; for when one Country despises and contemns the Religious Rites and Customs of their Neigh∣bours, this always begets Heart-burnings among them. But some give this Rea∣son for Deifying of these Creatures: They say, that in the beginning, Men that were of a fierce and beastly Nature herded together and devoured one another; and being in, perpetual War and Discord, the stronger always destroy'd the weak∣er. In process of time, those that were too weak for the other (taught at length by Experience) got in Bodies together, and had the representations of those Beasts (which were afterwards Worship'd) in their Standards, to which they ran together when they were in a Fright, upon every occasion, and so made up a con∣siderable Force against them that attempted to assault them. This was imitated by the rest, and so the whole Multitude got into a Body; and hence it was that that Creature, which every one suppos'd was the cause of his safety, was honour'd as a God, as justly deserving that Adoration. And therefore at this day the People of Egypt differ in their Religion, every one Worshiping that Beast that their Ancestors did in the beginning. To conclude, they say that the Egyptians, of all other Peo∣ple, are the most grateful for Favours done them, judging Gratitude to be the safest Guard of their Lives, in as much as it is evident, that all are most ready to do good to them with whom are laid up the Treasures of a grateful Mind to make a suitable Return. And for these Reasons the Egyptians seem to honour and a∣dore their Kings no less than as if they were very Gods. For they hold that without a Divine Providence they never could be advanc'd to the Throne; and being they can confer the greatest Rewards at their will and pleasure, they judge them partakers of the Divine Nature. Now tho' we have said perhaps more than is needful of their sacred Creatures, yet with this we have set forth the Laws of the Egypt∣ians, which are very remarkable. But when a Man comes to understand their Rites and Ceremonies in Burying their Dead, he'l be struck with much greater Admiration. For after the Death of any of them, all the Friends and Kindred of the de∣ceased throw Dirt upon their Heads, and run about through the City; mourn∣ing Their Burials. and lamenting till such time as the Body be interr'd, and abstain from Baths, Wine and all pleasant Meats in the mean time; and forbear to cloath themselves with any rich Attire. They have three sorts of Funerals: The Stately and Magnificent, the Moderate, and the Meanest. In the first they spend a Talent of Silver, in the second twenty About 62 l. 10 s. Minas, in the last they are at very small Charges. They that have the Charge of wrapping up and burying the Body, are such as have been taught the Art by their Ancestors. These give in a Writing to the Family of every thing that is to be laid out in the Funeral, and inquire of them after what Manner they would have the Body interr'd. When every thing is agreed upon, they take up the Body and deliver it to them whose Office it is to take Care of it. Then the Chief among them (who is call'd the Scribe) having the Body laid upon the Ground, marks out how much of the left Side towards the Bowels is to be incis'd and open'd, upon which the The Disse∣ctor. Paraschistes (so by them call'd) with an Ethiopian Stone dissects so much of the Flesh as by the Law is justifiable, and having done it, he forthwith runs away might and main, and all there present pursue him with Execrations, and pelt him with Stones, as if he were guilty of some horrid Offence, for they look upon him as an hateful Person, who wounds and offers Violence to the Body in that kind, or does it any Prejudice what∣soever. But as for those whom they call the The Imbal∣mers. Taricheutae, they highly honour them, for they are the Priests Companions, and as Sacred Persons are admitted in∣to the Temple. Assoon as they come to the dissected Body, one of the Taricheutae thrusts up his Hand through the Wound, into the Breast of the Dead, and draws out all the Intestins, but the Reins and the Heart. Another cleanses all the Bow∣els, and washes them in Phaenician Wine mixt with diverse Aromatick Spices. Having at last wash'd the Body, they first anoint it all over with the Oyl of Cedar and other precious Ointments for the space of . forty days together; that done, they rub it well with Myrrhe, Cinnamon, and such like things, not only apt and effectual for long Pre∣servation,
but for sweet scenting of the Body also, and so deliver it to the Kindred of the Dead, with every Member so whole and intire, that no Part of the Body seems to be alter'd till it come to the very Hairs of the Eye-lids and the Eye-brows, insomuch as the Beauty and Shape of the Face seems just as it was before. By which Means many of the Egyptians laying up the Bodies of their Ancestors in stately Monuments, perfectly see the true Visage and Countenance of those that were buried, many Ages before they themselves were born. So that in viewing the Proportion of every one of their Bodies and the Lineaments of their Faces, they take exceeding great Delight, even as much as if they were still living among them. Moreover, the Friends and nearest Relations of the Dead acquaint the Judges and the rest of their Friends with the Time prefixt for the Funeral of such an one by Name, declaring that such a day he is to pass the Lake. At which Time forty Judges appear and sit together in a Semicircle, in a Place beyond the Lake; where a Ship (before provided by such as have the Care of the Business) is hal'd up to the Shoar, govern'd by a Pilot, whom the Egyptians call Charon. And therefore they say, that Orpheus seeing this Ceremony when he was in Egypt, in∣vented the Fable of Hell, partly imitating them in Egypt, and partly adding some∣thing of his own; of which we shall speak particularly hereafter. The Ship be∣ing now in the Lake, every one is at Liberty by the Law to accuse the Dead before the Coffin be put aboard; and if any Accuser appears and makes good his Accusa∣tion, that he liv'd an ill Life, then the Judges give Sentence, and the Body is de∣barr'd from being buried after the usual Manner; but if the Informer be convicted of a scandalous and malicious Accusation, he's very severely punish'd. If no In∣former appear, or that the Information prove false, all the Kindred of the Decea∣sed leave off Mourning, and begin to set forth his Praises; but say nothing of his Birth (as is the Custom among the Greeks) because they account all in Egypt to be equally noble. But they recount how the deceased was educated from a Child, his 1. Godliness, 2. Righteous∣ness, 3. Sobri∣ety commend∣ed by the Hea∣thens. Breeding till he came to Man's Estate, his Piety towards the Gods and his Justice towards Men, his Chastity and other Virtues, wherein he excell'd; and they pray and call upon the infernal Deities to receive the deceas'd into the Society of the Just. The common People take it from the other, and approve of all that is said in his Praise with a loud Shout, and set forth likewise his Vertues with the highest Praises and Strains of Commendation, as he that is to live for ever with the just , in the infernal Region. in the Kingdom of JOVE. Then they (that have Tombs of their own) interr the Corps in Places appointed for that Purpose; they that have none of their own, build a small Apartment in their own Houses, and rear up the Coffin to the Sides of the strongest Wall of the Building. Such as are deny'd common Burial, either because they are in Debt, or convicted of some horrid Crime, they bury in their own Houses; and in After-times it often happens that some of their Kindred grow∣ing rich, pay off the Debts of the deceas'd, or get him absolv'd, and then bury their Ancestor with State and Splendour. For amongst the Egyptians it's a Sacred Con∣stitution, that they should at their greatest Costs honour their Parents and Ancestors, who are translated to an Eternal Habitation. It's a Custom likewise among them to give the Bodies of their Parents in Pawn to their Creditors, and they that do not presently redeem them, fall under the greatest Disgrace imaginable, and are deny'd Burial after their Deaths. One may justly wonder at the Authors of this excellent Constitution, who both by what we see practis'd among the living, and by the decent Burial of the dead, did (as much as possibly lay within the Power of Men) endeavour to promote Honesty and faithful Dealing one with another. For the Greeks (as to what concern'd the Rewards of the Just and the Punishment of the Impious) had nothing amongst them but invented Fables and Poetical Fictions, which never wrought upon Men for the Amendment of their Lives, but on the contrary, were despis'd and laught at by the lewder Sort. But among the Egypti∣ans, the Punishment of the bad and the Rewards of the good being not told as idle Tales, but every day seen with their own Eyes, all Sorts were warn'd of their Du∣ties, and by this Means was wrought and continu'd a most exact Reformation of Manners and orderly Conversation among them. For those certainly are the best Laws that advance Virtue and Honesty, and instruct Men in a prudent Converse in the World, rather than those that tend only to the heaping up of Wealth, and teach Men to be rich.
And now its necessary for us to speak of the Legislators of Egypt, who establish'd Lawmakers in EGIPT. such Laws as are both unusual elsewhere, and admirable in themselves. After the ancient way of living in Egypt, which was (according to their own Stories) in the Reigns of the Gods and Demigods; they say that Mnevis, a Man of an heroic Spi∣rit 1. Mnevis. and famous in his Generation for a commendable Life, was the first that insti∣tuted written Laws, feigning that he receiv'd them from Mercury, and that from them would accrue great Benefit and Advantage to the publick. The same De∣vice Minos us'd among the Grecians in Creet, and Lycurgus among the Lacedemoni∣ans; The first pretending he had them from Jupiter, and the other from Apollo. This Contrivance, its said, has been made use of amongst diverse other Nations, who have reapt much Advantage by observing such Laws. For its reported, that among the A People in Sarmatia, in Muscovy. Aramaspi, Zathrausles pretended he receiv'd his Laws from a good Genius; and that Zamolxis amongst the People call'd the A People of Scythia. Getes patroniz'd his by Vesta; and among the Jews, that Moses alledg'd the God call'd I AO to be the Au∣thor of his. And this they did either because they judg'd such an Invention (which brought about so much Good to Mankind) was wonderfully commendable and of a divine Stamp; or that they concluded the People would be more observant out of a reverend Regard to the Majesty and Authority of those who were said to be the Lawmakers. The second Lawmaker of Egypt, they say, was Sasyches, a 2. Sasyches. very wise and prudent Prince, who added to the former, and made excellent Laws also relating to the Honour and Worship of the Gods. He's reported to have found out Geometry, and to have taught the Art of Astronomy. The third who they cry up is Sesostris, who not only excell'd all the Kings of Egypt in his warlike 3. Sesostris. Atchievments, but fram'd Laws for Military Disciplin among the Egyptians, and put every thing in due Order relating to Military Affairs. The fourth Lawmaker they say was King Bocchoris; a wise and prudent Man, 4. Bocchoris. he establish'd every thing that concern'd the Kings, and prescrib'd exact Rules and Laws for the making of Contracts. He was so wise and of so piercing a Judgment in his Decisions, that many of his Sentences for their Excellency are kept in Me∣mory to this very day. He was (they say) of a very weak Constitution of Body and extraordinary covetous. After him King Amasis imploy'd himself in the framing of Laws for the Dire∣ctions 5. Amasis. of the Nomarchi in their several Governments, which reduc'd all the Pro∣vinces of Egypt into due Order. It's said, he was a most wise, just and good 3 or 4 years before the death of Ne∣buchadnezzar, before Christ, 567. Man, for which he was advanc'd to the Throne by the Egyptians, tho' he was not of the Blood-Royal. 'Tis repored, that when the Eleans were about to celebrate the Olympick Games, and sent their Embassadors to him to advise them how they might manage those Sports most justly, he answer'd, That the way to do that was for none of the Eleans to be Parties in the Contest. Polycrates, the petty King of Samos, entred into a League of Friendship with him: But when he heard how Polycrates opprest his own Subjects, and injur'd Strangers that came into his Country, he sent Embassadors to him to advise to Moderation; but not being able to persuade him, he at length sent a Letter to him to let him know he dissolv'd and renounc'd the League that was betwixt them, saying, He was not willing forthwith to be involv'd in Grief and Sorrow, for that he per∣fectly foresaw the miserable. Fall that would presently overtake one who govern'd so tyran∣nically. He was greatly admir'd, they▪ say, by the Grecians both for his kind and gentle Disposition, and for that what he said, shortly after befel Afterwards crucify'd by O∣roetis, Gover∣nor of Sardis, Olymp. 64. Her. l. 3. c. 125. Polycrates. Darius, the Father of Xerxes, is said to be the sixth who made Laws for the Go∣vernment of the Egyptians. For with Hatred and Abhorrence of the Impiety Cambyses his Predecessor for his prophaning of the Temples in Egypt, he made it his Business to approve his reverend Regard towards the Gods, and his Kindness towards Men; for the familiarly convers'd with the Egyptian Priests, and learnt their Theology, and acquainted himself with the Things and Transactions re∣corded in their Sacred Registers, whereby he came to understand the Heroic Spi∣rits of the Ancient Kings, and their Kindness towards their Subjects, which cau∣sed him to imitate them in the like, and upon that Account he was so highly ho∣nour'd amongst them, that while he was alive he gain'd the Title of a GOD, which none of the other Kings ever did; and when he was dead, the People al∣low'd him all those Ancient Honours due and accustom'd to be done to the former Kings of Egypt after their Deaths. And these are the Men (they say) who com∣pos'd the Laws of Egypt that are so celebrated and cry'd up amongst other People.
But in After-times (they say) many of their excellent Laws were abrogated by the Macedonians, who came to be Lords and Kings of EGYPT. Having now given an Account of these Things, it remains we should declare Many Grecians travell'd into Egypt. how many wise and learned Men among the Grecians journey'd into Egypt in Anci∣ent Times, to understand the Laws and Sciences of the Country. For the Egypti∣an Priests out of their Sacred Records relate, that Orpheus, Musaeus, Melampodes, Daedalus, Homer the Poet, Lycurgus the Spartan, Solon the Athenian, Plato the Phi∣losopher, Pythagoras the Samian, Eudoxus the Mathematician, Democritus the Abde∣rite, and Oenopides the Chian, all came to them in Egypt, and they shew certain Marks and Signs of all these being there. Of some by their Pictures, and of others by the Names of Places, or Pieces of Work that have been call'd after their Names. And they bring Arguments from every Trade that is us'd, to prove that every thing wherein the Grecians excel, and for which they are admir'd, was brought over from Egypt into Greece. For they say, that Orpheus brought over most of the Religious Rites and Ceremonies, both as to what concerns the Celebration of the Orgia, and relating to his wandring up and down, and the whole intire Fable of Hell; for that the Ceremonies and Rites of Osiris agree in every thing with those of Bacchus, and that those of Isis and Ceres are one and the same, differing in no∣thing but the Name. And whereas he introduces the wicked tormented in Hell, the Elysian Fields for the pious and just, and the fictitious Appearances of Ghosts (commonly nois'd abroad) they say he has done nothing but imitated the Egyp∣tian Funerals. And that the feigning of Mercury to be the Conductor of Souls, was deriv'd from the old Egyptian Custom, that he who brought back the dead Body of Apis (when he came to the Place) deliver'd it to him who represented Cerberus, which being communicated by Orpheus to the Greeks, Homer in Imitation of him inserted it in his Poem, Cyllenius leads to the infernal Strand, Homer Odyss. lib. 24 in the beginning. The Hero's Ghost arm'd with his golden Wand. And then he adds, They reach th' Effluxes of the . Ocean. Ogilb. swelling Seas, Then Leuca's rock; thence on their Course they keep To the Sun's Portals and the Land of Sleep, When streight they come into a flowry Mead, Where after Death departed Souls reside. The Name (they say) of Oceanus here mention'd is attributed to the River Nile, for so the Egyptians in their own Language call it; by the Sun's Portals is meant Heliopolis; the Meadow feign'd to be the Habitation of the dead (they say) is the Place bordering upon the Lake call'd Acherusia, near to Memphis, surrounded with pleasant Ponds and Meadows, with Woods and Groves of Lotus and sweet Canes; and that therefore he feign'd those Places to be inhabited by the dead, because that many of the Egyptian Funerals, and such as were the most considerable were there; the dead Bodies being carry'd over the River and the Lake Acherusia, and there in∣terr'd. And that other Fictions among the Grecians concerning Hell agree with those things that are done in Egypt even at this day. For the Ship which trans∣ports the dead Bodies is call'd Baris, and that for the Fare an Half-penny is paid to the Ferryman, who is call'd in their own Country Language, Charon. They say likewise, that near to these Places is the Temple of black Hecates, and the Gates of Cocytus and Lethe, made up with brazen Bars; and be∣sides these, that there is another Gate of Truth, next to which stands the headless Image of Justice. There are many others of these Grecian Fictions remaining still in Egypt, which both in Name and Practice continue there to this day. For in the City of Acanthus, beyond Nile towards Lybia, about , Fifty. an hun∣dred and twenty Furlongs from Memphis stands an Hogshead full of Holes, into which (they say) three hundred Priests every day pour in Water carried out of the River Nile. The This Fable of the Ass is feign'd by Cratinus, an Athenian Comedian who flourish'd in the 81. Olymp. he feigns one in Hell twisting a Rope and an Ass gnawing in pieces what he had done. Whence the Proverb, Con∣torquet piger funiculum. See Pausanias in Phoc. c. 29. where the person twi∣sting the Rope is call'd Ocnus, signi∣fying Slothful. Funiculum intorquet longum dextra impiger Ocnus. Mox{que} asina intortum ventre profunda vorat. Alciat. Embl. 91. Fable likewise of the Ass is acted at a solemn Festival not far from thence, where a Man is twisting a long Rope, and many that follow him are as fast undoing what he had before wrought.
The Egyptians further say, That Melampodes brought into Greece the Rites and Solemnities of Bacchus, and the fabulous Story of Saturn and the Titans, and the intire History of the Sufferings of the Gods out of Egypt. And they say that De∣dalus imitated the Labyrinth there, which remains to this very Day, built at first by Mendes, or (as some report) by King Marus, many Years before the Reign of Minos. They affirm likewise, that the ancient Statues of Egypt are of the same size and proportion with those set up by Dedalus in Greece; and that the stately Porch of Vulcan in Memphis, was the handy-work of Dedalus, and that he was in such high Esteem among them, that they plac'd his Statue of Wood (made by his own Hands) in the Temple; whom at length for his Ingenuity and ex∣cellent Inventions, they honour'd as a God; for in one of the Islands belonging to Memphis, a Temple dedicated to Dedalus is resorted unto by the Inhabitants at this day. That Homer came into Egypt, amongst other Arguments, they endeavour to prove it especially by the Potion Helen gave Telemachus (in the Story of Mene∣laus) to cause him to forget all his Sorrows past. For the Poet seems to have made an exact Experiment of the Potion Nepenthes, which he says Helen receiv'd from Polymnestes the Wife of Thonus, and brought it from Thebes in Egypt; and indeed in that City even at this Day, the Women use this Medicine with good success: And they say, that in ancient Times, the Medicine for the Cure of An∣ger and Sorrow, was only to be found among the Diopolitans; Thebes and Dios∣polis being by them affirm'd to be one and the same City. And that Venus from an ancient Tradition, is call'd by the Inhabitants, Golden Venus; and that there is a Field so call'd, within the Liberties of Memphis: And that Homer deriv'd from Egypt his Story of the Embraces between Jupiter and Juno, and their Tra∣velling into Ethiopia; because the Egyptians every Year carry Jupiter's Tabernacle over the River into Africa, and a few Days after bring it back again, as if the God had return'd out of Ethiopia: And that the Fiction of the Nuptials of these Two Deities was taken from the Solemnization of their Festivals, at which time both their Tabernacles adorn'd with all sorts of Flowers, are carry'd by the Priests to the Top of a Mountain. To these they add, that Lycurgus, Solon, and Plato borrow'd from Egypt many of those Laws which they establish'd in their several Commonwealths. And that Pythagoras learnt his mysterious and sacred Expressions, the Art of Geometry, Arithmetick, and Transmigration of Souls, in Egypt. They are of Opinion likewise, that Democrates was Five Years in Egypt, and in that time much improv'd himself in the Art of Astrology. So they say, thet Oenopides by his familiar Converse with the Priests and Astrologers, amongst other Advantages, gain'd especially the Knowledge of the Periodical Motion of the Sun; and came to know that his Course is contrary to that of the Stars: And that Eudoxus likewise by studying Astrology in Egypt, left many useful Monu∣ments of his Art behind him in Greece, for which his Name was famous. Lastly, they say that the most famous Carvers of Images in Stone. Statuaries of ancient Time liv'd amongst them for some time, as Telecles and Theodorus, the Sons of Rhaecus, who made the Sta∣tue of Apollo Pythius in Samos; for its said, that one half of this Statue was made by Telecles in Samos, and the other part was finish'd by Theodorus in Ephesus; and that there was such an exact Symmetry of Parts, that the whole seemed to be the Work of one and the same hand: Which Art (they say) the Grecians were not at all acquainted with, but that it was in frequent use among the Egyptians. For with them the exact Cut of a Statue is not judg'd of by the Eye and Fancy (as it is by the Greeks) but after that they have cut out the Stone, and wrought every part by it self, then they measure the exact proportion of the whole, from the least Stone to the greatest. For they divide the whole Body into One and Twenty Parts, and One Fourth, which makes up the Symmetry and intire proportion. Upon which, after the Workmen have agreed among themselves of the bigness of the Statue, they go away, and every one of them carve their se∣veral Parts so exactly, according to their just Proportions, that the singular skill of these Workmen is wonderful and amazing. And thus the Of Apollo before-men∣tion'd. Statue in Sainos which (according to the Art and Skill in Egypt) was cut in Two from the Head to the Privities exactly in the middle, yet notwithstanding was equally propor∣tion'd in every part. And they say, that it exactly resembles the Statues in Egypt, having its Hands stretcht out, and its Thighs in a walking Posture. But we have
now said enough of such things as are remarkable and worthy of memory in Egypt. In the next Book (according to what we purpos'd in the beginning of this) we shall give an account of things done elsewhere, and of other Fables and Srories, beginning with the Actions of the Assyrians in Asia.
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK II. The PREFACE. THE Former Book (being the First of the whole) contains the Af∣fairs of Egypt; among which are related what is fabulously reported of the Gods of Egypt, and what strange and wonderful Accounts are given of the Nature of Nile, and other things concerning that River. We have spoken there likewise of the Land of Egypt, their ancient Kings, and their several Actions; and have added the Building of the Pyramids, reckon'd amongst the Seven Wonders of the World. We have likewise set forth their Laws and Courts of Justice, and the strange Adoration of Beasts in Egypt. Lastly, the manner of their Burials, and the Greeks that were famous for Learning, and travell'd into Egypt, and brought over from thence many useful and profitable Arts and Sciences into Greece. In this next Book we shall describe the things done in Asia in ancient times, beginning with the Assyrian Empire. CHAP. I. Ninus the First King of Assyria: His Acts: He invades Babylonia, Me∣dia, and overruns several other Countries. Nineve built by him; the Description of it; Marries Semiramis; her Descent. Derceta the Phi∣listines Dagon. His Expedition against Bactria; he dies. Semiramis builds Babylon, and several strange Works there; as a Passage under Water, Jupiter's Temple, &c. Hanging Gardens in Babylon. A vast Stone cut out. The strange property of a Morass. Her several Expeditions. The wonderful Lake in Ethiopia; their Burials there. Semiramis's Expedi∣tion into India: Her mock Elephants. Her Expedition proves fruitless. She surrenders her Kingdom to Ninyas her Son; her End. ASIA was anciently govern'd by its own Native Kings, of whom there's no History extant, either as to any memorable Actions they perform'd, or so much as to their Names.
Ninus is the First King of Assyria that is recorded in Hi∣story; Ninus, Ann. Mun. 2737. Ʋsher's Ann. Time of Deborah; but gene∣rally Chronologers make him far more antient, Ann. Mun. 2000, Ant. Chr. 1950, about the time of Abra∣ham's Birth. he perform'd many great and noble Actions; of whom we have design'd to set forth something particularly. He was naturally of a Warlike Disposition, and very am∣bitious of Honour and Glory, and therefore caus'd the strongest of his Young Men to be train'd up in Martial Discipline, and by long and continual Exercise inur'd them readily to undergo all the Toyls and Hazards of War. Having therefore rais'd a gallant Army, he made a League with Arieus King of Arabia, that was at that time full of strong and valiant Men. For that Na∣tion are constant Lovers of Liberty, never upon any Terms admitting of any Foreign Prince: And therefore neither the Persian, nor the Macedonian Kings af∣ter them, (though they were most powerful in Arms) were ever able to con∣quer them. For Arabia being partly Desart, and partly parcht up for want of Water (unless it be in some secret Wells and Pits known only to the Inhabitants) cannot be subdu'd by any Foreign Force. Ninus therefore, the Assyrian King, with the Prince of Arabia his Assistant, with a numerous Army, invaded the Babylonians, then next bordering upon him: For the Babylon that is now, was not built at that time; but the Province of Babylon had in it then many other considerable Cities, whose Inhabitants he easily subdu'd, (being rude and unexpert in Matters of War,) and impos'd upon them a Yearly Tribute; but carried away the King with all his Children Prisoners, and after put them to Death. Afterwards he entred Armenia with a great Army, and having overthrown some Cities, he struck Terror into the rest, and there∣upon their King Barzanus seeing himself unable to deal with him, met him with many rich Presents, and submitted himself; whom Ninus out of his generous dis∣sition, courteously receiv'd, and gave him the Kingdom of Armenia, upon con∣dition he should be his Friend for the future, and supply him with Men and Pro∣vision for his Wars as he should have occasion. Being thus strengthen'd, he invaded Media, whose King Pharnus coming out against him with a mighty Army, was utterly routed, and lost most of his Men, and was taken Prisoner with his Wife and Seven Children, and afterwards Cruci∣fied. Crucify'd. Ninus being thus successful and prosperous, his Ambition rose the higher, and his desire most ardent to conquer all in Asia, which lay between Tanais and Nile; (so far does Prosperity and Excess in getting much, inflame the Desire to gain and compass more.) In order hereunto, he made one of his Friends Governor of the Province of Media, and he himself in the mean time marcht against the other Provinces of Asia, and subdu'd them all in Seventeen Years time, except the Indians and Bactrians. But no Writer has given any Account of the seve∣ral Ninus Con∣quers several Countries. Battels he fought, nor of the number of those Nations he conquer'd; and therefore following Ctesias the Cnidian, we shall only briefly run over the most famous and considerable Countries. He over-ran all the Countries bordering upon the Mediterra∣nean. Sea, together with the adjoining Continent, as Egypt and Phenicia, Celo-Sy∣ria, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Lycia, Caria, Phrygia, Mysia and Lydia; the Province of Troas and Phrygia upon the Hellespont, together with Propontis, Bithynia, Cappa∣docia, and the Barbarous Nations adjoyning upon Pontus, as far as to Tanais; he gain'd likewise the Country of the Caddusians, Tarpyrians, Hyrcanians, Dacians, Derbians, Carmanians, Choroneans, Borchanians and Parthians. He pierc'd likewise into Persia, the Provinces of Susiana, and that call'd Caspiana, through those nar∣row Straits, which from thence are call'd the Caspian Gates. He subdu'd likewise many other less considerable Nations, which would be too tedious here to re∣count. After much toyl and labour in vain, because of the difficulty of the Passes, and the multitude of those Warlike Inhabitants, he was forc'd to put off his War against the Bactrians to another opportunity. Having marcht back with his Army into Syria, he markt out a Place for the building of a stately City: For in as much as he had surpast all his Ancestors in the glory and success of his Arms, he was resolv'd to build one of that state and grandeur, as should not only be the greatest then in the World, but such as none that ever should come after him should be able easily to exceed. The King of Arabia he sent back with his Army into his own Country, with many rich Spoils, and noble Gifts. And he himself having got a great number
of his Forces together, and provided Mony and Treasure, and other things ne∣cessary for the purpose, built a City near the River Euphrates, very famous for its Ninive built. Walls and Fortifications; of a long Form; for on both sides it ran out in length above About 23 Miles. an Hundred and Fifty Furlongs; but the Two lesser Angles were only Nine∣ty Furlongs apiece; so that the Circumference of the whole was About 74 Miles. Four Hundred and Fourscore Furlongs. And the Founder was not herein deceived, for none ever after built the like, either as to the largeness of its Circumference, or the stateliness of its Walls. For the Wall was an Hundred Foot in Height, and so broad as Three Chariots might be driven together upon it in breast: There were Fifteen Hundred Turrets upon the Walls, each of them Two Hundred Foot high. He appointed the City to be inhabited chiefly by the richest Assyrians, and gave liberty to People of any other Nation, (to as many as would) to dwell there, and allow'd to the Citizens a large Territory next adjoining to them, and call'd the City after his own Name Ninive. Ninus. When he had finish'd his Work here, he marcht with an Army against the Bactrians, where he marry'd Semiramis; who being so famous above any of her Sex (as in History it is related) we cannot but say something of her here in this Place, being one advanc'd from so low a Fortune, to such a state and degree of Honour and Worldly Glory. There's a City in Syria, call'd Ascalon, near which is a deep Lake abounding Semiramis her Descent. with Fish, where not far off stands a Temple dedicated to a famous Goddess call'd by the Syrians This was the Philistines Dagon. Vid. Ovid. Met. lib. 4. Derceto, she represents a Woman in her Face, and a Fish in all other parts of her Body, upon the account following, as the most Judicious a∣mong the Inhabitants report; for they say, that Venus being angry at this God∣dess, caus'd her to fall into a vehement pang of Love with a beautiful Young Man, who was among others sacrificing to her, and was got with Child by him, and brought to Bed of a Daughter; and being asham'd afterwards of what she had done, she kill'd the Young Man, and expos'd the Child among Rocks in the Desert, and through Sorrow and Shame cast her self into the Lake, and was af∣terwards transform'd into a Fish; whence it came to pass, that at this very Day the Syrians eat no Fish, but adore them as Gods. They say that the Infant that was expos'd, was both preserv'd and nourish'd by a most wonderful Providence, by the means of a great Flock of Pigeons that nestled near to the Place where the Child lay: For with their Wings they cherisht it, and kept it warm; and ob∣serving where the Herdsmen and other Shepherds left their Milk in the Neigh∣bouring Cottages, took it up in their Bills, and as so many Nurses thrust their Beaks between the Infants Lips, and so instil'd the Milk: And when the Child was a Year old, and stood in need of stronger Nourishment, the Pigeons fed it with pieces of Cheese which they pickt out from the rest: When the Shepherds return'd, and found their Cheeses pickt round, they wondred (at first) at the thing; but observing afterward how it came to pass, they not only found out the cause, but likewise a very beautiful Child, which they forthwith carry'd away to their Cottages, and made a Present of it to the King's Superintendent of his Flocks and Herds (whose Name was Simma) who (having no Children of his own) carefully bred up the Young Lady as if she had been his own Daughter, and call'd her Semiramis, a denomination in the Syrian Language deriv'd from Pi∣geons, which the Syrians ever after ador'd for Goddesses. And these are the Stories told of Semiramis. Being now grown up, and exceeding all others of her Sex for the Charms of her Beauty, one of the King's great Officers call'd Menon, was sent to take an account of the Kings Herds and Flocks: This Man was Lord President of the King's Council, and chief Governor of Syria, and lodging upon this occasion at Simma's House, at the sight of Semiramis, fell in love with her, and with much intreaty obtain'd her from Simma, and carried her away with him to Ninive, where he Marry'd her, and had by her Two Sons, Hypates and Hydaspes: And being a Woman of admirable Parts as well as Beauty, her Husband was altoge∣ther at her Devotion, and never would do any thing without her Advice, which was ever successful. About this time Ninus having finish'd his City (call'd after his own Name,) Ninus's Expe∣dition against Bactria. prepar'd for his Expedition against the Bactrians; and having had experience of the greatness of their Forces, the valour of their Souldiers, and the difficulties of passing into their Country, he rais'd an Army of the choicest Men he could
pick out from all Parts of his Dominions'; for because he was baffl'd in his for∣mer Expedition, he was resolv'd to invade Bactria with a far stronger Army than he did before. Bringing therefore his whole Army together at a General Ran∣dezvouz, there were numbred (as Ctesias writes) Seventeen Hundred Thousand Foot, above Two Hundred and Ten Thousand Horse, and no fewer than Ten Thousand and Six Hundred Hooked Chariots. This number at the first view seems to be very incredible; but to such as seriously consider the largeness and popu∣lousness of Asia, it cannot be judg'd impossible. For if any (not to say any thing of the Eight Hundred Thousand Men that Darius had with him in his Ex∣pedition against the Scythians, and the innumerable Army Xerxes brought over with him into Grecce) will but take notice of things done lately, even as of Ye∣sterday, he'l more easily credit what we now say. For in Sicily Dionysius led on∣ly out of that one City of Syracuse, an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Foot, and Twelve Thousand Horse; and lancht out of one Port, a Navy of Four Hundred Sail, of which some were of Three Tyre of Oars, and others of Five: And the Romans a little before the Times of Hannibal, rais'd in Italy of their own Citi∣zens and Confederates, an Army little less than a Million of Fighting Men; and yet all Italy is not to be compar'd with one Province of Asia for number of Men. But this may sufficiently convince them, that compute the ancient Populousness of the Countries by the present depopulations of the Cities at this day. Ninus therefore marching with these Forces against the Bactrians, divided his Army into Two Bodies, because of the straitness and difficulty of the Passages. There are in Bactria many large and populous Cities, but one is more especially Famous, call'd Bactria, in which the King's Palace, for greatness and magnificence, and the Citadel for strength, far excel all the rest. Oxyartes reign'd there at this time, who caus'd all that were able, to bear Arms, and muster'd an Army of Four Hundred Thousand Men. With these he met the Enemy at the Streights, entring into his Country, where he suffered Ninus to en∣ter with part of his Army: When he saw a competent number enter'd, he fell upon them in the open Plain, and fought them with that resolution, that the Bactrians put the Assyrians to flight, and pursuing them to the next Mountains, kill'd a Hundred Thousand of their Enemies; but after the whole Army enter'd, the Bactrians were overpower'd by number, and were broken, and all fled to their several Cities, in order to defend every one his own Country. Ninus easily sub∣du'd all the rest of the Forts and Castles; but Bactria it self was so strong and well provided, that he could not force it; which occasion'd a long and tedious Siege, so that the Husband of Semiramis (who was there in the King's Camp) being Love-sick, impatient of being any longer without his Wife, sent for her, who being both discreet and couragious, and indowed with other noble Qua∣lifications, readily imbrac'd the opportunity of shewing to the World her own natural Valour and Resolution; and that she might with more safety perform so long a Journey, she put on such a Garment as whereby she could not be discern'd whether she were a Man or a Woman; and so made, that by it she both pre∣serv'd her Beauty from being scorcht by the heat in her Journey, and likewise was thereby more nimble and ready for any business she pleas'd to undertake, being of her self a youthful and sprightly Lady; and this sort of Garment was in so high esteem, that the Medes afterwards when they came to be Lords of Asia, wore Semiramis's Gown, and the Persians likewise after them. As soon as she came to Bactria, and observ'd the manner of the Siege, how Assaults were made only in open and plain Places most likely to be enter'd, and that none dar'd to approach the Cittadel, because of its natural Strength and Fortisication, and that they within took more care to defend the lower and weaker parts of the Walls, than the Castle where they neglected their Guards, she took some with her that were skilful in climbing up the Rocks, and with them with much Toyl, pass'd over a deep Trench, and possess'd her self of part of the Castle; whereupon she gave a Signal to them that were assaulting the Wall upon the Plain. Then they that were within the City being suddenly struck with a Pa∣nick Fear at the taking of the Castle, in desperation of making any further defence forsook the Walls. The City being taken in this manner, the King greatly admir'd the Valour of the Woman, and bountifully rewarded her, and was presently so passionately af∣fected at the sight of her Beauty, that he us'd all the Arguments imaginable to per∣suade
her Husband to bestow his Wife upon him, promising him as a Reward of his Kindness, to give him his Daughter Sosana in Marriage: But he absolutely refus'd; upon which the King threatn'd him, that if he would not consent, he would pluck out his Eyes. Menon hereupon out of fear of the King's Threats, and overpower'd with the Love of his Wife, fell into a distracted Rage and Madness, and forthwith hang'd himself. And this was the occasion of the advancement of Semiramis to the Regal state and dignity. Ninus having now possess'd himself of all the Treasures of Bactria (where was abundance of Gold and Silver) and settled his Affairs throughout the whole Province of Bactria, return'd with his Army to his own Country. Afterwards he had a Son by Semiramis, call'd Ninyas, and dy'd leaving his Wife Queen Regent. She bury'd her Husband Ninus in the Royal Palace, and rais'd over him a Mount of Earth of a wonderful bigness, being Nine Furlongs in height, and ten in breadth, as Ctesias says: So that the City standing in a Plain near to the River Euphrates, the Mount (many Furlongs off) looks like a state∣ly Cittadel. And it's said, that it continues to this day, though Ninve was de∣stroy'd by the Medes when they ruin'd the Assyrian Empire. Semiramis was naturally of an high aspiring Spirit, ambi∣tious to excel all her Predecessors in glorious Actions, and Semiramis builds Babylon. therefore imploy'd all her Thoughts about the building of a City in the Province of Babylon; and to this end having pro∣vided Semiramis Reign'd, Ann. Mund. 2006, Ant. Chr. 2944. Petavius says, Abraham was born in the 24. h Year of her Reign, lib. 1. c. 2. Architects, Artists, and all other Necessaries for the Work, She got together Two Millions of Men out of all Parts of the Empire to be imploy'd in the building of the City. It was so built as that the River Euphrates ran through the middle of it, and she compass'd it round with a Wall of Three Hundred and Sixty Furlongs in Circuit, and adorn'd with many stately Turrets; and such was the state and grandeur of the Work, that the Walls were of that breadth, as that Six Chariots abreast might be driven together upon them. Their height was such as exceeded all Mens belief that heard of it (as Ctesias Cnidius relates) But Clitarchus, and those who afterwards went over with Alexander into Asia, have written that the Walls were in Circuit Three Hundred Sixty Five Furlongs; the Queen making them of that Compass, to the end that the Furlongs should be as many in number as the Days of the Year: They were of Brick cemented with Bitumen, As∣phaltes. Brimstone; in height as Ctesias says Fifty Orgya, is 6 Foot; so 50 Crgya's is 100 Yards. Orgyas; but as some of the later Wri∣ters report, but Fifty Cubits only, and that the Breadth was but a little more than what would allow two Chariots to be driven afront. There were Two Hun∣dred and Fifty Turrets, in height and thickness proportionable to the largeness of the Wall. It is not to be wondred at, that there were so few Towers upon a Wall of so great a Circuit, being that in many Places round the City, there were deep Morasses; so that it was judg'd to no purpose to raise Turrets there where they were so naturally fortify'd: Between the Wall and the Houses, there was a Space left round the City of Two Hundred Foot. That the Work might be the more speedily dispatcht, to each of her Friends was allotted a Furlong, with an allowance of all Expences necessary for their se∣veral Parts, and commanded all should be finish'd in a Years time; which being diligently perfected with the Queen's Approbation, she then made a Bridge over the narrowest part of the River, Five Furlongs in length, laying the Supports and Pillars of the Arches with great Art and Skill in the Bottom of the Water Twelve Foot distance from each other. That the Stones might be the more firmly joyn'd, they were bound together with Hooks of Iron, and the Joints fill'd up with melted Lead. And before the Pillars, she made and placed Defences, with sharp pointed Angles, to receive the Water before it beat upon the flat sides of the Pillars, which caus'd the Course of the Water to run round by degrees gently and moderately as far as to the broad sides of the Pillars, so that the sharp Points of the Angles cut the Stream, and gave a check to its violence, and the roundness of them by litle and little giving way, abated the force of the Current. This Bridge was  wih reat oices and Planks of Cedar, Cypress and Palm Trees, and was Thi oot in breadth, and for Art and Curiosity, yielded to none of the Works o . On either side of the River she rais'd a Bank, as broad  great cost drew it out in length an Hundred Furlongs.
She built likewise Two Palaces at each end of the Bridge upon the Bank of the River, whence she might have a Prospect over the whole City, and make her Passage as by Keys to the most convenient Places in it, as she had occasion. And whereas Euphrates runs through the middle of Babylon, making its course to the South, the Palaces lye the one on the East, and the other on the West Side of the River; both built at exceed∣ing Costs and Expence. For that on the West had an high and stately Wall, made of well burnt Brick, 7 Miles and an half. Sixty Furlongs in compass; within this was drawn another of a round Circumference, upon which were portray'd in the Bricks before they were burnt, all sorts of living Creatures, as if it were to the Life, laid with great Art in curious Colours. This Wall was in Circuit Forty Furlongs, Three Hun∣dred Bricks thick, and in height (as Ctesias says) 50 Origia's. a Hundred Yards, upon which were Turrets an Hundred and Forty Yards high. The Third and most inward Wall immediately surrounded the Palace, Thirty Furlongs in Compass, and far surmounted the middle Wall, both in height and thickness; and on this Wall and the Towers were represented the Shapes of all sorts of Living Creatures, arti∣ficially exprest in most lively Colours. Especially was represented a General Hunt∣ing of all sorts of wild Beasts, each Four Cubits high and upwards; amongst these was to be seen Semiramis on Horseback, striking a Leopard through with a Dart, and next to her, her Husband Ninus in close Fight with a Lion, piercing him with his Lance. To this Palace she built likewise Three Gates, under which were Banqueting Houses. Apartments of Brass for Entertainments, into which Passages were open'd by by a certain Engin. This Palace far excell'd that on the other side of the River, both in greatness and adornments. For the outmost Wall of that (made of well burnt Brick) was but Thirty Furlongs in compass. Instead of the curious Por∣trature of Beasts, there were the Brazen Statues of Ninus and Semiramis, the great Officers, and of Jupiter, whom the Babylonians call Belus; and likewise Armies drawn up in Battalia, and divers sorts of Hunting were there represented, to the great diversion and pleasure of the Beholders. After all these in a low Ground in Babylon, she sunk a Place for a Pond Four-square, every Square being Almost 40 Miles. Three Hundred Furlongs in length, lin'd with Brick, and cemented with Brimstone, and the whole Five and Thirty Foot in depth: Into this having first turn'd the River, she then made a Passage in nature of a Vault, from one Palace to another, A Passage made under Water from one Palace to another. whose Arches were built of firm and strong Brick, and plaister'd all over on both sides with Bitumen Four Cubits thick. The Walls of this Vault were Twenty Bricks in thickness, and Twelve Foot high, beside and above the Arches; and the breadth was Fifteen Foot. This Piece of Work being finish'd in Two Hun∣dred and Sixty Days, the River was turn'd into its ancient Channel again, so that the River flowing over the whole Work, Semiramis could go from one Pa∣lace to the other, without passing over the River. She made likewise Two Brazen Gates at either end of the Vault, which continu'd to the time of the Persian Em∣pire. In the middle of the City, she built a Temple to Jupiter, whom the Ba∣bylonians Jupiter's Temple. call Belus (as we have before said) of which since Writers differ amongst themselves, and the Work is now wholly decay'd through length of Time, there's nothing that can certainly be related concerning it: Yet it's apparent it was of an exceeding great height, and that by the advantage of it, the Chaldean Astrolo∣gers exactly observ'd the setting and rising of the Stars. The whole was built of Brick, cemented with Brimstone, with great Art and Cost. Upon the top she plac'd Three Statues of beaten Gold of Jupiter, Juno and Rhea. That of Jupiter stood upright in the posture as if he were walking; he was Forty Foot in height, and weighed a Thousand Babylonish Talents. The Statue of Rhea was of the same weight sitting on a Golden Throne, having Two Lions standing on either side, one at her Knees, and near to them Two exceeding great Serpents of Silver, weighing Thirty Talents apiece. Here likewise the Image of Juno stood upright, and weighed Eight Hundred Talents, grasping a Serpent by the Head in her right Hand, and holding a Scepter adorn'd with precious Stones in her left. For all these Deities there was plac'd a Or Altar. Common Table made of beaten Gold, Forty Foot long, and Fifteen broad, weighing Five Hundred Talents: Upon which stood Two Cups weighing Thirty Talents, and near to them as many Censers weigh∣ing Three Hundred Talents: There were there likewise plac'd Three Drinking Bowls of Gold, one of which dedicated to Jupiter, weigh'd Twelve Hundred Babylonish Talents, but the other Two Six Hundred apiece; but all those the Persian
Kings sacrilegiously carry'd away. And length of Time has either altogether consum'd, or much defac'd the Palaces and the other Structures; so that at this day but a small part of this Babylon is inhabited, and the greatest part which lay within the Walls is turn'd into Tillage and Pasture. There was likewise a Hanging Garden (as it's call'd) near the Citadel, not See Qu Curtius lib. 5. Sect. 1. built by Semiramis, but by a later Prince, call'd Cyrus, for the sake of a Curtesan, who being a Persian (as they say) by Birth, and coveting Meadows on Mountain Tops, desir'd the King by an Artificial Plantation to imitate the Land in Persia. This Garden was Four Hundred Foot Square, and the Ascent up to it was as to the Top of a Mountain, and had Buildings and Apartments out of one into ano∣ther, like unto a Theater. Under the Steps to the Ascent, were built Arches one above another, rising gently by degrees, which supported the whole Plantation. The highest Arch upon which the Platform of the Garden was laid, was Fifty Cubits high, and the Garden it self was surrounded with Battlements and Bul∣warks. The Walls were made very strong, built at no small Charge and Expence, being Two and Twenty Foot thick, and every Sally-port Ten Foot wide: Over the several Stories of this Fabrick, were laid Beams and Summers of huge Massy Stones each Sixteen Foot long, and Four broad. The Roof over all these was first cover'd with Reeds, daub'd with abundance of Brimstone; then upon them was laid double Tiles pargeted together with a hard and durable , Such as we call Plaister of Paris. Mortar, and over them after all, was a Covering with Sheets of Lead, that the Wet which drencht through the Earth, might not rot the Foundation. Upon all these was laid Earth of a convenient depth, sufficient for the growth of the greatest Trees. When the Soyl was laid even and smooth, it was planted with all sorts of Trees, which both for Greatness and Beauty, might delight the Spectators. The Arches (which stood one above another, and by that means darted light sufficient one into another) had in them many stately Rooms of all Kinds, and for all purposes. But there was one that had in it certain Engins, whereby it drew plenty of Wa∣ter out of the River through certain Conduits and Conveyances from the Plat∣form of the Garden, and no body without was the wiser, or knew what was done. This Garden (as we said before) was built in later Ages. But Semiramis built likewise other Cities upon the Banks of Euphrates and Tigris, where she establish'd Marts for the vending of Merchandize brought from Media and Paretacenes, and other Neighbouring Countries. For next to Nile and Ganges, Euphrates and Tigris are the noblest Rivers of all Asia, and have their Spring-heads in the Mountains of Arabia, and are distant one from another Fifteen Hundred Furlongs. They run through Media and Paretacena into Mesopotamia, which from its lying in the middle between these Two Rivers, has gain'd from them that Name; thence passing through the Province of Babylon, they empty themselves into the The Persi Gulf. Red Sea. These being very large Rivers, and passing through divers Countries, greatly inrich the Merchants that traffick in those Parts; so that the Neighbouring Places are full of Wealthy Mart Towns, and greatly advanc'd the glory and majesty of Babylon. Semiramis likewise caus'd a great Stone to be cut out of the Mountains of Ar∣menia, The gr Stone  of the  tains by  ramis. an Hundred and Twenty Five Foot in length, and Five in breadth and thick∣ness; this she convey'd to the River by the help of many Yokes of Oxen and Asses, and there put it Aboard a Ship, and brought it safe by Water to Babylon, and set it up in the most remarkable High-way as a wonderful Spectacle to all Beholders. From its shape it's call'd an * Obelisk, and is accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World. Oblos in Gre signifies a S There are indeed many remarkable and wonderful things to be seen in Babylon; but amongst these, the great quantity of Brimstone that there flows out of the Ground, is not to be the least admir'd, which is so much, that it not only supply'd all their occasions in building such great and mighty Works, but the common People profusely gather it, and when its dry, burn it instead of Fewel; and though it be drawn out by an innumerable Company of People, as from a great Fountain, yet it's as plentiful as ever it was before. Near this Fountain there's a Spring not big, but very fierce and violent, for it casts forth a Sulphureous and gross Vapour, which suddenly kills every living Creature that comes near to it; for the Breath being stopt a long time, and all power of Respiration taken away by the force of the Exhalation, the Body presently swells so, that the Parts about the Lungs are all in a Flame.
Beyond the River there is a Morass, about which is a crusty Earth; if any unac∣quainted Strange Pro∣perties of a Morass. with the Place get into it, at first he floats upon the Top, when he comes into the Middle he's violently hal'd away, and striving to help himself, seems to be held so fast by something or other, that all his Labour to get loose is in vain. And first his Feet, then his Legs and Thighs to his Loyns are benumm'd, at length his whole Body is stupify'd, and then down he sinks to the Bottom, and presently after is cast up dead to the Surface. And thus much for the Wonders of BABYLON. When Semiramis had finish'd all her Works, she marcht with a great Army into Her several Expeditions. Media, and encamp'd near to a Mountain call'd Bagistan; there she made a Garden twelve Furlongs in Compass: It was in a plain Champain Country, and had a great Fountain in it, which water'd the whole Garden. Mount Bagistan is dedi∣cated to Jupiter, and towards one side of the Garden has steep Rocks seventeen Furlongs from the Top to the Bottom. She cut out a Piece of the lower Part of the Rock, and caus'd her own Image to be carv'd upon it, and a Hundred of her Guard that were Launceteers standing round about her. She wrote likewise in Syriac Letters upon the Rock, That Semiramis ascended from the Plain to the Top of the Mountain by laying the Packs and Fardles of the Beasts that follow'd her one upon another. Marching away from ence, she came to Chaone, a City of Media, where she incamp'd upon a rising Ground, from whence she took notice of an exceeding great and high Rock, where she made another very great Garden in the very Mid∣dle of the Rock, and built upon it stately Houses of Pleasure, whence she might both have a delightful Prospect into the Garden, and view the Army as they lay incamp'd below in the Plain; being much delighted with this Place she stay'd here a considerable Time, giving up her self to all kinds of Pleasures and Delights, for she forbore marrying lest she should then be depos'd from the Government, and in the mean time she made Choice of the handsomest Commanders to be her Gallants; but after they had layn with her she cut off their Heads. From hence she march'd towards Ecbatana, and arriv'd at the Mountain Zarche∣um, which being many Furlongs in Extent, and full of steep Precipices and craggy Rocks, there was no passing but by long and tedious Windings and Turnings. To leave therefore behind her an Eternal Monument of her Name, and to make a short Cut for her Passage, she caus'd the Rocks to be hew'd down, and the Valleys to be fill'd up with Earth, and so in a short time at a vast Expence laid the Way open and plain, which to this day is call'd Semiramis's WAY. When she came to Ecbatana, which is situated in a low and even Plain, she built there a stately Palace, and bestow'd more of her Care and Pains here than she had done at any other Place. For the City wanting Water (there being no Spring near) she plentifully supply'd it with good and wholesom Water, brought thither with a great deal of Toyl and Expence, after this manner: There's Mountain call'd Orontes, twelve Furlongs distant from the City, exceeding high and steep for the Space of five and twenty Furlongs up to the Top; on the other side of this Mount there's a great Mear which empties it self into the River. At the Foot of this Mountain she dug a Canal fifteen Foot in Breadth and forty in Depth, through which she convey'd Water in great Abundance into the City. And these are the Things which she did in Media. Afterwards she made a Progress through Persia and all the rest of her Domini∣ons in Asia, and all along as she went she plain'd all the Way before her, levelling both Rocks and Mountains. On the other hand in Champain Countries she would raise Eminences on which she would sometimes build Sepulchres for her Officers and Commanders, and at other times Towns and Cities. Throughout her whole Expeditions she always us'd to raise an Ascent, upon which she pitcht her own Pa∣vilion, that from thence she might have a View of her whole Army. Many Things which she perform'd in Asia remain to this day, and are call'd Semiramis's Works. Afterwards she pass'd through all Egypt, and having conquer'd the greatest Part of Lybia, she went to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and there inquir'd of the Oracle how long she should live; which return'd her this Answer, That she should leave this World and afterwards be for ever honour'd by some Nations in Asia, when Ninyas her Son should be plotting against her.
When she had perform'd these things, she marcht into Ethiopia, and having sub∣du'd many Places in it, she had an Opportunity to see what was there very remark∣able and wonderful. For they say there's a four-square Lake, a hundred and sixty The wonder∣ful Lake in Ethiopia. Foot in Circuit, the Water of which is in Colour like unto Vermilion, and of an extraordinary sweet Flavour, much like unto old Wine; yet of such wonderful Operation, that whosoever drinks of it goes presently mad, and confesses all the Faults that ever he had been before guilty of; but some will scarce believe this Relation. The Ethiopians have a peculiar way of burying their Dead; for after they have Burials in Ethiopia. imbalm'd the Body they pour round about it melted Glass, and then place it upon a An high form or block; Pillar, so that the Corps may be plainly seen through the Glass, as Herodotus has reported the thing. But Ctesias of Cnidus assirms that he tells a Winter-tale, and says that its true indeed that the Body is imbalm'd, but that Glass is not pour'd upon the naked Body, for the Bodies thereby would be so scorch'd and defac'd that they could not possibly retain any likeness to the dead: And that therefore they make an hollow Statue of Gold, and put the Body within it, and then pour the melted Glass round upon this Statue, which they set upon some high Place, and so the Statue which resembles the dead is seen through the Glass, and thus he says they use to bury those of the richer Sort; But those of meaner Fortunes they put into Statues of Silver; and for the poor they make Statues of Potters Clay, every one having Glass enough, for there's Abundance to be got in Ethiopia, and ready at hand for all the Inhabitants. But we shall speak more fully of the Customs and Laws of the Ethiopians and the Product of the Land and other things worthy of Remark presently when we come to relate their Anti∣quities and old Fables and Stories. Semiramis having settl'd her Affairs in Egypt and Ethiopia, return'd with her Ar∣my Her Expediti∣on into India. into Asia to Bactria: And now having a great Army, and enjoying a long Peace, she had a longing Desire to perform some notable Exploit by her Arms. Hearing therefore that the Indians were the greatest Nation in the whole World, and had the largest and richest Tract of Land of all others, she resolv'd to make War upon them. Stabrobates was at that time King, who had innumerable Forces, and many Elephants bravely accoutred and fitted to strike Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies. For India for the Pleasantness of the Country excell'd all others, being water'd in every Place with many Rivers, so that the Land yielded every year a double Crop; and by that Means was so rich and so abounded with Plenty of all things necessary for the Sustenance of Man's Life, that it supply'd the Inhabi∣tants continually with such things as made them excessively rich, insomuch as it was never known that there was ever any Famine amongst them, the Climate being so happy and favourable; and upon that account likewise there's an incredible Number of Elephants, which for Courage and Strength of Body far excel those in Africa. Moreover this Country abounds in Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron and preti∣ous Stones of all sorts, both for Profit and Pleasure. All which being nois'd abroad, so stirr'd up the Spirit of Semiramis, that (tho' she had no Provocation given her) yet she was resolv'd upon the War against the Indians. But knowing that she had need of great Forces, she sent Dispatches to all the Provinces, with Command to the Governors to list the choicest young Men they could find, or∣dering the Proportion of Souldiers every Province and Country should send forth according to the Largeness of it; and commanded that all should furnish them∣selves with new Arms and Armour, and all appear in three years time at a general Randezvouz in Bactria bravely arm'd and accountred in all Points. And having sent for Shipwrights out of Phoenicia, Syria, Cyprus, and other Places bordering upon the Sea-coasts, she prepar'd Timber for them fit for the Purpose, and order'd them to build Vessels that might be taken asunder and convey'd from place to place wherever she pleas'd. For the River Indus bordering upon that Kingdom being the greatest in those Parts, she stood in need of many River-boats to pass it in Order to repress the Indians. But being there was no Timber near that River she was necessitated to convey the Boats thither by Land from Bactria. She further consider'd that she was much inferior to the Indians for Elephants (which were absolutely necessary for her to make use of) she therefore contriv'd to have Beasts that should resemble them, hoping by this Means to strike a Terror into the Indians, who believ'd there were no Elephants in any place but in India.
To this End she provided three hundred thousand black Oxen, and distributed the Flesh amongst a Company of ordinary Mechanicks and such Fellows as she had to play the Coblers for her, and ordered them by stitching the Skins together and stuffing them with Straw to imitate the Shape of an Elephant, and in every one Mock-Ele∣phants. of them she put a Man to govern them, and a Camel to carry them, so that at a distance they appear'd to all that saw them as if they were really such Beasts. They that were imploy'd in this Work wrought at it night and day in a Place which was wall'd round for the Purpose, and Guards set at every Gate, that none might be admitted either to go in or out, to the end that none might see what they were doing, lest it should be nois'd abroad and come to the Ears of the In∣dians. Having therefore provided Shipping and Elephants in the space of two years, in the third she randezvouz'd all her Forces in Bactria. Her Army consisted (as Ctesias says) of three Millions of Foot, 500000 , but in the mar∣gent, , 200000. two hundred Thousand Horse, and a hundred Thousand Chariots, and a hundred Thousand Men mounted upon Camels with Swords four Cubits long. The Boats that might be taken asunder were two Thousand; which the Camels carry'd by Land as they did the Mock-Elephants, as we have before declar'd. The Souldiers made their Horses familiar with these feign'd Beasts by bringing them often to them, lest they should be terrify'd at the Sight of them; which Perseus imitated many Ages after when he was to fight with the Romans, who had Elephants in their Army out of Africa. However this Con∣trivance prov'd to be of no Advantage either to him or her, as will appear in the Issue herein a little after related. When Stabrobates the Indian King heard of these great Armies and the mighty Preparations made against him, he did all he could to excel Semiramis in every thing. And first he built of great Canes four Thousand River-boats: For abun∣dance of these Canes grow in India about the Rivers and Fenns, so thick as a Man can scarce fathom: And Vessels made of these Reeds (they say) are exceeding useful, because they'l never rot or be worm-eaten. He was very diligent likewise in preparing of Arms and going from Place to Place throughout all India, and so rais'd a far greater Army than that of Semiramis. To his former Number of Elephants he added more, which he took by hunting, and furnish'd them all with every thing that might make them look terrible in the Face of their Enemies, so that by their Multitude and the Compleatness of their Breastplates. Armour in all Points it seem'd above the Strength and Power of Man to bear up against the violent Shock of these Creatures. Having therefore made all these Preparations, he sent Embassadours to Semiramis (as she was on her March towards him) to complain and upbraid her for beginning a War without any Provocation or Injury offer'd her; and by his private Letters taxed her with her whorish Course of Life, and vow'd (calling the Gods to wit∣ness) that if he conquer'd her he would nail her to the Cross. When she read the Letters, she smil'd, and said, the Indian should presently have a Trial of her Valour by her Actions. When she came up with her Army to the River Indus she found the Enemies Fleet drawn up in a Line of Battle; whereupon she forthwith drew up her own, and having mann'd it with the stoutest Souldiers, joyn'd Battle, yet so ordering the Matter as to have her Land-forces ready upon the Shoar to be assisting as there should be Occasion. After a long and sharp Fight with Marks of Valour on both sides, Semiramis was at length victorious, and sunk a Thousand of the Ene∣mies Vessels, and took a great number of Prisoners. Puffed up with this Success she took in all the Cities and Islands that lay in the River, and carry'd away a hun∣dred Thousand Captives. After this the Indian King drew off his Army (as if he fled for Fear) but in Truth to decoy his Enemies to pass the River. Semiramis therefore (seeing things fall out according to her wish) laid a broad Bridge of Boats (at a vast Charge) over the River, and thereby passed over all her Forces, leaving only threescore Thousand to guard the Bridge, and with the rest of her Army pursu'd the Indians. She plac'd the Mock-Elephants in the Front that the Enemies Scouts might presently inform the King what Multitudes of Ele∣phants she had in her Army: And she was not deceiv'd in her hopes; for when the Spies gave an Account to the Indians what a great Multitude of these Creatures were advancing towards them, they were all in amaze, inquiring among them∣selves, whence the Assyrians should be supply'd with such a vast number of Elephants: But the Cheat could not be long conceal'd, for some of Semiramis's Souldiers being
laid by the Heels for their Carelesness upon the Guard (through Fear of further Punish∣ment) made their Escape and fled to the Enemy, and undeceiv'd them as to the Ele∣phants; upon which the Indian King was mightily encourag'd, and caus'd Notice of the Delusion to be spread through the whole Army, and then forthwith march'd with all his Force against the Assyrians, Semiramis on the other hand doing the like. When they approach'd near one to another, Stabrobates the Indian King plac'd his Horse and Chariots in the Van-guard at a good distance before the main Body of his Army. The Queen having plac'd her Mock-Elephants at the like distance from her main Body, valiantly receiv'd her Enemies Charge; but the Indian Horse were most strangely terrify'd; for in Regard the Phantasms at a distance seem'd to be real Elephants, the Horses of the Indians (being inur'd to those Creatures) prest boldly and undauntedly forward; but when they came near and saw another sort of Beast than usual, and the smell and every thing else almost being strange and new to them, they broke in with great Terror and Confusion, one upon another, so that they cast some of their Riders headlong to the Ground, and ran away with others (as the Lot happen'd) into the midst of their Enemies: Whereupon Semi∣ramis readily making use of her Advantage, with a Body of choice Men fell in up∣on them, and routed them, forcing them back to their main Body: And though Stabrobates was something astonish'd at this unexpected Defeat, yet he brought up his Foot against the Enemy with his Elephants in the Front: He himself was in the right Wing, mounted upon a stately Elephant, and made a fierce Charge upon the Queen her self, who happen'd then to be opposite to him in the left. And tho' the Mock-Elephants in Semiramis's Army did the like, yet they stood the violent shock of the other but a little while, for the Indian Beasts being both exceeding strong and stout, easily bore down and destroy'd all that oppos'd them, so that there was a great Slaughter; for some they trampl'd under foot, others they rent in pieces with their Teeth, and toss'd up others with their Trunks into the Air. The Ground therefore being cover'd with Heaps of dead Carcases and nothing but Death and Destruction to be seen on every hand, so that all were full of Horror and Amazement, none durst keep their Order or Ranks any longer. Upon which the whole Assyrian Army fled outright, and the Indian King encountred with Semiramis, and first wounded her with an Arrow in the Arm, and afterwards with a Dart (in wheeling about) in the Shoulder, whereupon the Queen (her Wounds not being mortal) fled, and by the Swiftness of her Horse (which far exceeded the other that pursu'd her) she got off. But all making one way to the Bridge of Boats, and such a vast Multitude of Men thronging together in one strait and nar∣row Passage, the Queen's Souldiers miserably perish'd by treading down one ano∣ther under foot, and (which was strange and unusual) Horse and Foot lay tumb∣ling promiscuously one over another. When they came at length to the Bridge, and the Indians at their Heels, the Consternation was so great that many on both sides the Bridge were tumbled over into the River. But when the greatest part of those that remain'd had got over; Semiramis caus'd the Cords and Tenons of the Bridge to be cut, which done, the Boats (which were before joyn'd together, and upon which was a great Number of Indians not in the Pursuit) being now di∣vided into many Parts, and carry'd here and there by the force of the Current, Multitudes of the Indians were drown'd, and Semiramis was now safe and secure, having such a Barrier as the River betwixt her and her enemies. Whereupon the Indian King being forewarn'd by Prodigies from Heaven and the Opinions of the Soothsayers, forbore all further Pursuit. And Semiramis making Exchange of Prisoners in Bactra return'd with scarce a third part of her Army. A little time after Semiramis being assaulted by an Eunuch through the treache∣rous Contrivance of her Son, remembred the former Answer given her by the Oracle at the Temple of Hammon, and therefore pass'd the Business over without punishing of him who was chiefly concern'd in the Plot: But surrendring the Crown to him, commanded all to obey him as their lawful King, and forthwith disappear'd as if she had been translated to the Gods, according to the Words of the Oracle. There are some which fabulously say she was metamorphos'd into a Pigeon; and that she flew away with a Flock of those Birds that lighted upon her Palace: And hence it is that the Assyri∣ans Her End. But others say she was kill'd by her Son Ninyas soliciting him to incestuous Embraces. adore a Dove, believing that Semiramis was enthron'd a∣mongst the Gods. And this was the * End of Semiramis Queen
of all Asia, except India, after she had liv'd Sixty two years, and reign'd Forty two. And these are the Things which Ctesias the Cnidian reports of her in his History. Athenaeus, and some other Writers, affirm that she was a most beautiful Strumpet, and upon that account the King of Assyria fell in Love with her, and at first was taken into his Favour, and at length becoming his lawful Wife she prevail'd with her Husband to grant her the sole and absolute Authority of the regal Govern∣ment for the space of five days. Taking therefore upon her the Scepter and royal Mantle of the Kingdom, the first day she made a sumptuous Banquet and magnificent Entertainments, to which she invited the Generals of the Army and all the Nobility, in order to be observant to all her Commands. The next day having both great and small at her beck, she committed her Husband to the Goal: And in Regard she was of a bold and daring Spirit, apt and ready to undertake any great Matters, she easily gain'd the Kingdom, which she held to the time of her old Age, and became famous for her many great and wonderful Acts: And these are the Things which Historians variously relate concerning her. CHAP. II. Ninyas succeeds Semiramis: His close and slothful Manner of Life. The Reign of Sardanapalus: His Luxury and Effeminacy. His Epitaph. Depos'd by Arbaces the Mede; and the Assyrian Empire overturn'd. Nineveh raz'd. AFTER her Death Ninyas, the Son of Ninus and Semiramis, succeeded, and 3. Ninyas. reign'd peaceably, nothing at all like his Mother for Valour and martial Af∣fairs. For he spent all his Time shut up in his Place, insomuch as he was never seen of any but of his Concubines and Eunuchs; for being given up wholly to his Pleasures, he shook off all Cares and every thing that might be irksome and trouble∣some, placing all the Happiness of a King in a fordid Indulgence of all sorts of Voluptuousness. But that he might reign the more securely, and be fear'd of all his Subjects, every year he rais'd out of every Province a certain number of Soul∣diers, under their several Generals, and having brought them in the City, over every Country appointed such a Governor as he could most confide in, and were most at his Devotion. At the end of the year he rais'd as many more out of the Provinces, and sent the former home, taking first of them an Oath of Fidelity. And this he did, that his Subjects observing how he always had a great Army ready in the Field, those of them that were inclin'd to be refractory or rebel (out of fear of Punishment) might continue firm in their due Obedience. And the further Ground likewise of this yearly Change was, that the Officers and Souldiers might be from time to time disbanded before they could have time to be well acquainted one with another. For length of Time in martial Imployments so improves the Skill and advances the Courage and Resolution of the Commanders, that many times they conspire against their Princes and wholly fall off from their Alle∣giance. His living thus close and unseen, was a Covert to the Voluptuous Course of his Life, and in the mean time (as if he had been a God) none durst in the least mutter any thing against him. And in this manner (creating Commanders of his Army, constituting of Governors in the Provinces, appointing the Chamberlains and Officers of his Houshold, placing of Judges in their several Countries, and or∣dering and disposing of all other Matters as he thought sit most for his own Ad∣vantage) he spent his Days in Nineve.
After the same manner almost liv'd all the rest of the Kings for the space of Thirty Generations, in a continu'd Line of Succession from Fa∣ther to Son, to the very Reign of Sardanapalus; in whose time Sardanapalus. The Assyrian Em∣pire to Sardanapalus continu'd 1360 Years. This is Justin's Account, and agrees best with the Holy Scrip∣tures: So Velleius Paterculus agrees, and the Reign of Belus or Nimrod, 55 Years. The beginning of his Reign falls in Ann. Mun. 1718. And Sardanapalus his Fall, was in Ann. Mun. 3078, in the 19th of Jehu, 543 Years before the Taking of Ba∣bylon by Alexander the Great, Ant; Chr. 872, Vid. Helvicus's Chron. the Empire of the Assyrians devolv'd upon the Medes, after it had continu'd above Thirteen Hundred and Sixty Years, as Ctesias the Cnidian says in his Second Book. But it's needless to recite their Names, or how long each of them reign'd, in regard none of them did any thing worth remembring, save only that it may deserve an Account how the Assyrians assisted the Trojans, by sending them some Forces under the Command of Memnon the Son of Tithon. For when Teutamus. Teutamus reign'd in Asia, who was the Twentieth from Ninyas the Son of Semiramis, it's said the Grecians under their General Agamemnon, made War upon the Trojans, at which time the Assyrians had been Lords of Asia above a Thousand Years. For Priam the King of Troy (being a Prince under the Assyrian Empire, when War was made upon him) sent Ambassadors to crave aid of Teutamus, who sent him Ten Thousand Ethiopians, and as many out of the Province of Susiana, with Two Hundred Chariots under the Conduct of Memnon the Son of Tithon. For this Tithon at that time was Governor of Persia, and in special Favour with the King above all the rest of the Princes: And Memnon was in the Flower of his Age, strong and couragious, and had built a Pallace in the Cittadel of Susa, which retain'd the Name of Memnonia to the time of the Persian Empire. He pav'd also there a Common High-way, which is call'd Memnon's Way to this day. But the Ethiopians of Egypt question this, and say that Memnon was their Country-man, and shew several antient Palaces which (they say) retain his Name at this day, being call'd Memnon's Palaces. Notwithstanding, however it be as to this matter, yet it has been generally and constantly held for a certain Truth, that Memnon led to Troy Twenty Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Chariots, and signaliz'd his Valour with great Honour and Reputation, with the Death and Destruction of many of the Greeks, till at length he was slain by an Ambuscade laid for him by the Thessalians. But the E∣thiopians recover'd his Body, and burnt it, and brought back his Bones to Tithon. And these things the Barbarians say are recorded of Memnon in the Histories of their Kings. Sardanapalus, the Thirtieth from Ninus, and the last King of the Assyrians, ex∣ceeded Sardanapalus the Thirtieth King, and the last. all his Predecessors in Sloth and Luxury; for besides that, he was seen of none out of his Family, he led a most effeminate Life: For wallowing in pleasure and wanton Dalliances, he cloathed himself in Womens Attire, and spun fine Wool and Purple amongst the throngs of his Whores and Concubines. He paint∣ed likewise his Face, and deckt his whole Body with other Allurements like a Strumpet, and was more lascivious than the most wanton Curtezan. He imitated likewise a Womans Voice, and not only daily inured himself to such Meat and Drink as might incite and stir up his lascivious Lusts, but gratify'd them by fil∣thy By Sodomy. Catamites, as well as Whores and Strumpets, and without all sense of Mo∣desty, abusing both Sexes, slighted Shame, the concomitant of filthy and impure Actions; and proceeded to such a degree of Voluptuousness and sordid Unclean∣ness, that he compos'd Verses for his Epitaph, with a Command to his Successors Epitaph. to have them inscrib'd upon his Tomb after his Death, which were thus Translated by a Cli, vide ∣neus, lib. 12. Clemens, lib. 2. Strom. Grecian out of the Barbarian Language, , . Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exsaturata Libido. Cicero. Tusc. lib. 5. Hausit, at illa jacent multa ac praeclara relicta. What once I gorg'd I now injoy, An Epitaph fitter for an Ox than a Man. says Aristotle. And wanton Lusts me still imploy. All other things by Mortals priz'd, Are left as Dirt by me despis'd.
Being thus corrupt in his Morals, he not only came to a miserable end him∣self, but utterly overturn'd the Assyrian Monarchy, which had continu'd longer than any we read of. For Arbaces a Mede, a Valiant and Prudent Man, and General of the Forces Arbaces. which were sent every Year out of Media to Ninive, was stir'd up by the Go∣vernor of Babylon (his Fellow Soldier, and with whom he had contracted an in∣timate familiarity) to overthrow the Assyrian Empire. This Captain's Name was 2 Kin. 20. . call'd Ba∣ladan, and Isa. 39. 1. Ush. Ann. 61. Ant. Ch. 747. Belesis, a most Famous Babylonian Priest, one of those call'd Caldeans, expert in Astrology and Divination; of great Reputation upon the account of foretelling future Events, which happen'd accordingly. Amongst others, he told his Friend, the Median General, that he should depose Sardanapalus, and be Lord of all his Dominions. Arbaces hereupon hearkning to what he said, promis'd him, that if he succeeded in his Attempt, Belesis should be chief Governor of the Province of Babylon: Being therefore fully persuaded of the truth of what was foretold, as if he had receiv'd it from an Oracle, he enter'd into an Association with the Governors of the rest of the Provinces, and by feasting and caressing of them, gain'd all their Hearts and Affections. He made it likewise his great business to get a sight of the King, that he might observe the Course and manner of his Life; to this end he bestow'd a Cup of Gold upon an Eunuch, by whom being introduc'd into the King's Presence, he perfectly came to understand his Laci∣viousness, and Esseminate course of Life. Upon sight of him, he contemn'd and despis'd him as a Vile and Worthless Wretch, and thereupon was much more earnest to accomplish what the Chaldean had before declar'd to him. At length he conspir'd with Belesis so far, as that he himself persuaded the Medes and Per∣sians to a defection, and the other brought the Babylonians into the Confederacy. He imparted likewise his Design to the King of Arabia, who was at this time his special Friend. And now the Years attendance of the Army being at an end, new Troops suc∣ceeded, and came into their Place, and the former were sent every one here and there, into their several Countries. Hereupon Arbaces prevail'd with the Medes to invade the Assyrian Empire, and drew in the Persians in hopes of Liberty, to join in the Confederacy. Belesis in like manner persuaded the Babylonians to stand up for their Liberties. He sent Messengers also into Arabia, and gain'd that Prince (who was both his Friend, and had been his Guest) for a Confederate. When therefore the Yearly Course was run out, all these with a great number of Forces flockt together to Nineve, in shew to serve their Turn according to cu∣stom, but in truth to overturn the Assyrian Empire. The whole number of Sol∣diers now got together out of those Four Provinces, amounted to Four Hundred Thousand Men. All these (being now in one Camp) call'd a Council of War in order to consult what was to be done. Sardanapalus being inform'd of the Revolt, led forth the Forces of the rest of the Provinces against them; whereupon a Battel being fought, the Rebels were totally routed, and with a great Slaughter were forc'd to the Mountains Seventy Furlongs from Nineve. Being drawn up a Second time in Battalia to try their Fortune in the Field, and now fac'd by the Enemy, Sardanapalus caus'd a Proclamation to be made by the Heralds, that whosoever kill'd Arbaces the Mede, should receive as a Reward, Two Hundred Talents of Gold, and double the Sum to him (together with the Government of Media,) who should take him alive. The like Sum he promis'd to such as should kill Belesis, or take him alive. But none being wrought upon by these Promises, he fought them again, and destroy'd many of the Rebels, and forc'd the rest to fly to their Camp upon the Hills. Arbaces being disheartn'd with these Misfortunes, call'd a Council of War to consider what was sit further to be done: The greater part were for returning into their own Countries, and possess themselves of the strongest Places, in order to fit and furnish themselves with all things further necessary for the War. But when Belesis the Babylonian assur'd them that the Gods promis'd, that after many Toyls and Labours they should have good Success, and all should end well, and had us'd several other Ar∣guments (such as he thought best) he prevail'd with them to resolve to run through all the hazards of the War.
Another Battle therefore was fought, wherein the King gain'd a third Victory, and pursu'd the Revolters as far as to the Mountains of Babylon. In this Fight Arbaces himself was wounded, though he fought stoutly, and slew many of the Assyrians with his own Hand. After so many Defeats and Misfortunes one upon the neck of another, the Conspirators altogether despair'd of Victory, and therefore the Commanders re∣solv'd every one to return to their own Country. But Belesis, who lay all that Night Star-gazing in the open Field, prognosticated to them the next day, that if they would but continue together Five Days, unexpected Help would come, and they would see a mighty change, and that Affairs would have a contrary as∣pect to what they then had; for he affirm'd, that through his Knowledge in A∣strology, he understood that the Gods portended so much by the Stars; therefore he intreated them to stay so many days, and make trial of his Art, and wait so long to have an Experiment of the Goodness of the Gods. All being thus brought back, and waiting till the time appointed, News on a sudden was brought that mighty Forces were at hand, sent to the King out of Bactria. Hereupon Arbacs resolv'd with the stoutest and swiftest Soldiers of the Army, forthwith to make out against the Captains that were advancing, and ei∣ther by fair words to perswade them to a defection, or by Blows to force them to join with them in their Design. But Liberty being sweet to every one of them, first the Captains and Commanders were easily wrought upon, and presently after the whole Army join'd, and made up one intire Camp together. It happen'd at that time, that the King of Assyria not knowing any thing of the Revolt of the Bactrians, and puft up by his former Successes, was indulging his Sloath and Idle∣ness, and preparing Beasts for Sacrifice, plenty of Wine, and other things neces∣sary in order to feast and entertain his Soldiers. While his whole Army was now feasting and revelling, Arbaces (receiving in∣telligence by some Deserters of the Security and Intemperance of the Enemy) fell in upon them on the sudden in the Night; and being in due order and discipline, and setting upon such as were in confusion, he being before prepar'd, and the other altogether unprovided, they easily broke into their Camp, and made a great Slaughter of some, forcing the rest into the City. Hereupon Sardanapalus committed the charge of the whole Army to Salemenus his Wife's Brother, and took upon himself the defence of the City. But the Re∣bels twice defeated the King's Forces, once in the open Field, and the Second time before the Walls of the City; in which last ingagement Salemenus was kill'd, and almost all his Army lost, some being cut off in the pursuit, and the rest (save a very few) being intercepted, and prevented from entring into the City, were driven headlong into the River Euphrates; and the number of the Slain was so great, that the River was dy'd over with Blood, and retain'd that Colour for a great distance, and a long course together. The King being afterwards besieg'd, many of the Nations (through desire of Liberty) revolted to the Confederates; so that Sardanapalus now perceiving that the Kingdom was like to be lost, sent away his Three Sons and Two Daugh∣ters, with a great deal of Treasure into Paphlagonia, to Cotta the Governor there, his most intire Friend; and sent Posts into all the Provinces of the Kingdom, in order to raise Souldiers, and make all other Preparations necessary to indure a Siege. And he was the more incouraged to this, for that he was acquainted with an ancient Prophesy, That Nineve could never be taken by force, till the River became the City's Enemy; which the more incourag'd him to hold out, because he conceiv'd that was never like to be; therefore he resolv'd to indure the Siege till the Aids which he expected out of the Provinces came up to him. The Enemy on the other hand grown more couragious by their Successes, eagerly urg'd on the Siege, but made little impression on the Besieg'd by reason of the strength of the Walls; for Ballistes to cast Stones, Testudos to cast up Mounts, and Battering Rams were not known in those Ages. And besides (to say truth) the King had been very careful (as to what concern'd the defence of the place) plentifully to furnish the Inhabitants with every thing necessary. The Siege continu'd Two Years, during which time nothing was done to any purpose, save that the Walls were sometimes assaulted, and the Besieg'd pen'd up in the City. The Third Year it happened that Euphrates overflowing with continual Rains, came up into a part of the City, and tore down the Wall Twenty Furlongs in
length. The King hereupon conceiving that the Oracle was accomplish'd, in that the River was an apparent Enemy to the City, utterly despair'd, and therefore that he might not fall into the Hands of his Enemies, he caus'd a huge Pile of Wood to be made in his Palace Court, and heapt together upon it all his Gold, Silver, and Royal Apparel, and enclosing his Eunuchs and Concubines in an Apart∣ment within the Pile, caus'd it to be set on Fire, and burnt himself and them to∣gether, which when the Revolters came to understand, they enter'd through the Breach of the Walls, and took the City; and cloath'd Arbaces with a Royal Robe, and committed to him the sole Authority, proclaiming him King. When he had rewarded his Followers, every one according to their demerit, and ap∣pointed Governors over the several Provinces, Belesis the Babylonian, who had fore∣told his advancement to the Throne, put him in mind of his Services, and de∣manded the Government of Babylon, which he had before promis'd him. He told him likewise of a Vow that he himself had made to Belus, in the heat of the War, that when Sardanapalus was conquer'd, and the Palace consum'd, he would carry the Ashes to Babylon, and there raise a Mount near to his Temple, which should be an eternal Monument to all that sail'd through Euphrates, in memory of him that overturn'd the Assyrian Empire. But that which in truth induc'd him to make this Request was, that he had been inform'd of the Gold and Silver by an Eunuch (that was a Deserter) whom he had hid and conceal'd: Arbaces therefore being ignorant of the Contrivance (because all the rest beside this Eu∣nuch, were consum'd with the King) granted to him liberty both to carry away the Ashes, and likewise the absolute Government of Babylon without paying any Tribute. Whereupon Belesis forthwith prepar'd Shipping, and together with the Ashes carry'd away most of the Gold and Silver to Babylon. But when the King came plainly to understand the Cheat, he committed the Examination and Decision of this Theft to the other Captains who were his Assistants in the de∣posing of Sardanapalus. Belesis upon his Trial confess'd the Fact, and thereupon they condemn'd him to lose his Head. But the King being a Man of a noble and generous Spirit, and willing to adorn the beginning of his Reign with the Marks of his Grace and Mercy, not only pardon'd him, but freely gave him all the Gold and Silver which had been carry'd away; neither did he deprive him of the Government of Babylon, which at the first he conferr'd upon him, saying, That his former good Services did overballance the Injuries afterwards. This gracious Dis∣position of the King being nois'd abroad, he thereby not only gain'd the Hearts of his People, but was highly honour'd, and his Name famous among all the Provinces, and all judg'd him worthy of the Kingdom, who was so compassio∣nate and gracious to Offenders. The like Clemency he shew'd to the Inhabitants of Nineve; for though he disspers'd them into several Country Villages, yet he restor'd to every one of them their Estates, but raz'd the City to the ground. Nineve raz'd. The rest of the Silver and Gold that could be found in the Pile (of which there were many Talents) he convey'd to Ecbatana the Seat Royal of Me∣dia. And thus was the Assyrian Empire overturn'd by the Medes Ann. Mund. 3080. Before Christ 868. Herodotus says, lib. 1. c. 95, but 520 Years from Ninus, which Ʋsher follows; so that Ninus falls in with the times of Deborah, as is before observ'd, against the Stream of all Chro∣nologers almost. after it had continu'd Thirty Generations; from Ninus above Fourteen Hundred Years.
CHAP. III. Of the Ancient Chaldeans, and their Philosophy. The Planets and their Course. The Empire of the Medes and their Kings. A Description of India: The ancient Manners and Customs of the People. Their Laws; Tribes. A Description of Scythia. Of the Amazons. Of the Hyperbo∣reans. HEre it will not be amiss to say something of the Chaldeans (as the Babylonians call them) and of their Antiquity, that nothing worth Remark may be o∣mitted. They being the most ancient Babylonians, hold the same station and dignity in A Description of the Chal∣deans. the Common-wealth as the Egyptian Priests do in Egypt: For being deputed to Divine Offices, they spend all their Time in the study of Philosophy, and are e∣specially famous for the Art of Astrology. They are mightily given to Divina∣tion, and foretel future Events, and imploy themselves either by Purifications, Sa∣crifices, or other Inchantments to avert Evils, or procure good Fortune and Suc∣cess. They are skilful likewise in the Art of Divination, by the flying of Birds, and interpreting of Dreams and Prodigies: And are reputed as true Oracles (in declaring what will come to pass) by their exact and diligent viewing the In∣trals of the Sacrifices. But they attain not to this Knowledge in the same man∣ner P. 82. as the Grecians do; for the Chaldeans learn it by Tradition from their An∣cestors, the Son from the Father, who are all in the mean time free from all o∣ther publick Offices and Attendances; and because their Parents are their Tu∣tors, they both learn every thing without Envy, and rely with more confidence upon the truth of what is taught them; and being train'd up in this Learning from their very Childhood, they become most famous Philosophers, (that Age being most capable of Learning, wherein they spend much of their time.) But the Grecians for the most part come raw to this study, unfitted and unprepar'd, and are long before they attain to the Knowledge of this Philosophy: And after they have spent some small time in this Study, they are many times call'd off and forc'd to leave it, in order to get a Livelihood and Subsistence. And although some few do industriously apply themselves to Philosophy, yet for the sake of Gain, these very Men are opinionative, and ever and anon starting new and high Points, and never fix in the steps of their Ancestors. But the Barbarians keeping constantly close to the same thing, attain to a perfect and distinct Knowledge in every par∣ticular. But the Grecians cunningly catching at all Opportunities of Gain, make new Sects and Parties, and by their contrary Opinions wrangling and quarelling con∣cerning the chiefest Points, lead their Scholars into a Maze; and being uncertain and doubtful what to pitch upon for certain truth, their Minds are fluctuating and in suspence all the days of their Lives, and unable to give a certain assent unto any thing. For if any Man will but examine the most eminent Sects of the Philosophers, he shall find them much differing among themselves, and even op∣posing one another in the most weighty parts of their Philosophy. But to re∣turn to the Chaldeans, they hold that the World is eternal, which had neither any certain Beginning, nor shall have any End; but all agree, that all things are or∣der'd, and this beautiful Fabrick is supported by a Divine Providence, and that the Motions of the Heavens are not perform'd by chance and of their own ac∣cord, but by a certain and determinate Will and Appointment of the Gods. Therefore from a long observation of the Stars, and an exact Knowledge of the motions and influences of every one of them, wherein they excel all others, they foretel many things that are to come to pass. The say that the Five Stars which some call Planets, but they Interpreters, are most worthy of Consideration, both for their motions and their remarkable in∣fluences, especially that which the Grecians call Saturn. The brightest of them all, and which often portends many and great Events, they call Sol, . Sol, the other Four they name Mars,  Mars, Venus, . Venus, Mercury, . Mercury and Jupiter,  Jupiter, with our own Country A∣strologers. They give the Name of Interpreters to these Stars, because these only
by a peculiar Motion do portend things to come, and instead of Jupiters, do de∣clare to Men before-hand the good-will of the Gods; whereas the other Stars (not being of the number of the Planets) have a constant ordinary motion. Future Events (they say) are pointed at sometimes by their Rising, and sometimes by their Setting, and at other times by their Colour, as may be experienc'd by those that will diligently observe it; sometimes foreshewing Hurricanes, at other times Tempe∣stuous Rains, and then again exceeding Droughts. By these, they say, are often portended the appearance of Comets, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, Earth∣quakes and all other the various Changes and remarkable effects in the Air, bo∣ding good and bad, not only to Nations in general, but to Kings and Private Persons in particular. Under the Course of these Planets, they say are Thirty Stars, which they call Counselling Gods, half of whom observe what is done un∣der Stars, Coun∣selling Gods. the Earth, and the other half take notice of the actions of Men upon the Earth, and what is transacted in the Heavens. Once every Ten Days space (they say) one of the highest Order of these Stars descends to them that are of the lowest, like a Messenger sent from them above; and then again another ascends from those below to them above, and that this is their constant natural motion to continue for ever. The chief of these Gods, they say, are Twelve in number, to P. 83. each of which they attribute a Month, and one Sign of the Twelve in the Zo∣diack. Through these Twelve Signs the Sun, Moon, and the other Five Planets run The Course of the Sun, Moon, and the Five other Planets. their Course. The Sun in a Years time, and the Moon in the space of a Month. To every of the Planets they assign their own proper Courses, which are per∣form'd variously in lesser or shorter time according as their several motions are quicker or slower. These Stars, they say, have a great influence both as to good and bad in Mens Nativities; and from the consideration of their several Natures, may be foreknown what will befal Men afterwards. As they foretold things to come to other Kings formerly, so they did to Alexander who conquer'd Darius, and to his Successors Antigonus and Seleucus Nicanor; and accordingly things fell out as they declar'd; which we shall relate particularly hereafter in a more con∣venient time. They tell likewise private Men their Fortunes so certainly, that those who have found the thing true by Experience, have esteem'd it a Miracle, and above the reach of Man to perform. Out of the Circle of the Zodiack they describe Four and Twenty Stars, Twelve towards the North Pole, and as many to the South. Those which we see, they assign to the living; and the other that do not ap∣pear, they conceive are Constellations for the Dead; and they term them Judges of all things. The Moon, they say, is in the lowest Orb; and being therefore next to the Earth (because she is so small,) she finishes her Course in a little time, not through the swiftness of her Motion, but the shortness of her Sphear. In that which they affirm (that she has but a borrow'd light, and that when she is e∣clips'd, it's caus'd by the interposition of the shadow of the Earth) they agree with the Grecians. Their Rules and Notions concerning the Eclipses of the Sun are but weak and mean, which they dare not positively foretel, nor fix a certain time for them. They have likewise Opinions concerning the Earth peculiar to themselves, affirming it to resemble a Boat, and to be hollow, to prove which, and other things relating to the frame of the World, they abound in Arguments; but to give a particu∣lar Account of 'em, we conceive would be a thing foreign to our History. But this any Man may justly and truly say, That the Chaldeans far exceed all other Men in the Knowledge of Astrology, and have study'd it most of any other Art or Science: But the number of Years during which the Chaldeans say, those of their Profession have given themselves to the study of this natural Philosophy, is incre∣dible; for when Alexander was in Asia, they reckon'd up Four Hundred and Se∣venty Thousand Years since they first began to observe the Motions of the Stars. But lest we should make too long a digression from our intended Design, let this which we have said concerning the Chaldeans suffice. Having now therefore spoken of the Assyrian Empire, and its Translation to the Medes, we shall return to that part of our History from whence we broke off.
Whereas remarkable Authors have differ'd among themselves about the large Empire of the Medes. Empire of the Medes, we conceive we shall not stray from the Duty of true and faithful Historians, if we compare the different relations of Writers one with another. Herodotus indeed, who liv'd in the time of Xerxes, says that the Assyrians were conquer'd by the Medes after they had held the Empire of Asia for the space of five Hundred Years: That thence for many Ages after there was no one King that had the sole and absolute Authority of the Empire, but that the Cities in every Place enjoy'd their own Laws in a Democratical Government. At length after the Course of many Years, he says one Cyaxares besieges Nineve, and taketh it An. Mun. 3348; about 3 or 4 years after the death of Josiah, before Christ 600. Herod. Cyaxares, renown'd for his Justice, was advanc'd to the Throne; and that he was the first that subdu'd the neighbouring Nations to the Medes, and gave beginning to that Empire; whose Posterity afterwards brought under the bordering Countries and inlarg'd their Do∣minions, and continu'd their Empire to the time of Astyages (who was conquer'd by Conquered by Cyrus An. Mun. 3391. Before Christ 557. Cyrus and the Persians) of whom we shall now only give a touch in short, and shall treat more distinctly and particularly hereafter when we come to the Times more proper for this Purpose. For in the second year of the seventeeenth Olym∣piad (as Herodotus says) Cyaxares was elected King by the Medes. But Ctesias the Cnidian who was later then Herodotus, and liv'd about the time of Cyrus his Expedi∣tion against his Brother Ataxarxes: (for being then taken Prisoner (for his Skill in Physic) he was taken into the King's Favour, and continu'd with him in great Honour and Esteem for the space of seventeen years.) Out of the publick Records (in which the Persians (by force of some Law made for that Purpose) had in Or∣der of Time noted and registred the ancient Affairs and Things done in the King∣dom) he industriously pick'd out every thing that was remarkable, and methodi∣cally compos'd them into an History, and brought them over into Greece. In this History he declares that after the Overthrow of the Assyrian Empire, all Asia was under the Power of the Medes, and that Arbaces who overcame Sardana∣palus (as is before related) was sole Monarch, and that after he had reign'd eight and twenty years, his Son Mandauces succeeded him, who reign'd over all Asia fifty years. After him reign'd Sesarmus thirty years; then Artias Fifty; after whom succeeded Arbianes two and twenty years. In his time (its said) a great War broke out between the Medes and the Cadusians upon the Occasions following. One Parsodes a Persian, for his Valour, Prudence and other Virtues, was a Man highly honour'd and dearly belov'd of the King, and one of the greatest States∣men in the Kings Council. This Man taking some Offence at a Sentence pronounc'd against him by the King, fled with three Thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse to the Cadusians, where he marry'd the Sister of the most potent Man amongst them; and not only rebell'd himself, but perswaded the whole Nation of the Cadusians to a general Revolt, and to stand up for their Liberties: Whereupon he was presently (upon the Account of his noted Valour) made General of the War. And now hearing that mighty Forces were preparing against him, he rais'd no less than two hundred Thousand Men out of the Country of the Cadusians, and pitcht his Camp upon the Borders of the Province; and tho' King Arseus came against him with eight hun∣dred Thousand Men, yet Parsodes routed him and kill'd above fifty Thousand, and drove the rest out of the Country. Upon this Victory he was so honour'd and admir'd that the Inhabitants forthwith made him their King; after which he vex'd and tyr'd out Media with continual Incursions, and wasted and destroy'd all Places round about him. His Name therefore being grown famous, and now waxing old and drawing near to the End of his days, he injoyn'd his Successor (with the Denunciation of most dreadful Execrations) never to make Peace with the Medes, and if they did he wish'd that both the whole Nation of the Cadusians and his own Posterity might be rooted out and perish together. And for this Reason the Cadusians were ever after Enemies to the Medes, never subject to their Kings, till Cyrus transferr'd the Empire to the Persians. After the Death of Arsaeus. Artaeus, Artynes was King of the Medes, and reign'd two and twenty years; after him Aibarnas fourteen years, in whose Reign the Par∣thians revolted and deliver'd up both their City and Country into the Hand of
the A People of Scythia. Sacae; whereupon arose a War between the Sacae and the Medes, which con∣tinu'd many years, and after many Battles fought, and great Slaughter on both sides, at length Peace was made upon these Conditions, That the Parthians should return to their ancient Subjection, and that both sides should quietly whatever enjoy they did P. 85. before, and should ever after be Friends and Confederates. Zanara at that time was Queen of the Sacae, a Woman of a warlike Spirit, far exceeding any of her Sex among the Sacae for Courage and Activity in Martial Affairs. For this Nation is remark∣able for brave spirited Women that use to go out to the Wars as Fellow-souldiers with the Men; and they say that this Virago was extraordinarily beautiful, and admirable for Courage and Council in all her Affairs. For she conquer'd the neigh∣bouring Princes who had proudly oppress'd the Sacae, and civiliz'd the most part of the Country, and built many Cities, and every way improv'd and inrich'd her People; and therefore the Citizens after her Death in Gratitude for the many Advántages they injoy'd by her and to preserve the Memory of her Virtues, built for her a Sepulcher far higher than any of the rest. For they rear'd up for her a Pyramid Triangular from the Foundation Three Furlongs broad on every side, spiring up in a sharp Point at the Top a Furlong in Height. They plac'd likewise upon her Tomb a Colossus in Gold representing her, and ador'd her as a Demi-Goddess, and perform'd all other things with more State and Grandeur than to any of her Predecessors. After the Death of Astibara King of the Medes, who dy'd old in Ecbatana, his Son Apandas (whom the Grecians call Astyages) succeeded, who being con∣quer'd by Cyrus the Persian, the Empire devolv'd upon the Persians. Of which we shall write distinctly in its proper Place. Having therefore said enough (as we conceive) of the Empire of the Assy∣rians and Medes, and the Differences among Writers concerning them, we shall pass over to India, and give a particular Account of Things said to be done there. INDIA is of a Quadrangular Form, one side lying towards the East, and India. the other to the South, inviron'd and washt by the great Ocean; that side on the North is divided by the Mountain Hemodus from Scythia, where the Sacae inhabit: The Fourth part towards the West, is bounded with the River Indus, the greatest of all others next to the River Nile. The whole Extent of India from East to West, is Eight and Twenty Thousand Furlongs; and from North to South Two About 3200 Miles. and Thirty Thousand Furlongs. The Extent of India being thus very large, it seems most of any other part of the World to lye under the When the Sun enters Capri∣corn, it is their Summer. Tropick of . Rather under the Equinoctial Line. Capricorn. And in many re∣mote parts of India, the Sun casts no Shadow, neither is the North Pole seen there in the Night, nor any of the Arctus. Constel∣lation call'd Arcturus, Arcturus, Charles's Wain; i. e. towards the South. in the utmost parts; and for this reason they say, the Shadows bend towards the South. The Mountains of India abound with all sorts of Fruit Trees, and the Fields every where cloath'd with Fruits of the Earth, full of pleasant Plains, watered with many Rivers; so that the Country bears Two Crops in the Year. It breeds likewise divers sorts of Creatures, both Volatile and Terrestrial, for strength and largeness remarkable above others. It affords plentiful Pastures for multitudes of mighty Elephants, in so much as those kind of Beasts which are bred there, are far stronger than those in Africa. And therefore many of them being taken in Hunting, and inur'd to Martial Exercises, are of great use and ad∣vantage to them for the obtaining of Victories. And such is the plenty there of all sorts of Fruits, that the Men are taller and bigger than any elsewhere; and the Air is so pure, and the Water so clear and wholsom, that by the help of these natural Advantages, the Inhabitants are very quick and ingenious in any Art or Profession. As the Earth is fruitful in the producing plenty of pleasant P. 86. Fruits, so in the Bowels of it are to be found all sorts of Metals: For it abounds in Mines of Gold and Silver, Brass, Iron and Tin, and richly affords all other things useful both as to Pleasure and Profit, and likewise for Service in Times of War. Besides Corn, abundance of Millet grows there, being richly water'd by the overflowing of the Rivers: There's likewise great store of all sorts of Pulse and Rice, and that which they call Bosphorus, and many other Fruits for the su∣staining of Man's Life. To all these may be added many other Fruits useful for
Food, and likewise as many fit for the feeding of Cattel, of which it would be too tedious to write particularly. And for this reason it's said, that there's ne∣ver any Famine in India, or want of Victuals; for being that the Land there bears Two Crops every Year, once in the Winter about the time of Wheat-seed∣ing among other Nations, and the other about the time of the Beginning of June. Summer Sol∣stice, when Rice, Bosporus, Sesamus and Millet are us'd to be sown; at both these times the Indians reap very plentifnl Harvests. And if one Harvest happens to miss, the other is sure to make amends for it. Besides there are many Fruits which grow naturally of themselves, and the Marishes afford for Mens Food, a∣bundance of Roots of a most sweet and delicious Taste. For all the Fields almost of the whole Country are watered in Summer time with the sweet Waters of the overflowing Rivers, and with the Rains from Heaven, which fall constantly at certain times every Year in the Summer; and the Roots in the Marishes (espe∣cially of the Canes) are perfectly boyl'd by the heat of the Sun. There are Laws likewise in India, which conduce much to the preventing of Famine among them. Amongst other People, by Devastations in time of War the Land lies untill'd; but amongst the Indians, Husbandmen (as sacred) are never toucht, so that though the Armies fight and ingage even under their very Noses, yet they are never in the least prejudic'd. For though the Armies on both sides slaughter one another, yet they never hurt the Husbandman, as one who is a Servant for the common good and advantage of them all; neither do they burn their Enemies Country, or cut down their Trees or Plants. Moreover in India are many great navigable Rivers which descend into the Rivers. Gan∣ges. Plains from the Mountains in the Northern Parts (where they have their Spring-heads) and at length all meet together and fall into the River Ganges, which is Something above Three Mile. Thirty Furlongs in breadth, and takes its Course from the North to the South, and so empties it self into the main Ocean; passing by in its course the Nation of the Gandarides lying on the East, where are bred Multitudes of most monstrous Elephants. No Foreign King hitherto ever conquer'd that part of the Country, all Strangers dreading the number and strength of those Creatures. Even A∣lexander himself, who conquer'd all Asia besides, left only the Gandarides untoucht. For when he came with his whole Army as far as to the River Ganges, and had subdu'd all the Indians behind him, as soon as he understood that the Gandarides had Four Thousand Elephants sitted and compleatly furnished for War, he whol∣ly desisted the further Prosecution of his Design against them. Much like to the River Ganges is that call'd Indus, which runs with a swift Course likewise from the North, and falls into the Ocean, and divides India from the rest of Asia; and in Indus. its Course through wide and spacious Plains takes in many Navigable Rivers, a∣mongst which the most famous are Hipanis, Hydaspes, and Arcesines. There are many other Rivers also which pass through several Parts of India which inrich the Country with pleasant Gardens, and all sorts of Fruits. The Philosophers and Naturalists of this Country give this Reason why there P. 87. are so many Rivers, and such plenty of Water in India. They say, that the ad∣jacent Countries, the Scythians, Bactrians and Arianians, lye higher than India, whence (from good reason) they conclude that the Rains flowing down by de∣grees into the lower Countries, so water them, that they make many large Ri∣vers: But above all the other Rivers of India, that they call Silla (which springs from a Fountain of the same Name) has a peculiar property: For this only of all the others will not admit any thing thrown into it to swim, but in a wonderful manner swallows up every thing, and forceably draws it to the bottom. Moreover India being of the largest Extent of all other by far, is inhabited by many different Nations (of whom none are Foreigners, but all natural Inhabi∣tants:) And they say that no Strangers ever planted amongst them, nor they them∣selves ever sent forth any Colonies into other Countries; and they tell Stories that anciently the Inhabitants fed only upon Herbs and Roots that grow in the Fields, and cloath'd themselves with wild Beasts Skins, as the Grecians did; and that Arts and other things conducing to the well-being of Man's Life were found out by degrees, Necessity pressing upon a Creature that was rational and inge∣nious, and had likewise the further helps and advantages of Hands, Speech and quickness of invention to find out ways to relieve himself. Some of the Learnedst of the Indians have given an account of the Antiquity of their Country, of which it is our part here to say something in short.
They say, that in ancient Time, when Men liv'd scatter'd and dispers'd here and there, Bacchus with a great Army from the West, overran all India, which at that time had no considerable City in it able to make any resistance; and that a Plague (through the violent and parching heat) destroying many of his Souldiers, (they say) that prudent General drew his Army out of the Plains to the tops of the Mountains, where (by means of the cool Blasts of the refreshing Air, and drink∣ing of the Spring-Waters there at hand) they were restor'd to their former Health; and that the Place where his Army was thus recover'd, was call'd the . Thigh; hence the Grecians frame a Story of this God to this Day, that Bacchus was bred in the Jupiter's Thigh. Thigh. Afterwards (they say) he diligently imploy'd himself in sowing and planting divers Fruit-Trees, and imparted the Art to the Indians, and found out the use of Wine, and other things conducing to the comfort of Man's Life. He built likewise stately Cities, and remov'd the Villages to more commodious Situations; and instituted the manner of Divine Worship, and made Laws, and set up Courts of Justice; and at last for the many excellent Inven∣tions imparted to the Indians, he was esteem'd as a God, and obtain'd immortal Honours. They report that he had a Regiment of Women in his Army, and that in the heat of Battel he made use of Timbrels and Cymbals, the Trumpet being not at that time found out: And that after he had reign'd over all India for the space of Two and Fifty Years, he dy'd of extream old Age, leaving the Kingdom to his Sons, who injoy'd it, and their Posterity after them successively, till many Ages after the Regal Authority was abrogated, and the Cities were govern'd by a De∣mocrasy. These are the things related of Bacchus and his Posterity by the Inha∣bitants of the Mountainous parts of India. They say moreover, that Hercules was born amongst them, and like the Greeks, furnish him with a Club and a Lion's Skin; and for Strength and Courage that he excell'd all other Men, and clear'd both Sea and Land of Monsters and Wild Beasts: That of many Wives he begat many Sons, but one only Daughter. A∣mong P. 88. these Sons, when they were grown up, he divided India into equal Parts, and appointed each to be King over their several shares, allotting likewise one part of the Kingdom to his Daughter, whom he carefully brought up under his own Eye. It's said that he built many Cities, the most famous of which is call'd Palibothra, in which he built a stately Palace, and planted it with a great number of Inhabitants, and fortify'd it round with deep Trenches, fill'd with Water from the River. And at length after his Death he was honour'd as a God. His Posterity reign'd for many Ages together, and perform'd many noble Actions; but never made any Foreign Expeditions, or sent forth any Colonies into other Parts; and though that after the Course of many Years, most of the Cities re∣duc'd themselves under the power of a Democratical Government, yet there were some of the Indians that flourish'd under a Monarchy, till the very time that A∣lexander invaded that Country. Although the Indians have Laws peculiar to themselves, differing from all other The Indian Law concern∣ing their Li∣berties. People, yet one especially is most remarkable, instituted by their ancient Philo∣sophers, which is this: It's an establish'd Law, That none amongst them should be a Servant; but that every one being free, all should be honour'd with equal respect: For they that know that they are neither to be superior nor inferior to any, are ready to under∣go all the Shocks of Fortune with Courage and Resolution. For it's a Foolish thing to make Laws for an equality amongst all, and yet at the same time to order ine∣quality of Estates. All the People of India are divided into Seven Ranks; the First is Philosophers, The division of the People. 1 Tribe, Phi∣losophers. who are least in number, but chiefest in esteem: For they are free from all pub∣lick Offices; and are neither subject themselves to any, nor any subject to them. Yet they are made use of by their Friends to offer Sacrifice for them while they are alive, and to perform the solemn Exequies at their Funerals when they are dead, as Persons who are greatly belov'd of the Gods, and skilful in Matters relating to the Affairs of the Dead in the Shades below; for which piece of Service they are highly honour'd, and presented with many rich Gifts: Especially they much advantage the Indians in general, at such times as being admitted into the pub∣lick Assemblies, at the beginning of every Year they foretel Droughts, Rains, Winds and Diseases, and other things convenient and useful for the Auditors to be inform'd of; for so both King and People being forewarn'd of things to come,
provide against them, and always prepare something or other that may be of ad∣vantage to them in such cases. And if any of the Philosophers prove afterwards to be mistaken in his Prog∣nostication, he undergoes no other Punishment, save only that he is evil spoken of, and is to be silent ever after while he lives. The Second Rank or Tribe is of the Husbandmen; These are more in number 2d Tribe, Hus∣bandmen. than any of the rest: These likewise are free from the Militia, and all publick Offices, and spend all their time and care about Tilling and Improving the Lands. No Enemy ever does them any Prejudice; but out of a due regard to the com∣mon good, forbear to injure them in the least degree; and therefore the Land be∣ing never spoil'd nor wasted, yields its Fruits in great Abundance, and furnishes the Inhabitants with plenty of Victuals and all other Provision. The Husbandmen live in the Fields with their Wives and Children, and never meddle with the concerns of the Cities. They pay the King his Tribute out of the Fruits of the Ground: For all the Land of India belongs to the King, and no private Man has any Land of his own. Besides the Tribute, the Fourth part of the Fruits are paid to the King. The Third Tribe comprehended the Herdsmen and Shepherds, and all sorts of 3d Tribe, The Shepherds and Herds∣men. feeders of Cattel; and these neither liv'd in the Cities nor Villages, but in Tents, and by Hunting clear'd the Land both of wild Beasts and hurtful Birds; and by this Exercise all India was freed from Ravenous Creatures which abounded in the Country, both Birds and wild Beasts of all sorts, that eat up and devour'd the Seed and Fruits of the Husbandman. The Fourth Classis and Order of Men amongst them was made up of the Me∣chanicks, 4th Tribe, Ar∣tificers. some of whom were imploy'd in making of Arms, and others of Tools for Tillage and Husbandry, and other serviceable Utensils. This Order is P. 89. not only free from all Taxes and Impositions, but is allow'd a yearly propor∣tion of Corn out of the King's Granaries. The Fifth is the Militia (the Second for number) who in Times of Peace live 5th Tribe, Souldiers. idle lives, and give themselves up wholly to their pleasures. All the Souldiers with the War-Horses and Elephants are kept and maintain'd out of the King's Treasury. The Sixth Tribe are the Ephori, who are the Inquisitors, and have a diligent 6th Tribe, Ephori. and observant Eye upon every thing that is done throughout all India, and up∣on any discovery inform the King of what the know; and when there's no King, the Princes and principal Ministers of state. In the Seventh Rank are reckon'd the Senators, such as have Place in the great 7th Tribe, Senators. and General Councils: These are the fewest in number, but of greatest Dig∣nity for their Birth, and highest esteem for their Wisdom and Prudence. Out of these are chosen the King's Privy-Council, Governors of Provinces, Judges, Generals of Armies in Times of War, and other Principal Officers. These are the parts into which almost all India is divided. It is not lawful for any to marry out of the Tribe to which he belongs, nor to exercise any other Trade or Calling than that wherein he has been bred up, as for a Souldier to imploy himself in Husbandry or for an Artificer to turn Philosopher. India breeds the largest, most couragious and strongest Elephants of any Elephants. other Place. This Creature does not couple with the Female in any strange or unusual manner (as some say) but as Horses and all other four-footed Beasts. They go with young at the least Sixteen Months, at the most Eighteen. They 16 Months with Young. bring forth for the most part (like Mares) but one at a time, which the Dam suckles till it be Six Years old. Most of the Inhabitants live very long; the Oldest attain to Two Hundred Years. In India there are Magistrates appointed to take care of Strangers to see that no Injury be offer'd them; and if any of them be sick these Magistrates provide Physitians, and in all other respects are very careful of them; and if they dye, they bury them; and whatever Goods or Monies they leave behind, they give it to their Kindred.
Their Judges are very diligent in deciding Suits brought before them; and severely punish Offenders. But this short account shall suffice concerning India and its Antiquities. And now we shall say something particularly of the Scy∣thians, which border upon the other. The Scythians anciently injoy'd but a small Tract of Ground, but (through their, Scythia, its De∣scription. Valour) growing stronger by degrees, they inlarg'd their Dominion far and near, and attain'd at last to a vast and glorious Empire. At the First a very few of them, and those very desplcable for their mean o∣riginal, seated themselves near to the River Araxes. Afterwards one of their ancient Kings, who was a warlike Prince, and skilful in Arms, gain'd to their Country, all the Mountainous Parts as far as to Mount Caucasus, and all the Champain Country, to the The Euxine Sea. Ocean, and the Lake Maeotis, a Lake brancht from the Euxine Sea, now call'd the Black Sea. Maeotis, and all the rest of the Plain to the River Tanais. Then they tell a Story, That a Virgin was born a∣mong them of the Earth, of the shape of a Woman from the middle upwards, and of a Viper downwards: And that Jupiter begot of her a Son call'd Scythes; they say, that from this Prince (being more eminent than any of his Ancestors) the People were call'd Scythians: There were Two Brothers that descended from this King, that were remarkable for Valour, the one call'd Palus, and the other Napas. These Two Brothers, after many glorious Actions done by them, divided the Country between them, and from their own Names call'd one part of the Inhabitants Palians, and the other Napians. Some time afterwards their Posterity becoming famous and eminent for Valour and martial affairs, subu'd many Territories beyond Tanais. Then turning their Arms the other way they led their Forces as far as to the River Nile in Egypt, and having subdu'd many Nations lying between, they P. 90. inlarg'd the Empire of the Scythians as far as to the The Indian Sea. Eastern Ocean one way, and to the Caspian Sea and the Lake of Maeotis another. This Nation prosper'd still more and more, and had Kings that were very famous; from whom the Sacans, the Massageties, and the Arimaspanis, and many others call'd by other Names derive their original. Amongst others, there were two remarkable Colonies that were drawn out of the conquer'd Nations by those Kings; the one they brought out of Assyria, and settl'd in the Country lying between Paphlagonia and Pontus; the other out of Media, which they plac'd near the River Tanais, which People are call'd Sauromatians, who many Years after increasing in number and power, wasting the greatest part of Scythia, and rooting out all that they conquer'd, totally ruinated the whole Nation. Af∣terwards the Royal Line failing, they say, Women remarkable for Courage and Strength of Body reign'd instead of Kings. For in these Nations, Women like Men, are train'd up for the Wars, being nothing inferior to Men for Cou∣rage. Henceforward many and great things were done by famous Women, not on∣ly in Scythia, but in the neighbouring Nations. For when Cyrus King of Persia the most powerful Prince in his Age, led a mighty Army into Scythia, the Tomiris, Justin. Queen of Scythia routed the Persian Army, and taking Cyrus himself in the Battel Pri∣soner, afterwards Crucify'd him. And such was the Valour of the Amazons, af∣ter they had thus strengthened themselves, that they not only overran their Neigh∣bours, but conquer'd a great part both of Europe and Asia. But since now we have begun to speak of the Amazons, we conceive it not impertinent if we here relate cursorily those things concerning them which for the strangeness of the matter may seem to resemble Romantick Fables. There was heretofore a Potent Nation seated upon the River Thermodon, go∣vern'd always by Women, as their Queens; in which the Wo∣men, like Men, manag'd all their Martial Affairs. Amongst An Account of the Amazons, in Sarmatia, in Asia, in the North part of Kussia, and beyond Northward. these Female Princes (they say) there was one that excell'd all the rest for strength and valour, who got together an Ar∣my of Women, and having train'd them up in Martial Dis∣cipline, first subdu'd some of her Neighbouring Nations; afterwards by her Va∣lour growing more fam'd and renown'd, she led her Army against the rest, and Fortune favouring her Arms, she was so puft up, that she call'd her self The Dangh∣ter of Mars, and ordered the Men to spin Wool, and do the Womens Work with∣in Doors.
She made Laws also, whereby she injoin'd the Women to go forth to the Laws of the Amazons. Wars, and the Men to be as Slaves, and do all the Servile work at Home. There∣fore when any Male Child was born, they broke their Thighs and Arms, to render them useless and unfit for War: And for the Females they sear'd off the right Breast, lest it should be an hinderance to them in Fight: And hence they were call'd Without a Breast. Amazons. At length grown eminent for Policy and Skill in Mili∣tary Affairs, she built a large City call'd Themiscyra, at the Mouth of the River Thermodon, and beautify'd it with a stately Palace. She was very exact in Martial Discipline, and keeping good Order: She first conquer'd all the Neighbouring Nations, as far as to the River Tanais; and having perform'd all these noble Exploits (they say) in a Battel, she afterwards fought, (having first signalized her Valour) she ended her Days like an Hero. Upon her Death her Daughter P. 91. succeeded her in the Kingdom, who imitating her Mother's Valour, in some Ex∣ploits excell'd her: For she caus'd the Girls from their very Infancy to be exer∣cis'd in Hunting, and daily train'd up in Martial Discipline. Then she insti∣tuted solemn Festivals and Sacrifices to be offer'd to Mars and Diana, call'd Tau∣ropoli. She advanc'd her Arms beyond Tanais, and brought under all the Nations as far as to Thrace. Then returning to her own Country with a rich Booty, she erected stately Temples to those Deities before mention'd, and gain'd the Hearts of her Subjects by her easie and gentle Government. Afterwards she under∣took an Expedition against them that lay on the other side of the River, and added a great part of Asia to her Dominion, and extended her Arms as far as to Syria. After her Death, the Crown descended still to the next of Kin, and every one in their time govern'd with great Commendation, and advanc'd the Honour and Renown of the Amazons Kingdom. Many Ages after (the Fame and Renown of the Amazons being spread Abroad all the World over) they say, that Hercules, the Son of Ju∣piter and Alcmena, was enjoin'd by This Euristheus was King of Mysena, who put Hercules upon all his Difficulties, on purpose to de∣stroy him. Eurystheus to fight Hip∣polyta, the Amazon Queen, and to strip her of her Belt. Upon which, he made War upon the Amazons, and in a great Bat∣tel routed them, and took Hippolyta, and her Belt together, which so weaken'd them, that the Neighbouring Barbarians knowing their low Condition, despis'd them; and remembring what ruin and destruction they had formerly made amongst them, so wasted them with con∣tinual War, that not so much as the Name of Amazons is now to be found any where in the World. For a few Years after Hercules's Time, the Trojan War broke forth, at which time Penthesilia Queen of those Amazons that were left, and Daughter of Mars (having committed a cruel Murther among her own People) for the horridness of the Fact fled, and after the Death of Hector, brought aid to the Trojans; and though she bravely behav'd her self, and kill'd many of the Greeks, yet at last she was slain by Achilles, and so in Heroick Actions ended her Days. This, they say, was the last Queen of the Amazons, a brave spirited Woman, after whom the Nation (growing by degrees weaker and weaker) was at length wholly extinct: So that these later Ages look upon all those old Stories concerning the valiant Acts of the Amazons, to be but meer Fictions and Fa∣bles. Now since we have thus far spoken of the Northern Parts of Asia, it's convenient to observe something relating to the Antiquity of the Hyperbo∣rcans. Amongst them that have written old Stories much like Fa∣bles, Hyperboreans. Hecateus and some others say, that there is an This seems to be Brittain. Island in the Ocean over against Gall, (as big as Sicily) under the Artick Pole, where the Hyperboreans inhabit, so call'd, because they lye Or rather very far North. beyond the Breezes of the North Wind. That the Soyl here is very rich, and very fruitful; and the Climate temperate, insomuch as there are Two Crops in the Year. They say that Latona was born here, and therefore that they worship Apollo above all other Gods; and because they are daily saying Songs in praise of this God, and ascribing to him the highest Honours, they say that these Inhabitants demean themselves, as if they were Apollo's Priests, who has there a stately Grove, and renown'd Temple of a round Form, beautify'd with many rich Gifts. That there is a City likewise consecrated to this God, whose Citizens are most
of them Harpers, who playing on the Harp, chant Sacred Hymns to Apollo in the P. 92. Temple, setting forth his glorious Acts. The Hyperboreans use their own natural Language: But of long and ancient time, have had a special Kindness for the Grecians; and more especially for the Athenians, and them of Delos. And that some of the Grecians pass'd over to the Hyperboreans, and left behind them divers  Things dedi∣cated to the Gods. Presents, inscrib'd with Greek Characters; and that Abaris formerly travell'd thence into Greece, and renew'd the ancient League of Friendship with the De∣lians. They say moreover, that the Moon in this Island seems as if it were near to the Earth, and represents in the face of it Excrescences like Spots in the Earth. And that Apollo once in Nineteen Years comes into the Island; in which space of time, the Stars perform their Courses, and return to the same Point; and therefore the Greeks call the Revolution of Nineteen Years, the Great Year. At this time of 19 Years, the Great Year. his appearance (they say) that he plays upon the Harps, and sings and daunces all the Night from the 10th of March. Vernal Equinox, to the rising of the In Septem∣ber. Pleiades, sola∣cing himself with the Praises of his own successful Adventures. The Sovereignty of this City, and the care of the Temple (they say) belongs to the Boreades, the Posterity of Boreas, who hold the Principality by Descent in a direct Line from that Ancestor. CHAP. IV. A Description of Arabia the Desert, Happy, &c. Metals, Precious Stones, Beasts, &c. A Description of Taprobana in the Southern Ocean, now call'd Ceylon or Zeilan. The strange things there. How discover'd by Iambu∣lus. HAving now finish'd these foregoing Relations, we shall bend our Discourse to the other Parts of Asia not yet spoken of, and chiefly to Arabia. Arabia. This Country is situated between Syria and Egypt, and is divided into several Nations. On the East the Arabians, call'd the Nabateans, inhabit a Tract partly Nabateans, a Desert, dry and barren Country. Desert, and in other Parts without Water, and very little of it there is that bears any Fruit; and therefore the Inhabitants live by Robbing and Stealing, and for that end roving up and down the Countries far and near, they vex the Inhabi∣tants with their continual Incursions and Robberies, it being a very difficult mat∣ter to subdue them. For in the dry Country, they have Wells digg'd in conve∣nient Places, unknown to Strangers, whither they fly for refuge, and are safe: For knowing where the Waters lye hid and private, upon opening of the Wells they are largely supply'd; but Strangers, who pursue them (unacquainted with those Fountains) either perish for Thirst, or falling into many other Disasters, and quite tyr'd out, scarcely ever return home: And therefore these Arabians (be∣ing that they are not to be conquer'd) are never inslav'd, nor ever admit any Foreign Prince over them, but preserve themselves continually in perfect Liber∣ty; and therefore neither the Assyrians antiently, nor the Medes and Persians, nor the very Macedonians themselves, were ever able to conquer them; who, though they often march'd with great Forces against them, yet they ever fail'd in their Designs. In the Country of the Nabateans, there's a Rock strongly Fortified, to which there is an Ascent but one way, through which a few only at a time mount up to cast down their Fardles. There's likewise a large The Lake of Sodom, or Dead-Sea and Asphaltes. Mere which produces Brimstone, from whence they raise no small Revenue: It's 60 Miles. Five Hundred Furlongs in length, and Betwixt 7 and 8 Miles. Josephus in lib. of the Wars of the Jews, Book 5, c. 5. says it's 580 Furlongs long, and 150 broad, ex∣tending in length to Zoar in Arabia. Sixty in breadth: The Water for Smell stinks, and is bitter in Taste, so that neither Fish, nor any other living thing us'd to the Water can live there. There are indeed great Rivers, whose Waters are exceeding sweet, which empty themselves into the Lake, and yet it stinks howsoever. Every
Year the Brimstone rises up out of the middle of the Mere, some Pieces Two, and others Three Plethras Square in quantity. The greater Pieces the Inhabitants call Plethra 200 or 300 Foot. Bulls, and the lesser Calfs. When the Brimstone swims upon the Water, it re∣presents at a distance the form of an Island. There are apparent Signs of casting The Lake As∣phaltes, or So∣dom. P. 93. up of the Brimstone Twenty Days before; for every where round the Lake for many Furlongs distant, a Steam arises with a stinking smell, and all Gold, Silver, or Brass near those Places, change their natural Colour; but return to their for∣mer, when all the Brimstone is exhal'd. And in as much as all Places near adjoyning are corrupted with a Fire and stinking Stench, it infects Mens Bodies with Diseases, and shortens their days. However this Region abounds with Palm-trees, because it's water'd with wholesom Rivers and Springs. In a Valley thereabouts grows that which they call Balsam: Whence they gain a plentiful Revenue, in regard this Plant grows in no other Parts of the World; which affords likewise excellent Medicines for the Use of the Physician. The other Arabia adjoyning to this barren and dry Country Arabia, so far excels Arabia the Happy. it, that for its Fruitfulness and Plenty of all other good things its call'd Arabia the Happy. It plentifully produces The Bark of a sweet Cane. Calamus and Mastick, and other Aromatick Plants, and breaths out all sorts of fragrant Smells from the Trees, and abounds with divers kinds of sweet Gums, which distil from them. The furthest Parts Mastick, Greek , Schi∣nus. likewise of Arabia produce Myrrh and Frankincense (so grateful to the Gods) which is carry'd all the World over. Upon the Mountains grow in abundance not only Firs and Pine-trees, but tall Cedars, Junipers and the Tree call'd Gyratus. Agyreus; and many other fruitful Plants, which yield not only a pleasant Tastle, but a most sweet and delicious Smell to those that come near them. The very Nature of the Soyl it self is odoriferous and use∣ful for sweet Perfumes; and therefore in some Places of Arabia in digging of the Ground they find sweet-scented Veins of Stone Metal, which furnish the Inhabi∣tants Metals. with large Quarries, who build Houses of the Stone cut out of these Delphs; and when the Rain falls upon them, the Metal in the Stone melts, and runs within the Joints of the Building, and so binds all together, that the Wall seems to be all of one Piece. In Arabia are found Mines of pure Gold call'd  Gold without Fire: For it is not extracted out of the little Pieces of drossy Metal by melting in the Fire as in other Places, but its pure and refin'd at the first digging it out of the Earth, every Piece about the Bigness of a Chesnut, and of so bright and glorious a Colour that this Gold adds an exceeding Beauty and Lustre to the most precious Stones that are set in it. ARABIA is so rich in all sorts of Cattle, that many Provinces (imploying themselves only as Herdsmen and Shepherds) live fully and contentedly without the Use of Corn. That Part joyning upon Asia breeds vast Multitudes of exceed∣ing great wild Beasts; for the Lyons and Leopards here are far more for Number, and larger and stronger than any in Africa; to which may be added those they call the Babylonian Tygers. It produces likewise Beasts of a double Nature, and mixt Shape; amongst whom are those that are call'd Ostrich-Ca∣mels. Struthocameli, who have the Shape both of a Camel and an  Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. I. 10. c. 1. Ostrich. For in the Bulk of their Bodies they are as big as a Camel newly foal'd, having upon their Heads small Hairs and great and black Eyes; in Shape and Colour they are like to Camels, having long Necks, and very short Beaks turning inwards, and sharp at the Point; they have Wings also of soft and hairy Feathers; they are supported with two strong Thighs, and are cloven hoofed, so that this Creature seems to be both terrestrial and volatile, a P. 94. Land-Beast and a Bird: But being not able to fly by reason of the Bulk of her Body, she runs upon the Ground as swift as if she flew in the Air; and when she is pursu'd by Horsemen, with her Feet she hurls the Stones that are under her, with that Force as if they were sent out of a Sling, and many times kills the Pursuers with the Blows and Strokes they receive. When she is near being taken, she thrusts her Head under a Shrub or some such like Cover; not (as some suppose) through Folly and Blockishness, as if she would not see any or be seen of them, but because her Head is the tenderest Part of her Body she seeks to secure that Part all man∣ner of ways she can; for Nature teaches all Creatures to seek not only to preserve themselves but their Kind; through a natural Instinct and Love of Life prompting them to perpetuate their Species by a constant Propagation.
Those Creatures call'd Cameleopards partake of both kinds, as is denoted by Camel-leo∣pards. Vid. Plin. Na. Hist. lib. 8. c. 18. their Name. They are indeed less then Camels, and lower crested; but in their Heads and Eyes like unto Leopards: In the Bulch upon their Backs they resemble Camels; but in Colour, Hair, and in the Length of their Tails they are in Nature Leopards. There are likewise bred Tragelaphi, Buffels. Tragelaphi, Goat Harts bred near the River Phasis in Colchis. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 8. c. 33. Buffels or Buffs. Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 8. c. 34. Tragclaphi and Buffels, and many other Creatures of a double Shape, partaking of several Na∣tures; which would require a long Discourse to describe every one of them particularly. For its very reasonable to conceive that by the vivifying Heat of the Sun in the Southern Parts of the World many sorts of wonderful Creatures are there bred. And upon this Account it is that there are Crocodiles and River-horses in Egypt; and great Numbers and divers sorts of Elephants, Serpeuts and other Beasts, and (amongst the rest) Dragons of an unusual Bigness and Fierceness in Ethiopia and the Deserts of Africa; and for the same Reason it is that there are Elephants in India more than elsewhere for their Number, and excelling all others in Strength and the Bulk of their Bodies. In these Parts also are produc'd by the Influence of the Sun, not only several kinds of living Crea∣tures, but divers sorts of precious Stones commendable both for the Variety of Pretious Stones. their Colours, and their sparkling Lustre and Beauty. Crystal (they say) is produc'd of the purest Water congeal'd and hardned, not Crystal. by Cold, but by the Power of the Sun; so that it continues for ever, and receives many Shapes and Colours according as the Spirits are exhal'd. The The Emerald of a green Colour: and so the Beryl, but sometimes of a Gold Colour. Smaragdos and Beryl (as they are call'd) which are found in the Copper-Mines are said to have their Colour from their Mixture with Sulphur: And that the Chrysolite of a Golden Colour. Chrysolite pro∣duc'd by the Heat of the Sun, receives its Tincture from an hot and fiery Exhalation. And therefore its said that those Stones call'd Pseudocrists, counterfeit Gold or counterfeit Golden Colour. Pseudocrists are made of Crystal calcin'd by the Goldsmiths Fire. By the Heat of the Sun likewise are pro∣duc'd Rubies call'd Carbuncles. Rubies, which differ one from another as there is more or less Light inclos'd in them in the Concretion. And for the same Reason Birds Feathers differ in Colour, so that some are all over of a Purple Dye, others only spotted here and there. For some things seem red, others yellow, some green, and many of a golden Colour, according to their Position to the Light. To con∣clude, P. 95. innumerable sorts of Colours (very difficult to be reckon'd up) are occa∣sion'd by this Means; which we see is done by the Reflection of the Sun's Beams upon the Rainbow. Whence the Naturalists do agree, that even the various Colours of Things above proceed from their Diversity of Heat, the lively Opera∣tion of the Sun causing their several Forms and Shapes; and that the various Colours of Flowers, and even of the Earth it self proceed from the Efficacy of the Sun, whose natural Operations the Arts of Men (as Nature's Scholars) do imitate, framing Variety of Colours in Painting and Embroidery: And that as Colours are form'd by Light, so Smells of Fruits, Variety of Tastes, Greatness of living Creatures, and the natural Constitution of every Thing, and the several Properties of the Earth are caus'd by the Heat of the Sun, which makes both the Earth and Water fruitful with its cherishing Heat, and is the Parent of every Creature; and therefore neither the Marble of Paros, nor any other Stone (tho' never so admirable) are comparable to the Stones in Arabia, which exceed all others for Lustre, Weight and Delicacy. This singular Property (as I have said) every thing is cloath'd with by the Power of the Sun in this Region: For by its Heat it concretes, by Exhalation hardens, and by its Light beautifies. Hence it is that Birds are of a hot Nature, swift of Flight, and deck'd most with Variety of Colours in those Regions that are directly under the Scorch∣ing Heat of the Sun. For in the Province of Babylon are bred many Peacocks, beau∣tify'd with various Colours; and in the Eastern Parts. furthest Parts of Sy∣ria, Parrots, Porphyrio, see Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 10. c. 46. Porphyrios, Meleagrides, sorts of Turky-Cocks or Hens in Africa, into which the Sisters of Meleager were trans∣form'd for their immoderate Mourning for him. Ovid. Met. lib. 8. Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 10. c. 26. Meleagrides, and many strange Birds of various Natures and Colours. The like may be said of other Parts of the World, where the Climate is the same; as of India, the Parts about the Red Sea, of Ethiopia, and
some Parts of Africa. But the Eastern Parts being richer and more fruitful breed larger and more noble Creatures. Those Creatures that are bred in other Countries have Natures agreeable to the Goodness of the Soyl. So as to the Trees, the Date Trees. Palm Trees of Africa bear but small and indigested Fruit: But in Coelo-Syria the Dates which they call Cariots, so call'd because the wine made of the Juice is hurtful to the Head. Plin. N. H. l. 13. c. 4. Cariots, excel all others for pleasant Juice, Sweetness and Largeness. Yet in Arabia and in the Province of Babylon grow far larger than those, in Quantity fix Fingers round, some of a yellow, some scarlet, and others of a purple Dye, delightful both to the Eye and grateful to the Taste. The Palm Trees are very tall, streight and smooth to the Top. The Branches grow near to Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 4. the Head, but not all in the like Manner. For some have their Branches growing round them on every side here and there and between them, the Fruit bursting out in Clusters through the Bark. Others represent a burning Lamp, their spiring Branches surrounding only one Part near the Top. Others whose Boughs clasp on every Part round the Tree, and guarded on both sides with a double row of tender Sprouts, represent something painted or inscrib'd. That Part of Arabia lying to the South is call'd Arabia the Happy; the Arabians Arabia the Happy. that inhabit the inner Parts, live Pastoral Lives, and in Tents. They have great Herds of Cattle, and are continually in vast and large Pastures. That Region which lyes between them and Arabia the Happy, is Desert, without Water, as Arabia the Desert. we have before observ'd. The Places towards the West are sandy Deserts, so that all that travel there direct their Course (as Mariners at Sea) by the Artic Pole. Bear P. 96. Star. The other Part of Arabia stretching towards Syria is full of Husbandmen Sandy Arabia. and divers sorts of Merchants. These by their Traffic and Merchandize by im∣porting and exporting plentifully furnish all other Parts round about, with what things they want. That Part bordering upon the Ocean lyes about Arabia the Happy, and there (by many Rivers falling down together) are made many large Ponds and Lakes up and down in the Country: And because large Tracts of Ground are water'd by the Rivers and the Rains that fall in the Summer time, they have a double Harvest. This Place breeds Troops of Elephants and other Beasts of vast Proportion, and likewise of double Shapes and strange Kinds; and also abundance of tame Cattle, especially Oxen and Sheep, which have very great and thick Tales. There are there bred in like manner a sort of Camels far beyond all others (both Hairy and smooth. bare and rough) and the Bulch upon their Backs twice as big as any others, and therefore they are call'd Double∣bulch'd. Dityles. Some of these bring in great Pro∣fit both by their Milk and their Flesh. Others, accustom'd to Burthens, will carry Ten Medim∣nas. twenty Bushels of Corn upon their Backs; which being of smaller Bodies, but swifter than the rest, are us'd to running, and dispatch a vast Tract of Ground, especially in the dry and desert Country. These Beasts are useful in times of War; for in Battles they carry two Archers sitting back to back, the one to oppose them that attack them in the Front, and the other to repulse such as fall upon them in the Rear. Although this Discourse of Arabia and the Things there bred and produc'd may perhaps seem to be too tedious, yet the observing Reader may find in it many things worthy to be known. And now we purpose to say something briefly of a certain Island lying in the Southern Ocean, and of the Wonders there, Taprobana, now Ceylon or Zeilan, in Scripture call'd Ophir, as Bocha proves. giving first an exact Account by what Means it came to be dis∣cover'd. There was one Iambulus, from his Youth studious and learn'd. After the Death of his Father (who was a Merchant) he apply'd himself like∣wise to that Calling; but as he travell'd through Arabia to This Island describ'd by Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 6. c. 22. The Discovery by Iambulus. that Part of the Country where Spices most abounded, he and all his Company fell into the Hands of Thieves. And first he was made a Shepherd, together with another of his Fellow Cap∣tives. Afterwards he was again taken by Ethiopian Skulkers, and carry'd away into the Maritime Parts of Ethiopia. And they were thus stolen and carried away, that (being Strangers) by them they might purge and expiate the Land. For the Ethiopian Inhabitants there had a Custom anciently us'd among them, and appointed by the Oracles of the Gods Twenty Generations before, that is, Six Hundred Years (every Generation comprehending Thirty Years a Gene∣ration. Thirty Years) that the Land should be purg'd by Two Men that were Strangers. They prepar'd therefore
a little Ship, yet sufficient to endure the Storms at Sea, and easily to be govern'd by Two Men: Upon this Ship they put the Men on Board, with Six Months Provision, that (according to the direction of the Oracle) they might sail away in a direct Course towards the South, in order to arrive at a Fortunate Island, where they might find People that were gentle and kind, with whom they might live happy lives. And that if they arriv'd safe at the Island (they told them) their own Nation, from whence they came, should enjoy Peace and Prosperity for Six Hundred Years to come. P. 97. But if they were affrighted with the length of the Voyage, and should return again, they told them, that like impious Wretches, and destructive to the Nation, they should undergo most severe Punishments. Then they say the Ethiopians kept a Festival upon the Sea-shoar, and after splendid Sacrifices, crown'd the Purga∣tors with Garlands, and sent them away, and so perfected the Purgation of the Nation. These Two Men (they say) being tossed for Four Months together, ha∣ving pass'd over a vast Ocean (after many Storms and hardships at Sea) at last ar∣riv'd at the Island design'd in the Fourth Month. The Island is of a round Form, About Eight Hundred Miles. Five Thousand Furlongs in Compass. When The shape of the Island. the Men drew near to Shoar, some of the Inhabitants came to meet them, and brought the Ship into Harbour: Whereupon many more flockt in, and throng'd about the Strangers, wondring how ever they got thither; however they cour∣teously receiv'd them, and entertain'd them with what their Country could af∣ford. The Inhabitants are much unlike to us in these Parts of the World, both as to The Inhabi∣tants. their Bodies, and their way of living; but among themselves, they are for Form and Shape like one to another, and in stature above Six Foot. Four Cubits high. They can bend and turn their Bones somewhat like unto Nerves; and as the Nervous Parts after motion ended, return to their former state and position, so do their Bones. Their Bodies are very tender, but their Nerves far stronger than ours, for whatever they grasp in their Hands, none are able to wrest out of their Fin∣gers. They have not the least Hair in any part of their Bodies, but upon their Heads, Eye-brows, Eye-lids and Chins; all other Parts are so smooth, that not the least Down appears any where. They are very comely and well shap'd, but the Holes of their Ears are much wider than ours, and have something like little Tongues growing out of them. Their Tongues have something in them singu∣lar and remarkable, the Effect both of Nature and Art; for they have partly a double Tongue, naturally a little divided, but cut further inwards by Art, so that it seems two, as far as to the very Root, and therefore there's great variety of Speech among them, and they not only imitate Mans Voice in articulate Speak∣ing, but the various Chatterings of Birds, and even all sorts of Notes as they please; and that which is more wonderful than all, is, that they can speak per∣fectly to two Men at once, both in answering to what is said, and aptly carrying on a continu'd Discourse relating to the subject Matter in hand; so that with one part of their Tongue they speak to one, and with the other part to the o∣ther. This Island is under a most excellent and moderate Climate (lying near ra∣ther. under the The Climate. Aequator) neither scorcht with Heat, nor pincht with Cold; there they have ripe Fruit all the Year long, as the Himer. Poet says, , . Apples and Pears always both ripe and green, With Grapes and Figs may ever there be seen. The Days and Nights are there always of an equal length; neither is there any Shadow at Noon-day, because the Sun is directly in the Zenith over head. They live divided into Tribes, according to their Kindred, and into distinct So∣cieties; Divided into Ts. yet so as that there are not above Four Hundred admitted into any one Tribe or Society. They live in Meadows where they are plentifully supply'd with all things necessary for Food by what the Earth produces. For the Fertility of the Soyl, and the Temperature of the Air is such, that Corn (more than e∣nough) grows there of it self. Plenty of Calamus likewise is produc'd there, whose Fruit is like to ed Ee. white Vetches: When they have gather'd it, they steep in it hot
Water, till it puffs up to the bigness of a Pigeons Egg; then bruising it, and rub∣bing Their Bread. it skilfully in their Hands, they knead it into Dough, and then bake and eat it, being exceeding sweet and delicious Bread to the Taste. There are there both hot and cold large Baths, both for the curing and preventing of Distempers, be∣ing Baths. P. 98. exceeding sweet and pleasant. They are learn'd in all sorts of Sciences, es∣pecially in Astrology. They use Eight and Twenty particular Letters, for the signifying what they mean, and Seven Characters, every one of which are form'd Characters. Long liv'd. Four manner of ways. They live long generally, without ever being Sick, to an Hundred and Fifty Years of Age. Those that are lame, or have any other weakness or infirmity of Body (accor∣ding Customs and Laws. to the severe Law of their Country) they put to Death. They write not cross over the Sheet as we do, but begin at the top of the Leaf, and go on in one direct Line down to the Bottom. They have a Law that they may live to such a certain number of Years, and when those are run up, they dispatch themselves by a strange kind of Death; for there's an Herb of a double nature, that grows among them, upon which, if any one lies down, he silently passes away and dies, without any sense of pain, as if he were in a sweet Sleep. They never marry, but make use of Women promiscuously, and breed up the Children so begotten (as common to them all) with equal care and affection to one as well as to another. The Children while they are tender Infants are often chang'd by the Nurses, that they cannot be known by their Mothers; and therefore by that means there being no Ambition among them, they live in great concord and amity, without any Sedi∣tions or Tumults. There are Beasts among them very small, but of an admirable property as to their Flesh, and the excellent virtue that is in their Blood. Their A little Beast strange. Bodies are round, and something like to a Tortoise, divided by Two Streaks which run down the Back; at each end of every Streak they have an Eye and a Mouth; so that they have Four Eyes to see with, and Four Mouths to feed with; but the Meat they eat, is convey'd through one Throat, and hence into the Belly, the common Receptacle of all: And so in like manner they have but one Gut, nor but one of every other of the inner Parts: They have many Feet plac'd round their Bodies, and make use of them to go on what side they will. There's a marvelous virtue in the Blood of this little Creature, for it presently at an in∣stant closes all Cuts and gaping Wounds in every Body that has still life in it; and if a Hand, or any other Member of that kind (that is not Vital) be cut off, by the application of this Blood (while the Wound continues green) it heals up again. Each Society of these Inhabitants do keep many great Birds of a singular Na∣ture, Great Birds carry Chil∣dren. by which they try the Courage of their Children; for they place them upon the Birds Backs, and as many of them as sit fast when the Birds take their Flight, they bring up; but those that faint and are terrify'd, they throw away, as such that can never indure hardship any long time, nor have any generous Spirit in them. In every Tribe or Society, the eldest governs the rest as King, and all yield him perfect Obedience: If the first put himself to Death (according to the Law) after he has liv'd a Hundred and Fifty Years, the next to him in age succeeds in the chief Command and Authority. The Sea that surrounds this Island is very rough, and causes very great and high Tides, but the Water is fresh and sweet. The The Pole Artick. Bear Star, and many other visible with us, are never seen here. These Islands are Seven in number, equal in bigness one to another, and of the Here seems something to be wanting. Their Fruga∣lity. same distance one from another, and the same Laws and Customs are us'd in all of them: And though these Islands afford plenty of Provision out of the natural growth of the Country to all the Inhabitants, yet they use them not luxuriously, but are frugal, and gather only so much as will serve their turns. They do in∣deed cook for themselves Flesh-meat, and all other sorts of Victuals both rosted and boil'd, but as for Sauces, and other delicate Inventions of that kind by Cooks, and the various Tasts and Savours contriv'd for curious Pallats, they are altoge∣ther ignorant of them. For Gods they worship especially the whole frame of Heaven, because it com∣prehends Worship. all things; and next to that the Sun, and then all the Celestial Bodies. By various ways of Fishing and Fowling, they catch Fish and Fowl of all sorts. P. 99. There are among them abundance of Fruit-Trees, and Vines, and Olive-Trees, whence they draw great quantity of Oil and Wine.
Here are exceeding great Serpents, which yet do no harm to any; nay, their Great Ser∣pents. Flesh is good Meat and very sweet. They make their Garments of a soft and fine Cotton, contain'd in certain Reeds and Canes. This Cotton they dye with the Shell-Fishes call'd Ostreses, made up in Balls, and mixt and wrought amongst the Wool, and so with great pains make themselves Garments of a Purple Co∣lour. It produces living Creatures of different Natures from all others, and even in∣credible because they are unusual. Their way of Feeding is according to a prescrib'd Rule; for they do not eat all Dyet. sorts of Meats together at one and the same time, nor the same always; but up∣on some certain Days Fish, other Fowl, sometimes the Flesh of Land-Cattel, at other times Olives, and on other Days, very low and mean Diet. They help one another in their Callings and Imployments by turns: Some imploy themselves in Fishing; others in Manufactures, and others in other things useful and profitable to the Commonwealth. Some at certain times do exercise publick Offices, ex∣cept those that are grown old. Upon their Festival Days, and times of Invoca∣tion upon their Gods, they celebrate their Praises both in Acclametions and Songs; especially the Sun, to whom they devote themselves and their Islands. Their Dead they carry to the Sea-shoar at the Fall of the Tide, covering them Burials. with a little Sand, that at the time of Full Sea heaps of Sand may be rais'd higher upon them. Those Canes whence they gather Fruit to eat, are the Compass of a Crown in thickness; they say, that towards the Full of the Moon they increase, and to∣wards the New Moon they proportionably decrease. The Water of their hot Springs is sweet and wholsom, and ever continues warm, never growing cold, unless it be mixt with Wine or cold Water. After Iambulus with his Companion had continu'd in this Island Seven Years, they were (as wicked and vile Fellows) ejected. Having therefore their Ship fitted out, and furnish'd with Provision, they set Sail, and after they had continu'd their Voyage for above Four Months together, they fell at length upon the Sandy shallows of India, where Iambulus his Companion was drown'd, and he himself was afterwards cast upon a certain Village, and forthwith carried away by the Inhabitants of the Place, to the King, then at a City call'd Polybothia, many Days Journey distant from the Sea; where he was kindly receiv'd by the King, who had a great love for the Grecians, and was very studious in the liberal Sciences. At length (having obtain'd Provision from the King) he first sail'd into Persia, and thence safely arriv'd in Greece. This Iambulus committed all these Adventures to Writing, and gave an account of many things relating to the Affairs of India, be∣fore unknown to Strangers. But having now perform'd what we promis'd in the beginning of this Book, we shall here make an end.
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK III. The PREFACE. P. 100. THE First of the Two Books preceding, contains the Acts of the ancient Kings of Egypt, and the Fabulous History of the Egyptian Gods: Of those things reported of the River Nile; of their Fruits, divers kinds of Beasts, the Situation of the Country, and of their Laws and Courts of Ju∣stice. In the Second are comprehended the Affairs of Asia, the Acts of the Assyrians in antient Times, and amongst them the Birth and Advancement of Semiramis; how she built Babylon, and many other Cities, and invaded the Indians with a mighty Army. We have treated there likewise of the Cal∣deans, and their Art in Astronomy. Of Arabia, and the wonderful things there: Of the Amazons: And lastly, of the Hyperboreans, and the Island Taprobana. In this ensuing Book pursuing such things as are coherent with those that went before, we shall treat of the Ethiopians and Africans, and of the Atlantick Islands. CHAP. I. Of the Ethiopians: Their Letters, Laws, Arms, Religion, Funerals: The Description of several Parts of the Country. Manner of making of Gold. Of the Ichthyophages, their several sorts, and way of Living. THE Ethiopians say that they were the First Men that ever were in the World, and that to prove this, they have clear Demonstrations: For they say, they are Natives of the Country, and not Strangers that came to settle there, and are therefore by the general Consent almost of all Men call'd Born in the Land. Autochthones; and that in every Man's Opinion, it's most probable that those that inhabit the Near the Pole Antartick South, were the first Living Men that sprung out of the Earth. For being that the heat of the Sun at the first exhal'd the Moisture of the Earth, and in the first production of all things, influenc'd it with a quickening Virtue, they say it's very rational to conclude, that those Places next to the Sun, should be the first Parents of all Living Creatures.
It's affirm'd among them, that they were the first that instituted Religious Wor∣ship, and pompous Sacrifices, with solemn Assemblies, and other things us'd in the Service, and to the honour of the Gods; and they hold that the Sacrifices of the Ethiopians are the most acceptable to the Gods of any other; and in Testimony hereof, they produce the most ancient Poet, and of greatest Authority amongst the Grecians, who in his Iliads introduces Jupiter with the rest of the Gods tra∣velling into Ethiopia to the Anniversary Sacrifice, and solemn Festival prepar'd for them by the Ethiopians. Homer Iliad. lib. 1. v. 424. For Jove and all the Gods are gone to Feast With pious Ethiopians in the West. And they say it's very evident, that the Gods reward them for their Piety, for that they were never brought into subjection to any Foreign Prince, but always remain'd a free People, and at perfect Peace among themselves. And although many, and those most Potent Princes likewise, have invaded, yet none have suc∣ceeded in their Attempts. For Cambyses making in upon them with mighty For∣ces, was in danger both to have lost his Life and his whole Army. And Semiramis (who was so famous both for her Skill and Success in Arms,) having but enter'd a little way into Ethiopia, presently saw it was to no purpose to think of con∣quering that Nation. Hercules likewise, and Bacchus, who ran through the whole World, forbore only the Ethiopians, being awed by the Piety of that People, and discourag'd with the difficulty of the Attempt. The Ethiopians likewise say, that the Egyptians are a Colony drawn out from P. 101. them by Osiris; and that Egypt was formerly no part of the Continent, but a Sea at the beginning of the World; but that afterwards it was by degrees made Land by the River Nile, which brought down Slime and Mud out of Ethiopia. And that that Country was made dry Land, by heaps of Earth forc'd down by the River (they say) is apparent by evident Signs about the Mouths of Nile. For always every Year, may be seen fresh Heaps of Mud cast up at the Mouths of the River by the working of the Sea, and the Land increas'd by it. Moreover they affirm, that most of the Egyptian Laws, are the same with those in Ethiopia, the Colony still observing the Customs of their Ancestors; and that they learnt from the Ethiopians the Custom of Deifying of their Kings, and their Care and Costs in their Burials, and such like things us'd amongst them: Besides the making of Statues, and the Characters of their Letters. For whereas the Egyptians have com∣mon and ordinary Characters us'd promiscuously by all the Inhabitants, and like∣wise those they call Sacred, known only by the Priests, privately taught them by their Parents; yet the Ethiopians use both those sorts without any difference or distinction. The several Colleges of the Priests (they say) observe one and the same Order and Discipline in both the Nations. For as many as are so consecrated for Divine Service, are wholly devoted to Purity and Religion, and in both Coun∣tries are shaven alike, and are cloath'd with the like Stoles and Attire, and car∣ry a Scepter like unto a Plow-share, such as their Kings likewise bear; with high crown'd Caps tufted at the Top, wreath'd round with Serpents call'd Asps; by which is seem'd to be signify'd, that those who contrive any thing against the Life of the King, are as sure to dye, as if they were stung with the deadly Bite of the Asp. Many other things they report of their Antiquity, and of a Colony of them heretofore carry'd away into Egypt, of which it's unnecessary fur∣ther to write. But lest we should omit things that are antient and remarkable, it's fit some∣thing Hierogly∣phicks. should be said of the Ethiopick Characters, and of those which the Egyp∣tians call Hieroglyphicks. The Ethiopick Letters represent the Shapes of divers Beasts, Parts and Mem∣bers of Mens Bodies, and Artificers Tools and Instruments. For by their Wri∣ting they do not express any thing by composition of Syllables, but by the sig∣nification of Images and Representations, the meaning of them being ingraven and fixt in the Memory by use and exercise. For sometimes they draw the Shape of a
Kite, Crocodile or Serpent, sometimes the Members of a Man's Body, as the Eye, the Hand, the Face, and such like. The Kite signifies all things that are quickly dispatcht; because this Bird flies the swistest almost of any other. For Reason presently applies it by a suitable Interpretation to every thing that is suddain and quick, or of such nature, as perfectly as if they had been spoken. The Croco∣dile is the Emblem of Malice: The Eye the preserver of Justice, and the Guard of the Body. Amongst the Members of the Body, the Right Hand, with open Fingers signifies Plenty, the Left with the Fingers close Preservation, and custo∣dy of Men's Goods and Estates. The same way of reasoning extends to all other Parts of the Body, and the forms of Tools and all other things; for being that they diligently pry into the hidden signification of every thing, and have their Minds and Memories daily imploy'd with continual Exercise, they exactly read and understand every thing coucht within the Hieroglyphicks. A great part of the Ethiopian Laws differ very much from other Nations, es∣pecially The Laws of the Ethiopians. those which concern the Election of their Kings: For they pick out the best of their Priests out of every Rank and Order, and whomsoever of those so chosen, their Revelling God (which they carry about according to Custom) does first lay hold on, the People they make King, and forthwith fall down upon their Knees, and worship as a God, and render him other Honours, as he to whom the Authority of the chief Magistrate is committed by Divine Providence. Being so elected, he orders the Course of his Life according as the Law has P. 102. prescrib'd; and governing in all other respects according to the Customs of the Country; he neither confers Rewards, nor inflicts Punishments upon any, but ac∣cording to the ancient Laws ratify'd and approv'd by his Ancestors from the beginning. It is a Law among them, That no Subject shall be put to Death, nor Con∣demn'd to Dye, though he be never so guilty: But one of the Sheriffs. Lictors is sent to the Criminal, bearing before him the Badge or Sign of Death; upon sight of which, the Party goes Home, and kills himself. It is not lawful to change his Punish∣ment by wilful Banishment, and flying into other Countries, as it is the Custom of the Greeks. And therefore they report, that one once preparing to fly out of Ethiopia, after the Sign of Death was sent to him by the King, that his Mo∣ther discerning his Design, fastned her Garter about his Neck, and he never in the least lifted up his Hands to hinder her, but underwent all till he was strangl'd to Death, lest he should leave behind him a Blot and Stain upon his Kindred and Family. And above all, that Custom is most strange, which relates to the Death of the Kings; for those Priests that are imploy'd in the Service of the Gods at Meroe, who are here of greatest Authority, whensoever they please, they send a Messenger to the King, commanding him to put himself to death; for that such is the pleasure of the Gods, and that it is not lawful for any to despise the Com∣mands of the Gods; adding also other Reasons, which a plain and honest Mind, inur'd to an ancient and constant Custom (and not being furnish'd with suffi∣cient Arguments to evince the unreasonableness of the Commands) is easily in∣duc'd to believe. And so in former Ages, the Kings without force or compulsion of Arms, but meerly bewitcht by a fond Superstition, observ'd the Custom; till Ergamenes a King of Ethiopia, who reign'd in the time of Ptolomy the Second (bred up in the Grecian Discipline and Philosophy) was the first that was so bold as to reject and despise such Commands. For this Prince assuming the Spirit and Cou∣rage becoming a King, marcht with a considerable Body of Men to the Place (very difficult of access) where stood the Golden Temple of the Ethiopians, and there cut the Throats of all the Priests; and having abolish'd that ancient bar∣barous Custom, reform'd what appertain'd to the Service of the Gods, in such manner as he thought fit. There is moreover a strange and wonderful Law a∣mongst the great Officers of the King's Houshold, which continues, they say, to this very day. For it's a Custom amongst the Ethiopians, that if the King be maim'd or debilitated upon any occasion in any Member of his Body, all his Houshold-Servants do the same thing to themselves. For they hold it a base and unworthy thing, that if the King be lame, for his Servants to attend upon him with whole and sound Limbs, and not all to be lame as well as he. And that it's a thing most unworthy of true and firm Friendship, not to sympathize and bear
a share both in Prosperity and Adversity, in Sorrow and Sadness, and in the pains and deficiencies of the Body. They say moreover, that it's a Custom for the King's Domestick Servants, to put themselves to Death when their Kings dye, and such Death they account honourable, and as a Testimony of their sin∣cere love to their Prince; and therefore it's no easie matter for the Ethiopians to assassinate any of the King's Friends, being that both they and the King are care∣ful and solicitous for the mutual preservation of each other. These are the Laws of those Ethiopians that inhabit the Capital City, and the Island Meroes, and those Tracts that lye next unto Egypt. But there are many o∣ther Ethiopian Nations, whereof some dwell on both sides the River Nile, and in P. 103. the Islands in the River; others border upon Arabia, and some are seated in the heart of Africa. The greatest part of these, especially those in and about the River, are Blacks, flat Fac'd, of curl'd Hair, exceeding fierce and cruel, and in their Manners like Beasts, not so much in their natural Temper, as in their stu∣dy'd and contriv'd pieces of wickedness. Their whole Bodies are filthy and nasty, and their Nails long like wild Beasts, and cruel one towards another. They have a shrill Voice, and in regard they are never taught by any how to lead a more civiliz'd Course of Life (in that way of Education as others are) they mightily differ from us in all their Manners. Some of them carry Shields made of the raw Hide of an Ox, and short Laun∣ces: Others Darts with forkt Points; sometimes they use Bows of Wood 8 Foot. Four Cubits long, and discharge their Arrows, by forcing the Bow with the help of their Foot; and when their Shafts are spent, they fall on with A great Stake burnt at one end. Cloaths. Clubs. They arm likewise their Women, till they attain to such an Age; many of whom use to hang a Brass Ring at their Lips. Some of them never wear any Cloaths, but go naked all their Lives long, and shelter themselves from the scorching heat of the Sun, only with such helps and defences as in their way they can meet withal. Some of them cut off Sheeps Tails, and bind them about their Loyns to cover their Privities: Others make use of Beasts Skins for this purpose. Some there are that are cloth'd round their Loyns with Breeches made of the Hair of their Heads; for the nature of the Ground is such, that the Sheep carry no Fleeces. Their Meat is a certain Fruit that grows about the Pools and Marishes: Some pluck off the tender Branches of small Trees, and with them cover themselves from the heat of the Southern Sun. Some sow Sesamus and Lotus: And others live upon certain tender Roots of Canes. And many of them that are good Archers, maintain themselves with abundance of Fowl they kill. But most of them live upon Flesh, Milk and Cheese. Those that inhabit the Parts above Meroes, have Two Opinions concerning the Gods. Some of them say they are eternal and incorruptible: Amongst which, they Religion. reckon the Sun, Moon, and the intire Universe. Others they conceive were at first Mortal Men, but for their Virtue and their Benefits procur'd to Mankind, purchas'd immortal Honour. They especially worship Isis, Pan, Hercules and Ju∣piter, whom they account to be the greatest Benefactors to Mankind. But some few of the Ethiopians are of opinion, that there are no Gods at all: And these fly to the Marishes from the Sun when it rises, as from an implacable Enemy. They have Laws likewise different from all other Nations about their Funerals. Some throw their Dead into the River, as looking upon that to be the best sort Funerals. of Burial. Others by pouring upon them melted Glass, keep them in their Houses; because they think it not convenient or decent that their Countenances should not be known by their Kindred, or that they should be forgotten by their Posterity. Some bury them in Earthen Coffins, about their Temples; and to swear by their Names, is counted the most Sacred Oath. Those that are most Beautiful some of of them chuse to be their King, judging that Regal Power and Beauty are al∣ways the Gifts of Fortune. Others intrust the Royal Power in the Hands of the most industrious Shepherds, as such as would make it their business to take most care for the good of their Subjects. Others bestow the Kingdom upon those that P. 104. are richest, judging such only most able by their Riches, to supply the wants of their People. There are others that are for the advancing them to the Throne, who are most approv'd for their Valour; because they judge those that are Conquerors to be most worthy of Honour.
That part of the Country in Lybia that borders upon Nile, is the most plea∣sant The Descrip∣tion of the Parts of the Country. and richest for all manner of Provision; for the Morasses afford the most advantagious shelters against the parching heat of the Sun; and therefore the E∣thiopians and Africans quarrel, and are at continual Wars one with another for the possession of that Place. Herds likewise of Elephants out of the higher Lybia (as some write) come down into those Parts, because of the abundance of Pasture, and the sweetness of it. For there are wonderful Morasses, abounding in all sorts of Food all along the Banks of the River, and here they are held by the Mouth, when they taste the sweetness of those Reeds and Canes that grow here, and so eat up the Food of the Inhabitants; and therefore the People are forc'd to resort to these Places for Relief (being Shepherds and living in Tents) making that their Country where they can find the most Plenty. The Herds of Elephants of which we before hinted, leave the upper Parts for want of Pasture, which is presently burnt up there by the heat of the Sun. For by reason of the scorching Heat, and want both of Spring and River-water, the Grass is parcht up, and none to be had. Some write, that in the Deserts and other wild Places (as they are call'd) are bred a World of Serpents of a wonderful bigness. These (they say) with great fury and violence, set upon the Elephants at the brink of the Waters, clasping themselves in many Circles round their Thighs, and sticking fast there so long, as that at length the Beasts (tir'd out by their great and weighty bulk) fall down in a foaming Sweat to the ground; upon which, others in multitudes coming in, they presently devour them, and that with ease; the poor Creatures being so un∣weldy, as scarce able to move themselves. If for some Reason or other, they succeed not in their Attempt, (out of eagerness to their natural Food) they pur∣sue not the Elephants to the Rivers Bank before mentioned. For they say these vast Serpents avoid all they can the open Fields, and abide about the Feet and hollows of the Mountains in deep Holes and Caves: And hence it is, that they leave not those Places so fit for their shelter and defence, Nature teaching every Creature to make use of that which is most helpful to it, and to avoid what is hurtful. And thus much we have thought fit to say of the Ethiopians and their Coun∣try: And now something is to be said of the Historians: For many have written such things concerning Egypt and Ethiopia, as deserve not the least credit, in as much as the Authors were either too easie to believe Lies, or else in sport and for diversion invented them themselves. But Agatharchides of Cnidus in his Second Book of the Affairs of Asia, Arte∣midorus the Ephesian, in his Eighth Book of Geography, and some others that were natural Egyptians, who have written Histories of the things herein before by us related, have in their Writings nearly pursu'd the Truth. And I my self in the time of my Travelling and Sojourning in Egypt, associated with many of the Priests, and conferr'd with many Ambassadors and others sent out of Ethiopia, whence having exactly come to the knowledge of every thing, and having like∣wise examin'd the several Relations of the Historians, have fram'd and moulded my History, so as to suit with those things wherein all of them did agree and consent. But this shall suffice to be said of the Western Ethiopians. We shall now speak a little of those inhabiting the Southern Parts, and towards the Red Sea. But it's fit first that we say something of the making of Gold in these Parts. In the Confines of Egypt and the neighbouring Countries of Arabia and Ethiopia P. 105. Manner of making Gold. there's a Place full of rich Gold-mines, out of which with much Cost and Pains of many Labourers Gold is dug. The Soyl here naturally is black, but in the Body of the Earth, run many white Veins, shining with white Marble, and glistering with all sorts of other bright Metals; out of which labourious Mines, those ap∣pointed Overseers cause the Gold to be dug up by the labour of a vast Multitude of People. For the Kings of Egypt condemn to these Mines, notorious Criminals, Captives taken in War, Persons sometimes falsly accus'd, or such against whom the King is incens'd; and that not only they themselves, but sometimes all their Kindred and Relations together with them, are sent to work here, both to punish them, and by their Labour to advance the Profit and Gain of the King. There are infinite numbers upon these Accounts thrust down into these Mines, all bound
in Fetters, where they work continually, without being admitted any rest Night or Day, and so strictly guarded, that there's no possibility or way left to make an escape. For they set over them Barbarians, Souldiers of various and strange Languages, so that it's not possible to corrupt any of the Guard, by discoursing one with another, or by the gaining Insinuations of a familiar Converse. The Earth which is hardest and full of Gold, they soften by putting Fire un∣der it, and then work it out with their Hands: The Rocks thus softn'd, and made more pliant and yielding, several Thousands of profligat Wretches break it in pieces with Hammers and Pickaxes. There's one Artist that is the Overseer of the whole Work, who marks out the Stone, and shews the Labourers the way and manner how he would have it done. Those that are the Strongest amongst them, that are appointed to this Slavery, provided with sharp Iron Pickaxes, cleave the Marble-shining Rock by meer Force and Strength, and not by Art or Slight of Hand. They undermine not the Rock in a direct Line, but follow the bright shining Vein of the Mine. They carry Lamps fastn'd to their Forheads to give them Light, being other∣ways in perfect Darkness in the various windings and turnings wrought in the Mine; and having their Bodies appearing sometimes of one Colour, and sometimes of another (according to the nature of the Mine where they work) they throw the Lumps and Pieces of the Stone cut out of the Rock upon the Floor. And thus they are imploy'd continually without intermission, at the very nod of the Overseer or Tax-master, who lashes them severely besides. And there are little Boys that attend upon the Labourers in the Mine, and with great labour and toyl gather up the Lumps and Pieces hew'd out of the Rock as they are cast upon the Ground, and carry them forth and lay them upon the Bank. Those that are about Thirty Years of Age take a Piece of the Rock of such a certain quantity, and pound it in a Stone Mortar with Iron Pestels till it be as small as a Vetch, then those little Stones so pounded are taken from them by Women and older Men, who cast them into Mills that stand together there near at hand in a long Row, and Two or Three of them being imploy'd at one Mill, they grind it so long till it be as small as fine Meal, ac∣cording to the pattern given them. No care at all is taken of the Bodies of these poor Creatures, so that they have not a Rag so much as to cover their Nakedness, and no Man that sees them can chuse but must commiserate their sad and deplorable Condition. For tho they are Sick, Maim'd or Lame, no rest no intermission in the least is allow'd them: Neither the weakness of Old age, nor Womens Infirmities are any plea to excuse them; but all are driven to their work with Blows and Cudgel∣ling, till at length overborn with the intollerable weight of their misery, they drop down dead in the midst of their insufferable Labours; so that these miserable Crea∣tures always expect worse to come than that which they then at present indure, P. 106. and therefore long for Death as far more desirable than Life. At length the Masters of the Work take Stone thus ground to Powder, and car∣ry it away in order to the perfecting of it. They spread the Mineral so ground upon a broad Board somewhat hollow and lying shelving, and pouring Water upon it, rub it and cleanse it, and so all the Earthy and Drossy part being sepa∣rated from the rest by the Water, it runs off the Board, and the Gold by rea∣son of its weight remains behind. Then washing it several times again, they first rub it lightly with their Hands; afterwards they draw up the Earthy and Drossy Matter with slender Spunges gently apply'd to the Pouder'd Dust, till it be clean pure Gold. At last other Workmen take it away by Weight and Measure, and these put it into Earthen Urns, and according to the quantity of the Gold in every Urn, they mix with it some Lead, Grains of Salt, a little Tin and Barley Bran. Then covering every Pot close, and carefully dawbing them over with Clay, they put them in a Furnace where they abide Five Days and Nights together; then after a convenient time that they have stood to cool, nothing of the other matter is to be found in the Pots but only pure refin'd Gold, some little thing dimi∣nish'd in the weight. And thus is Gold prepar'd in the Borders of Egypt, and perfected and com∣pleated with so many and so great toyls and Vexations. And therefore I cannot but conclude that Nature itself teaches us, that as Gold is got with Labour and Toyl, so its kept with difficulty; creates every where the greatest cares; and the use of it mixt both with Pleasure and Sorrow.
Yet the invention of those Metals is very ancient, being found out, and made use of by the ancient Kings. Now we shall treat of those Nations that lye scatter'd among the Coasts of the . Arabian Gu Ichthyophages. Fish- Red Sea, and through Troglodyta and the Southern parts of Ethiopia. And First we shall speak of the Ichthyophages who inhabit the Sea Coasts all along as far as from Carmania and Gedrosia to the uttermost point of the Red Sea, which runs up into the Land an incredible long way, and at the entrance into it lyes bounded on one side with Arabia the Happy, and with the Country of the Troglodites on the other. Some of the Barbarians go stark naked, and their Wives and Children are as common among them as their Flocks and Herds. They know nothing either of Pleasure or Sorrow but what is natural, like Bruit Beasts, and have no apprehen∣sion either of Good or Evil. They inhabit not far from the very brink of the Sea Shore, where there are not only deep Caves, but Craggy Cliffs, and strait and narrow Valleys divided naturally into many crooked Windings and Turnings; which being of their own nature useful to the Inhabitants, they make up the passages both in and out with heaps of great Stones, and make use of those Places instead of Nets to catch their Fish. For when the Tide comes in and overflows the Coasts (as it does twice every Day about the Third and Ninth Hour) and the Sea covers the Strand up to the Brinks of the Banks, together with the Tide it brings in a Vast number of all sorts of Fish within the Land, which at the first are kept within those parts next to the Sea, but afterwards for Food disperse themselves about those hollow Caverns; but when the Tide ebbs, and the Wa∣ter by degrees leaves the hollows, and reflows through those heaps of Stones, the Fish within those Caverns are left destitute of Water. Upon which all the Barbarians (as if they were rouz'd up by one general shout) with their Wives P. 107. and Children Flock to the Place. Yet they divide themselves into several Com∣panies, and each run with an hideous shout to their several Places as if a Prey were suddenly and unexpectedly presented to them. Then the Women and Children gather the little Fish next to the shore; and throw them upon the dry Land, as fast as they can gather them; and the Men, and more able people busie themselves in catching the great and strong Fish; for the Sea not only casts up the huge Lob∣sters, Lampreys and Dog-Fish, but also the Sea Calves, and many such like both of strange names and shape. They Master not these Creatures with Arms made by the Artist, but strike 'em through with the sharp Goats Horns, and wound and cut them with rough Stones broken off from the Rock. For Necessity in every thing instructs Nature what to do, and readily complies with that which seems most useful and advantagious in the present exigency. After they have got their number in heaps together, they carry away their Booty, and put all they have caught into Stone Pots turn'd towards the South: the Fish being, as it were even by Fire, Fry'd by the heat of the Sun, after a small time they turn them upon the other side, then they take 'em by the Tails and shake 'em, and the Flesh thus scalded and softned by the Sun falls off; but the Bones they heap together in one place; and keep 'em for their use as shall be here∣after related. Then they boil their Flesh in a little Stone Pot for a certain time, mixing with them the seed of a Fruit call'd Paliurus, a Plant bearing a red Fruit, of a pleasant Taste. . Nat. . l. 1. c. 1. Paliurus. By working of this toge∣ther it becomes a Lump of one and the same colour, and this seems as if it were a Sauce to their Meat. At last this that is thus brought into a Body, they spread upon long Tiles, and lay it forth to dry in the Sun; which after it has been dry'd a little (lying down together) they merrily feed upon, and eat not according to Weight and Measure but as every one thinks fit, making their natural Appe∣tite the measure of their Repast. For they have always enough of this store to resort unto, as if Neptune perform'd the Office of Ceres. Yet sometimes the Sea rises so high, that all the Shoars are overflow'd for many Days together, so that none dare attempt to come near; in the mean time therefore (wanting food) they first gather Shell-fish of such a vast magnitude, as that some of them weigh Four Minas. These they break in Pieces with huge great Stones, and eagerly guttle up the raw Fish in them, which are in Taste much like  Oysters. If by Storms and Winds the Sea continues long in a high Tide, and that they are hindred from taking of Fish by Tempestuous Weather, they first (as is said before) betake themselves to the Shell-fish; and when these fail, they run to the heaps of Bones; and from among them pick out those that are fresh and moist,
and divide 'em one joint from another, and some they presently grash in Pieces with their Teeth, and others that are more hard they bruise with Stones and Feed upon them like so many Beasts in their Dens. And thus they provide dry Food for themselves: And as to that which is moist and juicy, their use of it is wonderful and past belief. For they Fish continually for Four Days successively, in the mean time eating merrily together in great Flocks and Companies, con∣gratulating one another with harsh and untuneable Songs without any Melodious Harmony: Then they fall promiscuously, as every Man's Lot chances to company with their Women, for procreation sake; minding no business, nor taking any care for any thing, having so much plenty ready at hand. But the Fifth Day, they . 8. go in Droves to get Drink, to those Tracts lying under the Feet of the Moun∣tains, where are many Springs of Sweet Water, whither likewise the No. Shepherds drive their Flocks for the same purpose. Neither do they differ much from Herds of Cattel, as they go making a horrid noise, without any articulate Voice: In this Procession the Mothers carry their sucking Children continually in their Arms, and the Fathers after they are weaned; but after they are Five Years old, they run before their Parents very jocant and playful, as if they were going to some delightful and pleasant Recreation. For not being of a froward and discontented Temper, they place their chiefest good in having sufficient to supply their ne∣cessities, never seeking any further addition to their happiness in gaining more. When they come to the Shepherds watering Places, they gorge themselves with Water to that degree, that when they return, they can scarce go, they are so heavy and unweldy. All that Day they eat nothing, but every one lies groveling upon the Ground like a Drunken Man, with their Bellies almost burst, and scarce able to breath. And the next Day they fall a feeding upon their Fish; and this course and round they run in this manner of feeding all the days of their Lives. But those People who live thus within the strait narrow Caves near to the Sea-shoar, by reason of the plainness and meanness of their Diet, though they are scarce ever Sick, yet are far shorter liv'd than our own Countreymen. As for those other that live further beyond the Gulf, their way of Living is Gulf of the Red Sea. much more strange, who naturally never covet any Drink, nor are affected with any Passion: For their Lot falling to be in the Deserts, in Places unfit for Hu∣mane Habitation, they feed plentifully, by catching of Fish, but matter not any other Food; and in regard they eat their Fish slaby, and almost raw, they are so far from coveting Drink, that they know not what it is to drink. They are therefore contented with what Providence has provided for them; accounting themselves happy in this respect, that they are not affected with that troublesom Passion, the sense of want. And that which is most to be admir'd, is, that they so far exceed all other Men in freedom from boysterous Passions, that what we shall now relate is scarce credible. But many Egyptian Merchants, who in their Voyage through the Red Sea, have arriv'd at the Country of the Ichthophages, have avow'd it to me to be a certain truth, that they are not in the least mov'd with any thing. And Ptolemy the Third, who had a great desire to hunt the Elephants that were bred in that Country, sent Simia, one of his Friends to view the Place; who being furnish'd with sufficient Provision for his Journey, exactly and dili∣gently observ'd the manner of those Nations lying along the Sea-shoar, as Aga∣tharchides of Cnidus the Historian relates. Amongst other things he says, that the Ethiopians in those Parts are not affected with any disturbing Passion; that they never use to drink, nor have the least appetite or inclination thereunto, for the Reasons before mention'd. He affirms moreover, that they have no Converse or Discourse with any Stranger, nor are mov'd or concern'd at the sight of any, but fixing their Eyes upon them, are no more mov'd or affected, than as if no Person at all were near them. Nay, if they be assaulted (he says) with drawn Swords they'l not stir; and though they are hurt and wounded, yet they are not in the least provoked. Neither are the Common People at all concern'd, when any of the rest are hurt or injur'd; but many times when their Wives and Children are kill'd before their Eyes, they stand insensible as if nothing of prejudice were done to them, shewing no sign either of Anger or Compassion; and therefore they say, they speak not a word, but act a part with a mimick gesture of their Hands, as they use to do upon such an occasion. And that which is most of all to be ad∣mir'd, the Pho. Sea Calves (which are very familiar with them) like Men, help them
to catch Fish. These different and distinct People are yet exceeding Faithful one P. 109. to another, in securing one another's Children from harm and prejudice, and preserving their several Habitations from force and incroachment; and though they are of different Stocks, yet they peaceably and affectionately converse one with another, without offering the least injury on either side. And though this way of Living together be somewhat strange, yet through long custom, and constant use and practice, or because they find it necessary and conducing to their mutual advantage, it is still continu'd among them to this day. These Nations inhabit not after the manner of the other Ichthiophages, but have divers sorts of Dwellings according as their several Circumstances fall out to be; some live in Caves lying most commonly to the North, by which they have the advantage of being refresh'd not only by the depth of the Covert, but by the cooling Breezes of the Northern Air. For those towards the South scorch like a Fiery Furnace, and by reason of the violent heat no Man can indure them. Others that cannot otherwise furnish themselves with Caves that lye Northward, gather the Ribs of Whales (which the Sea casts up in abundance) and then bending them, tye 'em together at both ends, and cover them with Sea-grass, and so rest under those, guarded from the parching heat of the Sun, as by the Cover of a shady Arch; which Art and Contrivance they are taught by their own Neces∣sities. A Third sort of Lodgings these Ichthiophages have are these; about those Places grow abundance of Fir-trees, which are water'd by the Sea, and bear very thick Leaves, and Fruit like unto Chesnuts: The Boughs and Leaves of these Trees, they interlace one within another, and so make for themselves a thick and close Shade, and live merry and jocund Lives, under this their new Canopy, both in Land and in Water at one and the same time, being hereby guarded from the Sun by the shade of the Trees, and the natural heat of the Place being mitigated by the continual Fluctuations of the Sea, and their Bodies refresht with the cool∣ing Air of some Winds that blow at certain Seasons. But to proceed as to the Fourth sort of Dwellings. In this place there has been from the beginning of Time, a vast heap of Moss, like a Mountain, cast up by the Sea, which is so firm by the constant heat of the Sun, that its become solid and cemented together with Sand. In this they dig Caves of a Man's height, that part over-head they leave for a Roof, but below they make long Passages or Galleries to go in or out, one over against another. Here they abide with ease, protected from the heat of the Sun; and about the Time the Tide comes in, out they start, and then for that time imploy them∣selves in Fishing; and at the ebbing of the Tide, after they have fed deliciously to∣gether upon the Fish they have caught, they fly again to their several Caves. They bury their Dead only at the time of Low-Water; and at that time they cast their Carcases upon the Shoar, and there let them lye uncover'd, to be carry'd away by the next Tide. And so after all, having spent all their Days in a strange and un∣usual Course and way of Living, they themselves at last in their Burials become Food for the Fishes. But there's one Nation of the Ichthiophages whose Habitations are so strange, that inquisitive Men are very much pulled about them. For some of them dwell upon steep and dangerous hollows which time out of mind have been unaccessible to Mankind, as far as appears: For over their Heads are exceeding high Rocks, rugged and steep every way; and on both sides they are blockt up with unpass∣able Precipices; and before, the Sea is a Guard and Boundary to them, so that the best Footman cannot come at them. Neither have they any use or so much as P. 110. knowledge of any Boats or Ships as we have. Hence (the thing being so intricate and doubtful) we may justly conclude that they are There at the first, and never else∣where. Aborigines, and were ever in this Place without any certain time of their First Generation; which some Naturalists doubt not to affirm of all other Works of Nature whatsoever. But for as much as the perfect Knowledge of things of this nature are far above our Comprehension we may easily conclude, that those know but little, who are the most inquisitive, and soaring so high as to know all; who may perhaps tickle Mens Ears with a probable Fancy, but never really attain to the Knowledge of the Truth.
CHAP. II. Chelonophages: The Manner of taking Sea Tortoises. The Cetivores or Whale Eaters. The Sea Coasts over against Babylon; their Manner of taking of Fish. The Rizophages or Root Eaters. Those call'd Sperma∣phages and Hylophages, Hylogones or Hunters; their taking of wild Beasts: The Elephant Fighters; how they are taken: The Simoes, Stru∣thophages, Acridophages or Locust Eaters; their miserable Deaths. Cy∣nomolges: The Country of the Troglodites. Wild Beasts: The Terri∣ble Wild Bull: Serpents; That great one brought alive to Alexan∣dria. SOmething likewise is to be spoken of the Shellfish-eat∣ers. Chelonophages, to shew the whole Course and Manner of their way of living. There are a vast number of Islands in the Ocean near to the Continent, very small and of a low Situation, barren both as to Tillage and the natural Fruits of the Earth. Amongst these Islands (because they are so near one to another) there are no Storms or Tempests: For the Force of the Waves are broke by the Pro∣montories of these Islands that shoot out into the Sea, and therefore abundance of Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 9. c. 10. Sea Tortoises lye in and about these Places, seeking Relief under the Covert of this calm and quiet Shelter. In the Night they lye at the bottom of the Water feeding, but in the Day time appear above Water in that Part of the Sea that flows through the midst of the Islands, and lye sleeping with their Shells erect, expos'd to the Sun, and seem to resemble a little Skiff turn'd with the Keel up∣wards; for they are of a wonderful Bigness, no less than a small Fisher's Boat. The Barbarians that inhabit these Islands, taking the Opportunity, quietly and silently swim to these Sea Tortoises, and assailing them on both sides; some they thrust forward to the Shoar, others they lift up till they have turn'd them upon their Backs; then they that are on each side guide and direct the Creature to land like a Ship by the Stem, lest the Tortoise should turn it self again, and so by its natural Strength in swimming escape from them into the Sea: And while they are thus imploy'd, one of the Company swims to Shoar before with a long Rope ty'd at one end to the Fish, and then draws him to Land, those that assisted at the taking of him following close after. When he's brought into the Island, they fry the Fish a little while in the Sun, and then feed upon it merrily together. The Shells being in shape like to Boats are very useful to the Inhabitants; for they use them both to fail in to the Continent to get fresh Water; and likewise for Roofs to cover their Cottages, turning the hollow Parts downwards. So that Nature's Bounty has provided for them by one Gift many useful Advantages as Food, Vessels, Shipping and Habitations. Not far off from these upon the Sea Shoar in the Continent dwell other Barbari∣ans far different from the others in their way of living; for they feed upon Ctivori. Whales cast up by Chance by the Sea. Sometimes they have Plenty of Food by Reason of the vast Proportion of these Creatures; but at other times for want of them they are almost starv'd; and are forc'd through want of Food to gnaw Pieces of old stinking Bones, and to suck the Ends of the rotten Ribs. So many are the Nations of the Ethiopians who feed upon Fish; and this is the manner of their living, concluding this Account in a brief and summary way. But the Sea Coasts over against the Province of Babylon border upon a fruitful The Sea coasts over against the Province of Babylon. Country abounding in all sorts of Fruit-trees, where there is such Plenty of Fish, that they are more than the Inhabitants can consume: For upon the Sea shoar they set such a number of Canes, and so interwoven one within another, that they are like to a Net spread all along by the Sea-side. In every of which Works, there are many little Portals wrought and interlac'd with Reeds, and are tossed this way and that way with an easy Motion. These open by the Tide, when the Sea flows
in upon the Land, and when it returns into the Channel they shut again. So that through these Portals with the Efflux of the Sea the Fish slip every day, and when it ebbs they are left behind, because they cannot pass with the Water through those Canes thus knit and wrought together: And therefore near to the Sea-side sometimes may be seen Heaps of Fish panting for want of Water, which those that have the Care and Oversight of this Business, gather and carry away. Hence P. 111. they have both Plenty of Food, and raise a large Revenue beside. Some of the Inhabitants, when the Shoar is dry and the Country lies flat, draw broad Sluces from the Sea many Furlongs to their Cottages, at the ends of which they place Wears made of Twigs, which open when the Tide comes in, and shut again when the Sea goes out; And then the Water flowing through the narrow Mouths of the Portals, the Fish remain behind in the Sluces, and there they take out every time as many as they have occasion to use. Having gone through all those People bordering upon the Sea-coasts as far as from the Province of Babylon to the Red-Sea, we shall now proceed to give an Account of the other Nations. In Ethiopia above Egypt near to the River Asa, inhabit a People call'd Rizophages, Rizophages. who get up the Roots of the Canes that grow in the Marishes, and first wash them very clean: Then they bruise and pound 'em with Stones till they are soft and pliant; afterwards they lay a handful of 'em in the Sun till they are broil'd, and this is the Food they live upon all their days. But tho' they live in Plenty and are at constant Peace one with another, yet they are miserably infested and often fallen upon by the Lyons that abound in those Parts: For the Air being scorching hot, they come out of the Deserts into the Rizophages Country, both for shelter from the Heat, and to hunt the lesser Beasts for Prey; so that when the Ethiopians come out of the Marishes they are torn in Pieces by these Creatures; for being unarm'd they are unable to withstand the Strength of the Lyons: And the whole Nation would certainly be utterly destroy'd if Providence had not provided a Remedy in this Case; for about the beginning of the Dog-days, when there's not the least Wind, there comes in such a Multitude of Gnats (larger than those that are commonly seen) that the Inhabitants are forc'd to fly into the Marishes and so avoid them: And the Lyons partly tormented by their biting and stinging of 'em, and partly terrify'd with their humming and buzzing run far away out of the Coun∣try. Next to these are those Nations call'd Hylophages and Spenmatophages. The last of these gather in great Plenty Fruits which fall from the Trees in the Summer time, and so feed on them without taking any further Pains. The rest of the Year they feed upon a certain sweet Herb which grow in the shady Valleys: Which being a solid Plant, and having a Stalk like to a Turnip, it sufficiently supplies the want of other necessary Food. But the Hylophages, together with their Wives and Children, go into the Fields Hylophages, Wood-eaters. and climb the Trees, and feed upon the Buds and tender Branches; and by con∣stant Usage and Practice are so nimble in getting up to the Top of the highest Branch that it seems almost incredible. They skip from Tree to Tree like so many Birds, and mount up upon the slenderest Branches without the least Hazard. For being very slender and light body'd People, if their Feet fail, they catch hold with their Hands; nay, if they fall down from the very Top they are so light they get no harm. They easily chew every juicy Twig of the Tree, and as easily con∣coct them. They always go naked, and make use of their Wives promiscuously, and therefore all their Children they look upon to be common amongst them. They sometimes quarrel one with another for Places of Habitation; Their Arms are Clubs, with which they both defend themselves and pound in Pieces their conquer'd Enemy. Many of them are often famish'd to Death when they grow P. 112. blind, being depriv'd of so necessary a Member for the procuring of Suste∣nance. The next adjoyning Country is inhabited by the Ethiopian Hylogones, Born in the Woods. Hylogones call'd Hunters, who are indeed but few, but live after a peculiar and strange manner, answerable to their Name; for the Land being infested with multitudes of wild Beasts, is very terrible to live in, and very little running Water is to be found; therefore for fear of the Beasts the Inhabitants sleep all Night in Trees; and in the Morning they go to the Pools of Water with their Arms, where they hide themselves among the Boughs, and spy in the mean time out of the Trees: Then
when the Sun grows hot, the wild Bulls and Leopards, and a great Number of other wild Beasts come running to the Waters (being scorch'd with Heat and Thirst) and do so gorge themselves with drinking, that they are ready to burst, upon which the Ethiopians leap out of the Trees and set upon the Beasts (that can scarcely stir or move) with Clubs burnt at the end, Stones and Darts, and kill 'em with ease: Thus dividing themselves into Companies, they finish their Pursuit, and feed together upon the Prey they have caught: Very rarely it is that any of them are kill'd, even by the fiercest or strongest of them; but by slight they over∣come might. If they miss of their Prey, they wash the Skins of those they have formerly taken, and lay them upon a Fire made for the Purpose, and scorching off the Hair under the Ashes, and dividing the Skin amongst themselves, with this hard Fare they satisfy their Hunger. They teach the Boys to cast Darts exactly to hit a Mark, and if they miss, they suffer them not to eat. And by this Means (through pinching Hunger) they become excellent Archers. Not far from these, towards the West inhabit the Ethiopians, that are call'd Elephant fight∣ers. Elephantomachies. They dwell in large and woody Forests; where from the Tops of the highest Trees they diligently observe the Motions and Walks of the Ele∣phants. But they set not upon the intire Troops at once (for that were to little Purpose) but with wonderful Courage single them out as they come near to them. For when the Beast approaches to the right side of the Tree, where he that watches for him lyes hid, just as the Elephant passes by, he catches, hold of his Tail with his Hands, and clasps his Feet close to his left Thigh: Then with his Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 8. right Hand he lays hold of a sharp Ax (bound upon his Shoulder and managable by one Hand) and with that gives him one Wound after another whereby he cuts the Nerves and Sinews of the Elephant's right Ham, guiding and governing his Body in the mean time by his right Hand. This Feat is perform'd with that ad∣mirable Quickness and Activity, as if the Combat had been design'd to be ended no otherwise than by the Loss of one of their Lives. For what could be expe∣cted (since the Nature of the thing cannot admit of any other Conjecture) but either the Man must dye or the Beast be overcome? The Beast being thus Ham∣strung, not able to turn himself round by reason of the Slowness of his Motion, sinks sometimes on that side where he is wounded and falls down, and together with himself kills the Ethiopian. Sometimes the Elephant dashes the Man against a Tree or a Stone, and with his Weight presses upon him till he has kill'd him. Some of the Elephants overmaster'd (through the Smart and Torment of their Wounds) never regard him that wounds them, but run so long up and down the Plain, till the Ethiopian behind by his continual hacking and cutting in one and the same place, cuts his Sinews in pieces, and at length altogether disables him and brings him down: Whereupon the Ethiopians run in flocking, and cutting of Collops of his Flesh while he is yet alive, feed and feast themselves merrily together. P. 113. The Manner of taking Ele∣phants. Some of the neighbouring Ethiopians take the Elephants without any Danger of their Lives at all, overcoming Force by Slight. For this Creature when he is full, after feeding, differs from all other four-footed Beasts in disposing of himself to Sleep. For he cannot bend his Knees and lye down, but sleeps leaning his Body to the side of a Tree; so that the Tree by his frequent resort to it and pressing upon it, withers and rots; there being therefore many Signs and Footsteps of the Elephant's Walks by which the Hunters of this Prey discover where he rests himself, they having found out the Tree, saw it a little above the Ground till it be almost ready to fall, then rubbing out the Marks of their Feet they go away before the Elephant comes there, who afterwards in the Evening being full fed, makes to his usual Resting-place; and as soon as he leans with the Weight of his whole Body to the Tree, down it falls, and the Beast along with it, and there lyes all Night with his Heels upward, for he cannot possibly rise. As soon as it's day, they that saw'd the Tree come to the Place, and there kill the poor Creature without any Hazard, and build themselves Huts, where they stay till they have eaten him up. Next to these Nations upon the West inhabit those Ethiopians call'd Simoes: To the South lye the Nation of the Struthophages; for among them is a sort of Bird Simoes. of a mixt Nature, partly a Fowl and partly a Beast, and thence it has its Name. Struthophages. She's little less than the greatest Hart: Nature has form'd her with a long Neck, a round Body with Wings, but a tender and small Head, yet she has strong Thighs Ostrich. and Legs, and her Feathers are forkt; and she's so heavy and unweldy that she
cannot fly above the Earth; but she runs along with that Swiftness that she scarce touches the Ground. With a brisk gale of Wind she mounts up her Wings and makes forward as swift as a Ship with her Sayls spread under Sayl. Against the Pursuer she defends her self with flinging of Stones; which she throws with that Violence out of her Feet as out of a Sling; but when the Wind is low, her Wings flag, and so being depriv'd of that natural Help, she's easily taken. There are a great Number of those Birds; and by divers Arts and Devices the Barbarians easily take Multitudes of them, and feed upon their Flesh and make use of their Skins both for Vestments and Coverlets for Beds. But when these Struthophages are set upon by the Ethiopians call'd Simoes, for Arms they use the Horns of the The Oryx is a Beast as big as a Roe-buck, which has a Horn as sharp as it will pierce Brass. Oryxes, with which they repel the Assaults of their Enemies. For they are very great and sharp at the Ends, and these sort of Beasts do there so abound that their Horns are found scatter'd up and down, and so they become of special use to the Inhabitants. A little distant from these are the Acridophages, bordering upon the Deserts; Acridophages. Locust-eaters. lesser they are than other Men, of lean and meager Bodies, and exceeding black. In these Parts in the time of the Spring the South Winds rise high and drive an infinite Number of Locusts out of the Desert, of an extraordinary Bigness, fur∣nish'd with most dirty and nasty colour'd Wings; and these are plentiful Food and Provision for them all their days. They have a strange and peculiar way of catch∣ing of them; for in their Country there's a large and deep Vale extending far in P. 114. length for many Furlongs together, all over this they lay Heaps of Wood and other combustible Matter, of which they have Plenty in every Place, and when the Swarms of Locusts are by the Force of the Winds driven thither, then some of the Inhabitants go to one Part of the Valley and some to another, and set the Grass and other combustible Matter on Fire, which was before thrown among the Piles; whereupon arises a great and suffocating Smoke, which so stifles the Locusts, as they fly over the Vale, that they go not much further before they fall down dead to the Ground. This Destruction of them is continu'd for many days toge∣ther, so that they lye in great Heaps: The Country being full of Salt, they gather these Heaps together and season 'em sufficiently with this Salt, which gives them an excellent Relish, and preserves them a long time sweet without the least Putre∣faction, so that they have Food ever ready at hand from these Insects during all the rest of the Year: For they neither concern themselves with Flesh or Fish (being far remote from the Sea) nor have any other Provision for their Support and Suste∣nance. They are a little sort of People, very swift of Foot, but exceeding short liv'd, for they that live the longest never exceed forty: And as the Manner of their Their misera∣ble Death. Death is strange and wonderful, so it's sad and most miserable: For when they grow old, wing'd Lice breed in their Flesh, not only of divers Sorts but of horrid and ugly Shapes. This Plague begins first at the Belly and Breast, and in a little time eats and consumes the whole Body. He that is seiz'd with this Distemper, first begins to itch a little, as if he had the Scab, Pleasure and Trouble being mixt together. But afterwards when the Lice begin to break out at the Skin, abundance of putrid Matter (accompany'd with intolerable sharp Pa) issues out with them. Hereupon the sick Person so tears himself in Pieces with his own Nails, that he sighs and groans most lamentably, and while he is thus scratching of him∣self, the Lice come pouring out in such Abundance one after another as out of a Vessel full of Holes, and thus they miserably close and end their Days. Whether this proceeds from the Nature of their Food or the Temper of the Air is uncer∣tain. Upon this Nation there borders a large Country, rich in fair Pastures, but desert and uninhabited; not that there never were any People there, but that formerly when it was inhabited, an immoderate Rain happen'd which bred a vast Company of Spiders and Scorpions: And (as they write) these Creatures did so increase that tho' at the first the whole Nation attempted to destroy these implacable Ene∣mies of their Country, yet they were not able to master them (for whosoever was bit or string with them, immediately fell down dead) so that not knowing where to abide, or how to get Food, they were forc'd to fly to some other Place for Relief. And this is not at all incredible, for we are assur'd by very good and substantial Historians, that far more strange and wonderful Things than those have happen'd in the World. For in Italy Field-mice bred in such vast Numbers,
that they forc'd the Inhabitants out of the Country. In Media great Flocks of Sparrows ate up all the standing Corn, so as the People were forc'd to remove elsewhere. The People call'd Autariats, were forc'd by Frogs bred in the Clouds, which pour'd down upon them instead of Rain, to forsake their Country, and fly to these Parts where they are now settl'd. And who is there that is not well acquainted by Ancient Histories, how among those many Labours Hercules under∣took to eternize his Name, his driving out those devouring Birds out of the Marishes of Stymphalides was one? And some Cities of Lybia were altogether P. 115. depopulated by Lyons, breaking in upon them. And these Instances we have given to convince those that are apt to question whatsoever Historians relate that seem strange and unusual. But to return to the orderly Course of our Histo∣ry. The Southern Border is inhabited by Men whom the Grecians call Cynomones; but Cynomones, or Cynomolges, Dog-hunters. by the neighbouring Barbarians they are call'd in their own Country Language Wild Ethiopians. They wear long Beards, and keep up numbers of fierce Dogs to get them Food. For from the beginning of the Summer Solstice to the middle of Winter, an innumerable number of Indian Oxen come into their Countrey; the Reason of it is unknown. For its uncertain whether they fly from cruel wild Beasts, which in Troops set upon them, or that they do it for want of Pasture, or upon some other Accident (the Effect of Nature, the Parent of all Wonders) which Man's Reason cannot comprehend. These Oxen are so numerous, that the Inhabitants are not able to master them; therefore they loose their Dogs upon them, and by hunting 'em take many, of which they eat some fresh, and others they salt up. Many other Beasts they kill with these masty Dogs, and by this Means live upon Flesh. The Nations that lye furthest South live the Lives of Beasts under the Shapes of Men. But it yet remains to speak of two other Nations; the Ethiopians and the Troglo∣dites: But of the Ethiopians mention is made elsewhere, and therefore now we shall treat of the Troglodites. The Grecians call them Shepherds. Nomades, for they live Pastoral Lives in the Manner of Shepherds; and are divided into Tribes under a Monarchical Government, and enjoy their Wives and Children in common, except only the Wife of the King; yet if any of them happen to lye with her, he's only fin'd by the King in a certain Number of Sheep. When the Etesian Winds blow (at which time there falls abundance of Rain) they feed upon Milk and Blood mingl'd together, and boil'd for a little time. Afterwards when the Pastures are burnt up with the scorching Heat of the Sun, they fly into the low Marishes, where they often fight one with another for convenient Pastures for their Flocks: Those Cattle that grow old or are sick, they knock on the Head, and eat them; and from these always they have their Food and Sustenance: And therefore they never call any Father and Mother, but only a Bull, an Ox, a Goat or a Sheep, of which they call the Males Fathers, and the Females Mothers, because they have their daily Food from these and not from their Parents. Their ordinary Drink is a Liquor strain'd out of the Plant call'd Bearing a red Fruit. Paliurus: But the Drink or the Noblemen and Persons of Quality, is made of the Juice of a Flower no better than the worst of our Wines. Because of their Cattle they often shift and remove from one Pasture to another, and are very cautious and careful not to stay long in one Place. Their whole Bodies are naked, except about their Loyns, which they cover with Beasts Skins. All the Troglodites are circumcis'd like the Egyptians, except those who by reason of some Accident are call'd Cripples; for these only, of all Circumcision. those that inhabit these Streights, have from their Intancy that Member (which in others is only circumcis'd) wholly cut off with a Razor. Among the Troglodites those call'd Megabareans for Arms bear round Shields made of Ox raw Hides, and Clubs bound round with Iron at the thick ends; the rest are arm'd with Bows and Spears. When they are dead they tye them Neck and Heels with the Twigs and Branches of the Plant Paliurus; then they carry the Body to the Top of a Hill, where with great Sport and Laughter they pelt it with Stones till it be covered over; and then they stick up a Goats Horn upon the Heap, and so leave it without the P. 116. least Sense of Pity or Compassion. They fight not one with another out of any Spleen or Rage one against another, like the Grecians, but meerly for their
flourishing Pastures. In the beginning of their Fights they make their Onsets with throwing of Stones; after some Wounds given on both Sides they fall to it with their Bows and Arrows, whereupon great Numbers are slain in a short time. For by long Experience they become good Marksmen, and being all naked are expos'd to every Shot. At length their old Women by their Intreaties put an end to their Conflicts (whom they greatly reverence, for it's unlawful to do them the least Harm) and therefore as soon as they see them come towards them, they cease casting their Darts immediately, and all are quiet. When they grow so old that they cannot follow the Flocks, they tye themselves by their Necks to an Oxes Tail, and so put an end to their days: And if any defer his Death, any one as a Friend may first admonish him, and then if he does it not, the other may cast a Rope about his Neck and strangle him. In the like manner its lawful to put to Death any that become lame, or are seiz'd with any desperate and incurable Distemper. For they count it the highest and greatest Offence for any one to love his Life when he is able to do nothing worth living. And therefore all the Troglodites are of sound Bodies and of a strong and healthful Age, none exceeding Threescore. But this shall suffice concerning the Troglodites. Yet if this Account seem strange to any, and this Manner of living incredible, let but the Climate of Scythia be compar'd with that of the Troglodites, and then this our Relation may easily gain Belief. For there's so great a Difference between our Climate and theirs of which we write, that the different Natures being weigh'd and consider'd distinctly are scarce credible. For in some Places of Scythia by the Extremity of Cold the greatest Rivers are so frozen, that vast Armies and Cha∣riots may pass over them; and Wine and other Liquors do so congeal that they must be cut with Knives and Hatches. And most strangely and wonderfully Mens Fingers and Toes drop off with rubbing against their Cloaths, and their Eyes grow dark and dim. Neither can the Fire cast any Warmth or Heat; and by the Force of Cold even brazen Statues are burst asunder; and at these Seasons they say the Clouds are so thick and gross, that there's neither Thunder nor Lightning in those Parts. Many other Things there happen which seem incredible to the ignorant, but are intolerable to them that feel them by Experience. But in the utmost Coasts of Egypt and the Troglodites the Sun is so scorching hot at Mid-day that two standing together cannot see each other by reason of the Thickness of the Air. Neither is it safe for any to go without Shoes in these Parts, for if they do the Soles of their Feet are presently blister'd all over: And except Men have some∣thing ready to drink to quench their Thirst, they forthwith faint and dye, the violence of the heat quickly exhaling all the moisture out of a Man's Body: And moreover, if any do put Meat and Water into a Brazen Pot, and set it in the open Sun, it's presently boil'd without Fire and Fuel. But the Inhabitants of both these Countries are so far from seeking to avoid these uncomfortable Circumstances, that they chuse rather to be as it were ever dying here, than to be forc'd to live another sort of Life elsewhere. And thus every Country is belov'd by its own natural Inhabitants, and a long usage, even from the time of Childhood, over∣comes the inconveniences of an intemperate Climate. These great differences of P. 117. Climates are sometimes not far asunder; for from the Lake Meotis (where some of the Scythians inhabit, in the midst of extream Cold, and biting Frost,) many with a fair Wind sail to Rhodes in Ten Days time; thence in Four Days more, they reach to Alexandria; thence crossing the River Nile, they recover Ethiopia (most commonly) the Tenth Day; so that it's not above Four and Twenty Days sail from the coldest to the hottest Climates in the World. And therefore it's no wonder that there's such diversity of Food, Manners and Bodies so far differ∣ing from ours, when there's so great a Contrariety of Climates in so small a di∣stance one from another. Having given a distinct account of Nations, and their strange and unusual Man∣ners and Customs; something now is to be said particularly concerning the wild Beasts bred in those Countries. There's bred in Ethiopia, a Creature, call'd from the nature of the Beast, a Rhi∣noceros, Rhinoceros, so call'd from a Horn in his Nose. for Courage and Strength equal with the Elephant, but not so tall. His Skin is exceeding hard, and of the colour of Box. He has a flat Horn growing out a little above his Nostrils as hard as Iron. He's always at war with the Elephant for his Pasture, and for that purpose whets his Horn against a great Stone; in the Conflict he gets under the Belly of the Elephant, and cuts and gashes him, as
if it were with a Sword; and by this means his Enemy bleeds to death, and thus he destroys many of them. But if the Elephant prevent him from coming under his Belly, he catches the Rhinoceros up in his Trunk, and easily overcomes him, being far stronger in Body, and wounding deeper with the Stroaks of his Tushes. Sphinges are Marmozites, Plin. Nat. His. lib. 8. c. 44. Sphinges are bred near to the Troglodites in Ethiopia, not much unlike those which the Limners draw, save that they differ only in being rough. They are of a gentle nature, very docible, apt to learn any thing presently that is taught them. Those that are call'd Cynocephales, Baboons, Heads like Dogs, Plin. ib. Cynocephales, resemble ugly fac'd Men, and are conti∣nually snarling and grumbling. This Creature is exceeding curst, never to be tam'd, and from his Eye-brows looks with a most surly Countenance. The Fe∣males are extraordinary remarkable, for having their Privy Parts continually hang∣ing down out of their Body. The Beast call'd Cepus. Cepus, so nam'd from the beauty of his Body, and the com∣liness of Proportion. He has the Face of a Lion, and in all other Parts is like to a Panther, except that for his bigness he is as large as a Deer. Of all these strange A wild Bull. Carnivorus, Beasts none's so fierce as the Wild Bull, which Feeds upon Flesh, and is altoge∣ther invincible: he's larger than any tame Bull, and as Swift as any Horse, and his Mouth is Wide even up to his Eyes: He's exceeding red, his Eyes grayer than a Lions, and Sparkling in the Night like Fire. His Horns have a wonderful property, for he can move 'em as well as his Ears, and when he Fights keeps them fast and immovable. His Hair contrary to all other Beasts, stands on end, He's so exceeding Fierce that he'll set upon the strongest Creature whatsoever, and Feeds upon the Flesh of such as he destroys. He destroys the Flocks and Herds of the Inhabitants, and in a terrible manner Fights with Troops of Shep∣herds and whole Armies of Dogs at once. It's said his Skin is impenetrable; and therefore tho many have attempted to Kill him, yet none were ever able to e∣fect it. If he fall into a Pit, or be taken any other way by Snares or Ginns P. 118. laid for him, he Choaks and Stiffles himself with his unrully Rage, and will not suffer any Man to come near him tho never so gently: And therefore the Tro∣glodites justly account this Beast the strongest of all other; to whom Nature has given the stoutness of a Lion, the swiftness of a Horse, and the strength of a Bull; and which cannot be conquer'd with the Sword, which subdues all other things. There's another Creature among the Ethopians call'd a Crocut, of a mixt nature, Crocuts. between a Dog and a Wolf, more fierce than them both, and exceeding all others for his Tearing and Biting. Let the Bones be never so great, he presently grashes them in Pieces and digests them immediatly as soon as they come into his Sto∣mach. Some Historians (who love to tell strange things) report that this Beast will imitate the Voice and Speech of a Man, which we cannot in the least cre∣dit. The Inhabitants bordering upon the Deserts, say that there are in these Parts Serpents. divers sorts of Serpents of an incredible bigness; for those that say they have seen some a hundred 50 Yards. Cubits long, are lookt upon to be Liers, not only by me, but by every one else. But to gain the more credit to their fabulous Relati∣on, they add a Story far more absurd and impropable. For they say, that when these vast Creatures lye rould up in a Round in the open Plain, every Circle lying one upon another, they seem like Hills to them that are at a distance. But who can easily believe there are any such monstrous Creatures? But we shall say something of the greatest Serpents (that ever were seen) which The great Serpent brought to A∣lexandria. were brought to Alexandria in Nets, discoursing by the way of the manner of the hunting and taking them. For Ptolemy Philadelphus. Ptolemy the Second being very much given to the hunting of Ele∣phants, for that purpose incourag'd with great Rewards many that were skilful Hunters of the strongest wild Beasts, and not sparing Costs (in gratify∣ing the pleasure he took in this kind) he got together great multitudes of Ele∣phants, which he train'd up for his Wars; by which means many strange Beasts which were never seen before, became known to the Grecians. Upon these Considerations some of the Huntsmen, knowing the generosity and bounty of the King in his Rewards for things of this nature, agreed together with the hazard of their Lives to bring if it were but one of these monstrous Serpents,
alive to the King to Alexandria. It was a bold and difficult undertaking; but Fortune crown'd the Enterprize, and Prosperity effected the Attempt. They spy'd a Serpent lying in the standing Pools Thirty Cubits long, still and quiet (as it used to do at all other times, save when he spy'd any Beast come to the Water to drink, and then he suddainly leapt out, and with his wide Jaws, and the winding himself round about their Bodies, held them so fast as that they could never escape.) Hereupon these persons considering he was so very long, and naturally dull and slow, conceiv'd some hopes of catching him in Gins and Chains, having all things ready and prepar'd for the purpose; but the nearer they came to him, the more they were terrify'd, and when they saw his Eyes kindle like sparks of Fire, his Tongue slapping about his Jaws, his terrible Hissing, the sharpness of his Scales, his rusling among the Reeds and Bushes when he began to stir himself, the greatness of his terrible Teeth, his horrible Aspect and high Round whereunto he had wound himself, they grew wan and pale with excessive fear, and with trembling Hands cast the Gin upon his Tail; upon which, as soon as it toucht him, the Monster roul'd about with a terrible hiss, and lifting up himself above the head of the First that approacht him, he snapt him up, and tore him in Pieces. The Second he catcht by the winding of his Tail at a great P. 119. distance when he was making away, and (winding himself round him) held him fast round the middle of his Belly. Hereupon the rest were so affrighted, that away they fled; however, they did not so leave the Monster, for the hopes of the King's bounty overcame the fear of the imminent danger; and therefore what they could not do by Force they endeavour'd to effect by Art, making use of this following Contrivance. They made a Toil of Bulrushes, in shape like to a Bosom Net, large enough to receive and hold the Beast; observing therefore his Hole, and the time when he went out to Feed, and when he return'd, as soon as he was gone forth to hunt for his usual Prey, they stopt up the mouth of his Den with great Stones and Earth, and near to it dug another Hole, and there Plac'd the Toil made of Bulrushes just over against the Mouth of the Hole, that the Entrance might be plain and open. Then as he return'd from Feeding, the Darters, Slingers and a great Number of Horse-men with Trumpeters and other Assailants set upon him, and the Monster (as he came nearer to them) prickt up his Head far above the Heads of the Horse-men, but none of the whole Troop of Hunters durst come near him, being made cautious by the former misfor∣tune; but many cast Darts at him all at once at a great distance; so that by the sight of the Horses, multitude of great Dogs, and the noise of Trumpets, they terrify'd the Beast, and pursu'd him cautiously by degrees, till he came to his Hold, lest by pressing too hard and close upon him, he should be too much provok'd and inrag'd. Now approaching near to the mouth of the Den, before prepar'd for him, they all at once made a great noise with beating upon their Arms; and so with such a multitude of Men, and the noise and sound of Trumpets, they exceeding∣ly terrify'd the Monster, who not finding his former Hold, and fearing the Hunters, flies into the mouth of that which was open and near at hand. In the mean time while he was filling the Net, by rouling of himself round in it, some forthwith rid up with full speed to the Place, who (before the Beast could wind up himself) ty'd up the mouth of the Net, which was to the Top made very long on purpose for quickness of dispatch in this business. Then with all speed they put Roulers under the massy weight of the Net, to lift it up, and so drew it forth. The Serpent being thus shut up, hiss't most dreadfully, gnaw∣ing the Bulrushes with his Teeth, and tossing himself to and fro as if he were just leaping out of the Net, which the Hunters exceedingly fearing he would do, drew him out upon the ground, and by often pricking him in the Tail, caus'd him to snap and bite there where he was most sensible of pain. At length they brought him to Alexandria, and presented the Beast to the King; a most strange Monster, and almost incredible. And to admiration this Creature was afterwards made tame: For keeping him low in want of Food, he abated in his fierceness, so as by degrees to be very gentle. Ptolemy liberally rewarded the Hunters; and kept and fed the Serpent thus tam'd; a most wonderful sight to all Strangers that travell'd into his Kingdom.
It may not therefore be judg'd altogether incredible (or accounted for a Fable) what the Ethiopians have related, since so vast a Monster has been expos'd to o∣pen view. For they affirm that there have been seen Serpents amongst them of that extraordinary bigness, that they have not only devour'd Cows and Bulls, and other Beasts of that size, but have even fought with Elephants themselves: P. 120. For they so wrap themselves round their Thighs, and hold them so fast, that they are not able to move or stir, and pricking up their heads from under the Elephants Trunk, and looking direct upon them full in the Face with the fiery Rays that dart out of their Eyes, strike them blind, so that they fall down to the Ground as if they were struck with a flash of Lightning, and when they are down they tear them in Pieces. And now since we have given a clear and sufficient account of Ethiopia and Troglodita, and the bordering Countries as far as to the Torrid Zone, and of the Southern Coasts and Climates of the Red Sea, and the Atlantick Ocean, we shall proceed to the Description of the other parts bordering upon the Red Sea. A∣rabian Gulf, which we have learnt partly from the publick Records in Alexandria, and partly from those that have seen the Places themselves. For this part of the inhabited World, as likewise the British Isles, and the Places lying far to the North, are the least known of any other. But we shall describe those Nor∣thern parts which border upon the Frigid Zone, together with the British Isles, when we come to treat of the acts of Caius Caesar, who inlarg'd the Bounds of the Roman Empire, as far as to those parts, and by his means we come to the Knowledge of all those Countries which were altogether unknown to us before. CHAP. III. A Description of the Coasts and Countries on both sides the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea. The Perfumes of Arabia the Happy. The Fortunate Islands. A Description of part of Lybia: The Spectras near the Syrtes. THe The Red Sea. Arabian Gulf (as it's call'd) empties it self into the Southern Ocean, and stretches out many Furlongs in length; where it falls into the Sea its both bounded with Arabia and Troglodita. It's breadth both at the Mouths, and where it's lost in the Sea, is about Fifteen Furlongs. But from the Port of Pa∣normus, the opposite Shoar, is one Days sailing: The greatest breadth is at Mount Tyrceus, and Macaria, where the Sea is very rough and tempestuous; nor can Land be seen from one side to another; from thence it grows narrower, till it fall into the Ocean. In the Sea are many great Islands, between which the Passage for Ships is very narrow, and the Water very rough. And this in short is the Situation of this Gulf. We shall begin at the That is, next the O∣cean. utmost Parts of this Sea, and describe the Coasts on both sides, and what is remarkable in each, as if we were sailing along. And first, we shall give an account of the Coast on the Westward. Right Hand, the Seat of the Troglodites: The Troglodites take up all this part as far as to the vast Deserts. All along the Shoar on this right side from the City of Arsinoe, Mari∣ners meet with many Rivers of Salt-water, pouring down from the Rocks into the Sea. After the passing these running Fountains, appears a Mountain in a vast and large Plain of a red Colour, which dazles the Eyes of all those that look earnestly upon it. At the Foot of this Mountain is a Lake, with an Entrance of many windings and turnings into it, known by the Nae of Venus. Aphrodites; in this are Three Islands, Two of which abound with Figs and Olives; but the Third has neither; yet breeds great numbers of those Birds they call Mleogrides. From hence you sail through a vast Gulf call'd . Acathars. Filthy, or Acathartus, and near unto it is an exceeding deep Current, making a Peninsula, carrying Ships through a narrow straight into the open Sea on the other side. In sailing along by these Places, there lies an Island, surrounded with a deep Sea, Fourscore Fur∣longs
in length; call'd the Ophiodes. Serpents Island, because that in former times it abound∣ed P. 121. with divers sorts of dreadful Serpents; but in after-times, by the diligence of the Kings of Alexandria, it was so improv'd, that now there's not the least sign of any such Beast there. But it's not to be omitted for what Reason this Island was with so much charge improv'd: The chief reason was, for that in this Island was found the Topaz, a resplendent Stone, of a delightful Aspect, like to Glass, of a Golden colour, and of admirable brightness; and therefore all were forbidden to set footing upon that Place; and if any landed there, he was presently put to death by the Keepers of the Island. These Keepers were few, and liv'd a most miserable Life. And lest the Stones should be stolen and carry'd off, there was not a Ship left there; and if any by chance pass near to these Places, (out of fear of the King) they sail away as far off as they can. The Provision that is imported, is commonly soon spent, and there's nothing to be had that grows naturally in the Island; and therefore when their Store grows low, all the Inhabitants of the Village sit upon the Shoar, waiting and longing for the arrival of the Provision Ships; and if they stay longer than ordinary, the People are driven to the utmost desperation. This Stone grows in the Rocks, darken'd by the brightness of the Sun; it's not seen in the Day, but shines bright and glorious in the darkest Night, and discovers it self at a great distance. The Keepers of the Island disperse themselves into several Places to search for this stone, and whereever it appears, they mark the Place, with a great Vessel of largeness sufficient to cover the sparkling Stone; and then in the Day time, go to the Place, and cut out the Stone, and deliver it to those that are Artists in polishing of 'em. Then sailing on further from these Parts, appear many of those Nations call'd the Ichthuophages, dispers'd along the Sea-shoar; and many likewise of those Trog∣lodites call'd Shepherds. Nomades; several Mountains likewise present themselves in this Course, as far as to the Haven call'd Sotera. Safe-Port, which gain'd this Name from some Grecians that first sail'd into these Parts, and there arriv'd safe. Thence passing on, the Gulf begins to grow narrower, and bends its Course towards Arabia: And the peculiar property of the Places is such, that both the nature of the Sea, and the Soyl seem to be chang'd; for the Land appears very flat and low, without any Hills or Rising Ground, and the Sea seems to be mud∣dy and green all over, and is not above Three Or∣gia's, every Orgia Two Yards. Two Fathom and an half deep. The Greenness there is not ascrib'd to the nature of the Water, but to the abundance of Moss and Sea-Grass that grows at the bottom, and casts their Colour through the Water. This part is very safe and commodious for small Ships with Oars, because the Sea is there very calm, and no roughness of the Waves for many Leagues; and there they take abundance of Fish. But the Mariners that transport Elephants, run into great and desperate Hazards by reason of the strong built Ships they use for that purpose, and the depth of Water they draw. For oftentimes they are so driven by the violence of the Winds, at full Sail in the Night time, that they are either split upon the Rocks, or stranded upon some of the deep sanded Necks of Land thereabouts; and it's no going for the Mariners out of the Ship, because the Ford is above the height of any Man: Neither can they force the Ship in the least forward with their Poles: And although they throw all over-board but their Victuals; yet (even while they have Provision) they are reduc'd to the utmost Extremities; for neither Island, Promontory or Ship is to be seen P. 122. in these Parts, being desert, and seldom frequented by Mariners. And to the other Inconveniencies, this further is an Addition, the violent Waves on a suddain raise up such heaps of Sand out of the Channel, and so in∣close the Ship, as if Men on purpose had fixt it to some Continent: Being plung'd into this Calamity, at first they only gently and modestly breath out their Com∣plaints to a doleful Wilderness, which regards them not, yet not altogether de∣sparing of deliverance. For often by the raging working of the Sea, the Ship is mounted up on high above the heaps of Sand, and so the poor Creatures that were in this desperate Condition are unexpectedly (as by some God, assisting them out of an Engin) deliver'd. But if this help from God do not intervene, when their Provision grows low, the stronger throw the weaker overboard, that the Meat that is left may last the longer for the support of those few that remain: But at length,
when all hope of safety is gone, and Provision spent, these few die far more mi∣serably than those that perisht before. For these in a moment of time, give up that Breath which Nature had given them, but those (by prolonging their Mi∣sery, and dividing as it were their Sorrows into several parts) dye at last with more lingering Torments. The Ships being in this miserable manner depriv'd of their Pilots and Mariners, continue a long time as so many Solitary Sepulchers; and at length being buried in heaps of Sand, their lofty Masts and Main-Yards remain only Spectacles to move Compassion in them that see them afar off. For by the King's Command, the Monuments of these Misfortunes are not to be toucht, but are to remain as Sea-marks to Mariners to avoid those dangerous Places. It has been an ancient Report among the Ichthuophages (the Inhabitants of those Tracts) continu'd down to them from their Fore-fathers, that by a mighty reflux of the Sea (which hapned in former days) where the Sea is thus green, the whole Gulf became dry Land, and appear'd green all over, and that the Water overflow'd the opposite Shoar, and that all the Ground being thus bare to the very lowest bottom of the Gulf, the Water by an This seems to be the Passage of the Israelites over the Red-Sea. extraordinary high Tide, return'd again into the ancient Chan∣nel. The Navigation from Ptolemais, not in Phaenicia, but that bordering upon the Red Sea. Ptolemais to the Promontary of Tau∣rus, has been describ'd when we spoke of Ptolemy's Pleasure in hunting of Elephants: From Taurus the Sea Coasts turn to∣wards the East. Here from the time of the Summer, to the Winter Solstice, A further Description of the Coun∣try of the Troglodites. the Sun casts the shadow to the South, contrary to what it does with us. This Country is water'd with Rivers flowing down from the Psebarian Mountains (as they are call'd) and is divided into many spacious Plains, which produce Mallows, Cardanum, and extraordinary Palm-Trees, and divers other Fruits of an unsavory Taste, altogether unknown to us. The South parts of this Country are full of Elephants, wild Bulls, Lions and other wild Beasts. In passing over to this Coast, there lye several Islands in the way, which are altogether barren as to any Fruit that is grateful, but in them are bred strange sorts of Birds, and wonderful to view and observe. From hence sailing forward, the Sea is exceeding deep, and abounds with mighty great Whales, which yet do no harm, unless any (by chance) run upon their erected Finns; for they cannot pursue the Ships, because when they rise up towards the top of the Wa∣ter, they are struck blind by the brightness and splendour of the Sun. These are the utmost Bounds of Troglodita (known to us) inviron'd with the Psebarian Promontaries. And now we shall pass over to the other side of the Gulf, and take a view of The Arabian side of the Red Sea. the Regions lying towards Arabia, beginning again at that part of the Sea which is call'd Neptunium. P. 123. Neptunium, because Ariston erected there an Altar in honour of Nep∣tune, when Ptolemy sent him to discover the Arabian Coast as far as to the Ocean. From thence to the Month of the Gulf is a place along the Sea-Coast of great esteem among the Inhabitants for the profit it yields them; it's call'd the Garden of Palm-Trees, because they abound there, and are so very Fruitful, that they yield sufficient both for pleasure and necessity. But the whole Country next adjoyning, is destitute of Rivers and Brooks, and lying to the South, is even burnt up with the heat of the Sun; and therefore Where the Palm Trees grow. this fruitful Tract that lies amongst dry and barren Regions (far remote from Tillage and Improvement,) and yet affords such plenty of Food and Provision, is justly by the Barbarians dedicated to the Gods. For there are in it many Fountains, and running Streams as cold as Snow, by which means the Region from one side to the other is always green and flourishing, and very sweet and pleasant to the view. In this place there's an ancient Altar of hard Stone, with an Inscription in old and illegible Characters; where a Man and a Woman (that execute here the Priests Office, during their Lives) have the charge of the Grove and Altar. They are Persons of Quality and great Men that abide here, and for fear of the Beasts, have their Beds (they rest upon) in the Trees. The Mariner passing by this Country of Palms, arrives at an Island near to a Promontory of the Continent, which is call'd the Island of Phocarum Insula. Sea-Calves, from the great multitudes of those Creatures that frequent this Place. The Sea here so a∣bounds with them, that it's to the admiration of the Beholders.
The Promontory that shoots out towards this Island, lies over against Petra in Arabia and Palestine. It's said that the Gerrheans and Mineans, bring out of the higher Arabia, Frankincense and other odoriferous Gums into this Island. The Coast next adjoining, has been anciently inhabited by the Marranians, and afterwards by the Garyndaneans their Neighbours, who got possession in this manner. At the Festival celebrated every Fifth Year in the Palm Country, a great Con∣course Garyndanians destroy the Marranians. of the Neighbours meet together from all Parts; both to Sacrifice Stall∣fed Camels to the Gods of the Grove; and likewise to carry some of the Spring-water that rises there, back into their own Country, which they say is Physi∣cal. The Garyndanians taking the opportunity when the Marranians were gone to the Feast, cut the Throats of all those that remain'd at Home, and lay in wait for those that return'd, and in their way homeward, slew all them likewise; and so the Country being by this means depopulated, they divided that fruitful Re∣gion, and those rich Pastures for Flocks and Herds, by Lot amongst them∣selves. But this Coast has very few Harbours in it by reason of the many vast Moun∣tains that lye all along as they sail; from whence is presented to the view, such variety of Colours, that they afford a most wonderful and delightful Prospect to the Passengers at Sea as they sail along. The Promontory of Alainites next salutes them that sail on forward, full of Alainites, Nabateans. Towns and Villages inhabited by the Arabians call'd Nabateans: They possess a large Country all along the Sea-Coast, and go far likewise up into the Land: This Tract is very Populous, and exceeding rich in Cattel. Once they liv'd just∣ly and honestly, content with the Sustenance they had from their Flocks and Herds; but after that the Kings of In Egypt. The Ptolemies. Alexandria allow'd liberty to Merchants to traffick in the Red Sea, they not only rob'd them that were Shipwrackt, but provided little Skiffs, and acted the Pyrats, and spoil'd all other Merchants that traffickt in those Seas, imitating the Taurians of Pontus in cruelty and inhuma∣nity. But afterwards being beaten in a Fight at Sea by some Gallies sent out against them, they were punish'd according to their Demerits. After the passing of these Tracts, follows a flat Champain Country, water'd in every part, which (by the advantage of the many Springs and Fountains that are in it) abounds in rich Pastures, and produces great plenty of , Clavergrass, vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 18. c. 16. P. 124. Medica and Lotus, as high as a Man. Here in these Pastures are fed not only an infinite num∣ber of Cattel of all sorts, but of wild Camels, Harts, Red and Fallow Deer. This extraordinary Plenty, invites out of the Deserts, Lions, Wolves and Leopards, with whom the Shepherds and Herdsmen are forc'd to have Conflicts Night and Day for the preservation of their Flocks and Herds: And thus the richness of the Countrey, occasions Mischief and Prejudice. For Nature often distributes her Gifts with a mixture of good and evil. In sailing further along by this Champain Country, the Gulf offers to the view something strange and wonderful: For it shoots up with a bending Course into the Inland Parts, Five Hundred Furlongs in length, wall'd in on both sides with high and steep Rocks, so that both the Entrance and Passage is very difficult. For the Rocks that lye under Water, so stop up the Entrance, that it's scarce possible to enter into the Gulf, or come out; and by the continual dashing of the Floods with the violence of the Winds beating upon the Shoar, it foams terribly, and rages on every side the Rock. The People that inhabit these Parts, are call'd Bizomenians, and live upon wild Bizomenians. Beasts taken in hunting. Here's a Sacred Temple in high veneration among all the Arabians. To the Shoar of these Tracts, are adjoining Three Islands, which have many Ports: The first which is Desert, they say is consecrated to Isis. There remain the Foundations of the ancient Buildings and Pillars, whereon are Inscriptions in barbarous Characters; the rest are as much defac'd and ruin'd, yet they are shaded with Olive Trees planted here and there, much different from ours. Beyond these Islands, there are steep Rocks hard to pass all along the Shoar, for the space of a Thousand Furlongs. For there's neither Port nor Ancorage for Ships, nor any Wood which can afford any necessary Relief to Mariners, be they in never so great wants and extremities. To this Shoar adjoins a Mountain
roof'd over with craggy Rocks of a stupendious height; and at the foot, are many sharp Shelves which lye under water; and behind them, many winding Hollows, worn wide by the raging Waves dashing one upon another; and the Sea being very deep, when a Storm beats upon them, and the Water rebounds, they make a noise like a mighty Thunder; and part of the Waves dashing a∣gainst those huge Rocks, mount up in a Curl, and foam to admiration; and part being swallow'd up within these Caverns, cause such a terrible Whirlpool, that they that are driven (against their wills) near to these Places, are ready to dye for Fear. The Arabians call'd Thamudenians inhabit this Coast. Next adjoining to this Perilous Sea, is a mighty great Gulf, which washes many Islands disper'd in it here and there to the view, not much unlike to the Little Islands near Acarna∣nia in Greece. Echinades. All along this Coast which is very long and broad, lye high Heaps of black Sand. Thence sailing forward, is presented to the view, a Or an Isth∣mus, or Cher∣sonesus. Peninsula, where there is the most famous Port of any mention'd by Historians call'd Carmutha Port. Carmutha. For it lies under a large Key, where the Gulf as it inclines to the West, is not only wonderfully pleasant to the view, but far more commodious than any other. A Woody Mountain hangs over it a Hundred Furlongs in compass. The Mouth of the Haven is Two Hundred Foot broad, affording a very calm and safe Har∣bour, where Two Thousand Sail may ride: The Water moreover is exceeding good and sweet, a large River emptying itself into it. In the middle of it lies an Island full of good Water, and fit for gardening. To conclude, it's in eve∣ry respect like to the Port at Carthage, call'd Cothon, the Commodiousness of which we shall speak of in its proper place. By reason of the quietness and sweetness P. 125. of the Water, abundance of Fish come into it out of the Ocean. Sailing forward, appear Five exceeding high Mountains, spiring up like the Mountains like Pyramids. Pyramids of Egypt, so close as if they all united into one at the Point: Thence the Gulf appears in a round Form, surrounded with large and high Promontories: In the very middle of which rises a Hill, in form of a Table, upon which stand three Temples of a wonderful Height, dedicated to Gods unknown indeed to the Greeks, but in great honour and veneration with the Inhabitants. Hence the Coast shoots out forward a long way, abounding with Fountains and fresh Water. On this Coast is the Mountain Chabnus, cover'd over with divers shady Woods. The Country lying at the Foot of the Mountain, is inhabited by Arabians, call'd Debae, who imploy themselves in feeding Herds of Camels, which they make use Debae. of in their most weighty Concerns: For they ride upon these when they charge their Enemy; carry upon them their Victuals, and use them upon every speedy dispatch; they drink their Milk, and feed upon their Flesh; and with their Dro∣medary Camels, they presently run over all the Country. There runs a River through the Country, which carries along with it such abundance of Golden Sand, that at the Mouth of it where it falls into the Sea, the Soil seems to shine and glister like Gold; but the making and refining of Gold is altogether unknown to the Inhabitants. They entertain not all sorts of Strangers, but only the Beo∣tians and the Peloponesians, by reason of the ancient familiarity of Hercules with this Nation, as they have fabulously receiv'd it from their Ancestors. The Region next adjoining to this, is inhabited by the Alilaeans and Gasan∣dians, Alilaeans, Gasandians. another People of Arabia, which is not so burning hot as those near unto it, but often cover'd with thick Clouds, whence fall Snow, and seasonable Showers, which moderate the Heat of the Air. The Land there is rich, and capable of bringing forth any kind of Grain or Fruit whatsoever, but through the unskilfulness of the Inhabitants who addict themselves chiefly to Fishing, the Ground is not till'd and improv'd as it ought. Abundance of Gold is got there out of several Hollows in the Earth, not refin'd by melting of little Pieces, but growing there pure naturally, which from the nature of it is call'd Gold with∣out Fire. Apyros. The least Piece of it is as big as an ordinary Nut-Kernel, the greatest not much bigger than a large Nut. The Inhabitants wear them about their Arms and Necks, interlac'd with several bright sparkling Stones. But as they abound in Gold, so they are as much wanting in Iron and Brass, and therefore they exchange Gold with the Merchants, for the like weight in Iron and Brass.
Next to these inhabit those Arabians call'd Carbi, and next to them the Sabeans, Carbi Sabeans. Arabia the Happy. the most populous of any of the Arabians, for they possess Arabia the Happy, exceeding rich in all those things which we esteem most precious, and for breed∣ing of Cattel of all sorts, the most fertil Country in the World; for the whole Country is naturally perfum'd all over, every thing almost growing there, send∣ing forth continually most excellent Odours. On the Sea-Coasts grow Balsom and Cassia, and another Herb of a strange and peculiar property, which while it's fresh, is delightsom and strengthening to the Eyes, but kept a while, pre∣sently loses its virtue. Higher in the heart of the Country, are shady Woods and Forests, grac'd and beautify'd with stately Trees of Frankincence and Myrrh, Palm-Trees, Calamus and Cinamon, and such like Odoriferous Plants. For none can enumerate the several natures and properties of so great a multitude, or the P. 126. excellency of those sweet Odours that breath out of every one of them. For their Fragrancy is such, that it even ravishes the Senses with delight, as a thing di∣vine and unutterable; it entertains them that sail along by the Coast at a great di∣stance with its Pleasures and Delights. For in Spring-time the Winds from off the Land waft the Air perfum'd with the sweet Odours of Mirrh, and other O∣doriferous Plants, to those Parts of the Sea that are next to them. And these Spices have nothing of a faint and languishing Smell, as those that come to our Hands; but a strong and vigorous Odour that strongly pierces all their Senses to the utmost of their Capacity: For the Wafts of Air dispersing the Perfumes of these Odoriferous Plants, abundance of pleasant, healthful and strange variety of Scents (proceeding from the richest Spices) are convey'd to them that Sail near unto the Coast. For this sweet smell, comes not from Fruit bruis'd in a Mortar (whose strength is in a great measure decay'd) or from Spices made up in divers sorts of Vessels for Transportation; but from the ripeness of the Fruit as it grows, and from the pure and divine Nature of the Plant it self. So that they that have the advantage of these sweet Odours, seem as if they were entertain'd with that feign'd Meat of the Gods call'd Ambrosia; since those excellent Perfumes cannot have a Name ascrib'd them transcending their worth and dignity. Yet Fortune has not imparted to Men an intire and unmixt Felicily in these things, but has join'd some inconveniences with these Advantages, to correct them who (through a constant Confluence of Earthly Blessings) have usually despis'd and slighted the Gods. For these fragrant Forests abound with Or Fiery Serpents. So Agatharchides, in Plutarch: Symp. lib. 8. c. 9. Concern∣ing the little Serpents. Red Serpents of a Span long, whose Bite is deadly and incurable. They strike a Man with a vio∣lent Assault, leaping up in his very Face, leaving him besmear'd with his own Blood. There's something very remarkable amongst these People, as to them that have been long sick: For being that things of a more than ordinary piercing operation pass quick through the Pores of the Body, and so discuss the stubborn Matter, there follows a dissipation of Humours, and the Party becomes curable: Therefore they burn Brimstone mixt with Goats Hair under the Noses of the Sick, that by a contrary smell they may discuss and drive out those sweet and fragrant Odours that have overpower'd the Spirits of the Sick; for that which is good in it self, is profitable and delightful, us'd moderately and seasonably; but an immoderate injoyment, and beyond a due proportion of time loses the benefit and advantage of the Blessing bestow'd. The Capital City of this Nation is call'd Or Sa, from Seba, the eldest Son of Ch. Sabas, and stands upon an high Hill: They are govern'd by Kings who inherit the Crown by Descent; yet the Honour allow'd them by their Subjects is such, as that they are in some respects, notwith∣standing in a sort of Bondage and Slavery: For though they seem to be priviledg'd in this, that they have a Sovereign and absolute power in making of Laws, and are not to give an account of any of their Actions to their Subjects; yet they are as un∣happy in this, that they are never to stir out of their Palace, for if they do, the People stone them to Death, for so they are commanded by an ancient O∣racle. This Nation net only excels all the Neighbouring Barbarians in Wealth, but all other People whatsoever, for plenty of every thing that is accounted precious. For in their Traffick for a thing of a very small weight, they receive a greater Sum of  any other Merchants that sell Goods for Silver.
Being therefore that they never were conquer'd by reason of the largeness of their Country, they flow as it were in Streams of Gold and Silver, especially at Sabas, the Seat Royal of their Kings: Their Vessels, and all their Cups are of Gold and Silver, and likewise their Beds, Chairs and Stools have their Feet of Silver; and all other their Houshold-stuff is so sumptuous and magnificent, that it's incredible. The Portico's of their Houses and Temples, are some of them overlaid with Gold, and Silver Statues are plac'd upon some of the Chapiters of the Temples. The Doors and Roofs of their inner Rooms, are adorn'd with many Golden Bowls, set with pretious Stones. The like wonderful cost they are P. 127. at throughout their whole Building, adorning them in some Parts with Silver and Gold, in others with Ivory and precious Stones, and other things of great value. For they have injoy'd a constant and uninterrupted Peace for many Ages and Ge∣nerations, being very far remote from those whose Covetousness prompts them to advance their Gain by the Riches of others. The Sea there, is of a very white colour, so that a Man may as justly won∣der at the strangeness of the thing, as be inquisitive what should be the cause. Near hereunto are the Fortunate Islands, full of wall'd Towns; where all the Fortunate Islands. Sheep and Cattel are exceeding white, and none of the Females bear any Horns. The Merchants from all parts resort to these Islands, especially from Potana, built by Alexander the Great, upon the Banks of the River Indus, that there might be a commodious Port Town for shipping upon those Coasts: But of this Country and its Inhabitants we have said enough. And now we are not to omit what Wonders are seen there in the Heavens: What is said of the Bear. North Pole, is greatly to be admir'd, and puts all Mariners at a stand. For during the Month which the Athenians call December. Memacterion, none of the Seven Stars are seen about the Bear, till the first Watch of the Night; and in January. Posidion not till the Second: In the following Months, few of these (i'ts said) are seen by them at Sea, nor any of the Planets at all. As for the rest, some of them seem to be greater at the time of their rising, than they do with us; others not to rise and set in the same manner. Nor that the Sun (as with us) enlightens the Air upon the approach of it's rising, but even while its dark night, strangely and on a suddain appears, darting forth his refulgent Rays: And therefore there both Day and Sun appears together. They say it rises out of the middle of the Sea like a burning Coal, and shoots forth great Sparks of Fire, and appears not in a round form (as it seems to do with us) but like to a Pillar something thicker than ordinary towards the Head; and that it shines not bright, nor casts forth any Rays till one a Clock, but glows like Fire in the Night without Light; at Two a Clock it resembles the form of a Shield, and sends forth on a suddain, a fiery scorching Light, even to admiration. But near the time of it's setting, it's effects are contrary; for during the space of Two (or as Agatharchides of Cnidus says) Three Hours before (which is the most pleasant part of the Day to the In∣habitants) he both inlightens the World by his Rays, and abates in his Heat as he sets by degrees. The West, South, North-west and East Winds, blow here, as in other Parts of the World; but the South Winds never blow, nor are ever known in Ethiopia. But in Troglodita and Arabia, the South Winds are so exceeding hot, that they sometimes set whole Woods on Fire; and though the Inhabitants run into their Cottages for shelter, yet they faint and pine away with Heat; therefore North Winds are justly judg'd the best, which run through the whole Earth, and are always cool and refreshing. Having now given an account of these Countries, it will well agree with the Lybia. Course of our History, to describe Lybia, bordering upon Egypt; for in Cyren, the Syrtes, and in the Mid-lands, inhabit Four sorts of Africans: Those call'd Na∣somones possess the Parts towards the South; the Auchises the West: The Marma∣rides inhabit that large Tract lying between Cyrene and Egypt, as far as to the Sea-Coast: The Macae the most populous of all the rest, have their Habitations near the Syrtes. Some of these before-mention'd People are Husband-men, as having Fertil P. 128. Lands, fit for all sorts of Tillage: Others are Shepherds and Herdsmen, who im∣ploy themselves in feeding of Cattel, and maintain themselves and Families by that means. Both sorts are under a Kingly Government, not living altogether like
wild Beasts or unciviliz'd. A Third sort there is, that are neither subject to any King, nor have any Knowledge of good or bad, or regard to right or wrong, but live continually upon Spoil and Robbery: They make suddain Eruptions out of the Deserts: These rob and steal whatever is in their way, and then presently make away back to their former lurking Holes. All these rude Lybians lye in the Fields in the open Air, and live like wild Beasts, contriving how they may be most cruel: They affect neither Dainty Food, nor Civil Rayment, but are cloath'd in Goats Skins. Their Princes have neither City or Town, but live in Towns. Castles near Rivers sides, where they lay up all their Stores. They command all their Subjects once a Year to take an Oath of Allegiance: Those that are obedient and observant of them, they protect as Friends and Associates: Those that refuse to submit, they condemn to dye, and prosecute them with Fire and Sword, as Thieves and Rob∣bers. Their Arms are suitable to the nature of their Country and their own Dis∣position; for being nimble, and inhabiting a Country for the most part Cham∣pain, they go to the Field in times of War, each with their Darts, and a Bag fill'd with Stones. But they use neither Sword nor Helmet, nor any other Arms, but make it chiefly their Business to be quick and nimble in pursuing and retreating; and therefore are very active in running, and slinging of Stones; Care and conti∣nual Exercise improving natural Habits. They are neither just nor faithful to Strangers in any of their Compacts. The Country about Cyrene is a fat Soyl, and very Fertile: It not only abounds in Corn, but in Wine and Oyl, Fruit-Trees and Pastures, and is water'd with ma∣ny Rivers. But those Parts that lye far South, are barren and dry, without Water, and look like the Sea, where there's no variety of Objects, but all on every side Waste and Desert; over which there's no possibility of passing, and therefore there's neither Bird, nor Four-footed Beast to be seen, except it be Deer or Oxen: Neither is there so much as any Plant, or any thing else for the Eye to fix upon; for the Parts further up into the Land (for a long way together) are all full of Heaps of Sand. And as it's destitute of all things for the support of Man's Life, so it a∣bounds as much in Serpents of all shapes and sizes, especially those which they call Cerestes; whose Bites are Mortal, and they themselves of the same colour with the Sand; and therefore not being discern'd or distinguish'd from the Soyl, many (treading upon them unawares) run the hazard of losing their Lives. It's reported that this sort of Serpents once enter'd Egypt, and depopulated a great part of the Country. There's likewise a strange and wonderful thing often happens in this Country, both in the Deserts, and that part lying near to the Syrtes. For some time, and most commonly in calm Weather, there appear in the Air the shapes of divers li∣ving Creatures, some standing still, others moving; some flying, others pursuing; and are of that monstrous bigness, that they greatly terrify such as are ignorant of the nature of them. Some of them pursue Men, and when they take hold of them, a Chilness with a Trembling seizes upon all parts of their Bodies; and therefore Strangers unaccustom'd to such things, are ready to fall down dead with fear; but the Natural Inhabitants (being us'd to them) regard them P. 129. not. Some Natural Philosophers endeavour to give a Reason of these strange Ap∣paritions, which look indeed like meer invented Fables: They say that there are never any Winds in this Country, and if there be any, they are very small and in∣considerable, and that the Air is often so wonderfully serene, that it's altogether without the least motion, in regard that near those Parts, there are neither Woods, deep Valleys, nor swelling Hills; neither are there any great Rivers that run through the Country, nor any sort of Grain or other Fruits that grow there; and therefore there's nothing from whence any Vapours can arise, which are the Productive matter of Winds. The Air therefore being thick in this dry and sandy Region, the same things happen here in Lybia, as do upon Rainy Days elsewhere, where in the Clouds, various Shapes and Forms may be observ'd: Because the Air being concreted, transforms it self into many Shapes, which being wasted up and down with gentle Gales, and with often brushing one upon another, are con∣solidated, and carry'd about hither and thither.
At length when the Air is serene and calm, these Phaenomena by their weight fall to the Earth in that shape, that each have accidentally before receiv'd; and being that there is nothing at hand to dissolve it, what sort of Living Creature soever it meets with, it cleaves to it. And as for that motion to and fro which they seem to have (they say) it is not directed by any voluntary faculty; for that it is impossible any inanimate things should have a Will either to fly or pursue; but the Living Creatures to which they adhere, are the secret Causes of their several Motions. For in their going forward, they drive the Air before them, and therefore the Spectrum, which is made up of Air, seems gradually to go forward, and re∣semble one that flies; and by the Rule of Contraries, when the Body to which it approaches goes back, the Resemblances appear as if they pursu'd; for as much as being but empty and airy Images, they are attracted by the more solid Bodies; for by the force of the attraction the other way, they move again towards the fore-parts of the Body attracting; and whether the flying animated Bodies turn or stand still, the Spectrum is still with it; and then 'tis no strange thing, or unreasonable for the Image to dissolve, when it joins to a solid animate Body, and so by diffusing it self to affect it with a chilling Cold. CHAP. IV. Of the Amazons of Africa. Their Acts: Rooted out by Hercules; and the Gorgonians by Perseus. The Atlantides, and the Gods among them. The Original of the Titanes. The Acts of Basilea, or Cybele, said to be born in Phrygia. The Original of Atlas and Saturn. A long Account given of Bacchus; and the several Bacchus's there were. A Description of the Grota in Nysa, where he was brought up. The Building of the Temple of Hammon by him. The several Hercules's. The Monsters, Aegides and Campes kill'd by Minerva and Bacchus. HAving now run over those things before mention'd, it will be pertinent in Amazons. this place to relate what is reported concerning the ancient Amazons of Africa: For many have been persuaded into this Error, as to believe that there never were any but those that inhabited upon the Banks of Thermodon in Pontus; but in truth it is quite otherwise; for those in Africa were far more ancient and famous than any of the rest. Though we are not ignorant that the Account to be given of these will seem very strange, and a meer Novelty to the Readers, being that the Race of those Amazons were extinct long before the Trojan War; but these Virago's about the River Thermodon, flourish'd not long before these our Days: For what wonder is it that the latter (the knowledge of whom is so fresh) should seem more renown'd than the more ancient who are altogether unknown (through length of Time) to the greatest part of Mankind? For as much therefore as many things are reported of them both by the an∣cient Poets and Historians, and also by many later Authors, we shall likewise endeavour to give a distinct and orderly Account of their Actions; following the Example of Dionysius, who writ the History of the Argonauts and Bacchus, and many other Actions perform'd in ancient Times. In Africa there was not only one Race of Women who were famous for Va∣lour and Warlike Exploits: For we are inform'd that the Gorgones (against whom Perseus made War) for Courage and Valour were eminent: How famous P. 130. and potent they were, may be gather'd hence, in as much as that Perseus. Son of Ju∣piter (the most eminent Hero among the Grecians in his time) made choice of this Expedition as the greatest and most noble Enterprize. And as for the Ama∣zons, of whom we are now about to write, their Valour was most eminently remarkable, if we compare them with the greatest Spirited Women of our own Times.
In the Western Parts of Africa, upon the Borders of those Tracts that are in∣habitable, there were anciently a Nation under the Government of Women, whose Manners and Course of Living were altogether different from ours. It was the Custom for those Women to manage all matters of War, and for a cer∣tain time keeping themselves Virgins, they went out as Soldiers into the Field, and after so many Years run up in their warfare, they accompany'd with Men, for the preservation of Posterity; but the Magistracy and all publick Offices, they kept wholly in their own Hands; and the Men (as the Women do with us) lookt to the Houshold Affairs, submitting to whatever was thought sit to be done by the Wives; and were not upon any terms admitted to intermeddle in Mar∣tial Affairs, or to Command, or be in any publick Authority, which might any ways incourage them to cast off the Yoak of their Wives. As soon as any Child was born, they deliver'd it to the Father to nurse it up with Milk and other Meat agreeable to its Age. If it were a Girl, they sear'd off its Paps, lest they should be burthensom when they grew up; for they lookt upon them to be great hindrances in Fighting; and from the searing of their Paps, the Grecians call'd them Amazons. It's reported, they inhabited an Island call'd Hisperia, because it lies to the West near to the Morass call'd Tritonides: This Fen they say, is near to the Ocean which surrounds it, and is call'd Tritonides, from a River that runs into it, call'd Triton. This Morass borders upon Ethiopia, under the greatest Mountain in those Parts, call'd by the Grecians Atlas, extending it self to the Ocean. This Island, they say, is very large, abounding with all sorts of Fruit-Trees, which supply the Inhabitants with Food: That they have many Herds of Cattel, and Flocks of Sheep and Goats, which feed their Possessors both with their Milk and Flesh: But that they had no sort of Corn, for that in those Times they knew not what it was. These Amazons therefore, for Valour eminent above all others, and heated with an ambitious desire of War, first subdu'd all the Cities of this Island (except one call'd Mena, accounted Sacred) inhabited now by the Ethiopians, call'd Ichthopha∣ges: It's often scorch'd with many Eruptions of Fire, which break out of the Earth, and its Bowels are inricht with precious Stones, which the Grecians call Carbuncles. Anthraces, Sardonixes. Sardes and Emeraulds. Smaragdos. Afterwards having subdu'd many of the Neighbouring Africans and Numidians, they built a great City in the Morass of Triton, which for the shape of it was call'd Chersonesus. Then being further instigated by their innate Valour and Courage, they at∣tempted greater Matters, and invaded many other Countries. And first they set upon them upon Mount Atlas, a soft sort of People, who injoy'd a rich Country full of great Cities; among whom (in those Parts bordering upon the Ocean) the Gods first had their Original, as the Grecians fabulously report, of whom a par∣ticular Account shall be given hereafter. To this end, when Merina was Queen of the Amazons, she rais'd an Army of Merina Queen of the Ama∣zons. P. 131. Thirty Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Horse, for they were very exact and diligent in Training up Horses for the War. The Armour they wore for Coats of Mail, were the Skins of vast Serpents, with which sort of Creatures Africa abounds. But for offensive Arms, they carry'd Swords, Darts and Bows, in which they were so expert, that with these they not only broke their Enemies Batta∣lions; but when they pursu'd them upon their Flight, they were sure to hit their Mark. Entring therefore the Country of the Atlantides, in a Battel they routed them Atlantides. that inhabited Cercenes, and pursu'd them so close, that they enter'd pell-mel with them that got within the Walls, and took the City: And to strike a greater Ter∣rour into their Neighbours, they executed horrid Cruelties upon the Conquer'd; for they put all the Men to the Sword, and having raz'd the City to the Ground, carry'd away Captive all the Women and Children. The noise of this Destru∣ction being spread all over the Country, the rest of the Atlantides (being struck with a Pannick Fear) submitted, and deliver'd up all their Cities: Whereupon Merina receiv'd them all into her Favour, and made a League with them, and in the room of that which was destroy'd, built another City, calling it after her own Name, and peopled it with the Captives, and with such as were willing to come there to inhabit.
In the mean time being presented by the Atlantides with many rich Gifts, and decreeing to her (with a general Consent) many high Honours, she not only gra∣ciously accepted those Marks of their Kindness, but promis'd she would for the future endeavour to merit the good Opinion of the whole Nation. Being therefore often infested by their envious Neighbours the Gorgans, Merina to gratifie the Atlantides (who address'd themselves to her for that purpose) with an Army invaded the Country of the Gorgons, where joining Battel with them, the Ingagement was smart, in which the Amazons got the day, and kill'd great numbers of their Enemies, and took Three Thousand Prisoners: The rest flying into Woods, Merina (designing utterly to root up the Nation) endeavour'd to set the Woods on Fire; but not being able to effect it, she return'd with her Ar∣my into the Confines of her own Country, where by reason of her late Victory, being secure and careless in setting her Watch, the Prisoners kill'd many of her Amazons with their own Swords as they were asleep; but at length being surround∣ed by the whole Army (fighting it out to the last) they were every Man kill'd upon the spot. Then Merina erected Three Funeral Piles, and burnt up all those of her Army that were slain, and rais'd up as many Mounts of Earth over them, which are at this day call'd the Amazon's Sepulchers. The Gorgonians notwithstanding, were afterwards of great Power, till the Reign of Medusa, at which time they were conquer'd by Perseus. At length both they and the Amazons were utterly extinct by Her∣cules The Gorgonians rooted out by Perseus, and the Amazons by Her∣cules. Perseus destroyed the Gorgonians in the time of Crideon, An. Mund. 2657, before Christ, 1291. at the time when he travell'd into the Western Parts, and erected the Pillar in Africa. For it was a thing intollerable to him, who made it his business to be renown'd all the World over, to suffer any Nation to be govern'd any longer by Wo∣men. It's reported likewise, that by an Earthquake, the Tract towards the Ocean, o∣pen'd An Earth∣quake. its Mouth, and swallow'd up the whole Morass of Triton. Merina likewise overran a great part of Africa, and passing into Egypt, made a League with Orus the Son of Isis, who then reign'd there. She made War also upon the Arabians, and destroy'd many of them: Afterwards having subdu'd Sy∣ria, the Cilicians met her with Presents, and submitted themselves; whom (upon the account they of their own accord, gave up all into her Hands) she by an E∣dict ordain'd to be a free People; and for that reason they are call'd the free Ci∣licians to this Day. Afterwards having conquer'd the Nations about Mount Tau∣rus (who were both Men of strong Bodies, and stout Hearts) she descended through P. 132. the greater Phrygia to the The Medi∣terranean. Sea; thence passing through the Maritime Tracts, she put an end to her Expedition at the River Caicus: Out of her new Conquests, she pickt out the most convenient Places for the building of Cities, and built many there, among others one after her own Name; the rest she call'd after the Names of the chief Commanders of her Army, as Cymes, Pitanes, and Prineia, situated upon the Sea-Coasts; others she built up higher into the Conti∣nent. She possess'd her self likewise of several Islands, particularly Lesbos, where she built Mitylene, calling it after the Name of her Sister, who went along with her in the Expedition. Whilst she was busie in taking other Islands, she was endan∣ger'd by a Storm at Sea, where offering up her Prayers to the Cybele; or Vesta, the Mo∣ther of the Gods. Mother of the Gods for deliverance, she was driven upon a certain Desert Island, which she con∣secrated to the before-mention'd Goddess, being admonish'd so to do by a Dream; and there she erected Altars, and offered magnificent Sacrifices. This Island is call'd Samothracia, which according to the Greek Dialect signifies the Sacred Island. But there are some Historians that say, it was formerly call'd Samos; and from some Thracians that came to inhabit there, Samothracia. After that the Amazons were return'd into the Continent, they fabulously report, that the Cybele. Mother of the Gods (being delighted with this Island) plac'd there her Sons, call'd the Co∣rybantes. In the Records of their Sacred Mysteries, it's declar'd who was their Father; and she her self, (they say) taught them the Rites and Mysteries that are now in use in that Island, and instituted and appointed a Sacred Grove, and an inviolable Sanctuary. About these times (they say) one Mompsus, a Thracian, banish'd by Lycurgus King of Thrace, with an Army invaded the Country of the Amazons: His Asso∣ciate was one Sipylus, who was likewise Banish'd out of Scythia, bordering upon
Thrace. They with Sipylus and Mompsus overcame the other in a Battel, in which Merina the Amazon Queen, and many more of the Amazons were slain. In pro∣cess of Time (after the Thracians had overcome them in several Engagements,) they say that those that remain'd of the Nations of the Amazons, retir'd into Ly∣bia. And such was the end of the Amazonian Expedition out of Africa. And now since we have made mention of the Atlantides, we judge it not im∣pertinent to relate what the Atlantides fabulously report concerning the Genea∣logy of the Gods, not much differing from the Fables of the Greeks. The Atlantides inhabited a Rich Country, bordering upon the Ocean, and were Atlantides, the Gods born a∣mong them. esteem'd to excel all their Neighbours in civil Reception and Entertainment of Strangers; and they boast that the Gods were born amongst them, and say that the most famous Poet amongst the Grecians does confirm this their Assertion, where he brings in Juno speaking thus— The utmost bounds of Earth far off I see, Where Thetys and Ocean boast to be The Parents of the Gods.— They say that Ʋranus was their first King, who caus'd the People (who then Ʋranus, Hea∣ven or Coelum, or Coelus. wandred up and down) to dwell in Towns and Cities, and reducing them from a lawless and savage Course of Life, taught them to use and lay up the Fruits of the Earth, and many other things useful for Man's Life. It's said he had under his Dominion, the greatest part of the World, especially towards the West and the Northern Parts: And that being much addicted to Astrology, he prognosti∣cated many things that were come to pass in the World; and measur'd the Year according to the Course of the Sun, and the Months according to the Motion of the Moon; and divided the Days into Hours, and therefore the People, as at that time ignorant of the constant motion of the Stars, did so admire his Prog∣nostications, P. 133. that it grew into a common Opinion among them, that he was a God; and when he was dead, (by reason of his Deserts, and Art in Astronomy) they honour'd him as a God. The Starry Heaven was call'd after his , Ouranos. Name, because that he was so fa∣miliarly acquainted with the Rising and setting of the Stars, and other things hapning in the Etherial World; and for that his Merits transcended all the Ho∣nours that could be attributed to him, he was call'd the Eternal King of the U∣niverse. They report that this Ʋranus had Five and Forty Children by several Wives, and Eighteen of these were by one Titea, who had each of them a peculiar Name, but all in Common call'd Titanes, from their Mother Titea, who for her Wisdom The Titanes. and Beneficence was after her Death reputed a Goddess by those whom she had oblig'd by her Kindnesses, and was call'd Terra. Of Ʋranus and Titea were born several Daughters, of whom Two were most famous above the rest, Basilea and Rhea, by some call'd Pandora. Basilea being the Eldest (and most Prudent and Discreet) bred up her Brothers with the care and affection of a Mother, and therefore was call'd the Great Mother. After the Death of her Father, by the general Suffrage of the People and Con∣sent Basiled. of her Brothers she was elected Queen, being as yet a Virgin, and remarka∣ble for her Modesty and Chastity. She was long unwilling to marry; but after∣wards (desiring to leave Heirs of her own Body to succeed in the Kingdom) she marry'd Hyperion one of her Brothers, whom she most dearly lov'd, by whom she had two Children, Helio, that is, the Sun. Helio and Selene, that is, the Moon. Selene, who for their Beauty and Modesty were the Admiration of all; her other Brothers (they say) partly out of Envy at the Issue, and partly out of fear lest Hyperion should assume the Kingdom intirely to himself, committed a notorious wicked Act; for entring into a Conspiracy, they assassinated Hyperion and drown'd Helio (then a tender Infant) in The River Po, in Italy. Erida∣nus.
Upon the Discovery of this sad Disaster, Selene, who passionately lov'd her Brother, threw her self down headlong from the House-top; and the Mother, while she was seeking for her Son at the River side, with Grief fell asleep, and dreamt that she saw Helios standing by her to comfort her, and wish'd her not to grieve too much and afflict her self for the Death of her Children; for the Titanes should execute due Revenge upon the Malefactor, and that he and his Sister by the Providence of the Gods were to be deify'd, so as that which before was call'd the Holy Fire in Heaven should then be call'd Helios is in Greek the Sun. Helios, and that which before had the Name of Mene should then be term'd Luna the Moon. Selene is in Greek the Moon. Selenes. When she awak'd she told her Dream, and repeated all her Misfortunes, and then intreated her Subjects that they would adore her deceas'd Children as Gods, and that none for the future would come near her. Presently afterwards in a furious Rage of Madness (taking her Daughters ging∣ling Gewgaws) she wandred up and down, with her Hair dishevell'd about her Ears, and playing like a mad Woman upon a Timbrel and Cymbal, she was even a Terror to the Spectators: And while every body pity'd her miserable Condi∣tion, and some attempted to lay hold on her, there arose on a sudden a terrible Storm of Rain, Thunder and Lightning, and she was never seen after. The People hereupon admiring this Prodigy, began to transfer the Name of Helios and Selene (in Honour of them) to the Sun and the Moon in the Heavens; and being persuaded that the Mother was a Goddess, they erected Altars, and (with the noise of Timbrels and tinkling of Cymbals, and other things agreeable to her Cir∣cumstances) offer'd Sacrifices, and instituted other divine Rites and Ceremonies in Honour of her. But however Phrygia is said to be the Birth-place of this Goddess: For the Inha∣bitants P. 134. fabulously report, that Meones heretofore reign'd in Phrygia and Lydia, and that he marry'd Dyndima, and upon her begat a Daughter, which he unnaturally expos'd in the Mountain Cybelus: And that there, by a divine Providence, Leo∣pards and other fierce and wild Beasts, nourish'd the Child with their own Milk: But Shepherdesses thereabouts observing what was done, and (admiring the Strangeness of the thing) took away the Child, and call'd it, from the Place, Cybele. The young Lady growing up both in Strength and Years, was admir'd Cybele. by all for her Beauty, Modesty and Ingenuity: For she was the first that invented the Pipe, compos'd of many Reeds, and the Timbrel and Cymbal in Sports and Dances: She taught likewise how to cure (by purging) Diseases both in Children and Cattle. For her extraordinary Love to Children, whom she often restor'd to Health, by singing and lulling them in her Arms, she was call'd by all Mater monta∣na. The Mother of the Mount. Marsyas the Phrygian (they say) was very much with her, and the chiefest of all her Lovers: This Man, it's said, was mighty ingenious, and wonder∣fully chast. His Ingenuity they gather hence, that imitating the Sound of a Pipe compos'd of many Reeds, he found out how one single Pipe might make the same Harmony: And as an Argument for his Chastity (they say) he never had to do with any Woman all the days of his Life. Cybele being now ripe of Years, lov'd a young Man, one of the Natives, first call'd Attis, afterwards Papas: This Youth she accompany'd with, and was got with Child, about which time she was own'd by her Parents, and receiv'd by her Father into his Palace, as a Virgin: But being afterwards inform'd of the Mis∣carriage of his Daughter, caus'd Attis and her Nurses to be put to Death, and their Bodies to lye expos'd without Burial: Whereupon (they say) Cybele (through the Love she bore to the young Man, and overwhelm'd with Grief for her Nur∣ses) fell into a furious Madness, and ran out into the Fields, where all alone with her Hair about her Ears she fill'd the whole Country with the noise of her Timbrel, and her Wayling and Lamentations. But Marsyas pitying her miserable Con∣dition, and prompted thereunto by the Remembrance of his ancient Love and Kindness he had for her, follow'd her wherever she went; and coming together at length to Bacchus in Nysa, found there Apollo, then in great Esteem for his Skill in playing upon the Harp, invented by Mercury. There Marsyas contended with Apollo who should be accounted the greatest Artist, and the Nysians were to be the Judges. And first Apollo play'd only upon his Harp. But Marsyas as soon as he had winded his Hoboy (tickling their Ears with the Novelty of the Melody, and the Sweetness of his Notes) seem'd far to excel his Rival. Then they made a
Match that they should both make a Second Trial of their Skill before the Judges: Apollo therefore leading the way, first began as before, and added to the melodiousness of his Harp, the Harmony of his Voice, and by that means gain'd the Victory over the Applause formerly wan by the Hoboy. At which Marsyas was in a Rage, and said, that he was highly injur'd in not being allow'd the pre∣heminence, for that they ought to judge by the Art in playing, and not in the Voice and in singing, and that according to that Rule, Trial should be made, and Judgment given concerning the Melody and Harmony between the Harp and Hoboy; and that it was unjust to lay in the ballance Two Arts against one. To which it's said, Apollo answered, that he did no more than the other; for that Marsyas did the same thing, when he tun'd his Hoboy with his Breath, and there∣fore either both ought to be allowed the same Priviledge, or both should be re∣strained P. 135. from making use of their Mouths, and their Hands only should be the Instruments of evidencing the excellency of their Art and Skill. What Apollo said, seem'd most just and reasonable to all the Auditors. Then there was a Third Contest between them, in which Marsyas was again overcome: But A∣pollo was so incens'd with his vying with him, that he flea'd him alive: But pre∣sently after he was so sorry for what he had done, that he broke in pieces all the Strings of his Harp, and destroy'd that Musick which he himself had invented. But it was afterwards reviv'd; for the Muses restor'd the . Meane, Linus the String call'd the . Tenor, and Orpheus and Thamyris the Two Strings call'd the . Base, and next to the Base. They say that Apollo consecrated both the Harp and Hoboy to Bacchus, and left them in his Cave; and afterwards falling in love with Cy∣bele, wandred up and down with her as far as to the Hyperborean, signifies very far North; by which the Ancients use to express the furthest Parts of the World. Hy∣perborean Mountains. And whereas there was a Plague and Famine in Phrygia, the Phrygians inquir'd at the Of Apollo at Delphos. Oracle how they should be freed from the Calamity they lay under, It's said the God command∣ed them to bury Attis, and adore Cybele as a Goddess. The Phrygians therefore (because they could not find any part of his Body through length of time since he was kill'd) made a Statue for him, which they follow'd as to his Burial, with Howling, Lamentations, and other honourable Ceremonies proper for his Funeral, and so made an Attonement for their former Offence; which Solemnity they constantly observe to this very Day; and offer Yearly Sacrifices to Cybele, who formerly erected Altars to the Gods there. In honour of this Cybele, they built a magnificent Temple in Pesinunte, a City of Phrygia, and instituted solemn Sacrifices, and Divine Worship to her, which Work was advanc'd by the assistance of King Midas. They Plac'd Leopards and Lions standing by the Statue of the Goddess, because it was generally believ'd she was nurs'd up by them. And these are the things which the Phrygians and the At∣lantides, the Inhabitants of the Coasts bordering on the Ocean, do report of this Mother of the Gods. After the Death of Hyperion, they report that the Children of * Coelus divided Ʋranus. the Kingdom amongst themselves; amongst whom Atlas and Saturn were the most renown'd. The Country bordering upon the Ocean, fell by lot upon Atlas, who call'd the People there Atlantides, and the greatest Mountain in the World Atlas, after his own Name. They say, that he was an excellent Astrologer, and was the first that discover'd the Knowledge of the Sphere; whence rose the common Opinion, that he car∣ry'd the World upon his Shoulders; noting by this Fancy, his Invention and Description of the Sphere. The most eminent among his many Sons, was Hes∣perus, for Piety towards the Gods, and Justice and Kindness towards his Sub∣jects. Being upon the Top of Mount Atlas to observe the motion of the Stars, he suddainly vanisht in a Tempest. The People hereupon much lamenting the loss of him, that they might for ever honour him, call'd the Brightest Hesperus the Morning Star. Star in the Heavens after his Name. Atlas likewise had Seven Daughters, who were all call'd after their Father's Name Atlantides; but their several proper Names were Maia, Electra, Taygeta, Asterope, Merope, Halcyone, and Celaeno. All these were got with Child by several Heroick Princes, and even by some of the Gods themselves, and bore divers Sons
who were the first Ancestors of several Nations, and for their virtuous Quali∣fications, were afterwards call'd Gods and Demy-Gods. So Maia the Eldest, was got with Child by Jupiter, and bore Mercury, the In∣ventor of many Arts and Sciences for the use of Mankind. All the rest likewise had Sons who were famous in their Times, some of which gave beginning to whole Nations, others to some particular Cities; and there∣fore not only some of the Barbarians, but likewise some among the Greeks, refer P. 136. the Original of many of the ancient Heroes, to these Daughters of Atlas; for they were in great Reputation for Wisdom and Justice; and therefore when they were Dead, were ador'd as Goddesses, and fixt in the Constellation of the The Seven Stars. Pleiades. Nymphs were commonly call'd Atlantides, because Nymphs is a general Term in this Country apply'd to all Women. They say that Saturn the Brother of Atlas, was extraordinary Prophane and Covetous; and Marrying his Sister Rhea, he begat Jupiter, afterwards surnam'd Olympus. There was another Jupiter the Brother of Coelus, and King of Crete, but much inferior for Glory and Renown to the later: For this later was Lord of the World; but the ancient Jupiter was only King of the Island before-nam'd, and had Ten Sons whom they call'd Curetes, and call'd the Island Ida, after the Name of his Wife, where he himself was buried, the Remains of whose Sepul∣cher are to be seen at this Day. However the Cretians relate several Stories of these Jupiters, of whom we shall write distinctly when we come to their History. Saturn reign'd (they say) over Sicily, Africa and Italy, and inlarg'd his Domi∣nion over all the Western Parts of the World, and by Garrisons and strong Forts plac'd in convenient Places, kept his Subjects every where within the Bounds of their Duty: And hence it is, that at this very Day in the Western Parts of Sicily, the high Mounts that are to be seen here and there, are call'd Saturn's Castles. Jupiter. Cronia. Jupiter (they say) was the Sun of Saturn, who contrary to what his Father did before him, carry'd himself justly and courteously toward all, and therefore he was call'd Father by all his Subjects. He succeeded in the Kingdom either as given up to him by his Father, or set upon the Throne by his Subjects out of hatred to his Father: And though Saturn afterwards by the help of the Titans, made War upon his Son, yet Jupiter overcame him in a Battel, and so gain'd the King∣dom: And afterwards he ran through the whole World, doing good to all Man∣kind: And because he was of a strong Body, and endowed with all virtuous Qua∣lifications of Mind, he easily conquer'd the whole World. He chiefly made it his Business to punish the Impious, and to do good to all his People: And therefore (after he left the World) he was call'd Zeus. Zena, from Life, because he was the first that taught Men to live well: And therefore they of whom he had deserv'd well, rewarded him with this Honour, that he was unanimously by all placed in the highest Heavens, and call'd a God, and Supream Lord of all the Earth. And this is the full Account (distinctly related) of all the Gods mention'd and re∣corded by the Atlantides. And for as much as before in the account we gave of the Egyptian Antiquities, we came in the Course of the general History, to the Genealogy of Bacchus, (whom Bs. the Greeks call Dionysius) and his Acts— We conceive it sit here to add what the Grecians have delivered to Posterity concerning this God: But in regard the ancient Fabulous Historians and Poets have given different Accounts of Bacchus, and have related many monstrous Stories, it's very difficult to set forth truly his Genealogy and Acts. For some say, there was but one Bacchus. Dionysius, others that there were Three. But some say there never was any such Man, but conceive that Wine is to be taken for Dionysius. We shall therefore in short, run over distinctly what is said by every one of them. The Naturalists who speak of this God, and call Wine Bacchus, say, that the Earth amongst other Plants, naturally produc'd the Vine, and that it was not plant∣ed or found out at the first by any whatsoever. In Confirmation whereof, they P. 137. instance in wild Vines, which in many places at this day bear Grapes of them∣selves, as well as if they were husbanded and improved by the Care and Industry of Men: And that Bacchus was by the Ancients call'd Two Mo∣ Bimeter, because when the Vine is planted in the Earth, and begins to grow, that is to be esteem'd the
First Birth: The Second, when it shoots forth Branches, and puts forth Fruit, and brings them to Ripeness and Perfection; and so the First Birth of this God is to be judg'd to proceed from the Earth, and the Second from the Vine it self. The Fabulous Writers likewise feign a Third Generation of Bacchus, that he was the Son of Jupiter and Ceres, and that some Men of the Earth pull'd him in Pieces, and boil'd his Parts; and that Ceres gather'd his Members together again, and renew'd and reviv'd him. Which Fictions the natural Philosophers explain according to natural Reason; for he is said (they say) to be the Son of Jupiter and Ceres, because the Vine is nourish'd by the Earth, and the Rain from Heaven, and so produces Fruit; whence comes Wine, by pressing of the Grape. That the boyling of his Members, signifies the manner of ordering the Wine, which many boyl to make it more strong and fragrant. That his Members were pull'd in pieces by Earthly Men afterwards, and join'd together again, and he restor'd to his former State, denotes no more, but that after the Vintage and pruning of the Vines at the season of the Year, the Earth causes them to flourish again, and to be as fruitful as ever they were before. For it's certain, that by Ceres the ancient Poets and other Fabulous Authors meant the Mother Earth: And agreeable here∣unto, are those things that are deliver'd in the Verses of Orpheus, and which are exhibited in the celebration of the Sacred Mysteries, which it is not lawful for any ordinary Person particularly to treat of. In the same manner the Naturalists explain his being the Son of Semele; for they say, that the Earth was by the Ancients call'd Thion and Semele; From the Greek Word Somne, which signifies Splendid or Beauti∣ful. Semele, because the Worship of this Goddess was splendid and pompous; and Thyon from the frequent Call'd by the Greeks Thysias, and Thyelas. Sacri∣fices which were offered to her. He is feign'd to be begotten of Jupiter, Twice, because it being suppos'd that the Vines with other Plants, were de∣stroy'd in Deucalion's Flood, and that it afterwards sprung up again, therefore when this God appear'd again, as if he had sprung up by a Second Birth, he was feign'd to be born out of Jupiter's Thigh. And these are the Opinions of them, who take Bacchus for nothing else but the use and strength found out to lye in Wine. But those Fabulous Authors that say this God was a Man, unanimously attribute to him the finding out and first planting of the Vine, and every thing that be∣longs to the use of Wine. But whether there were more than one of that Name, they differ among themselves. Some affirm there was but One, and this very Bacchus who taught the use of Wine, and gathering of Grapes, and with an Ar∣my overran the whole World, and first instituted the Rites and Festivals of the Bacchanalia. Some (as I have before declar'd) have affirm'd, that there were Three that liv'd at several times, and have given an Account of the Actions of each of them. Of whom (they say) the most ancient was born in India, and therefore in re∣gard 1 Bacchus. that Country (through the Temper of the Climate, and richness of the Soil) naturally produc'd Vines, they affirm he was the first that taught the way of pressing of Grapes, and found out the use of Wine; and imploy'd himself like∣wise in pruning of Fig-Trees, and other Fruit Trees of a larger size, and taught others the same Art: And in Conclusion, that he found out whatever appertain'd to the Vine. And hence he was call'd the Leneus: Presser, and the Bearded, because it P. 138: is the Custom among the Indians to let their Beards grow all their Days without cutting them. This they say, is the Bacchus which overran the whole World with his Arms, and found out the manner of Planting of Vines, and the pressing of Grapes with Wine-Presses (and thence was surnam'd Leneus, as before) and imparted what he had discover'd to others; by which Advantages he so gain'd the Hearts and Respects of all Men, that when he was dead, they ador'd him with Divine Honours. At this day they shew the Place of his Birth in India, and many Cities there in their own proper Language, call'd after his Name. Many other things they relate of this Indian Bacchus, which is too tedious here to re∣hearse.
Another Bacchus (they say) there was who was the Son of Jupiter and Pro∣serpina, 2d Bacchus. or as some think, of Ceres. This they say, was the first that taught how to plow with Oxen, when Men before till'd the Ground with their own Handy Labours, and invented many other things useful for the Art of Husbandry, that the Countryman might not be overlaid with his Labours. By these Advantages and Benefits to Mankind, he gain'd such Reputation and Esteem, that he was by all ador'd as a God, and Divine Worship and Solemn Sacrifices were offered in honour of him. In all his Images and Statues he was painted and ingraven with Horns, as well to signifie the nature of this Second Bacchus, as to denote how great a benefit and advantage accrew'd to the Husbandmen by the inven∣tion of the Plow. A Third Bacchus they say, was born at Thebes in Beotia, of Jupiter and Semele, 3d Bacchus. the Daughter of Cadmus; for Jupiter being in love with her, by reason of her ex∣traordinary Beauty, is said frequently to lye with her; at which Juno was so in∣flam'd with Jealousy, that she resolv'd to be reveng'd upon the Girl; and to this end (minding to deceive her (she appear'd in the shape of one of her Servants, and perswaded Semele (who never suspected any finister design) that it was very fitting that Jupiter should lye with her in the same splendour, and glorious ap∣pearance as he did with Juno: Whereupon Semele over perswaded Jupiter, that he would honour her in his Addresses in the same manner as he did Juno; upon which he visited her in Thunder and Lightning, which kill'd the young Lady, causing her to miscarry; and Jupiter forthwith clapt up the Infant within his Thigh, and when he was come to the full time of his Birth, he convey'd him to Nysa in Arabia, where being nurs'd by Nymphs, he was call'd from his Fa∣ther and the Place In Greek Dis, is Jupi∣ter, and Nysa, the Place so called. Dionysus. Being a very Beautiful Young Man, he spent the time of his Youth in Dancing, Plays, and all manner of Sports and Pleasures with Young Women. Afterwards he got together an Army of Women arm'd with , Thersis. Launces, and adorn'd with Garlands of Flowers, and marcht with 'em through all Parts of the World, teaching Men his Mysterious Rites and Ceremonies, yet imparting them only to those that liv'd virtuously and piously. He every where likewise insti∣tuted Festival Days, and General Meetings for Sports and Dancings, and compos'd Differences both in Cities and Countries; and instead of Wars and Seditions, e∣stablish'd Peace and Concord amongst them. And when the noise of his coming to any Place was spread Abroad, and how kind he was to all, and how great a Benefactor he was in improving and civilizing the Manners of Men, they ran out flocking from all Parts to receive him. But some few Proud and Impious Persons despis'd him, and gave forth that he carry'd * Women along with him † The Bachl∣des. to gratify his Lusts, and that he taught his Rites and Ceremonies, meerly to com∣mit Whoredom with strange Women; but of these he took a speedy Revenge; for whenever he exerted his divine power in punishing the Wicked, sometimes he struck them with Madness, and at other times caus'd them to be torn in pieces by the Hands of the Women; and sometimes by his Sovereign Skill in Martial Af∣fairs, P. 139. caus'd his Enemies suddainly to be Slain. For instead of the Launces, he ordered his Bacchides to carry Darts wrapt round with Ivy at the Points, with which (on a suddain and unexpectedly) they assaulted and wounded to Death the Kings that were ignorant of the Stratagem, and therefore despis'd and contemn'd them, because they were Women. Amongst them that were punish'd by him, the most considerable and eminent were Pentheus the Grecian, and Myrrhanus the Indian King, and Lycurgus of Thrace. For Bacchus intending to transport his Forces out of Asia into Europe made a League with Lycurgus King of Thrace, whose Country was wash'd by the Hellespont. As soon as Bacchus had transported his Bacchides into the Country, one of his Allies (as he thought Lycurgus) commanded his Souldiers to set upon Bacchus and all his mad Crew in the Night, and to cut them all off. Of which Bacchus being inform'd by one of the Inhabitants, call'd Tharops, he was no little amaz'd, because he had but a few with him, the Strength of his Army being on the other side of the Hellespont; upon which he himself secretly pass'd over to his Army: But Lycurgus in the mean time cut the throats of all his Bacchides that were left behind, in a Place call'd Nisius. As soon therefore as Bacchus had transported his Forces, he fought the Thracians, and overcame them; and having taken Lycurgus Prisoner, first pluck'd out his Eyes, and after he had put him to all sorts of Tor∣ments
he could devise, and us'd him with all the Contempt and Disgrace ima∣ginable, he nail'd him to the Cross. Afterwards in Recompence to Tharops Crucify'd. for the Kindness shew'd him, he advanc'd him to the Kingdom of Thrace, and taught him the manner of Celebrating the Mysteries of his Solemnities call'd Orgyae. Orgyae. Oeagrus the Son of Tharops, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, being instru∣cted by him, in the same mysterious Rites and Ceremonies. Oeagrus afterwards taught them Orpheus his Son, who (being eminent for his Learning and Ingenuity) chang'd many things in the Orgyae. Hence those Rites and Mysteries first instituted by Call'd liber Pater. Bacchus were afterwards call'd Orphea. But some of the Poets, among whom is Antimachus, say, Lycurgus was not King of Thrace, but of Arabia; and that he treacherously set upon Bacchus and his Bacchides in Nysa in Arabia: And further relate that Bacchus having every where punish'd the wicked and rewarded the good, return'd out of India, mount∣ed upon an Elephant, into Thebes; and because he spent three Years in his Expedi∣tion, the Grecians celebrate the Festivals call'd Trieteriades. And report that being Trieteriades. loaden with the Spoils of so great an Expedition, he was the first that was brought in Triumph into the Country. These are the Genealogies of Bacchus, according to the unanimous Consent of all the Ancients. But many of the Cities in Greece contend for the Place of his Birth; for the Eleans, Naxians and the Inhabitants of Eleutherae, the Teians and many other, appropriate his Birth each particularly to themselves. And the Teians for Confir∣mation The Place of Bacchus his Nativity. of what they say, bring this Argument, that there is a Spring in their City, which at some certain times streams forth most rich and fragrant Wine: And as to the rest, some of them shew Parcels of Land dedicated to him; and others (from ancient Tradition) sacred Groves and consecrated Temples. But in Truth since this God has left behind him many Tokens of his Beneficence, and likewise of his personal Presence in most Parts of the World, it's no wonder that every one affirms that his own Country and City, was the Place that was espe∣cially dear to Bacchus. The Poet in his Hymns confirms what we have before declar'd, where speak∣ing P. 140. of those that doubt the Place of his Birth, brings him in as born at Nysa in Arabia in this manner— , . . . Some Dracanum, Icarus some, some Naxus name, Places from which the divine Bacchus came. From Thebes some, and from thy curling Streams Alphaeus others say: All silly Dreams. Thee Father JOVE in secret brought to Light Fearful of Men's, and his fair Juno's Sight, On Nysas Mount adorn'd with pleasant Woods Far from Phoenician Coasts near Egypt's Floods. Yet I am not ignorant that the Africans inhabiting the Sea-coasts, do themselves challenge the Birth Place of this God, and say that what things are reported to be done by him were done among them, and shew many Marks and Signs to prove what they say, which remain among them to this very day: And in further Con∣firmation hereof many of the ancient Historians and Poets, and likewise a great Part of the Modern Writers do agree in this thing concerning him. And that we may not omit any thing that is said of Bacchus, we shall range under distinct Heads what the Africans have related concerning him, and wherein the Grecian Historians have agreed with them, and lastly what Account is given of him by Dionysices, who compos'd a History of the ancient Stories and Fables.
For he has written a History of Bacchus, of the Amazons, of the Expedition of the Argonauts, and the War of Troy, and many other things, annexing there∣unto several Poems of the ancient Mythologists and Poets. He says that Linus was the first that invented Rhimes and Musick in Greece: And that Cadmus brought Letters out of Phoenicia, and was the first that taught the Grecians to pronounce them, and gave them their several Names, and form'd their distinct Characters: Hence these Letters are all generally call'd Phoenician Letters, because they were brought over out of Phoenicia into Greece: but they were afterwards call'd Pelasgi∣an Characters, because the Pelasgians were the first that understood them after they were brought over. He says, that this Linus being an excellent Poet and Musician, had many Scholars, amongst whom there were three that were the most famous, Hercules, Themyris and Orpheus. Hercules learnt to play upon the Harp, but was very dull and unapt to learn, insomuch as he was sometimes box'd and beaten, at which he was at length so inrag'd that he kill'd his Master by a Blow with his Harp. Themyris was very ingenions, and gave himself wholly to Musick; and grew so eminent therein, that he would boast he could sing more sweetly and melodiously than the Muses themselves; at which the Goddesses were so inrag'd, that they both depriv'd him of his Art, and struck him blind besides, as Homer affirms in these Verses, . Themyris then by th' Muses was envy'd And of his Art the Thracian they depriv'd. And then again, . Th' inraged Goddesses then struck him blind That th' way to Sing or Play he could not find. Of Orpheus, the last of his Scholars, we shall speak particularly when we come to what concerns him. This Linus (they say) writ in Phenician. Pelasgian Letters, the Acts of the first Bacchus, and left other Stories in his Writings behind him. Orpheus, likewise it's said, us'd the same Characters, and Pronapides, Homer's Master, an ingenious Musician. Thymaetes also the Son of Thymaetus, the Son of Leomedon, who liv'd in the time of Orpheus, and travell'd through many Parts of the World, as far as to the Western Parts of Lybia to the very Ocean: This Thymaetes visited likewise (they say) Nysa the Place where Bacchus was brought up, as is reported by the Ancient Inhabi∣tants; where being instructed by the Nysians, he wrote a Poesy call'd Phrygia, of the particular Actions of this God, in very old Language and Character. P. 141. Amongst other things, he says, that Ammon a King, reigning in some Part of Lybia, marry'd Rhea the Daughter of Coelus, Sister of Saturn and the other Titans; and that when he came first to the Kingdom, he met with a beautiful Virgin call'd Amalthea, upon the In Asia near the Caspian sea. Ceraunean Mountains, and falling in Love with her, begat a Son of her, who was afterwards famous and admirable both for Strength and Comeliness of Person; afterwards he made Amalthea Queen of the neigh∣bouring Nations, which in its Situation being in shape of an Ox's Horn, was therefore call'd the Western Horn, and that the Soyl is so very rich, that it abounds with Vines and all other sorts of Fruit-trees. Being possess'd of this Country, she call'd it after her own Name, Amalthea's Horn. And therefore Poste∣rity call every rich Piece of Land that abounds with Fruit-trees, Amalthea's Horn. But Ammon fearing the rageful Jealousy of Rhea, conceal'd his Adultery, and privately sent away the Child afar off to the City Nysa, which lyes in an Island almost inaccessible, surrounded with the River Triton, into which there is but one The Descrip∣tion of Nysa and the Grta. strait and narrow Entrance, call'd the Nysian Gates.
The Land there is very rich, abounding with pleasant Meadows, Gardens and Orchards, water'd on every side with refreshing Streams; wherein grow all sorts of Fruit-trees and Vines, which grow of themselves, for the most part running up upon the sides of Trees. A gentle, cooling and refreshing Wind pierces through the whole Island, which makes the Place exceeding healthful, so that the Inhabi∣tants live much longer here, than any others in the neighbouring Countries. The first Entrance into the Island runs up in a long Vale, shaded all along with high and lofty Trees, so thick, that only a dim and glimmering light passes through; but the Fiery Beams of the Sun enter not in the least to offend the Passenger. In passing along, drill many Sweet and Christal Springs, so that the Place is most pleasant and delightful to them that have a desire there to divert themselves. When you are out of this Vale, a pleasant and very large Grota, of a round Form, presents it self, arch'd over with an exceeding high Craggy Rock, be∣spangled with Stones of divers resplendent Colours; for being exchequer'd, some sparkl'd with Purple Rays, some with Azure, and others darted forth their re∣fulgent Beauty in divers other Colours, no Colour being ever known, but it might be seen there. At the Entrance grew Trees of a strange and wonderful Nature, some bearing Fruit, others always green and flourishing, as if they had been created only by Nature to delight the sight: In these nested all sorts of Birds, whose Colour and pleasant Notes, even ravisht the Senses with sweet delight: So that all the Place round, imparted a sort of Divine Pleasure, not only to the Eye, but the Ear; the sweetness of Natural Notes far excelling the Artificial Harmony of all other Musick whatsoever. Passing through this, appears a large and spacious Grota, in every part inlightned by the bright Rays of the Sun: Here grow various sorts of Flowers and Plants, especially Cassia, and others that perpetually preserve their sweet Odours in their natural Strength. Here are to be seen the many pleasant Apartments of the Nymphs, (compos'd of various Flowers, planted in that order by wise Nature's Hands, and not by Man's Art) fit to receive even the Gods themselves. Within all this pleasant Round, is not a Flower or Leaf to be seen wither'd, or in the least decay'd; so that the Spec∣tators are not only delighted with the sight, but even transported with the Plea∣sures P. 142. of the fragrant Smells, and sweet Odours of the Place. To this Cave the Child was brought by Ammon, and committed to the care of Nysa, one of the Sisters of Aristeus, to be brought up; but ordered Aristeus himself to be his Tutor, who was a Prudent, Honest, and very Learned Man: And that the Child might be the beteer secur'd against the mischievous Contrivances of his Stepmother Rhea, to these was joyn'd Minerva to be his Guardian, whom the River Triton they say, brought forth a little before these Times; and therefore from thence she was call'd Or Tritoangenes, because she first appear'd in a Virgins Habit at the River Triton. Tritonides. They report that this Goddess liv'd a Virgin all her Days, and that being likewise endu'd with extraordinary Wisdom, she found out many Arts and Sciences; and that her strength of Body, and Manly Courage was such, that she imploy'd her self in feats of Arms, and went out to the Wars. Amongst her other Actions, this was one remark∣able, that she kill'd Aegides a terrible Monster, before esteem'd invincible. It was the Birth of The Earth. Terra, and (in an horrible manner) naturally breath'd forth Flames of Fire at her Mouth. This Monster first appear'd in Phrygia, and burnt up the whole Country, which is therefore call'd Burnt Phrygia at this Day. Af∣terwards she bent her Course to the Places about Mount Taurus, and burnt and destroy'd all the Woods and Forests all along, as far as to India: Thence she mov'd towards the Sea-Coasts, and burnt down the Cedars upon Mount Liba∣nus in Phaenicia: Thence passing through Egypt, she burnt up Lybia, as far as to the Western Shoar, till at length she set on Fire all the Woods upon the Ceraunian Mountains. The Earth being thus all in a Flame, and the Inhabitants partly con∣sum'd, and partly through Fear, having forsaken their Country, Minerva (they say) eminently furnish'd both with Wisdom and Courage, kill'd this Monster; and wore its Skin upon her Breast, to be both as a Breast-plate and Coat of Mail against future Encounters, and likewise as a Memorial of her Valour and glorious Victory. Terra, the Mother of this Monster, being hereat inrag'd, in revenge brought forth the Giants, those implacable Enemies of the Gods, which were afterwards destroy'd by Jupiter, with the assistance of Minerva, Bacchus and other Deities.
But as for Dionysus bred up in Nysa, and instructed in the most learned Arts Bacchus. and Sciences, he grew not only eminent for the Strength and Beauty of his Body, and Endowments of his Mind, but for his Inventions of things useful for Man's Life. For while he was but as yet a meer Boy, he found out the nature and use of Wine, discovering the pressing of the Clusters of the Vine, and drying of the Grapes, to the end to store them up for future use. He found out likewise what Ground was most proper for the planting of every thing, and in hopes of attaining unto Immortal Honour for the great Benefits and Advantages of those things by him discover'd, he communicated his Inventions to Mankind. When his Fame and Glory was nois'd abroad in every Place, Rhea (it's said) inrag'd at Ammon, endeavour'd to seize Dionysus: But being disappointed in her Design, she forsook Ammon, and returning to her Brother the Titans, Marry'd her Brother Saturn, who at the instigation of Rhea, with the other Brothers, made War upon Ammon, and in a Battel routed him. That Ammon by reason of Fa∣mine was forc't to fly into Crete, and marry'd Geta, one of the Daughters of the Curati, then reigning there, and with her gain'd the Sovereignty of the Island, and call'd it after his Wife's Name Gete, which was before called Idea. Saturn they say, having gain'd the Kingdom of Ammon, govern'd cruelly, and P. 143. marcht with an Army to Nysa against Dionysus, who hearing of the routing of his Father, and the Confederacy of the Titans against him, rais'd Souldiers in Ny∣sa, Two Hundred of which were bred up with him, who as they were eminent for Valour, so they were great Lovers of Dionysus. He confederated likewise with the Neighbouring Lybians, Africans and the Amazons, of whom we have before related, that they were both valiant, and us'd to send great Forces abroad in o∣ther Countries, and had brought many Parts of the World under their Domi∣nion. They were brought (they say) into this Confederacy chiefly for the sake of Minerva, who minded the same way and course of Life as they did: For the Amazons were both Warriers and Virgins. The Army with Dionysus was divided into Two Bodies, the Men commanded by him, and the Women by Minerva; and in this Order they made a violent Charge upon the Titans: The Ingage∣ment was very hot, and great numbers fell on both sides: At length upon a Wound given to Saturn, Dionysus gain'd the Day, who signaliz'd his Valour in this Battel above all others. The Titans then fled to the Places formerly be∣longing to Ammon, and Dionysus with a great number of Prisoners return'd to Nysa, where he surrounded them with his Souldiers, and then in an Harangue, accus'd the Titans; so that all thought they must every Man be put to the Sword: But forthwith pardoning them all, he gave them liberty either to go Home, or to take up Arms with him: Upon which they all chose to serve him, and upon the account of their suddain and surprizing Deliverance, all ador'd him as a God. Then giving to each of them a Cup of Wine, as a Sacred Pledge of their Fidelity, he caus'd them Man by Man to swear that they would serve him faith∣fully, and fight for him to the end of the War. This Rite and Ceremony of pledging their Faith on both sides, by pouring out and drinking of Wine, being then first begun, was afterwards imitated by Posterity, and Truces and Leagues in times of War were called Drink Of∣ferings. Liba∣tions. Dionysus afterwards undertaking a War against Saturn, and marching out of Nysa with all his Forces for that purpose, they report that Aristaeus his Tutor, was the First that with great Solemnity offered Sacrifices to him as to a God. It's said the noblest of the Nysaeans, call'd Silenians, were his Companions. For Selenus was the First that reign'd in this Island, who is so very ancient, that none knows his Original: And forasmuch as he had a Tail growing out at his Rump, his Posterity partaking of his nature, had the same Badge. Dionysus therefore marcht away with his Army (and after much toyl and hazard for lack of Wa∣ter passing through many Deserts, infested with wild Beasts) he came at length to Zacira. Zabima a City of Lybia, and there encamp'd; near to this place he kill'd the Monster (the Spawn of The Earth Monster, Cam∣pes. Terra, call'd Campes, which had destroy'd many of the Inhabitants, for which he was in high Reputation among the People for his Valour. He rais'd a Mount of Earth over this Monstrous Beast he had kill'd, to the end to leave an everlasting Monument of his Valour to Posterity, which re∣mains to this very day. Thence he marcht against the Titans, causing his Army
to pass quietly and orderly through all Places, carrying himself courteously and civilly towards all; assuring every Body that he undertook this Expedition for no other Reason but to punish the Impious, and benefit all Mankind: So that the Lybians admiring his good Order and Discipline, and the Greatnese of his Mind, largely supply'd his Army with Provision, and freely join'd with him as Confe∣derates. And now approaching near to the City of Ammon, he routed Saturn again be∣fore the Walls, who afterwards set the City on Fire in the Night, with a pur∣pose to destroy the ancient Palace of Ammon, and he himself, with his Wife P. 144. Rhea, and others of his distressed Friends, secretly fled out of the City. But Dio∣nysus was nothing like to him in his Temper; for he not only pardon'd Saturn and Rhea, whom he had taken Prisoners, upon the account of being his Kindred, but intreated them that for the future they would as his Parents love him, and live with him as his choicest and most beloved Friends; so that Rhea lov'd him all her Life long as dearly as her own Son, but the love of Saturn was deceit∣ful. About this time Saturn and Rhea had a Son born, call'd Jupiter, who was advanc'd to many Places of Honour by Dionysus, and afterwards became King upon the account of his Virtuous Qualifications. The Africans had inform'd Dionysus before the Fight, that Ammon at the time he was driven out of his Kingdom, foretold, that after a certain time his Son Dionysus would recover his Father's Kingdom, and that he should inlarge his Do∣minion over the whole World, and should be ador'd as a God. Dionysus here∣upon concluding that the Prophesie would certainly take effect, he built a Temple and a City to his Father, and having order'd him to be worshipt as a God, con∣stituted Priests for the Oracle. It's reported that Ammon was portray'd with a Ram's Head, because he always wore an Helmet in the Wars of that shape. There are some that , fabulously re∣port. report he had Horns naturally growing out at his Tem∣ples; and hence it is, that his Son Dionysus is represented in the same manner; and modern Authors do deliver it as a most certain Truth, That this God was Horn'd. When he had built the City, and setled the Oracle, they say, he first consulted with this new God, concerning his intended Expeditions, and that his Father an∣swer'd him, that by doing good to all Mankind, he should attain to an Estate of Immortality. Being thus incourag'd, he first invaded Egypt, and made Jupi∣ter the Son of Saturn and Rhea, King of the Country, though he was but then a Boy: But appointed Olympus his Assistant and Tutor, by whose Instructions he attain'd to a high degree of Virtue and noble Endowments, and thence was call'd Jupiter Olympus. Dionysus was said to have taught the Egyptians the manner of planting, and use of the Vine, and to keep and store up Wine, Acorns or Crabbs. Apples and other Fruits. His Fame was now so nois'd abroad in every Place, that none durst oppose him, but all submitted of their own accord, and with Praises and Sacrifices ador'd him as a God. Passing thus (they say) through the whole World, he planted and improv'd the Countries all along as he went, and by his good Acts oblig'd all Mankind to a grateful remembrance, by rendring him immortal Honour: And whereas all Men have divers Sentiments of the rest of the Gods, yet they all a∣gree in the Immortality of Bacchus: For there's neither Greek nor Barbarian, but have tasted of his Grace and Bounty; yea, even those that inhabit the most bar∣ren Countries altogether unfit for the Planting of Vines, learnt of him how to make Drink of Barly, little inferior for deliciousness of Taste to Wine. Beer. They say moreover, that Dionysus with a swift March hasted out of India to the The Medi∣terranean. Sea, and there found the Titanes passing over with great Forces into Crete, against Ammon. And whereas Jupiter in the mean time had brought over Forces out of Egypt to the assistance of Ammon, and a great War was broke out in that Island, Dionysus forthwith, together with Minerva and others (reputed to be Gods) transported Aids to them in Crete. Hereupon was fought a great Bat∣tel, wherein the Dionysans were Victors, and the Titanes were every Man cut P. 145. off. After Ammon and Bacchus were translated to a state of Immortality, (and all the Titanes now utterly extinct,) Jupiter became Lord of the Universe, none da∣ring to be so impious as to oppose him.
These are the things which the Libyans say were done by the first Bacchus the Son of Ammon and Amalthea. The Second Bacchus (they say) was Son of Jupiter, by Io, the Daughter of Inachus, and reign'd in Egypt, and there taught the manner of divine Worship and Sacrifices. The Third was the Issue of Jupiter and Semele, and was among the Grecians a Rival of the other Two before mention'd. For making it his business to imitate them, he likewise with a great Army marcht through the whole World, and set up many Pillars at the utmost, Bounds of his several Expeditions, and planted and improv'd likewise the Countries as he went. And as the ancient Bacchus listed the Amazons into his Army, so did this other Women. He took likewise much care and pains about the Orgia and Sacred Rites and Ceremonies, some of which he reform'd, and added others. But because of the length of time, the first Invention and finding out of things is unknown to many; this last Bacchus only inherits the Glory and Reputation belonging to the former, which Misfor∣tune not only befell him, but Hercules after him. For whereas there was anciently Two of the same Name; one of them (and the more ancient) is said to have flourish'd in Egpyt, who having overcome a great part of the World, erected a Pillar in Africa. The other was born in Crete, and was one of the Idaei Dactyli; he was a Jugler, but likewise a good Soldier, and instituted the Olympick Games. The last was the Son of Jupiter, by Alcmena, born a little before the Trojan War: He travel'd through many Parts of the World, to execute the Commands of Euristheus; and succeeded in all his Enterprizes; he erected a Pillar in Eu∣rope. His Name being the same, and his Actions much like to those of the former, was the occasion that what things were done by the ancient Hercules's after their Deaths, were by Posterity solely ascrib'd to him, as if there had been never any but one Hercules in the World. Amongst other evident Proofs that there were more than one Dionysus or Bacchus, this very Fight of the Titanes does make it clear: For it's generally ac∣knowledg'd, that Dionysus was with Jupiter in the War against the Titanes, and they say that it is an absurd and undecent thing to account Semele Contemporary with the Titanes, and to affirm that Cadmus, the Son of Agenor was more ancient than the The Gods of Olympus. Celestial Gods. And these are the things which the Lybians relate of Bacchus. Thus having now perform'd our Promise made at the beginning, we shall here put an end to this Third Book.
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK IV. The PREFACE. I Am not ignorant that the Writers of Antiquities in many things fall short of the truth in their Relations. For being that ancient things are (as it were) scrap'd out of the Rubbish with very great difficulty, they greatly perplex the Historian. And because the Supputation of Times, wherein things were done, cannot now be so exact as to infer an Infallible Argument for the truth of the Actions related; therefore it is that the Reader despises the Authors of the History. And the multitude and variety of the Gods, Demy-Gods, and other Famous Men, whose Genealogies are to be treated of, add much more to the difficulty. And the greatest vexation of all is, that the Writers of Antiquities and Mythologies differ exceedingly in their Relations one from another: And therefore the most fam'd and noted Historians of later Times, have altogether wav'd Treatises of Ancient Things, and apply'd themselves to Composing Histories only of such as have happened in Times a little before their own. For Ephorus the Cumean, the Scholar of Isocrates, designing to write a General History, passing over matter of former Ages, began his Writings with the Time of Samuel the Prophet, Eighty Years after the Destruction of Troy. Return of the Heraclides: Callisthenes and Theopompus, who were Contemporary, follow'd the same Method, and wav'd all matters of Antiquity. But I am of a contrary Opinion from them in this matter, and therefore the more fully to discharge what I have undertaken, have resolv'd with the greatest care and diligence I can, to treat of the An∣tiquities of Ancient Times: For there are many things, and such as are very remarkable, that have been done by the Gods and Demy-Gods, and other Fa∣mous Men, to some of whom Posterity for their good Actions to the general benefit of Mankind, have attributed Divine Honours, as to Gods, and have ador'd others, by instituting Sacrifices to them as Demy-Gods. But the due praises of all these Worthies are publish'd to the World by History, to the Succession of perpetual Generations.
In the Three former Books, we have treated of the Affairs of other Na∣tions, and of their Gods; of the Description of Places in the several Coun∣tries; of the wild Beasts, and other living Creatures bred amongst them, and whatever we judg'd worthy of remark, or strange and wonderful. In this Book we shall set forth the Antiquities of the Grecians from the P. 147. most ancient Times, and therein treat of the Gods, and Demy-Gods, and of all others that have been famous and remarkable in feats of Arms, in times of War, or have found out what has been beneficial to Mankind in times of Peace, or such as have been Law-makers. We shall begin therefore with Dionysus or Bacchus, because he's the most ancient, and did most benefit to Mankind. In the former Books we have shew'd how that some of the Barbarians have challeng'd the Birth of this God to be amongst them. For the Egyptians say, that their God Osiris is the same whom the Grecians call Dionysus; and that he went through the whole World, and first found out the use of Wine, and taught Men how to plant the Vine, and that for this great Benefit to Mankind, all generally agree that he attain'd to a state of Immortality. The Indians likewise with no less Confidence say, that he was born a∣mong them, and that he shew'd the way and manner of Planting the Vine, and discovered the use of Wine; which having before declar'd, we shall now deliver what the Grecians report concerning this God.
CHAP. I. What the Grecians say further of Bacchus. The Story of Priapus. Of Her∣mophroditus. Of the Muses. The Birth of Hercules; and his Twelve Labours injoin'd him by Euristheus. His wandring Expeditions through Africk, Spain, France, Italy, Sicily: His setting up Two Pillars at Ga∣des, and his other Acts by the way. The Story of Orpheus. CAdmus (they say) the Son of Agenor, being sent out of Phenicia by the King his Father to seek Europa, was commanded to bring her back, or he himself never to return into Phenicia. After ma∣ny This of Gadmus, was An. Mund. 2660, in the time of Geidon; be∣fore Christ, 1688. long and tedious Travels through many Countries, not be∣ing able to find the lost Lady in any place, despairing of ever returning into his own Country, he came at length into Beo∣tia, and by Command of the Oracle, built Thebes, where he resided, and marry'd Harmonia, the Daughter of Venus, by whom he had Semele, Ino, Autonoes, Aga∣ves and Polydores. Semele was so beautiful, that Jupiter fell in love with her, and lay with her: But making his Addresses Silently, in a mean and ordinary manner, she lookt upon it as if he did it in contempt of her, and therefore earnestly en∣treated him to come to his Embraces with her in the same manner as he did when he lay with Juno. Whereupon decking himself in his Divine Majesty, he ap∣proacht to her in Thunder and Lightning, and so lay with her in Light and Splendour: But Semele being great with Child, and not able to bear the Flashes of Lightning that shot round about her, miscarry'd, and she herself was con∣sum'd by the Flame; and then Jupiter took away the Infant, and deliver'd it to Mercury, with Orders to convey him to the Cave in Nysa (which lies between Phenicia, and the River Nile) and there to recommend him to the care of the Nymphs, to be carefully bred up. Hence from Jupiter, whom the Greeks call Dia and Nysa, he was call'd Dionysus, as Homer in his Hymns witnesses in this Distick. Far off from Phenice stands the Sacred Nyse, Where Streams of Egypt's Nile begin to rise, On Mountain high with pleasant Woods adorn'd Being brought up by the Nymphs in Nysa, they say, he found out the use of Wine, and taught the way and manner of planting the Vine; and going almost into all Parts of the World, he civiliz'd many Nations and Countries, so that he was highly honour'd of all. He found out likewise the manner of making Drink of Barley; some call it Zythus, for Taste and fragrant Smell not much Zythus, Beer. inferior to Wine, which Art he especially taught them, whose Country was not fit for Planting, or producing of Vines. He led along with him an Army, not only of Men, but of Women, to execute Punishments upon impious and wicked Men. In Beotia (in gratitude to his own Country,) he set free all the Cities, and upon the account of this Freedom, built a City, and call'd it In Greek, Freedom. Eleuthera. After he had spent Three whole Years in an Expedition into India, he return'd with many rich Spoils into Beotia, and was the first in triumph mounted upon an Indian Elephant. Therefore the Beotians and the rest of the Grecians and P. 148. Thracians, to keep up the Memory of the Indian Expedition, instituted solemn Sacrifices every Third Year to Bacchus, call'd Trieterica, at which time they are of opinion this God appears among Men; and therefore every third Year in many Towns of Greece, the Festivals of Bacchus, call'd Bacchanalia, are celebrated by a Company of Women and Virgins, who (according to the solemn Rites)
carry * Javelins deckt with Flowers, and run about like Furies, hollowing and † Call'd Thyr∣ses. setting forth the Praises of the God. The Married Women likewise run to these Sacrifices, and fill the Air with loud and solemn Hymns to Bacchus, as if he were then present amongst them, in imitation of the Maenadae, Women that acted like fu∣ous Mad Wo∣men. Menades, which heretofore (as is said) went along with Bacchus. Amongst many others who were impious and wicked, he especially inflicted Punishment upon Pentheus and Lycurgus. But because the invention and use of Wine is very grateful to Man∣both for its pleasant relish, and its strengthening and inlivening of the Body, it is the Custom at Supper-time, when pure and unmixt Wine is freely offer'd to all, to call upon the Good Genius; but after Supper, when the Wine is mixt with Water, to call upon Jupiter the Saviour. Jupiter Soter: For from pure and unmixt Wine, ma∣ny times proceeds Madness; but temper'd and allay'd with Water call'd the Liquor of Jove, . the Liquor that descends from Jove, it truly chears and refreshes the Spirits, and cures Men of their Madness and Intoxication. Amongst all the Gods (they say) Bacchus and Ceres deserve most to be honour'd by Mankind, because they were by their good Inventions most benefited: For he found out the most pleasant Drink, and she the most strengthening Food. They report that there was another Bacchus or Dionysus, much ancienter than this, the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, call'd by some Sabazius, at whose Birth Dionysus, Sa∣bazius. Sacreds and Sacrifices were celebrated in secret, and in the Night, by reason of the filthy Commixtures that were then among them. It's said, he was of a ve∣ry sharp Wit, and was the first that taught how to yoke Oxen, and by them how to Plow and Sow the Ground; whence they feign him to have Horns. They say likewise, that the Dionysus of Thebes. Son of Semele was of later times; of a slender and deli∣cate shape of Body, and most comly Feature, exceeding Amorous, and addicted to the Sports of Venus: That he carry'd about with him, multitudes of Women in his Army, furnish'd with Launces wrapt about with all sorts of Flowers: And that the Muses attended him in his Expedition, Virgins excellently learn'd, who by their melodious Singing, Dancing and other pleasant Diversions, exceed∣ingly delighted the God. Selenus, its said was his Master, his Fauster Father, and Associate in his Wars; . and was an excellent Instructor and Teacher, and contributed much to the im∣provement of Bacchus in Virtue, and the advancement of his Reputation and Honour. In the time of Battel, he was furnish'd with warlike Weapons, and a Coat of Mail cover'd with a Panther's Skin; in time of Peace, when he celebrated Solemn Festivals, and came into the General Assemblies, he was cloathed with splendid and delicate Apparel; and to prevent the Head-ach by drinking of too much Wine, he wore a Mitre upon his Head, and was call'd The Miter Wearer. Mitrophorus. This gave occasion to Kings afterwards to wear Diadems. They say, he was call'd Bimater, one of Two Mo∣thers. Bimater, because both Dionysus's had one Father, but several Mothers; but the Younger succeeded the Elder in the like remarkable Actions, and therefore Posterity through ignorance of the Truth, and being both had one and the same Name, concluded that there was but one Diony∣sus. They attribute to him the carrying of a Rod, for the Reasons following: When Wine was first found out, it was drunk pure, not mix'd with Water, so that in many Meetings and solemn Festivals, many times Men drunk to that P. 149. Excess, that they grew Mad and Furious, and beat one another with Clubs and Staves, insomuch as some were grievously wounded, and others were kill'd; at which Dionysus was much offended; and though he did not altogether forbid the drinking of unmixt Wine, because it was so pleasant and delicious, yet in∣stead of Clubs, he order'd the use of Wanns and small Rods. Men have given him many Sirnames, according to the several Acts or Circum∣stances of his Life. For he's call'd Bacchaeus, from the  bowling or Mourning Women. Bacchae, that accompany'd him. Leneus, from pressing of the Grapes at the Lonos, a Wine-press. Iyrigene. Winepress. Bromeus or Thunderer, because of the Crash of Thunder that was at the time of his Birth; and for the same Reason he was call'd * Fireborn: He was sirnam'd likewise Thri∣ambus, because he was the first (of whom ever any mention was made) that Tri∣umph'd, when he return'd loaden with many Spoils into his Country from his Indian Expedition. Many other Names were assign'd him, which would be both
too tedious particularly to recite, and likewise foreign from the Design of this History. They held that he had two Biformis. Faces, because there were two Dionysus's, the ancient Dionysus, who always wore a long Beard, because all in ancient time let their Beards grow; and this later Bacchus who was a spruce young Man, as we have before declar'd. But some say, that a double Countenance was assign'd him, because of the two special Qualities wherewith Drunkards are affected, being either raging mad, or transported with Mirth. They say likewise that he carry'd Satyrs along with him, who by their dancing and skipping in his Sports and Plays made the God exceeding merry. To con∣clude, as the Muses pleas'd and delighted him with the Knowledge of the liberal Sciences, so the Satyrs with their Tricks and antick and ridiculous Gestures and Actions compleated the Happiness and Comfort of his Life. It's reported likewise he invented Plays, and set up Theaters, and instituted Musick Schools, and freed all Musicians that went along with him in his Expedi∣tions from publick Taxes; and hence it is, that Posterity (after the Example of Dionysus) have created Societies of Musicians, and decreed that all of that Profes∣sion should be free. But that we may keep within due Bounds, we shall here put an end to our Dis∣course concerning Bacchus, and his Actions in Ancient times. And now since what is anciently reported of Priapus is (as we conceive) perti∣nent to this History of Bacchus, we shall here proceed to give an Account of him. The Ancients feign that Priapus was the Son of Bacchus and Venus, induc'd thereunto by a probable Argument, which is this, That when Men are drunk they are naturally prone to Venery; and some say, that when the ancient Mythologists would name a Man's Yard, they call'd it Priapus; and therefore that the privy Parts (because they are the Instruments of Generation, and support the constant and continual Succession of Mankind) have receiv'd divine Honour. The Egyptians tell this Story concerning Priapus; They say that the Titanes in ancient times treacherously assassinated Osiris, and divided his Members into equal Parts, and that every one privately carry'd away a Part out of the Palace, only his privy Members they threw into the River, because none would meddle with them: But Isis (they say) after a diligent Inquiry made concerning the Murder of her Husband, and having reveng'd his Death upon the Titanes; by conjoyning his dismember'd Parts, reduc'd them to a humane Shape, and deliver'd the Body to the Priests to be bury'd, and commanded that Osiris should be ador'd as a God, P. 150. and appointed the Shape of his privy Member (which only was wanting and could not be found) to be set up as a sacred Relict in the Temple, and to be honour'd likewise as a Deity: And these are the Things which the ancient Egyptians feign concerning the Original and divine Worship of Priapus. Some call this God Ithyphallus, others Typhon. He's not only worshipp'd in the Temples in the Cities, but in the Fields and Villages, where he is reputed the Guardian and Keeper of their Vineyards and Orchards, and say that if any steal their Goods he inflicts Punishment upon them for it. This God is not only honour'd in the Festivals of Bacchus, but in all other sacred Solemnities, where with Sport and Ridicule his Image is presented to the View of all. They feign likewise that Hermaphroditus had the like Original, who being sprung Hermaphrodi∣tus. from Mercury. Hermes and Venus. Aphrodita, was from their two Names joyn'd together so call'd. Some say that this Hermaphroditus is a God, who at some certain times appears to Men, and is naturally both Man and Woman; in Beauty and Slender∣ness of his Body he represents a Woman, but in Strength and manly Countenance, a Man. Others account these Births for Monsters, which being but rare, portend sometimes both Good and Bad by turns; but enough of these. Here it's fit to say something of the Muses (of whom some mention is made in Muses. the History of Bacchus.) Most of the Writers of Antiquities, and those of great∣est Authority, say they were the Daughters of Jupiter and Memory. Mnemosyne. Some few of the Poets (among whom is Alcman) say they were the Issue of Coelum & Coelus and Terra, Hea∣ven & Earth. Terra. They differ likewise about their Number, for some reckon three, others nine; but the Number Nine by the Authority of the most famous Authors (such as Homer, Hesiod, and some others of the like Esteem) has prevail'd before all others. For thus says Homer—
. The Muses Nine with Voices sweet do cant. Hesiod likewise summs up their Names in these Verses— Clio, Thalia and Melpomene, Likewise Erato and Terpsichore, Polymnia, Urania, Euterpe, And one beyond them all, Calliope. To each of these they attribute their peculiar Art in particular sorts of Sciences, as poetical Harmony, Dancing, Singing, Astrology and the rest of the liberal Arts. They are said by most to be Virgins, because liberal Sciences seem to be uncorrupt, and virtuous Qualifications. They are call'd Muses from the Greek Word Myein, which signifies the teaching of things commendable and profitable, and such as are unknown to them that are instructed. They apply likewise to each a particular Reason of their several Names. Clio, they say, is so call'd, because she advances Mens Names to the Skies in assisting the Poets to resound their Praise. Euterpe, because she delights her Auditors with wholesom and commendable Instructions. Thalia, from the con∣stant Glory and Honour that attends upon Learning. Melpomene, is so call'd from Melody, by which means she insinuates her self with Delight into the Minds of Men. Terpsichore, because she delights her Scholars with those Pleasures that result from Learning. Erato, because she procures Love and Respect to Learned Men from all. Polymnia, from the many Hymns whereby she advances the Re∣nown of her Poets, and crowns their Names with immortal Praise and Glory. Urania, because those that are taught and improv'd by her are even lifted up to Heaven. Lastly, Calliope, from the Sweetness of her Voice, that is, her elegant P. 151. Language and exact Composures of her Verse, whereby she gains the general Applause of her Learned Auditors. Having treated sufficiently of these Matters, we shall now bend our Discourse to the things done by Hercules. Hercules. I am not ignorant that those that write of the Actions of the Ancients, especially of the Acts of Hercules, meet with many Difficulties; for of all the great Actions that ever were done in the World, those of Hercules far exceed all that ever have been recorded. A most difficult Task therefore it is to give such an Account of what this Hero did, as may be agreeable to the Worth and Dig∣nity of his Actions, or to frame such a Discourse as may equalize the Greatness of them, for which he attain'd to a State of Immortality. For in as much as things that are ancient and unusual are judg'd incredible by most, its absolutely necessary, though with the Diminution of this God's Glory, to omit some of his Acts, lest by relating all, the whole History be rejected as fabulous. For some unreasonably expect as clear Evidence for things that are ancient, as for those done in our own Age, and judge of the Greatness of Actions (which makes them seem incredible) according to the Rule of things done in the present time; and judge of the Strength of Hercules according to the weak Measure of Mens Strength now. And so by reason of the Greatness and Strangeness of things related, History suffers in its Credit and Reputation. But in In Mytholo∣gies. old Stories the Truth ought not to be search'd into too critically and punctually: For in the Plays and Theaters, tho' we do not believe for certain that there ever were such Creatures as Centaurs, or Creatures of a double Nature of several Species's, nor such a one as Geryon, that had three Bodies, yet we favourably receive and entertain those Fables, and with a general Applause advance the Honour of the That is, Her∣cules, who car∣ry'd away Ge∣ryon's Oxen. God. How unjust is it then that Men should forget the Labours of Hercules while he was here upon Earth? Where∣by he did Good to all the World, and instead of rendring him his due Praises,
to calumniate him, whom our Ancestors with unanimous Consent for his eminent Virtue honour'd with divine Honours. And what can be more impious, than not to preserve and defend that Religious Respect to this God, which they by their Example have recommended to us? But letting these things pass; we shall relate the things done by him from the begin∣ning, according as the Poets and the most ancient Mythologists have handed them down to us. Perseus (they say) was the Son of Jupiter by Danae, the Daughter of Acrisius, and that Perseus begat Electryo of Andromeda, the Daughter of Cepheus, and that Electryo begat Alcmenes of Eurydice the Daughter of Pelops, and that Jupiter (de∣ceiving Alcmenes) lay with her and begat Hercules: So that by this Genealogy Hercules descended from the chiefest of the Gods, both immediately by his Mother, and more remotely by his Great-Grand-Father Perseus. His Virtue and Valour were not only evident from his Acts, but might be concluded and foreseen by what happen'd before he was born: For when Jupiter lay with Alcmenes, he lengthen'd the Night threefold, so that spending so much time in procreating this Child, was a Sign how extraordinary strong he was like to be. They say that Jupiter lay not with her out of any amorous Pang of Love, as with other Women, but meerly for Procreation sake: And therefore willing that his Embraces at this time should be lawful, he forbore all Violence; and knowing that the Woman's Chastity was such, that no Arguments would prevail with her, he deceiv'd her by taking upon him the Shape of Amphitryo. And now the Time of her Delivery drew nigh, when Jupiter full of thoughts concerning the Birth of Hercules, in the presence of all the Gods de∣clar'd, that he would make him King of the Persians, who was to be born that P. 152. that day. Whereupon Juno inrag'd with Jealousie, with the assistance of Ilithyia, a Goddess assi∣stant to them in Travel. Ili∣thyia her Daughter, gave a Check to the delivery of Alcmenes, and brought forth Eurystheus before his full time. But though Jupiter was thus outwitted by Juno, yet that he might perform his Promise, he took care to preserve the Ho∣nour and Reputation of Hercules. And therefore its reported that he prevail'd with Juno to consent, that Eurystheus being made King according to his Promise, Hercules (who should be subject to him) performing Twelve Labours (such as Euristheus should impose upon him) should be taken into the Society of the Im∣mortal Gods. Alcmenes being deliver'd (out of fear of Juno's Jealousie) expos'd the Child in a place which is now from him call'd Hercules's his Field. About which time Minerva, together with Juno, walking Abroad, found the Infant, and much ad∣miring his Beauty, Minerva persuaded Juno to give it suck: The Child draw∣ing the Breast with more violence than at his Age was usual, Juno not able to indure the pain, cast away the Infant; whom Minerva took up, and brought Home to his Mother to be nurs'd by her. The Accident here seems very strange and remarkable. For the Mother, who ow'd a natural Affection to her own Child, expos'd him to Destruction; but she who hated him, as a Stepmother (unknow∣ingly) preserv'd her natural Enemy. Afterwards Juno sent two , Two Dragons. Serpents to devour the Child: But he took them with both his Hands by their Throats and strangl'd them. Upon which account the Argives (coming to understand what was done) call'd him Hercules, Hercules sig∣nifies the Glo∣ry of Juno, who is call'd in Greek Hera. because Juno was the Occasion of his Glory and Fame; for he was before call'd Al∣caeus. Others are nam'd by their Parents, but he gain'd his Name by his Va∣lour. In After-times it happen'd that Amphitrio, being banish'd from Tyrinthe, settl'd himself in Thebes; here Hercules was educated, here he was instructed and greatly improv'd in all laudable Exercises, in so much as he excell'd all others in Strength of Body, and also in the excellent Endowments of his Mind. Being now grown up to Man's Estate, he first freed Thebes from tyrannical Slavery, and thereby made a grateful Return to the Country where he was bred. The Thebans at that time were under the Tyranny of Erginus, King of the A People of Thessaly. Menyans, who every year exacted Tribute from them, not without Scorn and Contempt. Hercules therefore not at all discourag'd with the Greatness of the Bondage they labour'd under, attempted a glorious Piece of Service. For when those who were sent from the Menyae to collect the Tribute, carry'd it * insolently . towards the People, he cut off their Ears, and cast them out of the City, where∣upon
Erginus demanded the Delivery up of the Malefactor, and Creon the Prince of Thebes (dreading the Potency of Erginus) resolv'd to deliver him up; But Hercules stirr'd up the young Men of the City to arm themselves, in order to recover the Liberty of their Country, and to that end took away all the Arms that were in the Temples, formerly dedicated to the Gods by their Ancestors, of the Spoyls of their Enemies. For none of the Citizens had any Arms of their own, by Reason the Menyans had disarm'd the City; so that the Thebans had not the least Thought of a Revolt. Intelligence being brought that Erginus with an Army approach'd the City, Hercules set upon him in a strait Passage (where a Multitude was of little Use) and kill'd Erginus, and cut off almost his whole Army. He fell likewise suddainly upon the City of the Orchomenians, entring unexpectedly, and burnt the Palace of the Menyae, and raz'd the City to the Ground. The Fame of this notable Exploit was presently nois'd over all Greece, while such a suddain and unexpected Atchievement was the Subject of every Man's Ad∣miration, and Creon the King (wonderfully taken with the Valour of the young Man) gave him his Daughter Megaera to Wife, and committed to him the Care and Charge of the City as if he had been his own Son. But Euristheus King of Argos (jealous of Hercules his growing Greatness) sent P. 15. for him to perform the Labours he was to impose upon him, which he refusing, Jupiter commanded him to obey King Euristheus; whereupon Hercules went to Delphos, and inquir'd of the Oracle concerning this Matter, who answer'd him, That it was the Pleasure of the Gods, that he should perform twelve Labours at the Command of Euristheus, and that when he had finish'd them, he should receive the Reward of Immortality. Hereupon Hercules became exceeding sad and melan∣choly; for he judg'd it very much below him to be at the Beck of his inferior; and to disobey his Father Jupiter a second time he concluded was both unprofitable and impossible. While he was in this Perplexity Juno struck him with Madness; being therefore through the Discomposure of his Mind become distracted, and by the Growth of his Distemper altogether a mad Man, he design'd to murder Iolaus, who saving himself by Flight he fell upon his own Children by Megara, who were next in his Way, and struck them through with his Darts, as if they had been his Enemies. As soon as he came again to himself, and understood his Error, he almost sunk under the Weight of his Misery (being pity'd by every Body) and shut up himself in his own House a long time from the Converse and Society of Men. At length Time moderating his Grief, resolving to undergo all the Difficulties that were enjoyn'd him, he went to Euristheus; who in the first place com∣manded Hercules his 12 Labours. 1. The Neme∣an Lyon. him to kill the Lyon in the Forest of This Forest was in Achaia. Nemea, which was of a mon∣strous Bigness, not to be pierc'd or wounded by Sword, Spear or Stones, and therefore not to be dealt with but by meer Force and Strength of Hand. His Walks were commonly between Mycenas and Nemea, near the Mountain (from what happen'd to it) call'd Tretos bor'd through. Tretos. For at the Foot of this Hill there was a Den, in which this Monster us'd to lurk. Hercules here meeting with him lay'd hold on him, whereupon the Beast beginning to fly to his Den, he resolutely pursu'd him (having before stop'd up one of the Mouths of the Den) and so both clos'd, where he got the Lyon by the Throat, and strangl'd him with his Arms. Then he cloath'd himself with his Skin (which was big enough to cover his whole Body) and ever after wore it as a Defence in all Conflicts. His second Task was to kill the Hydra of Lerna. This Monster had a hundred 2. Hydra. Necks rising out of one Body, and upon every Neck a serpentine Head, and when one of these was cut off, two others grew up in its stead, and therefore this Mon∣ster was accounted invincible; and not without good reason; for from the Part that was lost, arose a double Assistance in its Room. Against this Difficulty he invented this Stratagem; he commanded Iolaus to sear the Part that was cut off with a Firebrand, that thereby the Blood might be stop'd, by which Means the Beast was kill'd; and he dipt the Points of his Darts in the Monster's Gall, that wherever they struck, the Wound might be incurable. The third Command was, that he should bring the Erymanthean Boar (which 3. The Ery∣than Boar. rov'd about in the Plains of Arcadia) to him alive. This seem'd to be a most difficult Task. For he that fought with this Beast ought to be so subtil as diligent∣ly to watch the exact Time and fittest Opportunity in the Management of the
Conflict; for if he should let him go while he was in his full strength, the Cham∣pion was in danger to be rent in pieces with his Tushes; and if he wounded him too sore, and so kill'd him, his Labour was lost, and his Victory imperfect. How∣ever he so prudently manag'd the Combat, that he brought the Boar alive to Euristheus, who was so terrify'd to see him come hurrying with the Boar upon his Shoulders, that he hid himself in a Brazen Hogshead. In the mean time Hercules subdu'd the Centaurs upon this occasion: There was one Pholus among the Centaurs, from whom the Neighbouring Mountain was P. 154. call'd Pholoes; this same having entertain'd Hercules as his Guest, took up an Hogshead of Wine that had for a long time been bury'd in the Earth. For it's reported that this Wine was anciently deposited in the Hands of a certain Cen∣taur by Bacchus, who commanded that it should be broacht at that very time when Hercules came thither; who now hapning to be there the Fourth Age after, Pho∣lus remembring Bacchus his Command, open'd the Hogshead; whereupon the Wine being old, and exceeding strong, the Flavour of it reacht to the Neigh∣bouring Centaurs, and struck them all with a fit of Fury and Madness; where∣upon they all came in Troops, and in a terrible Tumult assaulted Pholus his House, to carry away the Prey, in so much as Pholus in a great Fright hid him∣self. But Hercules unexpectedly set upon the Aggressors; for he was to fight with those who from the Mother partook of the Nature of the Gods, were as swift as Horses, as strong as double Bodied Beasts, and were indu'd with the understand∣ing and prudence of Men. Some of these Centaurs assail'd him with Fir-Trees pluck'd up by the Roots; others with huge and massy Stones, some with lighted Firebrands, and others with Axes, with whom he undauntedly enter'd the List, and fought with that bravery, as was agreeable to the glory of his former Actions. Their Mother A Cloud. Nephele assisted them by a violent Storm of Rain, which was no prejudice to them that were Four-footed; but he that had but Two, had by this means a troublesom and slippery Standing: However Hercules with wonder∣ful Valour overcame them, that had so many and great Advantages above him, Killing most of them, and putting the rest to flight: Of those that were slain, the most remarkable were Daphnis, Argeus, Amphion, Hippotion, Oreus, Isoples, Melanchetes, Thereus, Dupo and Phrixus. And every one of those that fled, came afterwards to condign Punishment; For Homadus, (because he ravisht in Arcadia, Atalcyona, the Sister of Euristheus) was slain by Hercules, for which his Generosity was greatly admir'd: For though he hated his Enemy upon his own private Ac∣count, yet he judg'd it a commendable piece of Humanity, to have Compassion of a Woman in her afflicted Condition, upon the account of her Dishonour and Dis∣grace. Somewhat likewise remarkable happened to Pholus, Hercules his Friend: For burying the Centaurs that were kill'd (upon the account of his Kindred and Re∣lation to them) plucking a Dart out of one of them, he chanc'd with the Point mortally to wound himself, of which he died; whom Hercules with great Pomp and State bury'd at the Foot of the Mount; which fell out to be far more glo∣rious than the most stately Monument; for the Mountain being call'd Philoe, pre∣serves the memory of him bury'd there, not by Characters and Inscriptions, but by similittude of Name. In the same manner he kill'd Another Centaur. Chiron (eminent for his Art in Phisick) by chance with the throwing of a Dart. But this that has been said of the Centaurs shall suffice. Afterwards Hercules receiv'd a further Command, That he should take the 4th Labour. swift Hart that had golden Horns, and bring him to the King. This he perform'd more by Art and Subtilty than strength of Body: For some say he took her in a Net, others by tracing her to the place where she rested, and there laying hold on her when she was asleep; but others say, that he ran her down, and so gain'd her by swiftness of Foot. However it were, it's certain he perform'd this La∣bour not by force or any hazard, but by Art and Skill. Being next commanded to drive away the Birds that were about the Stym∣phalian 5th Labour. Lake, by Art and Contrivance he easily perform'd this: For there were an innumerable number of Birds in those Places, which destroy'd and eat up all the Fruits in the Neighbourhood; and they were so numerous, that no Force could
prevail to be rid of them. Being therefore there was need of Art and Contrivance in this matter, he invented a Brazen Or Table, or other thing that ld sound and make a noise. Pan, and by the mighty sound it made, by striking upon it, frighted the Birds, and by the continual noise, drave them at length quite away; so that the Lake was never infested with them after∣wards. This Labour being now at an end, Eurystheus in Contempt of him, commanded 6. Augaeus his Stable. him without any Assistant to cleanse Augeus his Stable, in which were vast heaps of Muck and Dirt which had been gathering together for many Years. Hercules P. 155. therefore to avoid the ignominy of this Contempt cast upon him, scorn'd to car∣ry out the Muck and Dung upon his Shoulders, but in one Days time, without any disgrace to himself, cleans'd the Stable, by turning the Course of the River Peneus through it; in which thing the ingenuity of Hercules is admirable, who so executed the proud Command of his domineering Master, as to avoid every thing that was base and unbecoming the glory of his immortal Honour. Next was impos'd upon him the bringing the Bull out of Crete, with which 7. Bull out of Crete. (they say) Pasiphae fell in love. To this end therefore he sail'd into the Island, and by the assistance of King Minos, transported the Beast (for which he had made so long a Voyage) into Peloponesus. Having perform'd this Task, he instituted the Olympick Games, and for that purpose chose out a place he judg'd most convenient for the reception of such a Pompous Assembly, which were the Fields all along the Banks of the River Alpheus. Here he order'd Olympick Games by Hercules, An. Mund. 2730. An. Mund. 2747. Se∣cund. Helv. tempore Servitutis Jud. sub Ammonit. ante Jephtha, Cir. 12. the Solemnity of these Games to the honour of his Father Ju∣piter; and appointed to the Victors a Crown for a Reward, minding the general good and benefit of Mankind, without taking any advantage to himself. In every Exercise he was Victor, without any opposition; for by reason of his remakable strength and valour, none durst con∣tend with him, although the Contests were of a contrary and different nature one from another: For it's a hard matter even for a mighty Champion in Combate, always to win the Prize in a Course, and as difficult for those that are usually Vi∣ctors in small Contentions, to prevail against them that are eminent in greater Contests. Hercules therefore prevail'd in all these Games, carrying away the Prize from the chiefest among them. And here we are not to omit giving an account of the Rewards given to him by the Gods for his Virtue; for when he retir'd himself from Wars, and betook himself to his ease and quietness, and to follow Sports, Panegyricks and Festi∣vals, every one of the Gods presented him with their several Gifts. Minerva gave him an imbroidered Hood, Vulcan a Club and a Breast-plate; and between these Two, was a Contest who should excel in their several Arts, whilst the one wrought and bestow'd what was for pleasure and ornament in time of Peace, and the other what was for defence in time of War. Neptune presented him with Horses, Mercury with a Sword, Apollo a Bow, and taught him the art of Archery. And Ceres to expiate the Slaughter of the Centaurs, instituted in honour of Hercules some small Mysteries. But concerning the Birth of this God, this is remarkable, for the first Woman upon Earth that Jupiter lay with, was Niobe, the Daughter of Pharoneus; and the last was Alcmena, who was in the Sixteenth Age after Niobe as the Mythologists say. From the time of † her An∣cestors, Almen's Ancestors. he began to beget Men, and at length ended in this Alcmena, and would never after have any thing to do with any Mortal, or beget any Issue, never ex∣pecting to beget a more excellent Offspring. Afterwards when the Giants fought with the immortal Gods at Pallene, Hercu∣les aided the Gods, and after a great Slaughter made by him of those Sons of the Earth, he became greatly renown'd. For Jupiter call'd those only Gods of Olympus, who assisted him in the War, by this Title of Honour, to distinguish the Couragious from the Coward; which Surname he gave to Bacchus and Hercules, though their Mothers were Mortals; not only because they were the Offspring of Jove, but likewise for that they were like him in virtuous Qualifications, do∣ing good generally to all Mankind.
But Prometheus is judg'd to be Noah by some, and Magog the Son of Ja∣phet by others. See Gale's Court of the Gentiles, p. 1. c. 6. Sect. 4. Prometheus because he stole Fire from Heaven, and hand∣ed it to Men, was clapt in Chains by Jupiter, who caus'd an Eagle to seize and feed continually upon his Liver: But Her∣cules seeing that he suffered so much for his Kindness to Man∣kind, shot the Bird with an Arrow, and then having pacify'd Jove, freed this common Benefactor from all farther trouble. Afterwards he was injoyn'd to bring away Diomedes King of Thrace's Mares, P. 156. Diomedes's Mares. which were kept in Stalls of Brass, and (by reason of their Strength and Fierce∣ness) ty'd up in Iron Chains. Their Provender was not from the Product of the Earth, but they were fed with the Flesh of miserable Strangers that came thither, cut in small Pieces for that purpose. Hercules to gain Possession of them, laid their own Master Diomedes before them, who satiating their Hunger by his Flesh, who had wickedly taught them to feed upon Flesh, thereby became tame and ma∣nageable. Euristheus when they were brought to him, dedicated them to Juno, and their Breed continu'd to the time of Alexander the Great. When he had per∣form'd this Labour, he saild with Jason to Colchos, to bring away the Golden Fleece by force of Arms. But of this we shall speak, when we come to the Ex∣pedition of the Argonauts. Then he was commanded to strip Hyppolyta the Amazon of her Belt. Hereupon 9 The Amazons Belt. resolving upon a War against the Amazons, he sail'd into Pontus, from him call'd The Euxine Sea. Euxinus, and arriving at the Mouth of the River Thermodon, he incampt near the City Themiscyra, the Seat Royal of the Amazons: And first he demanded the Belt to be deliver'd to him; which being refus'd, he join'd Battel with them. The choice and most noble of the Amazons were drawn up against Hercules, the rest of the Army oppos'd the other ordinary Troops, so that there was a very sharp Ingagement. The first that fought Hand to Hand with him, was Aella, so call'd from her swiftness; but she found her Enemy swifter than her self: The Second was Philippis, who upon the first Onset, receiv'd a Mortal Wound, and fell down Dead. Then Prothoe entred the List, who, they say, Seven times baffl'd her Enemy in single Combat; but she being at length slain, he kill'd the Fourth call'd Eribea. She was so confident in her strength and feats of Arms, that she us'd to boast she needed none to second her; but meeting with one stronger than her self, she presently experienc'd the vanity of her boast∣ing. After these Celaenus, Euryaea and Phobe, Companions with Diana in Hunting, (who never us'd to miss their Mark, yet now could none of them hit one,) in defending one another, were all kill'd together upon the Spot. Then he over∣came Deianita, Asteria, Marpes, Tecmessa and Alcippe. The last mention'd had vow'd perpetual Virginity, and kept their Oaths, but could not preserve their Lives. Menalippe, she was rather Sister to Antiope, who was Queen. See Nat. Comes, lib. 7. c. 9. Melanippe also the Queen of the Amazons, (who was famous and highly admir'd every where for her Valour) then lost her Kingdom. The chief of the Amazons being thus cut off, he forc'd the rest to fly, and kil∣ling most of them in the pursuit, wholly destroy'd and rooted up that Nation. Of the Prisoners he gave Antiope to Theseus, but Melanippe he discharg'd, having first taken from her her Belt. After this, a Tenth Labour was impos'd upon him by Eurystheus, and that 10 Gryon's Oxen. was to drive away the Oxen of Geryon that pastur'd in Iberia near to the O∣cean. Hercules perceiving he could not perform this Task without much trouble and great preparation, set forth a brave Fleet, and mann'd it with such a num∣ber of Seamen and Souldiers, as such an Expedition justly requir'd: For it was nois'd Abroad through the whole World, that Chrysaores (so call'd from his Riches) King of Spain. Iberia, had Of whom this Geryon was one, whom the Poets feign to have Three Bodies. Three Sons, strong Bodied Men, and famous for Martial Affairs, and that each of them had great Armies of Valiant Men, con∣stantly at hand attending upon them; which was the reason Euristheus impos'd this Task upon him, conceiving this Ex∣pedition was greater than he was ever able to perform: But Hercules under∣took this with as much considence as he had done those before, and commanded Forces to be rais'd in Crete, whence he resolv'd to set forth; this Island being P. 157. the most convenient Port from whence to make any Expedition into any part
of the World. Before he set Sail, mighty Honours were conferr'd upon him by the Inhabitants; in grateful return of which Favours, he freed the Island from wild Beasts, so that no hurtful Creatures, such as Bears, Wolves, Serpents, and such like remain'd there ever after. He did these things in reverence to the I∣sland, because it was reported that Jupiter was bred and born there. Loosing thence, he arriv'd at Libya. Here in the first place he challeng'd and slew An∣taeus (famous for his great strength and skill in Wrestling,) who was us'd to kill the Strangers he wrestled with, after he had master'd them. Then he destroy'd the wild Beasts in the Deserts, and made Africa so quiet and improvable (which was before full of hurtful Creatures,) that every part was fit for Tillage, and planting of Fruit-Trees; the whole Country productive of Wine and Oyl. In short, he so improv'd Libya (which by reason of the multitude of wild Beasts was before uninhabitable,) that no Country in the World afterwards exceeded it for fertility and richness of Soyl. In like manner he so purg'd the Nation from wicked Men, and insolent Tyrants, that he put all the Cities into a flourishing state and condition. It's therefore reported that he was prosecuted with the hatred and opposition of all sorts of dreadful wild Beasts, and of wicked Men; for when he was an Infant in his Cradle, he was assaulted by Serpents, and when he was a Man, he was vext and perplext with the Commands of a proud and un∣just Tyrant. After the Killing of Antaeus, he went into Egypt, where he slew the Tyrant Bu∣siris, who murder'd all Strangers that landed there. After he had pass'd over the Sandy Deserts of Libya, he found a fertil and well water'd Country, in which he built an extraordinary great City, from the number of its Gates call'd Hecatompy∣lon, a Hundred Gates. He∣catompylon, which continu'd in a flourishing Condition till of latter Times that the Carthaginians with a great Army, (commanded by Eminent Captains) took it. Hercules having pass'd through a great part of Africa, arriv'd Or in the straits near Cadiz. in the Ocean, near Gades, where he erected Two Pillars, one on each side the straight upon the Continent. Thence (with his Fleet sailing along with him) he pass'd over into Spain. Iberia, where he found the Sons of Chrysaores, with Three mighty Armies. These at a distance, he challeng'd to a single Combat, and having at length slain the Three Generals, he gain'd Iberia, and drove away those remarkable Herds of Cat∣tel. In the mean time as he travell'd through Spain, he was magnificently enter∣tain'd by a petit Prince in the Country (who was a Pious and Just Man) in re∣turn of which, he bestow'd upon him some of the Cattel; and he again con∣secrated them all to Hercules, and every Year sacrific'd to him one of the fairest Bulls that were bred of them; some of which Sacred Breed remain in Iberia to this Day. And now because we have before made mention of Hercules Pillars, we con∣ceive Hercules's Pil∣lars. it fit in this Place to say something further concerning them. Hercules, when he arriv'd at the utmost Coasts of both Continents adjoining to the Ocean, resolv'd to set up these Pillars as lasting Monuments of his Ex∣pedition. That his Work therefore might be famous to all Posterity, it's said, that he much inlarg'd both the Mountains on each side, by making great Moulds for a long way into the Sea; so that whereas before they lay in the Sea at a great distance one from another, he made the Passage so narrow, that the great Whales from that time could not pass out of the Ocean through those Streights into the Mediterranean; and by the greatness of the Work, the Glory of the Workman is P. 158. preserv'd in everlasting remembrance. But there are some of a contrary Opinion, and affirm that the Continents once join'd together, and that he cut a Trench through them, whereby he open'd a Passage, and so brought the Ocean into our Sea. But every Man may judge of this matter as he thinks fit. The like he did before in Greece: For when the large Champain Country about Tempe, was all over a standing Lake, he cut Sluces through the lower Grounds, and through those Trenches drain'd all the Water out of the Lake, by which means were gain'd all those pleasant Fields of Thes∣saly as far as to the River Penaeus. But in Beotia he did quite contrary, for he caus'd the River which ran through the Country of the Minyae to overflow the whole Region, and turn all into a standing Pool: What he did in Thessaly, was to
gain the favour of the Grecians, but that in Beotia he did to punish the Minyae, be∣cause they opprest the Thebans. Hercules having committed the Government of the Kingdom of Iberia to the chiefest of the Inhabitants, marcht away with his Army into France. Celtica; and o∣vern the whole Country, and put an end to their usual Impieties and Mur∣dering of Strangers. And whereas a vast multitude from all Nations came and listed themselves of their own accord in his Army; having such a number, he built a Famous large City, which he call'd from his wandering Expedition Or Alexia, Arras. Alesia. But because many of the Barbarians from the neigbouring Places were mixt among the Citi∣zens, it happened that the rest of the Inhabitants (being much inferior in number) learnt the Barbarians Manners of the other. The Celtae at this Day have a great esteem and honour for this City, as being the chief and Metropolis of all Gaul; and ever since the time of Hercules it has remain'd Free never taken by any to our very days; till at length Caius Caesar, who (by reason of the greatness of his actions) was call'd Divus, took it by storm, and so it came into the hands of the Romans. With the rest of the Gauls Hercules marching out of Gaul into Italy, as he pass'd over the Alps levell'd and open'd those rough and difficult Ways (that were scarce passable) to make way for his Army and Carriages. The Bar∣barians who Inhabited those Mountainous Parts, were us'd to Kill and Rob, in the straight and craggy Places, Armies as they happned to pass this way; but he subdu'd them and put to Death the Ringleaders of those wicked practices, and so made the Passage safe this way to all Posterity. Having pass'd the Alps, he continu'd his March through Gaul, as it's now call'd, and came into Liguria. The Ligurians inhabit a rough and barren Soil, but being forc'd by continual Labour Hercules comes into Liguria. and Toyl, it produces some little Corn and other Fruits: The People here are short and low, but by reason of their constant Labours well set and strong; for they are far from idle and luxurious livers, and therefore are very active, and Valiant in time of War. To conclude, because all these neighbouring Regions are ply'd with continual Labours and Pains (for that the Land requires it) it's the Custom for the Women to work and labour in that kind, as well as the Men; and whereas the Women as well as the Men work for Hire, there fell out a remarkable Accident concerning one of these Women, strange and unusual to any of our Female Sex. Being great with Child, and falling in Labour in the midst of her work amongst the Men, without any noise or complaint she with∣drew herself into a certain Grove there near at hand, and there being Delivered, she cover'd the Infant with Leaves, and hid it among the Shrubs, and then re∣turn'd to her Work again, without the least sign of having born a Child, and continu'd with her Fellow-labourers in her Work as she did before. But the In∣fant crying and bawling, discover'd the whole matter; yet the Overseer of the P. 159. Workmen would by no means be perswaded to suffer her to leave her miserable Labour, till he that hir'd her, pitying her condition, paid her her Wages, and discharged her. Hercules after he had gone through Liguria, and Thuscany, incampt at Tiber, where Rome now stands, built many Ages after by Romulus the Son of Mars. The Natural Inhabitants at that time inhabited a little Town upon a Hill, now call'd Mount Pallae. Here Cacius in the Greek. Politius and Pinarius, the most eminent Persons of Qua∣lity among them, entertain'd Hercules with all the demonstrations of Kindness imaginable, and presented him with many noble Presents: There are now at Rome ancient Monuments of these Men; for the most noble Family, call'd the Pi∣narii, remains still among the Romans, and is accounted the most ancient at this day. And there are Politius his Stone Stairs to go down from Mount Pallatine (call'd after his Name) adjoyning to that which was anciently his House. Hercules being much pleas'd with the civil Entertainment of the Pallatines, fore∣told them, that whosoever should dedicate the Tenth of their Goods to him, after he was translated to the Gods, should be ever after more prosperous: And this Dedication has been over since constantly us'd to this day. For many of the Ro∣mans, not only such as are of mean Estates, but the great and rich Men (having experienc'd how Riches have flow'd in upon them, after the Decimation of their Goods to Hercules,) have dedicated the Tenth part of their Substances, which have been of the value of Four Thousand Talents. For Lucullus (the richest almost of all the Romans in his time, valu'd his Estate, and consecrated the Tenths
to this God, and feasted continually with prodigious Charge and Expence. The Romans afterwards built a Magnificent Temple near to the River Tiber, in honour of this God, and instituted Sacrifices to him out of the Tenths. Hercules marching from Mount Pallatine, pass'd through the Maritime Coasts of Italy, as they are now call'd, and came into the Champain Country of Cumaea, where (it's said) there were men infamous for their Outrages and Cruelties, call'd Giants. This Place is also call'd the Phlegraean Plain, from a Hill which anciently vo∣mited out Fire, like unto Etna in Sicily, now call'd Vesuvius, which retains many  Signs and marks of its ancient Irruptions. These Giants hearing of Hercules his Approach, met him in Battel Array; and fighting with the force and cruelty of Giants, Hercules (with the Assistance of the Gods) overcame them; and cutting off most of them, quieted that Coun∣try. These Giants were call'd Sons of the Earth, by reason of the vast Bulk of their Bodies. These are the things that some report (whom Timaeus follows) con∣cerning the destruction of the Giants of Phlegraea. Leaving the Plains of Phlegraea, he came to the Sea, where he perform'd some remarkable Works about the Lake Avernus (as it's call'd) which is consecrated to Proserpine. It's situated between Micenus and Diciarcheos, near the hot Baths, Five Furlongs in Circuit, and of an incredible Depth. The Water of this Lake is exceeding clear, and the mighty depth of this Gulf casts a blew Colour upon the Surface. It's reported, that anciently there was here an Oracle, where they conjur'd the Infernal Spirits, which the latter Ages abolish'd. Whereas this Lake extended P. 160. as far as to the Sea, it's said Hercules by casting up of Earth, so stopt up its Cur∣rent, that he made the way near the Sea, now call'd the Herculean way. And these are the things he did there. Marching thence, he came to a certain Rock in the Country of the Posidonias, where they report a kind of a Miracle happened. A certain Huntsman (famous all over the Country for his brave Exploits) was us'd formerly to fix the Heads and Feet of all the Game he took, to Trees, as an Offering to Diana: But ha∣ving then taken a great wild Boar (in Contempt of the Goddess) he boasted, and declar'd he would only consecrate the Head to her; and forthwith according to what he said, hung it upon a Tree. It being then Summer-time, about Noon, he laid him down to Sleep, during which time, the Band which fastned the Head, broke, and so it fell down upon him that slept, and kill'd him. And there's no reason to wonder at this, when many of the like kind are reported to have hap∣pened, by which the Goddess has reveng'd her self of the Impious. But the con∣trary happened to Hercules, for the sake of his Piety; for when he came to the Borders of Rhegium and Locris, being wearied with his March, and laid down to rest, they say he was disturb'd with the noise and creaking of the Grashop∣pers, whereupon he intreated the Gods to free him from that disturbance, who heard his Prayers: For the Grashoppers flew away, not only for that time, but none were ever seen there at any time after. When he came to the narrowest Passage over the Sea, he caus'd the Cattel to swim over before him into Sicily, and he himself catcht hold of one of the Horns of the Oxen, and in that manner swam along for the space of Thirteen Furlongs, as Timaeus reports the matter. Afterwards, desiring to go round the Island, he went on his Journey from Peloriadis to Eryx, and passing along the Shoar, the Nymphs open'd the hot Baths for him, where he refresh'd himself af∣ter his tedious Journey. These Baths were Two in number, the Hemerian and Egestean, so call'd from the Places. After Hercules came into the Country of E∣ryx, Eryx the Son of Venus and Bula, the King of the Country, challeng'd Her∣cules to wrestle with him. Both sides propos'd the Wager to be won and lost; Eryx laid to stake his Kingdom, but Hercules his Oxen; Erix at first disdain'd such an unequal Wager, not fit to be compar'd with his Country; but when Her∣cules on the other side answer'd, that if he lost them, he should lose together with them Immortality, Eryx was contented with the Condition, and engag'd in the Contest: But he was overcome, and so was stript out of the Possession of his Country, which Hercules gave to the Inhabitants, allowing them to take the Fruits to their own use, till some one of his Posterity came to demand it, which afterwards hapned: For many Ages after, Doriaeus the Lacedemonian (sailing into Sicily) recover'd his Ancestors Dominion, and there built Heraclea, which growing
great on a suddain, became the Object of the Carthaginians Envy and Fear, lest growing stronger than Carthage it self, it should deprive them of their Sovereign∣ty; and for that Reason they besieg'd it with a mighty Army, and took it by force, and raz'd it to the Ground; of which we shall speak particularly in its pro∣per time. Hercules having view'd Sicily round, came to the City now call'd Syracuse, where P. 161. when he came to be inform'd of the Rape of Proserpina; he offer'd magnificent Sa∣crifices to the Goddesses, and at Cyane sacrific'd the goodliest of his Bulls, and or∣dered the Inhabitants to sacrifice Yearly to Proserpina, and observe an Anniversary Festival at Cyane. Then travelling through the heart of the Country with his Oxen, he was set upon by the Sicani, with a strong Body of Men; whom after a cruel Battel he routed, and cut off most of them; amongst whom (it's reported) there were Captains of extraordinary Valour, who are honour'd as Demy-Gods to this Day; to wit, Leucaspis, Pedicrates, Buphonas, Caugates, Cygaus and Crytidas: Thence he pass'd through the Country of Leontines, and much admir'd the plea∣santness of the Territory, and by reason of the singular respect he found from the Inhabitants, he left there eternal Monuments of his Presence. Among the Agyrineans something remarkable happened concerning him; for they kept magnificent Festivals, and offered Sacrifices to him as to the Gods them∣selves; which was the first time he approv'd of such Worship, never before al∣lowing any Sacrifice to himself: But now the Deity it self ratify'd his Divinity; for not far from the City in a Rocky Way, the Oxen made Impressions with their Feet, as if it had been in Wax; and the same thing likewise happening to Hercules himself, caus'd him to conclude that (his Tenth Labour being now per∣fected) his Immortality was in part sealed to him; and therefore he refus'd not the Yearly Solemnity of Sacrifices instituted in honour of him by the Inhabitants. That he might therefore manifest his gratitude to them for the Honours conferr'd upon him, he caus'd a Pond to be sunk near the City, Four Furlongs in Compass, which he call'd after his own Name. The Impressions likewise made by the Hoofs of his Oxen, he nam'd after himself; and Or built a Temple. consecrated a Grove to Geryon, as to a Demy-God, whom the Inhabitants religiously worship at this Day. He built likewise there a famous Temple in honour of Iolaus, his Associate in his Expe∣dition, and appointed he should be honour'd with Yearly Sacrifices, which are observ'd at this day: For all the Inhabitants of this City let their Hair grow, with∣out Cutting, from their very Births, in honour of Iolaus; till they make an Of∣fering of them to him, and gain the favour of the God by costly and magnificent Sacrifices. Such is the Holiness and Majesty of this Temple, that whosoever do not observe these holy Rites, they are strucken Dumb, and are like Dead Men: But as soon as any recollects himself, and vows to offer his Sacrifices, and gives a Pledge to the God for that purpose, they are presently restor'd to their former Health. The Inhabitants therefore very fitly call the Gate where these Sacred Solemnities are perform'd Heraclea. They every Year likewise with great ear∣nestness celebrate the Wrestlings, Quoitings, &c. Gymnick Sports, and Horse-Races; whither all the People both Bond and Free flocking, they privately taught their Servants how to wor∣ship this God, how to celebrate the Solemn Sacrifices, and to perform when they met together the Sacred Rites and Festivals. After this, Hercules pass'd over his Oxen again into Italy, and in his marching along by the Sea-Coasts, he kill'd one Lacinius that was stealing some of his Oxen. There he buried Croton, and erected a stately Monument over him, whom he had unfortunately slain; and foretold that in time to come there should be built a famous City, call'd after the Name of him that was there bury'd. Having at length marcht round about Adria, and all the Coasts of that Gulf on Foot, he pass'd through Epirus into Peloponesus. Having finisht his Tenth Labour, Euristheus impos'd another Task upon him, 11th Labour, Cerberus out of Hell. and that was that he should bring Cerberus out of Hell. Preparing himself there∣fore to perform this, to be better enabled thereunto, he went to Athens to be ini∣tiated into the Mysterious Rites of Elusina, where Musaeus the Son of Orpheus was P. 162. then High Priest. And because we have now occasion to mention Orpheus, we conceive it will A Digression to Orpheus. not be amiss here to give a short Account of him. He was the Son of Oeagrus, and by Birth a Thracian, for the Art of Musick and Poetry far excelling all that
ever were recorded. For he compos'd a Poem for sweetness and smoothness, the Subject of all Mens admiration: And he grew so eminent in this Art, that by the Melody of his Musick, he was said to draw even wild Beasts and Trees after him: And being naturally very studious, he attain'd to an extraordinary degree of Knowledge in the ancient Theology. He improv'd himself likewise very much by travelling into Egypt, so that he was accounted to excel the most accomplish'd Person among all the Grecians for his Knowledge, both in Divinity and Sacred Mysteries, in Musick and Poetry. He was one likewise in the Expedition of the Argonauts, and for the exceeding Love he had to his Wife (with an admirable Courage) descended into Hell, and there so inchanted Proserpina with the sweet∣ness of his Musick, that she gratify'd him so far as to suffer him to carry back his Wife along with him, that dy'd a little before. In like manner they say Bacchus hereupon rais'd his Mother Semele from the Shades below, and enduing her with Immortality, surnam'd her Thyone. Having now done with this Digression relating to Orpheus, we return to Her∣cules: When he enter'd the Infernal Regious (the Mythologists say) Proserpina kindly receiv'd him as her Brother, and gave him liberty to loose Theseus and Perithous from their Chains; and at length contrary to the Expectations of all Men, brought up the Cerberus. Dog ty'd in his Chain, and presented him to open view. The last Labour injoin'd him was to fetch away the Golden Apples of the 12th Labour, The Hesperian Apples. Hesperides, to which purpose he pass'd over a Second time into Africa. The My∣thologists vary in their Writings concerning this; for some affirm that there were really golden Apples in some of the Gardens of the Hesperides, guarded continually by a terrible Dragon. Others say, that there are Sheep of exqui∣site beauty in the Hesperides, and that from thence they are Poetically call'd Golden Apples, as Venus from her Beauty is call'd Golden Venus. Others will have it, that the Fleeces upon the Sheep's Backs are of that admirable Colour, that they glitter like Gold, and thence have been so call'd. And by the Dragon they un∣derstand the Shepherd of the Flocks, who being a Man of a strong Body and stout Heart, preserv'd the Flocks, and kill'd the Thieves that attempted to steal them. But let every one judge of this matter as he thinks best himself: For Hercules kill'd the Keeper, and brought away the Apples or Sheep (which so∣ever they were) to Eurystheus, trusting now, that since all his Tasks were per∣form'd (according to the Oracle of Apollo) he should be rewarded with Immor∣tality.
CHAP. II. An Account of Atlas and his Daughters, call'd Atlantides and Hesperides. The Amazons routed by Theseus in Attica. The further Acts of Hercules; he goes against Leomedon King of Troy, and other Acts. The Story of Meleager Son of King Oeneus. Amalthea's Horn. Hercules his further Acts. His Death by a poyson'd Shirt. BUT we are not to omit what is said of Atlas, and the Original of the Hesperides. In the Country call'd Hesperis, liv'd Two famous Brothers, Hes∣perus Atlas. and Atlas; They were possess'd of most lovely Sheep, of a Ruddy and Golden Colour, for which cause the Poets in their Phrase call'd them Melon, in Greek, signifie, both a Sheep and an Apple. Golden Apples. Hesperis the Daughter of Hesperus was married to his Brother Atlas, whence the Country was call'd Hesperis; by her Atlas had Seven Daughters, which from their Father were call'd Atlantides, and from their Mother Hesperides. Busiris King of Egypt having a great desire to injoy these Virgins by reason of their extraordinary Beauty, sent out some Pirates, with Orders to seize these Ladies, and bring them away to him. P. 163. About this time Hercules being imploy'd in his Second. last Labour, kill'd Anteus in Lybia, who compell'd those Strangers that came into his Country, to wrestle with him; and inflicted condign Punishment upon Busiris in Egypt, who sacrific'd all Strangers that (arriv'd there) to Jupiter. Afterward passing over the River Nile, he came into Ethiopia, and kill'd Ematheon the Ethiopian King, who had challeng'd him to a Battel: And then he again set upon the Task injoin'd him. In the mean time the Thieves hurried away the Girls out of a Garden where they were Playing, and in great haste got to their Ships; whom Hercules met with upon a certain Shoar, where they were refreshing themselves; and being inform'd by the Virgins of the Rape, he kill'd all the Thieves, but deliver'd the Girls to Atlas their Father; for which Kindness he was so grateful, that he not only readily assisted him with what things were needful for the accomplishment of what he had then in hand, but willingly taught him the Art of Astrology: For he bestowed much of his Care and Pains in the Study of this Art; and because he had a curiously wrought Sphear of the Stars, he was said to carry the whole World upon his Shoulders. In the like manner Hercules tranferring the Doctrine of the Spheres to the Greeks, gain'd a Name, as he that from Atlas took upon himself the burden of the whole World: The Greeks darkly signifying thereby what then happened betwixt him and Atlas. While Hercules was thus imploy'd, they say, those Amazons that were left, ga∣ther'd Amazons rout∣ed by Theseus. all in a Body from all Parts of the Nation, to the River Thermodon, with a Design to revenge themselves upon the Grecians, for the Losses they sustain'd by Hercules; and they bore a particular grudge and hatred to the Athenians, be∣cause that Theseus carry'd away Captive Antiope, (or as others write) Hippolytes, Queen of the Amazons. Being therefore join'd with the Scythians, as their Confederates, they rais'd a great Army, with which the Amazonian Leaders passing over the Cimerian Bos∣phorus, marcht through Thrace, and pierc'd through a great part of Europe, and incamp'd at length in Attica, at a Place which from them is now call'd the Ama∣zonian Field. Theseus having intelligence of their Approach, marcht out against them with an Army rais'd from among the Citizens, taking along with him An∣tiope, by whom he had now his Son Hippolytus. Battel being join'd, those with Theseus through the Valour of the Athenians won the day, and slew part of the Amazons upon the spot, and drave all the rest out of Attica. There Antiope in the defence of her Husband, fought bravely, and dy'd in Battel like a Hero. Those Amazons that remain'd, despairing ever to recover their Country, went away with the Seythians their Confederates into Seythia, and there seated them∣selves.
at having spoke sussiciently of these, we return to Hercules; who having now finish'd all his Labours, was told by the Oracle that it was a thing very ne∣cessary, that before he was translated to the Gods, he should plant a Colony in Sar∣dnia, and make his Sons of the Stock of the Thespiadae, Governors of the Island. He therefore with his Nephew Iolaus, pass'd over thither with the Boys, because they were yet very Young. Here we think it convenient to premise something concerning the Birth of these young Boys, that we may more clearly give an ac∣count of the Colony. Thespis was of the most noble Family among the Athenians, the Son of rtheus, and Prince of a Territory so call'd from him. He had of many Wives, Fifty Daughters. This Thespis being desirous that his Daughters should have Issue by Hercules, who was as yet but very Young, but of strength of Body beyond the usual course of Nature at that Age, invited him to a sacred Festival, and there nobly entertain'd him, and sent for his Daughters severally, one after another; Hercules lay with them all, and got them with Child, and so became both a Husband of Fifty Wives, and a Father of Fifty Sons; all which (being call'd by the general Name of Thespiadae in obedience to the Oracle, when they were grown up, he ordered them to be sent away, to plant a Colony in P. 04. Sardinia; and because Iolaus was Admiral of his whole Fleet, and his Compa∣nion in all his Expeditions, he committed the care of the Colony of these Thes∣pians to him. But Two of the Fifty remain'd in Thebes, whose Posterity (they say) continue there in great Honour and Esteem at this Day; and Seven more, whom they call Dei,  of the People. Peuchi, resided in the City Thespis, whose Posterity (they say) were the principal Men of the City within the time of Man's Memory. All the rest, and whosoever else would go along with them, Iolaus transported into Sar∣dinia; and having overcome the Inhabitants in Battel, the pleasantest part of the Island, and that which was most Champain, he divided by Lot, which at this day is call'd Iolacion. And he so improv'd the Island, and planted it with Fruit-Trees, that it became afterwards a Bone of Contention: For from that time it grew so Famous for the Riches and Fruitfulness of the Soyl, that the Carthaginiaus grow∣ing Rich and Powerful, so coveted this Island, that they fought many Battles to gain it; of which we shall speak hereafter in its proper Place. After Iolaus had setled his Colony, he sent for Daedalus out of Sicily, and im∣ploy'd him in building many stately Structures, which remain to this Day, and from the name of the Architect, are call'd Daedala. Daedalus his Works. He built like∣wise stately and sumptuous Publick Schools for all manner of Exercises, and Courts of Justice, with many other such Works conducing to the happiness and well-being of Man's Life: He call'd also the Inhabitants Iolacians, after his own Name, the Thespiade allowing him that honour as their Father. For upon the Ac∣count of his faithful Service to them, they so loved him, that they call'd him Father. Whence it came to pass in After-times, that they who sacrifi'd to this God, call Iolaus Father, as the Persians did Cyrus. Afterwards Iolaus return'd into Greece, and arriv'd at Sieily, were he staid a considerable time. About that time some of his Fellow-Travellers (taken with the pleasantness of the Island) the seated themselves; and being mixt among the Siani, they con∣tinu'd there, and are in great esteem with the Inhabitants. But Iolaus is espe∣cially honour'd, to whom for the general good, he did in many Cities, Temples and Groves are built, and Divine Worship instituted as to a Demy-God. This Colony is  upon the account of a remarkable Circumstance; for the Ora∣cle commanded that all Persons of this Colony should be Freemen, and that their Posterity for ever should so continue; which Freedom is effectually injoy'd at this very day: For many Barbarians being mixt with this Colony, in process of time the whole Colony became Barbarous; and removing themselves to the Mountains, inhabited in Places inaccessible; where being us'd to Flesh and Milk (having ma∣ny Herds and Hocks of Cattel,) they never made use of Bread-Co; and be∣ing that they live in Caves under Ground, they have easily avoided the Miseries of War; and therefore though both the Carthaginians and Romans have often at∣tempted to subdue them by force of Arms, yet all has been in vain: But let this now suffice that has been said concerning Iolaus and the Thespiadae, and their Co∣lony in Sardinia.
Hercules having now finish'd all his Labours, gave his Wife Megara to Iolaus, P. 165. suspecting that to have Issue by her, would be unfortunate, by reason of the mi∣serable Disaster that befel his former Children; and for this Reason, he sought after another Wife (less to be suspected) by whom he might have more Children. In order whereunto, he desir'd Iole the Daughter of Eurytus Prince of Oechaliae, in Marriage. But Eu∣rytus Iole the Daughter of Eurytus, re∣fus'd to be given to Hercules in Marriage. (fearing the Misfortune of Megara) told him he would consider of it. Hercules looking upon this as a Denial, to revenge himself for the Dishonour put upon him, drave away Eurytus his Horses: But Iphitus the Son of Eurythus suspecting how the matter was, came to Tiryn∣thus to seek them; where Hercules brought him up to the Top of an high Tur∣ret, and bid him look round about, to see whether he could spy the Horses pa∣sturing in any Place: Iphitus not discerning any of them, Hercules complain'd he had falsly accused him of Theft, and thereupon threw him down headlong from the Top of the Tower. For which wicked Fact being punished with a grievous Disease, he went to Neleus, at Pylus, and intreated him to expiate his Offence. Whereupon Neleus consulted concerning this matter with his Sons; who all de∣clar'd (except Nestor the Youngest,) that no expiation ought to be allowed. Then he went to Deiophobus the Son of Hippolytus, and desired him to expiate him. But sinding still no Remedy for his Disease, he consulted at the Oracle of Apollo what he should do to be cured; who answer'd him, that he should be easily freed from his Distemper, if he were sold for a valuable Price, and the Mony given to I∣phitus his Children. In obedience therefore to the Oracle, (forc'd through the violence of the Distemper) with some Friends he pass'd over into Asia, and there suffer'd one of his Servants to sell him: And sold he was as a Slave to Om∣phala the Daughter of Jardanus, and Queen of the Maeones, (for so the Lydians were formerly call'd) and the Seller gave the Price to the Children of Iphitus ac∣cording to the command of the Oracle. Hercules hereupon being recover'd of his Distemper diligently serv'd Omphala, and clear'd the Land of Robbers that infested it; for some of the Thieves call'd Cercopes (who had done abundance of mischief) he Kill'd, others he brought boud before the Queen. He Kill'd also Sileus with a Spade, who forc'd all Strangers that came thither to work in the Vineyards. He recover'd likewise the Spoils by force of Arms from the Itones, that wasted a great part of the Kingdom with their De∣predations, and took and raz'd their City to the Ground, from whence they made all their Excursions. Omphales admiring the Valour and noble Exploits of the Man, after she came to understand who he was, and from whence descended, not only Manumitted him, but Marry'd him, by whom she had Lamon. He had a Son likewise before call'd Cleolaus, begotten in the time of his servitude, of one of his Fellow Servants. Returning afterwards into Peloponesus, he led an Army against Laomedon, King of Troy, for some Injuries receiv'd from him. For he had deny'd to deliver the Horses he had promis'd him for the Killing of the Whale at the time that he ac∣company'd Jason by force of Arms to bring away the Golden Fleece, of which we shall presently treat particularly in the History of the Argonauts. But being at that time prevented from revenging himself by reason of the Expedition where∣in he was ingag'd with Jason, he pickt out a fit opportunity afterwards, and sail'd (as some say) with Eightheen Ships against Troy, but as Homer says with Six only in the whole, who introduces Tlepolimus in these Words. But Hercules my Father, as is said, The Lions strong in Valour did exceed, That only with Six Ships and Slender Force, For Laomedon's Horses took his Course; And then Besieg'd and took the City Troy, And many of her People did destroy.
Hercules therefore, when he arriv'd in the Country of Troas, marcht straight with a Valiant Number of Men to Troy, but left Oiclcus the Admiral, the Son of Am∣phiaraus with the Fleet to be ready to assist him as occasion serv'd. In the mean time Laomedon being surpriz'd by the suddain advance of the Enemy, in a great hurry raised as many Forces as the shortness of the time would admit him to do, and led them against the Fleet, hoping by burning of it, to put a speedy end to the War. Oicleus the Admiral met the Enemy, and was kill'd at the first Onset; P. 166. the rest being forc'd to their Ships, stood off to Sea. Laomedon then return'd and Fought with Hercules, and he and most of his Men were cut off. Hereupon Hercules presently took the City by Storm, and put many of the Inhabitants that oppos'd him, to the Sword, but advanc'd Priam (for his Justice) to his Father's Throne. He was the only Son of Laomedon, that dis∣approv'd what his Father did, and advis'd that the Horses should be deli∣ver'd to Hercules according to the Contract. Hercules to crown Telamon's Va∣lour with an honourable Reward, gave him Hesione the Daughter of Laomedon to Wife. For he was the first that in this Storm made his Way into the City at the very strongest part of the Castle Wall, where Hercules himself made the Assault. After his Return into Peloponesus, he made War upon Augeas for defranding him of his promis'd Reward; but after a Battel fought with the Eleans, without effecting any thing further at that time, he return'd to Olenus, who had before entertain'd him as his Guest, whose Daughter Hippolyte was at that time just Mar∣ry'd to Axanus. Hercules being then there, kill'd Eurytion the Centaur, for of∣fering Violence to Hippolyte at the time of her Marriage. Being return'd to Tirynthe, Eurystheus (mov'd upon some Suspicion of Treason or other) Banish'd him with his Mother Alcmena; and likewise Ephicle and Iolaus out of the Kingdom. Being thus forc'd away, he resided at Pheneus in Arcadia. Where he heard that the Sacreds of Neptune in a Solemn Procession were sent to the Istmos under the Conduct of Eurytus the Son of Augeas: Whereupon he hasted away, and set upon Eurytus on the suddain near to Cleone where Hercules's Temple now stands, and kill'd him. Afterwards entring the Country of Elis, with a Potent Army, he kill'd also King Augeas, and took the City by Storm, and recall'd Phyleus into his Country, and gave up the City, together with the Kingdom into his Hands. For he was banish'd by his Father, for order∣ing the Reward to be given to Hercules, being chosen an Arbitrator between them. Afterwards it happened that Tyndarus was banish'd from Sparta by Hippocoon, whose Sons likewise being Twenty in number, had kill'd Hyionus the Son of Lycimnius, Hercules his Special Friend. Hercules understanding what they had done, made War upon them, and in a great Battel routing them, slew Multi∣tudes of them; and took Sparta by Storm, and restor'd Tyndarus the Father of the Castor and Pollux. Dioscuri to the Kingdom, upon this Condition, that (in as much as he had gain'd it by Conquest) he should keep it, and hereafter deliver it up intire to his Posterity. In this Battel there were very few kill'd on Hercules his side, a∣mongst whom were those Famous Men Iphiclus, and Seventeen Sons of Cepheus; for of Twenty, Three only escap'd. On the other side, there fell Hippocoon himself with Ten of his Sons, and a great number of the Spartans. After this Battel, he return'd into Arcadia, and resorted to King Aleos, whose Daughter Augeas by stealth lay with, and got with Child, and then went to Stymphalus. Aleos being ignorant of what was done, afterwards discover'd the matter, by the swelling of his Daughter's Belly, and thereupon askt her who was the Fa∣ther; who answer'd she was forc'd by Hercules. Her Father not giving any credit to what she said, deliver'd her to a Nauphan whom he consided in, and order'd him to drown her. Auge being carry'd away for Nauphalia, a City in Ar∣gos. Nauphalia, in her Voyage fell in labour near the Mountain Parthenius, and turn'd aside into a Wood near adjoining, under colour of discharging the necessities of nature, and there was deliver'd of a Son, which she left hid among the Shrubs: Then she went away with the Nauplian, and came at length to Nauplia, a Port in the Territory of Argos, and so was un∣expectedly P. 167. preserv'd: For the Nauplian was not willing to drown her as the King had commanded, but gave her to certain Strangers of Caria, who were then setting Sail for Asia, who took her away, and sold her to Teathras King
of Mysia. In the mean time the Child that was left in Mount Parthenius was found sucking of an Hind, by some Shepherds belonging to King Corythus, who brought it to their Master: Corythus willingly receiv'd it, and educated and brought it up as his own Son, and nam'd him Telephus from the  Elaphos is a Hind in Greek. Hind that suckl'd him. When he was grown up to Mans Estate, he went to the Oracle at Delphos to inquire who was his Mother, where he was answer'd that he must repair to Teuthras, King of Mysia: Having found out his Mother, and it being now known who was his Fa∣ther, he was in high Esteem and Reputation, so that Teuthras, who had no Heir Male, marry'd him to his Daughter Argiope, and adopted him his Heir and Suc∣cessor to the Kingdom. In the mean time Hercules the Fifth Year after his Banishment into Pheneus, being exceedingly griev'd for the Deaths of Hyionus the Son of Lycimnius, and of his Brother Iphiclus, wholly abandon'd Arcadia and Peloponesus; and being accompa∣ny'd with Multitudes of the Arcadians went to Calydon, a City of Aetolia. And having now neither Wife nor lawful Issue, he marry'd Deianira the Daughter of Oenus, Meleeager being then dead. And here it will not be amiss to make a small Digression, and declare what hap∣ned to Meleager. Oencus upon a great Plenty of Corn, in Gratitude, sacrific'd to all the Gods, but Meleager. only Diana: At which the Goddess being inrag'd, sent among them that so fam'd and mighty Calydonian Boar, which wasted and spoyl'd all the Neighbouring Region, and kill'd and destroy'd most of their Cattle. Meleager the Son of Oene∣us being then in the Flower of his Age and full Strength, and not inferiour to any for Valour, associated himself with many other Gallants to hunt this Boar. He being the first that wounded the Beast with his Dart, by the general Consent of all carry'd away the Spoyl and Honour of the day, which was the Boar's Skin. Atalanta the Daughter of Echeneus, was one of his Associates in this Hunting; and therefore Meleager (being much in Love with her) presented her with the Skin, attributing to her the Glory of the Action. But the Sons of Thestius his Fellow-hunters took it most hainously, that a Stranger should be preferr'd before them, and no regard be had to the Nearness of Kindred that was between them and Meleager. To defeat her therefore of Meleager's Gift they lay in wait for her, and fell upon her in her return to Arcadia and took away the Skin by Force. But Meleager (for the Love he bore to Atalanta) being much troubled at the Affront and Disgrace offer'd her, took upon him the Defence of her Cause, and at first advis'd the Aggressors to restore what they had violently taken away. But when he could not prevail, he slew them. They were the Brothers of Althea, his Mother, who so immoderately griev'd for their Deaths, that she pour'd out most heavy Curses against her Son, and wish'd the Gods would cut him off, who heard her Prayer, and kill'd him. Some there be that feign that when Meleager was Ovid. 8. Meta. born the Destinies appear'd to Althea in her Dream, and foretold that Meleager her Son should dye when a Brand that was then in the Fire should be consum'd. His Mother therereupon conceiving the Life of her Son depended upon the Pre∣servation of the Firebrand, laid it up very carefully: But being incens'd at the Death of her Brothers, she threw it into the Fire, and so hastned her Sons Death. But afterwards repenting and grievously afflicted for what she had done, Ovid says she stab'd her self. she hang'd her self. In the mean time Hipponous in Clenum, a City in Achaia. Olenum being incens'd at his Daughter Peribaea, because she said she was with Child by Mars, sent her to Oeneus in P. 168. Aetolia, and desir'd him that he would forthwith put her to Death: But he having lately lost both his Son and his Wife, would not kill the Lady, but marry'd her, and begat of her Tydeus. But let this suffice concerning Meleager, Althea and Oeneus. Hercules to gain the Favour of the Calydonians diverted the River Vid. Ovid. Vid. Strabo. It had two Mouths representing two Horns, one of which was dam'd up by Hercules; the Stream roars like a wild Bull. Achelous into another Channel which he cut for it, and by that means water'd a great Part of the Country, and made it exceeding fruitful, which gave Occasion to the Poetical Fa∣bles, that Hercules fought with The Son of Oceanus and Terra, fought with Hercules for Deianira the Daughter of Oeneus: and find∣ing himself too weak transform'd himself into a Bull. Vid. Ovid and Strabo. Achelous transform'd into the Shape of a Bull, and in the Conflict cut off one of his Horns, and gave it to the Aetolians: This they call Amalthea's
Horn, in which (the Poets feign) grow all manner of Summer-fruit, as Grapes, Apples, and such like. By the Horn they darkly signify the new Course of the River Achelous, bending like a Horn through the other Channel: By the Ap∣ples, Pomegranates and Grapes they denote the Fruitfulness of the Soyl water'd by the River and the Plenty of fruitful Plants. By terming it * Amalt Horn they signify'd the Strength of him that cut the Ditch. Afterwards Hercules assisted the Calydonians in the War against the Thesrot., and took the City Ephyra by Storm, and slew their King Phileus; and lying with his Daughter, who was his Prisoner, on her he begat Tlepolemus. The Third Year after his Marriage to Deianira, Eurynomus the Son of Architelus (then a young Boy) serving Oeneus at Table, Hercules for some small Mistake in his Attendance gave him such a Box on the Ear (that much against his Will) he kill'd the poor Boy; for which Misfortune he was so griev'd, that with his Wife Deianira and Hyllus his Son by her who was then a young Child, he voluntarily banish'd himself out of Calydonia: In his Journey, when he came to the Banks of the River Euenus he found Nessus the Centaur, who carry'd People over the Ford for Hire. Deianira being the first that he carry'd over, the Centaur fell in Love with her for her Beauty, and attempted to ravish her, whereupon she cry'd out for Help to her Husband, who presently shot him through the Body with an Arrow. The Centaur through the Grievousness of his Wound dy'd in the very Act of his Rape, only had time to teil her that for the great Love he bore her he would teach her a . Receipt for the procuring of Love by Force, whereof Hercules should never after be familiar with any other Woman besides her self, and that was, that she should anoint Hercu∣les his under Garment with the Blood that issu'd from his Wound mixt together with Oyl and some of his Seed that fell from him; and having thus said he imme∣diatly breath'd out his last. Deianira observ'd what Directions he had given her, and mixing the Seed of Nessus with his Blood which dropt from the Arrow, kept it privately in a little Box for Hercules. Hercules having pass'd the River went to Ceyces, King of Trachinia, and dwelt with him as a Stranger, ever accompany'd with the Arcadians as his Fellow-soldiers and Associates. After these things, Philas King of the Dryopi being accus'd for some Act of Impiety against the Temple of Delphos, Hercules with the Assistance of the Meli∣enses took up Arms against him, and both kill'd him and cast the Dryopi out of their ancient Habitations, and gave their Country to the Melienses. On his Cap∣tive the Daughter of Philas he begat Antiochus. Besides Hyllus he had afterwards other Children by Deianira, Gryneus or Gleneus and Hodites. Some of the Dryopi that were driven out of their Country passed over to Eubaea, and there built the City Carystus: Others of them sayl'd into the Island Cyprus, and gain'd new Seats, and became one People with the Inhabitants; the rest fled to Eurystheus, who (in P. 169. Hatred of Hercules) receiv'd them into his Protection, and they with his Assistance built three Cities in Peloponesus, Asine, Hermione and Eione. After the Expulsion of the Dryopi, a War broke forth between the Dore∣ans (which inhabited Hestiaetes in the Reign of Aegimius) and the Lapithae, the Inhabitants of Mount Olympus, whose King was Coronus the Son of Phorone∣us. But the Lapithae being much stronger than the other, the Doreans crav'd the As∣sistance of Hercules, and promis'd him the third Part of the Kingdom; upon which Terms they prevail'd with him to joyn with them as their Confederate. With their joint Forces therefore they set upon the Enemy, and Hercules by the Valour of the Arcadians (whom he ever had with him as his Assistants) routed them, and slew the King himself, and cutting off Multitudes of the Enemy, forc'd the Lapithae out of the Territory which they contested for. This being thus effected, he gave up the third Part of the Country promis'd him to Aeginius, to be kept by him in Trust in Order to be restor'd to Hercules his Posterity. In his return to Trachinia, he kill'd Cygnus the Son of Mars, who challeng'd him to a Duel. And as he passed through the Country of the Pelasgi, from Itonus, he met with King Hormenius, and demanded his Daughter Astydamia in Marriage; but because Deianira was his lawful Wife before, he refus'd to give his Consent. Upon which he made War upon him, and both took the City and kill'd the King; and so possessing himself of Astydamia by Force of Arms, begat of her Cesippus. Afterwards he made a second Expedition against the Sons of
Eurytus, for denying to give him Iole in Marriage▪ And by the Help of the Arca∣dians took the City, and slew Toxeus, Molion and Pytius, the Sons of Eurytus; and carrying away Iole, made to the Promontory Cenaeus in Now N pot. Eubaea, where he appoint∣ed a solemn Sacrifice, and sent Lichas his Servant to Trachine to his Wife Deianira with Orders to wish her to send him his Coat and Shirt he us'd to wear when he sacrific'd to the Gods. Deianira (being inform by Lichas of her Husband's Love to Iole, and how he had a greater Love and Kindness for her than her self) anoint∣ed the Coat and Shirt with the destructive Receipt given her by the Centaur, which Lichas (ignorant of the Matter) carry'd to the Sacrifice. But as soon as Hercules put on the Garment, the Infection and Venom of the Receipt began by little and little to work, which put him at last upon the Rack in most miserable Torment. For the Poyson of the Arrow like a stinging Viper overspread the Garment, and by its scorching Heat even eat up the Flesh of his whole Body. Hercules being thus intolerably tormented forthwith kill'd his Servant Lichas; and then dismiss'd his Army, and return'd to Trachinia. But his Torment more and more increasing he sent Lioymnion and Iolus to Delphos to inquire of Apollo how he might be 'd. Deianira amaz'd at the Extremity of her Husband's Misery, and conscious of what she had done, hang'd her self. The Answer of the Oracle was, That with a war∣like Train they should carry Hercules away to Oa, and there raise up for him a great Pile of Wood, and Jupiter would take great Care of the rest. Iolus hereup∣on and those with him perform'd what was commanded, suspecting what the Issue was like to be. Hereupon Hercules (despairing of his Recovery) mounted the Pile, and earnestly desir'd those present to set it on Fire. When none would do it, at length Philocletes observ'd his Order, and put Fire under the Pile; and for P. 1. a Reward Hercules gave him his Bow and Arrows; hereupon the Pile was present∣ly on a Flame, not only by the Fire but with Thunder and Lightning from Heaven, and all was in an instant reduc'd to Ashes. Iolus afterwards seeking for his Bones, could find none at all; whence arose an Opinion that Hercules (as the Oracle had foretold) was translated from Men to the Gods. Iolus and the rest having therefore sacrific'd to him as a Demy-God, and rais'd up a great Monument in Remembrance of him, return'd to Trachinia. Afterwards Menalus, the Son of Actor, Hercules his special Friend, instituted that in Opuntus there should be offer'd up to him every Year as to a Demy-God, a Bull, a Boar and a Goat. The Thebans did the same; and the Athenians were the first that offer'd Sacrifices to him as a God, and their pious Example first induc'd all the Grecians, and afterwards all other Nations as such to worship him. To what we have said, we must further add this, that after his Translation to the Gods, Jupiter persuaded Juno to adopt Hercules for her Son; and ever after she bore towards him a Motherly Affection. And they report, that this Adoption was brought about in this manner; Juno being gone to Bed, and Hercules layd close to her Body, she dropt down from under her Cloaths to the Ground; which Rite and Ceremony the Barbarians use in adopting of a Son to this day. They feign that afterwards Juno marry'd him to The Goddess of Youth, Daugh∣ter of Juno, and Cupbearer to Ju∣piter. At a Feast her Foot slipp'd, and she shew'd all, and was displac'd, and Ganymed put in her room. Servius. She reor'd Iolaus to his Youth: See vid. 9. Met. He∣be; and in the Story of the Dead the Poet introduces his Ghost in these Words,— — Among the Gods he feasts with Hymns And in fair Hebe joys and sings. But they report that when Jupiter would have him to be one of the Amongst the Heathen there were Twelve Chief Gods. Ovid calls them Deos Nobiles: They en∣joy'd Heaven by natural Right; Juno, Vesta, Minerva, eres, Dia∣na, Venus, Mars, Mercury, Jove, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apolio. Goodw. Antiq. 36. Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Twelve Gods; Hercules refus'd that Honour; for that it was impossible for him to be taken into the Number, unless one of the Twelve were rejected, and it was an unseemly thing to accept such an Honour with the Disgrace of another God.
Altho' we have been long in our Relation concerning HERCƲLES, yet to make amends we have not omitted any thing material that is reported of him. And now it's time that we treat of the Argonauts, for Hercules went with them in that Expedition. CHAP. III. Of the Argonauts, Medea and the Daughter of Pileus. How the Ar∣gonauts gain'd the Golden Fleece. The Pranks of Medea, The Acts of Jason. The Cruelty of Pelias towards Jason's Kindred; how he was kill'd by his own Daughters through Medea's Charms. Medea burns the King of Corinth's Palace, and him in it. The miserable End of Jason. Of the Heraclidae, and their Return to Pelopone∣sus. JASON (they say) was Son of Aeson, and Nephew to Pelius King of Thessaly. And being a Man of strong Body and of an high Spirit, far above any of his Age, was ambitious to perform some memorable and remarka∣ble Action; for knowing that Perseus his Ancestor and some This Expedition of the Argonauts was An. Mun. 2094. about the time of the Death of Abimelech, Judg. 9. 23. before Christ 254. Helv. Chron. But Sr. Walter Rawleigh says, it was the 9 Year of Gideon, 34 Years before. Lib. 2. I. Part C. 13. Sect. 6. others (by their expeditious and admirable Atchievments in foreign Countries) had purchased eternal Honour and Re∣nown, he resolv'd to imitate them in the like heroick Under∣takings: Acquainting therefore the King his Uncle with his Purpose, he easily obtain'd his Consent, not that Pelius there∣by aim'd at the Honour and Glory of the young Man, but that he hop'd (among so many Hazards and Difficulties) he would be cut off; for having no Issue Male, he was afraid lest his Brother with the Assistance of his Son would some time or other invade his Kingdom. But he conceal'd his Suspicion in the mean time, and promis'd to furnish him with Provi∣sions for his Voyage, encouraging him to undertake the Adventure in Sayling to Colchis to bring away the Ram's Golden Fleece, so much fam'd and spoken of all the World over. Pontus at that time was inhabited by fierce and barbarous People, that were in∣famous for murdering of all Strangers that came amongst them, and therefore it was call'd Inhospitable. Axenos: However Jason (being ambitious of Glory) tho' he was something concern'd at the Difficulty of the Undertaking, yet when he consider'd it was not altogether impossible to be accomplish'd, and that the more hazardous it was, the greater his Honour and Glory would be, he furnish'd himself with all things necessary for his Expedition. And in the first Place built a Ship at the Mountain Pelius, much larger in P. 171. every respect than was usual in those Times; for then they us'd to sayl only in Boats and little Skiffs. Every one therefore at the sight of the Vessel was amaz'd, and the intended Design and the Building of this Ship was nois'd over all Greece, so that many of the noble and brisk Youths were eager to joyn and go away with Jason in Order to partake of the Honour in this Expedition. Jason now lanching forth his Ship, compleatly furnish'd with all things necessa∣ry, made choice of four and fifty of the greatest Persons of Quality out of the Number of those that were desirous to go along with him. Amongst whom the most remarkable were Castor and Pollux, Hercules and Telamon, Orpheus and Ata∣lanta, the Daughter of Schaeneus, the Sons of Thespius, and JASON himself the Head and Captain of the Expedition to Colchos; he call'd the Ship Argo, from the Builder, whose Name was Argus (as some fabulous Writers report) who (they say) imbark'd with them to repair the Ship, as Occasion might serve: But others say it was so call'd from its swift Sayling, for that Argon among the ancient Greeks signify'd swift. Being all on Board, they unanimously chose Hercules for his extra∣ordinary Valour to be their General. After they had set Sayl from Iolcus, and passed by Athos and Samothrace, they were by a Tempest cast upon Sigeum, a Pro∣montory
of Troas: Where landing, they found a Young Virgin tied near to the Sea-shoar, for this Reason as is said. The Report was, that Neptune being displeas'd with Laomedon the King con∣cerning the fabulously fam'd building of the Walls of Troy, sent a vast Monster out of the Sea upon the Land, which devour'd all that came upon the Shoar, and the Husbandmen that till'd the Ground upon the Sea-Coast; and that this Sea-God destroy'd the People by a Plague, and blasted all the Fruits of the Field. The whole Country being in this miserable Condition, the People met in a general Assembly, and consulted together what Course was to be taken for the redress of their deplorable Condition. Hereupon it's said that the King sent to inquire of the Oracle of Apollo what was to be done in this matter: Who receiv'd this Answer, That Neptune was angry, and would be then appeas'd, when one of the Trojan's Children upon whom the Lot should fall, should be offer'd up to be devour'd by the Sea-Monster. Hereupon they say, that a General Lot was cast, and that it fell upon the King's Daughter, call'd Hesione; whereupon Lao∣medon was forc'd to deliver up his Daughter, and left her bound in Chains upon the Shoar: And it fortunately happened at that very time, that Hercules land∣ed with the rest of the Argonauts, and being inform'd by the Lady of her Mis∣fortune, he broke off her Fetters, and brought her into the City, promising he would kill the Monster. Laomedon hereupon rejoyced exceedingly, and pro∣mis'd to bestow upon him as a Reward, some Horses he had that were uncon∣querable. They say this Monster was kill'd accordingly by Hercules, and that free Liberty was given the Lady either to go along with her Deliverer, or stay at Home with her Parents; the Lady it's said, chose to go along with the Stranger, not only as being more affected with the deliverance, than the Society of her Parents and Kindred, but fearing lest (if another Monster should appear) she should be again expos'd by the People to the same Cala∣mity. Hercules therefore receiving honourable Rewards suitable to so welcom a Guest, left Hesione and the Horses in trust with Laomedon, to be restor'd to him after P. 172. his return from Colchis. Then he proceeded on his Voyage with the Argonauts; and presently after they were overtaken with another violent Storm, insomuch as they despair'd of their Lives; Orpheus only, they say, of all his Companions in the Expedition (being a Religious Man) sacrific'd and pray'd to the Gods of Samothracia for their Preservation: Whereupon on a suddain there was a Calm, and Two Stars fell down upon the Heads of Castor and Pollux, to the great a∣mazement of the Beholders; and so all concluded, that by the Providence of the Gods, they were now out of danger. Hence it has been a Custom ever since, that when any are in a Storm at Sea, they call upon the Gods of Samothracia, and when any Stars appear, they are lookt upon then to be Castor and Pollux, that appear for their Deliverance. When the Storm was over, the noble Adventurers landed in a Province of Thrace, of which Phineus was King; where met them Two Young Men, who for the Punishment of their Offences, were driven out of the Territories, and grievously whipt all along as they came. They prov'd to be the Sons of Phi∣neus, by Cleopatra the Daughter of Boreas, and Orithya the Daughter of Erech∣theus. But through the malice of their Stepmother (by false Accusations) their Father was wrought upon to deal thus severely and unjustly with them; for Phi∣neus having Marry'd (besides his former Wife) Idaea the Daughter of Dardanus King of Seythia, was so inslav'd by an inordinate Affection to her, that he hu∣mour'd her in every thing she requir'd; and therefore at that time he gave cre∣dit to her Accusation, that those Two Young Men (to please their own Mother, and in contempt of her) attempted to lay violent Hands on her. Hercules with the rest, fortunately landing at that very time, they say the Young Men call'd out to those noble Hero's, and implor'd them as if they had been so many Gods, to rescue them out of those miserable Circumstances, de∣claring the cause why their Father was so inrag'd against them. But Phineus meet∣ing the Strangers, in a rage charg'd them not to meddle in other Peoples Con∣cerns; for they might be assur'd, that no Father would willingly so punish his own Sons, unless the greatness of their Faults had overcome all Natural Af∣fection.
But it happened, that at that time, the Boreadae, the Brothers of Cleopatra, were Companions with Hercules in this Expedition. These therefore were the First that (by reason of their near Relation) by force of Arms reliev'd the Young Men, and breaking in Pieces their Chains, kill'd as many of the Barbarians as oppos'd them. But when Phineus himself with a multitude of Thracians that came flocking in, marcht up to decide the matter by a Battel, it's said, that then Hercules stout∣ly laid about him, and slew both Phineus, and a great number of the other Thra∣clans. Then seizing upon the King's City and Palace, he set Cleopatra at li∣berty, and restor'd to her Sons their Father's Kingdom; who resolving to be reveng'd upon their Step-mother, he persuaded them to forbear doing any such thing, but rather to send Messengers into Scythia to her Father, to let him know that they left her wholly to his Discretion, to be punish'd for her Offences. Which being done accordingly, the Scythian put his Daughter to Death; and the Sons of Cleopatra were highly commended by the Thracians for their Mildness and Equity. But I am not ignorant how some of the Fabulous Authors relate, that Phineus put out his Two Sons Eyes, and that in retaliation when he was old, Boreas serv'd him the same Sauce: And they report likewise, that Hercules going out of the Ship to get a little fresh Water, was left behind by the Argo∣nauts in Asia. For in ancient Stories no Historians unanimously agree one with another; and therefore it's not to be admir'd, that in giving account of things in ancient Times, we do not in every thing agree with the Poets and other Writers. But it's said, that the Two Sons gave up the Kingdom to their Mother Cleo∣patra, and went along with the Argonauts in their Expedition; who sailing away from Thrace, and arriving at Pontus, landed in Taurica Chersonesus, being altoge∣ther ignorant of the cruelty of the Inhabitants: For it was a Custom amongst those P. 173. Barbarians, to sacrifice all Strangers that arriv'd there, to Diana Taurica. Amongst whom it's said, that in after-times, Ephigenia, the Priests of the Goddess, prac∣tis'd the same Cruelty upon all she could lay hold on. And here in regard the Course of the History requires it, it's requisite we should give an Account of the Causes of this horrid Cruelty executed upon Strangers, especially this Digression seeming pertinent to the Acts of the Ar∣gonauts. They say, that Sol begat Two Sons, Aeetes and Perses, and that Aeetes was King of Colchis, and the other of Taurica, and that both were exceeding cruel. That Hecate was the Daughter of Perses, far more fierce and cruel than her Fa∣ther; for being given to Hunting (if she could find no Game) she would sport her self with casting her Darts at Men instead of Beasts: She made it her bu∣siness likewise to compound Deadly Poysons, and was the first that found out Wolf-Bane, a most poyso∣nous Herb. Aconitum; and made trial of the nature and efficacy of every Composition, by mixing them with the Food given to Strangers. Being thus grown extraor∣dinary skilful in this devilish Art, she first poyson'd her own Father, and so u∣surpt the Crown. Then she built Diana's Temple, and ordered all Strangers that arriv'd there, to be sacrific'd to that Goddess; so that her Cruelty was nois'd abroad in every Place. She afterwards Marry'd Aeetes, and by him had Two Daughters, Cerces and Medea, and one Son call'd Aegialeus. Cerces likewise being much addicted to the Compounding of all sorts of Medicines, found out the wonderful Natures and efficacy of divers sorts of Roots and Herbs, many she learnt of her Mother Hecate, but many more she discover'd by her own industry; so that she left no∣thing new (for any that came after her) which might any ways advance that Art. This Cerces was Marry'd to the King of the Sarmathians, whom some call Scythians; but she likewise poyson'd her Husband, and so usurping the Kingdom, executed many Butcheries and Cruelties upon the Subjects; for which (as some Writers relate) she was driven out of the Kingdom, and fled to the Ocean, and possessing herself of a certain Desert Island, settl'd there, together with the Women her Companions. But as other Historians say, leaving Pontus, she settl'd in the Promontory of Italy, now call'd from her Cerceum. They report likewise, that Medea learnt the same Art from her Mother and Sister; but she plainly made use of it for contrary ends and purposes; for she constantly laid out her self to save the Lives of Strangers that were driven thi∣ther, sometimes begging the Lives of such as were condemn'd of her Father,
and at other times by her subtil Contrivance procuring their Escapes out of Pri∣son. For Aectes prompted thereunto both by the cruelty of his own Nature, and likewise incited by the Counsels and Persuasions of Hecate his Wife, observ'd the Custom of Murdering of Strangers. But Medea every day more and more opposed her Parents in this thing; Aectes (upon suspicion of Treason) com∣mitted his Daughter Medea to Prison, whence notwithstanding the escap'd, and fled to a Temple of Apollo, seated on the Sea-Shoar; about which same time, the Argonauts sail'd by Taurica, and arriv'd in the Night at Colchis, at the very Place where the Temple stood; where meeting with Medea, wandring upon the Shoar, were inform'd by her of the cruel Custom of Murdering of Strangers in those Parts; whereupon giving the Virgin thanks for her Humanity and Kindness, they told her of their Designs, and of the end of their adventure; and she on the o∣ther Hand inform'd them what Dangers she was surrounded with from her Fa∣ther, by reason of her Kindness and Compassion to Strangers: It being therefore evident to both Parties what was then fit to be done, Medea on her part pro∣mis'd she would assist 'em to the uttermost of her power, till they had accom∣plish'd P. 17 their Design; and Jason promis'd and confirm'd by a Solemn Oath, that Medea should from that time forward be his Wife. Hereupon the Argonauts leaving a Party to guard their Ships, went with Medea in the Night to the Golden Fleece: Of which we must here write more largely, that nothing may be omitted which is pertinent to the History. They say that Phryxus the Son of Athamantes, to avoid the malice of his Step-mother, fled out of Greece, together with Helles his Sister, and being by the ad∣vice and direction of the Gods, transported out of Europe into Asia, upon the Back of a Golden-fleec'd Ram, it happened that the Young Maid fell off into Pon∣tus, which was therefore from thence call'd Hellespont: But Phryxus landing safe in Colchis, by the Command of the Oracle sacrific'd the Ram, and hung up its Skin in the Temple of Mars. Afterwards the King was told by the Oracle, that he should dye when some Sea-faring Men came thither, and carry'd away the Golden-Fleece. And this was the Cause (besides the cruelty of his Nature) that mov'd this Vile Man to sacrifice Strangers, that (this horrid Cruelty being nois'd Abroad in all Parts) no Stranger might dare to set footing in his Country. He built a Wall likewise round the Temple, and plac'd a strong Guard of Taurican Soldiers to keep it, which has afforded matter for prodigious Stories among the Grecians; as how that Bulls that breath'd out Fire at their Nostrils guarded the Temple, and that a Dragon kept the Fleece. For by reason of the ambiguity of the Word Which signifies in Latin a Bull, and is like in sound to Taurica. Taurus, it was strain'd to signify the fierceness and violence of Bulls, and the cruel Murdering of Strangers, gave rise to the fiction of the Bulls breathing out Fire. Upon the same Account the Poets have given the Name of a most terrible and mon∣strous Beast, plac'd as a Guard for Security of the Temple. And much like to this Story, is what they say concerning Phryxus: For they say that he sail'd in a Ship, upon whose Foredeck was carv'd the Head of a Ram, and that Helles by leaning too much forward over the sides of the Ship to vomit, fell over-board into the Sea. Others say, that about the time that Phryxus with his School-master was taken by Aeetes; the Scythian King, the Father in Law of Aeetes, came to Colchis, and fell in love with the Boy, and upon that account he was bestow'd by Aeetes up∣on the Scythian, who lov'd him as his own Child, and adopted him his Heir and Suc∣cessor to the Kingdom. But that the School-master whose Name was Crius, signi∣fies a Ram in Greek. Crius, was sacrific'd to the Gods, and his Skin according to the Custom, was fastened to the Walls of the Temple. Afterwards Aeetes being foretold by the Oracle that he should dye when Stran∣gers carry'd away the Ram's-Skin, it's said that he gilt it with Gold, that the Splendour thereof should cause the Soldiers who were set to guard it, to be more careful and diligent in their watch. But we leave every one to judge of these things as he thinks fit. However it was, Medea conducted the Argonauts to the Temple of Mars, which was not above Seventy Furlongs distant from the City Sybaris, dignify'd with the Palace Royal of the Kings of Colehis. Medea therefore coming in the Night to
the Temple Gates, which were fast shut up, spoke to the Guards in the Lan∣guage of Taurica: Whereupon knowing her to be the King's Daughter, they forthwith open'd the Gates; upon which, the Argonants rush'd in with their drawn Swords, and kill'd many of the Barbarians, and drove the rest (terrify'd with the suddain Surprize) out of the Temple; and then plucking down the Fleece, they hasted back to their Ship with all speed. While these things were in acting, Medea was as diligent on her part, and poyson'd the ever wakeful Dragon, which wound himself about the Fleece in the P. 175. Temple; and then she went on Ship-Board with Jason. The Tauricans that fled, inform'd the King of what was done, who forthwith pursuing the Greeks with his Souldiers which were ready at hand, overtook them at the Sea-side, and falling upon them on the suddain, slew Iphitus, one of the Argonauts, Brother of Eurist∣heus, who impos'd upon Hercules so many Labours. But when the rest of the Greeks (who were before dispers'd) fell on in a great Body upon them, the Bar∣barians were most of them kill'd by Meleager, amongst whom was the King him∣self. The Grecians hereupon being fir'd with this Success, press'd more reso∣lutely upon the Colchians, and at length put them to flight, and slew the greatest part of them in the pursuit. Of the Argonauts were wounded in this Encounter, Jason, Lacrtes, Atalanta, and the Thespiadae, but they were cur'd within a few Days, by Applications, as is said, made up of Herbs and Roots by Medea. Then furnishing themselves with Provision, they set Sail, in order to return. But be∣ing got into the midst of the Pontick Sea, they were overtaken with a suddain Tempest, to the great hazard of their Lives. But Orpheus addressing himself to the Gods of Samothracia as before, the Winds presently ceas'd, and Glaucus the Sea-God presently appear'd near to the Ship, and swam along by the Ship-side for Two Days and Nights together, and foretold to Hercules his Labours and future Immortality. He told likewise the Castor and Pollux. Tyndarides, that they should be call'd The Sons of Jupiter. Dioscuri, and should be ador'd and reverenc'd by all Men as Gods. Then he call'd the Argonauts every one by their Names, and told them, that for the sake of Orpheus's Prayers, by the provident care of the Gods, he now appear'd to them, and had foretold them of things to come. Therefore he advis'd them, that as soon as they landed, they should pay their Vows, and give Thanks to the Gods, by whose Kindness they had been now twice deliver'd. Having said this, Glaucus dived again into the Sea. The Argonauts being now arriv'd at the Mouth of Pontus, made to Land, where Byzas then reign'd, from whom the City is now call'd Byzantium. Here they e∣rected Altars, and offered up their Prayers and Thanks to the Gods, and con∣secrated the Place, which is now at this Day accounted Sacred, and reverenc'd by all that sail by that way. Loosing from thence, they pass'd through Propontis, and the Hellespont, and made to the Coasts of Troy. When they arriv'd there, Hercules sent his Brother Iphiclus and Telemon into the City, to demand Hesione and the Horses: But Laomedon laid the Messengers by the Heels, and plotted the Destruction of all the Argonauts. To which foul Act, all his Sons (except Priam) contributed their helping Hands. For Priam alledg'd, that Compacts with Stran∣gers ought to be kept inviolable, and press'd that his Sister, with the Horses that were promis'd should be restor'd; whose Advice being disregarded, he privately convey'd Two Swords into the Goal to Iphiclus and Telamon, declaring to them his Father's Design, and by this means procur'd their Deliverance. For forthwith killing the Keepers that resisted them, they escap'd to the Sea, and discover'd all particularly to the Argonauts. The Heroes hereupon readily prepar'd them∣selves for Battel, and marcht on to meet the Trojans, who with their King were issu'd out of the City against them. A sharp Dispute and Conflict there was, but at length the Valour of the He∣roes P. 176. prevail'd, where they say, Hercules exceeded them all; for he kill'd Laomedon, and took the City by a sudden Assault, and punish'd them who were Parties and Contrivers in the Design with the King; but gave the Kingdom to Priam for his Justice and Equity; and after entring into a League of Friendship with him, loos'd from thence with the Argonauts. But some out of the ancient Poets say, that being furnish'd only with Six Ships, upon the Account of being deny'd the Horses, he took Troy himself, without the help of the Argonauts, and to confirm this, they alledge these Verses of H
, , , , . But Hercules my Father, as is said, The Lions strong in Valour did exceed, That only with Six Ships and Slender Force, For Laomedon's Horses took his Course; And then Besieg'd and took the City Troy, And many of her People did destroy. From Troy the Argonauts arriv'd at Samothracia, and then again gave Thanks to the Gods, where they dedicated their Drink-Offering Bowls, and left them in the Temple, which remain there at this Day. The return of the Heroes was not yet known; but the common Report was throughout all Thessaly, that Jason and all his Companions were destroy'd some where or other about Pontus. Pelias therefore now thinking it a fit opportunity to cut off all that might in any probability seem to affect the Kingdom, compell'd Jason's Father to drink ls Blood, and Murdered his Brother Promachus, who was then but a meer Child. But when Amphinome his Mother was sought for to be butchered, she acted the part of a manlike and noble Spirit, worthy of remark; for running to the King's Palace, she pour'd out most heavy Curses upon his Head, wishing that due Ven∣geance might overtake him for his Impiety; and then immediately stab'd her self, and so like an Hero ended her Days. Pelias having thus extinguish'd Jason's whole Family, in a short time after paid for it, and receiv'd the due Reward of his Wickedness: For Jason in the Night entring a Port of Thessaly not far from the City Iolcos (yet out of view of the Inhabitants) was by one inform'd of the sad state and condition of his Family, and thereupon all the Heroes were in a readiness to assist Jason, and to undergo all hazards for that purpose; but there arose some difference of Opinions a∣mongst them; for some were for surprizing the King with a suddain Assault, o∣thers were for the Raising of Forces out of every Country, and so to join against him in a common War: For it was impossible for Three and Forty Men, to think to overcome so Potent a Prince, both as to his Riches and the number of his Ci∣ties. In these different Councils its said, that Medea promis'd to kill the King by a Stratagem, and deliver up the Palace into their Hands, without any ha∣zard to any of them. The Heroes wondring at what she said, askt how she would accomplish it? Who answer'd, that she had great variety of Poysons of admirable strength and efficacy, some of them found out by her Mother He∣cate, and others by her Sister Cerces; that she had not as yet made use of them for the killing of any Man; but now by the help of them, she would execute due and deserved Punishment upon the wicked Wretches; and told the Argonauts her whole Design, after what manner she would get to the King; and pro∣mis'd that from some Turret in the Palace that look'd towards the Sea, she would give a Sign to their Watch by Fire in the Night, and by Smoke in the Day. Hereupon she provided a Hollow Image of the Goddess Diana, in which she hid several sorts of Poysons, and anointed her Hair with a sort of Oyntment, which turn'd it all gray and hoary, and with the same Ointment wrinkl'd up her Face and her whole Body, so that she look'd like an old wither'd Hagg. Then taking the Goddess with her, order'd in all respects so as to excite the common People to a superstitious Adoration, she enter'd the City when it was light; where∣upon the People came running in to her from all Quarters, as if she had been an inspir'd Priestess: And she her self commanded every Body to bear a reve∣rend regard to the Goddess, who was now by the special Providence of the P. 177. Gods, come to them from the Hyperboreans, for the Preservation of the King and
the whole City. All being now imploy'd up and down in adoring the Goddess, and preparing of Sacrifices in honour of her, the whole City was possess'd with such a Fanatical Fury of Superstition, that Medea ily procur'd her self to be brought into the Palace; where with her Delusions she infatuated both  his Daughters with such a Pang of Superstition, that they all believ'd the God∣dess was come to load the King's House with all manner of Blessings, for  declar'd that Diana in a Chariot, drawn through the Air by Dragons, had  over many Parts of the World, and had now at length made choice of the K as the most Pious Prince to settle her Image, and establish her worship  ever; adding, that she was commanded by the application of  to give a Check to his Old Age, and restore him to his former Youth and  and bestow many other Blessings upon him that might make hi Life comfort to himself, and pleasing unto the Goddess. The King being amaz'd at this strange and unusual Discourse, she promis'd him forthwith to give an assurance of the truth of what she said, by  in her own Body. To this end therefore she order'd one of  his ∣ters to bring her some Spring-Water; which being done, she shut up her self in a little Room, and bathing her Body all over in the Water, she cleans'd her self of the Ointment, and so being restor'd to her former Vigour, as soon as she came into the King's Presence, all the Beholders were amaz'd; for they conceited that an Old Woman was transforw'd into a Youthful and Beautiful Virgin by the power and providence of the Gods. She forthwith likewise by her Witchcraft caus'd the appearance of the shape of the Dragons to appear, by which the ∣dess was drawn through the Air from the Hyperborcans to continue as a Guest with Pelias. These things done by her, being lookt upon to be above the Course of Na∣ture, the King highly honour'd her, and believ'd all she said to be true; and it's said that he took his Daughter's aside, and order'd them to assist her, and do whatever she commanded; and that it was fitter his own Children should ap∣ply Medicines to his Body than Servants, in order to reap the Benefits design'd him by the Favour of the Gods. Pelias therefore having expresly commanded that his Daughters should observe whatever Medea order'd to be done, in refe∣rence to the care of their Father's Body, were ready in all things to obey her. About Midnight therefore when Pelias was fast asleep, she said it was absolutely necessary that his Body should be boil'd in a Cauldron: And though the young Ladies easily and readily of their own accord, prepar'd themselves to obey her, yet she apply'd her self to another Experiment for the gaining of further Credit to what she said: There was an old Ram bred up in the Stall, which she told the young Ladies, she would first Boil, and then it should come forth a Lamb. Whereupon they agreed, and then it's said, she cut the Ram into small Pieces, and boil'd them, till to their seeming, by the use of her inchanted Drugs, she brought forth a young Lamb out of the Kettle, to the admiration and astonish∣ment of the young Women, who now thinking they might with great assurance depend upon what she promis'd, resolv'd to observe her in all her Commands; and all of them, but Alcetis (who out of a pious and natural Affection to her, Father, would not lay Hands upon him) cudgell'd him to Death. Whereupon Medea pretended that Vows and Prayers were first to be made to the Moon, before his Body was dissected, and cast into the Cauldron: To which end, she carried the Young Ladies with Torches and Fire-brands to the top of the high∣est part of the Palace; where Medea to spin out time, mumbled out a long Prayer P. 178. in the language of Colchis, that the Argonauts might make the Assault in the mean time; who now seeing the Fire from the Turret, concluded the King was dispatch'd; and therefore in a Body they made hastily to the City; where presently mounting over the Walls, they enter'd the Palace with their drawn Swords, and kill'd the Watch that oppos'd them. As soon as Pelias his Daughters were come down to boil their Father, unexpectedly seeing Jason with the rest of the Noble Youths his Companions, enter'd into the midst of the Palace, they grievously cry'd out with exceeding sorrow and lamentation: Having now neither power to revenge them∣selves upon Medea, nor time to purge themselves from the horrid fact that by her Delusions they had committed, they had forthwith murder'd themselves, if Jason (pitying their miserable Condition) had not prevented them, and comfort∣ed them with this Consideration, that their present Misery was not occasion'd by
their own malitious Contrivance, but that they were without any Fault of theirs led aside by the deceit of another: He promis'd them likewise, that their whole family should be civilly and honourably us'd. Having therefore call'd together a General Assembly, he excus'd what was done, and declar'd that he had dealt far more gently with the Authors of those Injuries than they deserv'd, and what he had done, was far short of what he and his had suffer'd. Then he plac'd A∣castus the Eldest Son of Pelias upon his Father's Throne, and carry'd himself with all due respect to the King's Daughters; and in performance of what he had promis'd, it's said, he at length marry'd them to the greatest Persons of Qua∣lity. Alcestis the Eldest he marry'd to Admetus the Thessalian the Son of Pheretes; Amphinome to Andraemon the Brother of Leonteus; and Eradne to Canas the Prince of Phocis, the Son of Cephalus. And these were the things afterwards done by Jason. Then arriving with the rest of the Heroes in the Isthmos of Peloponesus, he there sacrific'd to Neptune, and dedicated the Ship Argo to that God. Having gain'd the special favour of Creon King of Corinth, he was made Free of the City, and ever after dwelt among the Corinthians. When the Argonauts were preparing every one to return into his own Country, they say Hercules made this Proposal, Olympick Games instituted by Her∣cules. This was the first Institution: But the Olympicks were not an Aera, till 460 Years after, An. Mund. 3174, in the 37th Year of Ʋzziah King of Judah, before Christ, 774. that to obviate the unexpected Blasts and Frowns of Fortune, they should enter into an Oath mutually to assist each other, whenever any of them stood in need of help; and that they should pick out the most remarkable place in Greece for the celebrating of Sports, and a General and Solemn Meeting of all the Grecians, and that the Games should be celebrated in honour of Jupiter Olympus, the greatest of the Gods. Upon which the Heroes enter'd into the Association propos'd, and left it to Hercules to institute the Games; who made choice of the Ground in the Territo∣ries of Elis, near to the River Alpheus, for the General and Solemn Meeting, and dedicated the Place to the chiefest of the Gods, from whom it was call'd Olympick. Having therefore appointed Horse-coursing, Wrestling, and other Oymnick Sports, and ordered their several Prizes and Rewards, he sent Messen∣gers to all the Cities, to acquaint them with the institution of these Games. He was in no small Honour and Repute before, upon the account of his Expedition with the Argonauts: But this Institution of the Olympick Games much more ad∣vanc'd his praise; for he was so cry'd up amongst all the Grecians, and was so e∣minently famous in the esteem of most of the Cities, that many desir'd to enter into a League of Friendship with him, and to stand and fall with him in all Dan∣gers whatsoever. His Valour and Military Art was so admir'd by every Body, that he present∣ly got together a vast Army, with which he went through the whole World, desiring to benefit all Mankind: Upon which account all unanimously agree that he has attain'd to a state of Immortality. But the Poets according to their pro∣digous P. 179. way of relating matters, say, that Hercules himself alone, and without any Arms, perform'd all those famous Actions reported of him. But we have before given an Account of all those things that are fabulously related concerning this God: And now it remains that we should proceed with the History of Ja∣son. It's said that he and Medea, as Man and Wife, liv'd together Ten Years in Co∣rinth, and of her begat first Two Twins, Thessalus and Alcimena, and a Third call'd Tisandrus, much younger than the other Two. During all this time, they say Medea was greatly belov'd of her Husband, being eminent not only for the excellency of her Beauty, but for her Prudence and other Virtuous Qualifications: But it's said, that when she grew old, and her Beauty began to decay, Jason fell in love with Glauces, the Daughter of Creon, and courted the young Lady to marry her. The Father agreed to the Match, and appointed a Day, but Jason they say, first apply'd himself to Medea, in order to persuade her to a volun∣tary Divorce; telling her, that he did not marry this other Lady out of any a∣version or disgust to her, but that he might have Children to be Heirs to the Royal Family. Hereat the Woman storm'd, and appeal'd to the Gods for Re∣venge,
the Witnesses of his Oath and Vows. However it's said, Jason without any further regard to her, marry'd the King's Daughter. Medea therefore being commanded to leave the City, having only one Day al∣low'd her by Creon to prepare for her Departure, by the Art of Witchcraft she chang'd the Form of her Countenance, and enter'd the Palace in the Night, and by a Root found out by Cerces her Sister (which being kindled, was of such a na∣ture, as it could not be extinguish'd) she set the Palace on Fire. And now all be∣ing in a Flame, Jason sprang out from the Burning, and escap'd, but Glance and her Father Creon hem'd in on every side by the Fire, were both consum'd. Some Historians say, that Medea's Sons presented the new Bride with poyson'd Pla∣sters, which she applying to her self, miserably perish'd, and her Father toge∣ther with her, by only touching her Body in endeavouring to help her. Medea thus succeeding in her first Attempt, proceeded still to be further reveng'd upon  . 7. Jason; for she was so far transported with Rage and Jealousie, yea, with impla∣cable Cruelty, that notwithstanding Jason's narrow Escape, and the Destruction of the Bride, she further inhanc'd his Misery, by murdering his Sons he had by her; for she cut all their Throats (except one who made his Escape by Flight) and bury'd them in the Temple of Juno; and when she had done, at Midnight fled with some of her Faithful Maid-servants from Corinth to Hercules at Thebes, who undertaking as a Surety for Jason, that he should perform his Vows made to her in Colchis, promis'd to assist her in taking Revenge. In the mean time, e∣very one judg'd Jason was justly punish'd in this loss, both of his Wife and Chil∣dren: Not being therefore able to bear the insupportable weight of his Cala∣mities he kill'd himself. The Corinthians were even astonish'd at the extremity of his Misery, and were especially perplext concerning the Burying of the Chil∣dren. Therefore they sent to Delphos to inquire of the Oracle how their Bo∣dies were to be dispos'd of: And it's said, the Oracle ordered them to be bu∣ry'd in Juno's Temple, and that they should for ever after be worship'd as De∣my Gods. The Corinthians accordingly observ'd what was commanded; and Thessalus, who escap'd the cruel Hands of his Mother, was brought up by them. Afterwards he return'd to Iolcus, his Father's Country, and found Acastus the Son of Pelius, then lately dead; and thereupon (as next Heir to the Crown) took upon him the Sovereign Authority, and call'd the People within his Domi∣nion P. 180. after his own Name, Thessalians. But I am not ignorant that there are o∣ther Accounts given concerning the naming of them Thessalians, of which we shall speak in their proper Place. In the mean time they say, Medea finding Hercules at Thebes distracted, and his Children a little before by him murder'd, she cur'd him with her Medi∣cinal Applications. But because there was no hope of Assistance for her from Hercules at the present, by reason of the Labours impos'd upon him by Euryst∣heus, she fled to Aegeus the Son of Paedion at Athens, who marry'd her, and be∣gat of her Medus, afterwards King of the Medes. Others say, she was brought to her Trial by Hippotus the Son of Creon, and fairly acquitted. Some small time after, when Theseus return'd from Traezene to Athens, she was expell'd the City for Witchcraft; and Aegeus sent her away by Messengers, with Orders to conduct her to what Place soever she had a mind to go; and it's said, she went into Phaenicia; and that from thence she past into the upper Parts of Asia, and being Marry'd there to a certain famous King, she had a Son by him call'd Medus, who after the Death of his Father, succeeded in the Kingdom, and became renown'd for his Valour, and after his own Name, call'd the People Medes. But by reason of the Monstrous Stories feign'd by the Tragedians, there's great variety and difference in the History concerning Medea. Others in favour to the Athenians say, that she return'd safe to Colchis, and took along with her Me∣dus the Son of Aegeus: And that about that time, Aeetes was by force of Arms depriv'd of his Kingdom by Perses his Brother, and was restor'd by his Nephew Medus, who kill'd Perses. Afterwards Medeus having rais'd a great Army, overran many Parts of Asia above Pontus, and subdu'd that Part now call'd from him Media: But it would be here unnecessary and too tedious to relate all the Stories that they have written
concerning Medea; therefore we shall now proceed with what remains of the History of the Argonauts. Many both of the Ancient and Modern Writers (amongst whom is Timaeus) re∣port that the Argonauts (after the carrying away of the Golden Fleece) coming to understand that Aeetes had blockt up the Mouth of Pontus with his Fleet, to prevent their return, perform'd that which was wonderfully remarkable: For it's said, they sail'd up to the Head of the River Tanais, and there drew the Ship a considerable way over Land into another River that ran into the Ocean, and so fell down that way into the Sea; and then bending their Course from the North to the West, leaving the Continent on their Left-Hand, they at length enter'd our Sea near Now Ca∣diz. Gades: And to confirm this, they use these Argu∣ments. First, that the The Galls, now French. Celts, the Inhabitants near the Ocean, do adore Castor and Pollux above all the rest of the Gods; for amongst these Celts, there's an ancient Tradition, that these Gods appear'd, and came to them out of the Ocean: And they affirm, that there are several Places near the Sea, that had their Names from the Argonauts and the Castor and Pollux. Dioscuri, which remain still to this Day; and that within the Continent be∣yond Gades, there are apparent Marks and Signs of the re∣turn of the Argonauts: For sailing by Now Tuscany. Tyrrhenia, and arriving at a certain Island call'd Ilua near Tuscany. Aethalia, there's a Spacious Ha∣ven, was call'd by them Argo, from the Name of their Ship, which Name the Port retains to this Day: And that there is P. 181. another Harbour in Hetruria, About an Hundred and Twenty Miles. Eight Hundred Furlongs from Rome, which they nam'd Telamon, and that the Port at the City Formia into Italy they call'd Aeetes, which is now nam'd Caieta. They further say, that being driven upon the Quick-sands in Lybia, by a Violent Tempest, they were inform'd by Triton the King, of the nature of the Sea in those Parts, and how to avoid the Danger; for which Kindness they presented him with a Brass Tripode, on which were inscrib'd very ancient Characters, which not long since it's said was amongst the Hesperians. We are not here to omit refuting those Historians, that affirm the Argonauts sailing through the River Ister to the Spring-heads below, pass'd through the Channel there straight before them into the Adriatick Gulf. But Time has now clearly manifested the mistakes of those Authors, who thought that that Ister which disimbogues itself by several Mouths into the Pontick-Sea, and that other which falls into Adria, rise from one and the same Spring-head. For since the Con∣quest of Istria by the Romans, it's known by experience, that the Fountain∣heads of this River, are not above Forty Furlongs from the Sea: But the Identity of Rivers Names has been the occasion of Historians Mistakes. Having now insisted long enough upon the Acts of Hercules, and the Ar∣gonauts, Hercules his Sons and Ne¦phews. it's requisite according to my Promise, to relate the Actions of his Sons. After the Translation of Hercules to the Gods, his Children dwelt in Trachinia, with Ceyces the King. When Hyllus and some of the rest were grown up to Mens Estates, Eurystheus began to fear, lest when they were all grown up, he should be ejected out of the Kingdom of Micaena: Therefore he resolv'd to ex∣pel the Heraclides out of all parts of Greece. To this end he requir'd Ceyces, to banish the Heraclides and the Posterity of Licymnius, together with Iolaus and the Arcadian Regiments (that assisted Hercules in his Expeditions) out of his Dominions, and threatned him that if he did not he would proclaim War against him. Hereupon the Heraclides and their Friends, considering they were not able to contend with him, resolv'd to fly from Trachine of their own accord: Making therefore away to other Cities more wealthy and considerable, they desir'd Resi∣dence amongst them: But none durst receive them but the Athenians, who out of their natural Generosity, entertain'd them, and gave them and their Friends Habitations in Tricorynthus, which is one of the The other Three Cities are Oenon, Probatintum and Marathon. Four Cities of that part of Attica call'd Tetrapo∣lis.
After some time when all the Heraclides were attain'd to Mens Estates, and their Spirits were rais'd up upon the account of the glory of their Father, Eu∣ristheus jealous of their growing Interest, led a strong Army against them. But the Heraclides assisted by the Athenians, having committed themselves to the care of Iolaus (Hercules his Brother's Son) who together with Theseus and Hyllus, com∣manded the Forces, fought Eurystheus, and routed his Army, and cut off a great part of them; and Euristheus himself (his Chariot breaking in pieces in his Flight) was kill'd by Hyllus the Son of Hercules; and all the Sons of Eurystheus fell in this Battel. The Heraclides having obtain'd so remarkable a Victory over Eurystheus, and their prosperous Success now advancing the number of their Forces, they inva∣ded Peloponesus under their General Hyllus. One Atreus at that time, after the Death of Eurystheus, had obtain'd the King∣dom of Mycaena; and being join'd with the Tegeans, and some other Confederates, marcht out against the Heraclidae. Both Armies met in the Isthmos, and there Hyllus challeng'd any one This Atreus was Uncle to Euryst∣heus, that is, Brother of Assidamia, the Mother of Euristheus. He was the Son of Pelops, and Father of A∣gamemnon. Vid. Thy. lib. 1. P. 182. of the Enemy to fight him singly, upon condition that if he overcame the other, the Kingdom of Euristheus should be gi∣ven up to the Heraclidae; but if he himself were kill'd, that then the Heraclidae should not return into Peloponesus, within the space of Fifty Years. Whereupon Echemus King of the Tegeans enter'd the List, and fought with Hyllus, who was slain in the Combat. The Heraclidae thereupon in performance of the Agreement, made no further At∣tempt to enter Peloponesus, but return'd to Trycorinthus. Afterwards Licymnius with his Children, and Tlepolemus the Son of Hercules, by the consent of the Citizens took up their Residence, and dwelt in Argos; the rest continu'd in Tricorynthus, till the Fifty Years were expir'd, and then they return'd into Peloponesus, whose Acts we shall set forth, when we come to those Times. Alchmena in the mean time came to Thebes, and a little time after vanish'd away, so that she was wor∣shipt by the Thebans as a Goddess. The rest of the Heraclidae, they say, apply'd themselves to Aeginius the Son of Dorus, who restor'd them to their Father's Kingdom, with which he was intrusted by Hercules, and so setled themselves a∣mong the Doreans. But they say, that Tlepolemus the Son of Hercules, who resided in Argos, was forc'd to fly thence to Rhodes, for the Killing of Licymnius the Son of Electryo, upon some falling out that was between them. The Island was then inhabited by the Hellenes, a Colony brought thither by Triopas the Son of Phorbas. Tlepolemus divided Rhodes, together with its Inhabitants, into Three equal Parts, and built there Three Cities, Lyndus, Jalysus and Camirus; becoming King of the Rhodians upon the account of the renow'd Actions of his Father, he af∣terwards assisted Agamemnon at the Siege of Troy.
CHAP. IV. The Acts of Theseus. The Minotaur in Crete. Androgeus the Son of Mi∣nos murther'd by Egeus. Ariadna Daughter of Minos, in love with The∣seus. Ariadna's Crown. Aegeus King of Athens kills himself. Theseus's Death. The War of Thebes by the Seven Captains. The Epigoni renew the War. The Pedigrees of the Heroes at Troy. Of the Centaurs, and La∣pithae. The Pedigrees of Aesculapius, Aeacus, Ajax, Pelops, Tantalus, Oenomeus. Dardanus's Posterity to Priam King of Troy. SInce we have spoken of Hercules and his Posterity, it remains that we say something of Theseus, because he seem'd to imitate Her∣cules in his brave and noble Actions. Theseus was Cotemporary with Hercules, An. Mun. 2720, to 2745. He was the Son of Aethra, the Daughter of Pittheus, by Aegeus Plut. judg'd by Neptune, till his Father was known, Plut. Neptune, and brought up in Traezena, with Pittheus his Mo∣thers Father. Having afterwards found (as is reported) the A Sword and a Pair of Shooes. See Plut. Thesius. Tokens hid under a Stone by Aegeus, he resolv'd to go to Athens: As he travell'd along the Sea-Coasts in the Isthmos, his Mind was full of Thoughts how to imitate the Valour of Hercules, and to perform some glorious and honourable Enterprizes. 1. First therefore he kill'd Corynetes, who us'd to carry a Club call'd Coryne, which he us'd as defensive Arms, and with the same Weapon knockt all Passen∣gers and Travellers on the Head. 2. Then next he slew Sinnis, who haunted the Isthmos, and us'd to bend down Two Pine-Trees, one to meet another, and He was call'd , a Bender of Pines, Plut. Thesers. bind one Arm to one of the Trees, and another to the o∣ther, of such as he took passing that way; and when he had done, then to let them spring up on a suddain, which by their force and violence so rent in Pieces the Bodies of the poor Miserable Creatures, that they dy'd in most horrid pain and torment. 3. The Third thing remarkable that he did, was the Killing of the Crommyo∣nion Sow, a most vast and fierce Creature which destroy'd many. 4. The Fourth was the Killing of Sciron, who lay lurking amongst the Rocks, call'd from him the Scyronian Rocks: His manner was, that he would force Pas∣sengers to wash his Feet upon the top of a steep Rock, and then kick them down head-long into the Sea, near Chelone. 5. Next he slew Cercyon at Eleusina, who kill'd all that he overcame in Wrest∣ling. 6. Afterwards he kill'd one Procrustes, who resided in Corydallus in Attica: His Custom was to force all that past that way, to lye down upon a Bed, and if they were longer than it, to cut off so much of their Legs, as reacht beyond the Bed; if they were shorter, then he wrackt and stretcht out their Limbs, till they reacht the full length; thence he was nam'd * Procrustes. † A Tor∣mentor. Having perform'd these notable Exploits, he came to Athens, and by the To∣kens which he brought along with him, he was known and owned by Ae∣geus. 7. Afterwards he master'd the Marathonian Bull (which Hercules in perfor∣mance of one of his Labours, brought from Crete into Peloponesus) and led the Monster in Triumph into Athens, which Aegeus sacrific'd to Apollo. P. 183. And now it remains that we speak of the Minotaur which was kill'd by The∣seus: Minotaur. But for the clearer understanding of the History, it's necessary that we first ascend to things done some time before, that have a Reference to the Narra∣tion. Teutamus. Tectamus the Son of Dorus, the Son of Hellen, the Son of Deucalion, arriving in Crete, with the Aeolians and Pelasgians, reign'd there as King, and marrying the Daughter of Cretheus, had by her Asterius; in the time of whose Reign, they say Jupiter having carry'd away Europa out of Phaenicia, transported her upon a
Bull's Back into Crete, and upon her begot Three Sons, Minos, Rhadomanthus, and Sarpedon. Asterius King of Crete afterwards marry'd Europa, but having no Children of his own, he adopted the Sons of Jupiter, and left the Kingdom to them. Rhada∣manthus prescrib'd Laws for the Cretians: Minos taking the Kingdom upon him, marry'd Itone, the Daughter of Lyctius, and of her begat Lycastes, who coming to reign, Marry'd Ida the Daughter of Corybantus, and of her begat another Mi∣nos, whom some say was the Son of Jupiter. He was the first of the Grecians that rigg'd out a gallant Navy, and gain'd the Dominion of the Sea. He marry'd Pa∣siphoe, the Daughter of Sol and Cretes, and by her had Deucalion, Astrea, Andro∣geus, Ariadne, and many other Children. Androgeus in the Reign of Aegeus, went to Athens, to the The Panathenean Festivals were kept in honour of Minerva, where∣in were exhibited Wrestling, Horse-Races, Dancing in Armour, &c. They were celebrated the 27th of July Yearly. Rous. Archaeal. Attic. lib. 2. c. 10. p. 67. Vid. Steph. Dict. They were instituted by Theseus; upon what ground: See Pausan. in Arcad. c. 2. Panathenean Solemnities, where he was Victor in all the Sports and Contests; upon which Account, he became very familiar with the Sons of Pallas; and thereupon Aegeus grew jealous, lest the House of Pallas, with the assistance of Minos, should out him of his Kingdom, and therefore contriv'd to cut off Androgeus. To which end, as he was travelling to Thebes to see a Sacred Procession by order of Aegeus, he was way-laid by some of the Country People, and assassinated near Oe∣non in Attica. Minos afterwards hearing of the sad Misfortune of his Son, went to Athens, and requir'd Justice for the Murder committed: But seeing that he could not prevail, he proclaim'd War against the Athenians, and prayed Jupi∣ter to send a Drought and Famine upon the City of Athens; whose Prayer was speedily heard, for forthwith there was a great Drought throughout Attica, and even through all Greece it self, together with a miserable Scarcity and dreadful Famine. The chief Men therefore of the several Cities, assembling themselves together, sent to consult the Oracle at Delphos, what they must do in order to avert the present Calamity; who answer'd, that they were to go to Aeacus the Son of Ju∣piter, and Aegina the Daughter of Asopus, and intreat him to offer Sacrifices for them: Which they did accordingly, and Aeacus perform'd what they desir'd: Upon which the Drought and Famine ceas'd in all Parts of Greece, but only in At∣tica, and there it still continu'd; so that the Athenians were forc'd to resort again to the Oracle, to implore Relief from the pressing Calamity. Upon which, the God return'd Answer, that to expiate the Murder of Androgeus, they should give to Minos such satisfaction as he requir'd. The Athenians obey'd the Oracle; and Minos demanded, that for Seven Years together, they should send Seven Boys, and as many Girls to be devour'd by the Minotaur, and that this they should do as long as the Monster liv'd. The Athenians sent them accordingly, and so the Famine ceas'd, and Minos desisted from further prosecuting of the War. When the Seven Years were expir'd, Minos came again with a great Navy into the Coasts of Attica, and demanded Fourteen Boys, which were delivered him. Theseus with the rest of the Children his Fellows, being now ready to set Sail, Aegeus sent a Pilot along with them, with Orders, that if Theseus overcame the Minotaur, that they should enter the Here seems something to be want∣ing, as how Theseus came to be one of them. Vid. Plut. Thes. Port of Athens with white Sails; but if he perish'd with black, as In token of Mourning, when they carry'd away the Children to Crete, Plut. Thes. they us'd formerly to do. When the Athenians arriv'd in Crete, Ariadna, Minos his Daughter, fell in love with Theseus for his gallant mean and deportment: Having therefore opportunity of Converse with her, by her Advice and Assistance, he both kill'd the Minotaur, and learn'd the P. 184. Passage out of the Labyrinth, and so came out safe. Then privately preparing for his return into his own Country, he stole away Ariadna, and sail'd out of the Port in the Night, and arriv'd at the Island then call'd Dia, but now Naxos. They report, that at that time Bacchus being taken with the Beauty of the Young Lady, took her by force from Theseus, and through the ardent Affection he had for her, marry'd her; and that his love for her was such, as that after her Death, he dignify'd her with Immortality, and transform'd her crown into
a Constellation of Stars, call'd Ariadna's Crown. Theseus they say, was so griev'd Ariadna's Crown. to be thus bereav'd of the Young Lady, that through Sorrow and Vexation, he forgot the Commands of Aegeus, and made into the Port of Athens with black Sails. At which sight, Aegeus concluding that his Son was destroy'd, resolv'd upon an Heroick, but a sad and lamentable Action; for he went up to the top of the Citadel (and through the excessiveness of his Grief, counting his Life a Burden to him) he threw himself down Headlong. After his Death Theseus suc∣ceeded him in the Kingdom, and govern'd according to the Laws, and ordered and performed many things, which conduc'd to the welfare and increase of the City. The most famous and remarkable among all the rest was this, That he gather'd all the People together that were scatter'd Abroad in the Country (and so were more considerable for their Number than their Power) and brought them into Athens. From this time the largeness of the City did so puff up the Athenians, and swell them with that confidence, that they question'd not but to be Lords of all Greece. But having said enough of these things, we shall go on with those that remain concerning Theseus, and which afterwards happened to him. Deucalion, the Eldest of Minos's Sons, reigning in Crete, enter'd into a League with the Athenians, and Marry'd his own Sister Phoedra to Theseus. After his Marriage he sent away his Son Hippolytus, whom he had by the A∣mazon, to Troezena, to be bred and brought up by his Sister Aethra: Of Phoedra he begat Acamantes and Demophon. Hippolytus a while after coming to Athens to the Celebration of a great Festi∣val, Phoedra was so taken with his Beauty, that she fell passionately in love with him: But he going back again for that time, she built near to the Citadel the Temple of Venus, whence she might have a prospect of Traezene. Afterwards going with Theseus to Traezene to visit Pittheus, she solicited Hippo∣lytus to lye with her; who refusing the Motion, her Love was turn'd into Ha∣tred and Rage, and therefore she accus'd him to her Husband, that he attemp∣ted to Ravish her. Theseus suspecting the truth of what she said, summon'd Hip∣polytus to appear and answer the Accusation; but Phoedra fearing she should be discover'd upon the Trial of the Cause, hang'd herself. When Hippolytus first heard of the Accusation, he was driving a Chariot; upon the News whereof, he was in such a Consternation and Disturbance, that he let the Reins fall; which so startled the Horses, that they hurried him away, and broke the Chariot in Pieces; and he himself being fastn'd in the Harness, was drag'd along upon the Ground, and so perish'd. Hippolytus thus losing his Life upon the account of his commendable Chastity, was ador'd by the Troeze∣nians as a God. Theseus afterwards by a Sedition being driven out of the City, died in Banishment. But the Athenians being sorry for what they had done, brought back his Bones, and honour'd him as a God, and the Place where they bury'd him in the midst of Athens, they made a Sanctuary, which from him was call'd Theseion. Since we have proceeded so far in the Story of Theseus, we shall give a distinct account also of the Rape of Helen, and of the intention of Perithous to court Proser∣pina; for these things have a Relation to the History of Theseus. Perithous the Son of Ixion, after the Death of his Wife Hippodamia, by whom he had a Son call'd Polypodes, went to Athens to Theseus; whom finding a Widower (ha∣ving then lately bury'd his Wife Phoedra) he advis'd to steal away Helen, the Daughter of Jupiter and Laeda, who was then about Ten Years of Age, and of surpassing Beauty: To this end they went (with some other of their Associates) P. 185. to Lacedemon, and catching a fit opportunity for the purpose, seiz'd upon Helen, as their common Prize, and carry'd her away to Athens; where it was agreed between them, to cast Lots for her, and that he who should have the good For∣tune to gain her, should faithfully assist the other (through all Hazards whatso∣ever) in procuring him another Wife. This Compact being confirm'd by a So∣lemn Oath, she fell by Lot to Theseus. The Athenians were much incens'd at what was done in this Business: Theseus therefore fearing the bad effect of it, privately kept Helen at Aphidna, one of the Cities of Attica, and committed her to the care of his Mother Aethra, and some other Persons of Quality that were his Faithful Friends.
Afterwards Perithous had a desire to court Proserpina, and for this purpose re∣quir'd Theseus to go along with him: At first Theseus endeavour'd to dissuade him, and to take him off from such a wicked and impious Design. But Peri∣thous urging him the more vehemently (and by vertue of his Oath being bound thereunto) he at length agreed to joyn with him in the At∣tempt. To this end both of them descended into the Hell. See this explain'd in Plut. Thes. This Pluto was the King of the Molossians, and his Wives and Daughters Name was Proserpina, who clapt both Theseus and the other up in Prison. Shades below, and for their Impudence and Impiety, were clapt up, and bound fast in Chains; but Theseus was afterwards releas'd for the sake of Hercules. But Perithous suffers Eternal Pains with the Infernal Spirits for his Wickedness; though some Writers report, that neither of 'em ever return'd. About the same time they say, Castor and Pollux (the Brother of Helen) assaulted Aphidna, and taking it by Storm, raz'd it to the Ground, and carry'd away Helen (still a Virgin) to Lacedemon, and with her among the Captives, Athra the Mother of Theseus. Having spoke sufficiently of these things, we shall now pro∣ceed to give an Account of the Seven Captains that made War against Thebes, and shew the first Causes of that War. Laius The Seven Captains against Thebes. This is the first War related by any Heathen Historian, either in Prose or Verse. An. Mund. 2727, the 10th Year of Jair, Judg. 10. 3. Before Christ, 1221, about 30 Years before the Trojan War. the King of Thebes having marry'd Jocasta the Daughter of Creon, and for a long time being without Children; at length consulted the Oracle whether he ever should have any Issue. Pithia the Priestess gave answer from the Oracle, that it would be unfortunate to him to have any Issue; for the Son that he should afterwards beget, should kill him, and involve his whole Family in most dreadful Calamities. But somewhat forgetful of what the Oracle had declar'd, he afterwards begat a Son, but bor'd his Feet through with an Iron, and order'd him to be expos'd in the open Fields; and for that reason he was afterwards call'd Oedipus. The Servants that took him Oedipus. into their Custody for that purpose, were unwilling to leave him so to the wide World, but gave him to King of Sci∣cion, or Co∣rinth. Polybus his Wife, who was barren. Being attain'd at length to Man's Estate, Laius resolv'd to inquire of the O∣racle, to know what was become of the expos'd Infant; and Oedipus at the same time being by some one inform'd of the Design against him when he was so very Young, took a Journey to Delphos, to inquire of the Oracle who were his true Parents: It so fell out, that both of them meeting one another upon the Road in Phocis, Laius in a proud and haughty manner commanded Oedipus to get out of the way; who thereupon was so inrag'd, that he fell upon Laius and kill'd him, not knowing him to be his Father. About that time they report that Sphinx, a double shap'd Monster, came to Sphinx. Thebes, and put forth a Riddle to be resolv'd by any that could: Which none be∣ing able to do (by reason of the difficulty of the thing) she destroy'd many: At length she became more moderate, and offer'd a Reward to such as should unfold it, that he should marry Jocasta, and with her injoy the Kingdom of Thebes. When none else could expound the Riddle, Oedipus was the only Man that did it. The Riddle propounded by Sphinx was this; What Creature is that that is Two-Footed, Three-Footed, and Four-Footed? When all others were puzled, Oedipus interpreted it to be a Man; who when he is an Infant, creeps upon all His Hands and Feet. Four; when he grows elder, goes upright upon his Two Feet; but when he is old, he's Three-Footed, using a Staff to support him by reason of his weakness. Whereupon Sphinx (as it is reported) threw herself down Headlong from the top of the Rock: And Oedipus marry'd his Mother unknown to him, and begat of her Two Sons, Eteocles and Polynices, and Two Daughters, Antigone and Is∣mene. The Sons being grown up to Mans Estate, came to the knowledge of the P. 186. Wickedness committed in their Family, and therefore for the foulness of the Fact, confin'd Oedipus so as that he should not stir Abroad; and his Sons took upon them the Government, first agreeing together to rule Yearly one after another by turns. Eocles the Elder Brother reign'd first, but when his Year was out, he refus'd to give way to his Brother: Polynices demanded the Government according to the Covenant between them, but his Brother turn'd to him the Deaf Ear; upon which he repair'd to Ardrastus King of Argos.
At which time Tydeus the Son of Oeneus King of Calydonia, was fled out of Ae∣tolia to Argos, for Killing of his Nephews Alcathous and Lycotheus. Adrastus kindly entertain'd them both, and by command of the Oracle, gave his Daugh∣ter Argia in marriage to Polynices, and Deipyle to Tydeus. The young Men being both in great Honour and Esteem, and highly approved of by the King for their virtuous Qualifications, Adrastus promis'd to restore them both to their own Countries. Resolving therefore first to bring back Polynices, he sent Tydeus on an Embassage to Etocles to debate the matter with him: In his Return, it's said, he was set upon by Fifty Men, imploy'd by Eteocles to way-lay him; all whom not∣withstanding he slew, and came safe, beyond all seeming Probability to Argos. Adrastus being inform'd of this piece of Treachery, prepar'd all things necessary for the War, and Procur'd Capaneus, Hippomedon and Parthenopaeus the Son of A∣talanta, the Daughter of Sheneus to joyn with him: Polynices also endeavour'd to persuade Amphiraus the Sooth-sayer, to go along with them to the War a∣gainst Thebes; but he foreknowing he should fall in that War if he went, re∣fus'd to stir. Polynices therefore presented Amphiraus his Wife with a Or Neck∣lace. Golden-Chain (which as is reported, was bestow'd upon Harmonia by Minerva) to persuade her Husband to joyn with them as one of their Confederates. There being some Controversie about that time between Adrastus and Amphiaraus con∣cerning the Kingdom, they agreed together to refer the whole matter in dif∣ference, both as to the Kingdom and the War, to the decisive Judgment of Eu∣riphile the Sister of Adrastus, and Wife to Amphiaraus. Hereupon she gave Judg∣ment for Adrastus, and that her Husband should joyn with the rest in the War against Thebes. Amphiaraus (though he lookt upon himself to be betray'd by his Wife,) yet prepar'd to go along with the other Captains: But before he went, commanded his Son Alchmeon, that after he was dead, he should kill Eri∣phyle; who afterwards executed his Father's Commands, by murdering his Mo∣ther; but was some time after so terrify'd in Conscience with the horridness of the Fact, that he went stark mad. But to proceed; Adrastus, Polynices and Tydeus, together with Four other Cap∣tains, Amphiraus, Capaneus, Hippomedon, and Parthenopeus, with a great Army, marcht against Thebes; where Eteocles and Polynices kill'd each other. Capeneus in attempting to scale the Walls, was likewise slain. The Earth open'd her Mouth and swallow'd up Amphiaraus and his Chariot together, and so he was never more seen. All the rest of the Generals likewise perish'd in this War except A∣drastus, and a great Slaughter there was among the common Souldiers, whom the Thebans would not suffer to be carried off the Ground; so that Adrastus was forc'd to leave them unbury'd, and return to Argos. The Bodies of the Slain thus lying unbury'd at Cadmea, none daring to interr them, the Athenians (always commendable above others for their Humanity) took care of this matter, and bury'd them all. And these were the Misfortunes that befel the Seven Captains in the War at Thebes. But the Children of them that were Slain (call'd † Epigoni) to revenge their Born after. Father's Deaths, all joyn'd together, and resolv'd to make War upon that City. The Oracle of Apollo (upon Enquiry) answer'd them, that they should over∣come P. 187. Thebes, if they made Alchmaeon the Son of Amphiaraus their General. Whereupon Alchmaeon being accordingly (with unanimous consent) created Com∣mander in chief, consulted the Oracle, both concerning the present intended Ex∣pedition, and the Revenge that he was injoyn'd by his Father to execute upon E∣ripyle his Mother. The Oracle commanded him to perform both, because she not only receiv'd a Chain of Gold for what she did, which was the occasion of his Father's Death, but a rich Or Gar¦ment call'd Peplus. Vale likewise as a Bribe, in order to the ruine of himself. Venus (they say) heretofore bestow'd this Chain and Garment upon Harmonia the Wife of Cadmus; but both were given to Eripyle; the Chain by Polynices, and the Vale by Thersandrus, Polynices his Son, that she might persuade Alchmaeon, to go to the Theban War. Alchmaeon therefore rais'd Souldiers out of Argos, but great Numbers out of the Neighbouring Towns, and with these he marcht against Thebes: The Thebans issued out of the City against them, upon which there was a sharp In∣gagement; but the Alchmeons at length got the Day. The Thebans being thus o∣vercome with a great Slaughter of their Citizens, seeing themselves too weak for the other, utterly despair'd of all future Success, and therefore consulted
Teiresias the Soothsayer what they should do. Who advis'd them to abandon the City, as the only means left for their Safety and Preservation. The Cadmeans follow'd his Advice, and in the Night forsook the City, and fled to a Province in Beotia, call'd Tilphotium. The Epigonians afterwards enter'd and raz'd the Ci∣ty, and being now Lords of all (among others) possessed themselves of Daphne, the Daughter of Teiresias, whom (according to their Vow) they devoted (as the chief of their Spoils) to the Oracle at Delphos. The Daughter nothing inferior to her Father for the Art of Divination, mightily improv'd it while she conti∣nu'd at Delphos; for she was endued with those Parts and Qualifications that were to be admir'd: She writ divers sorts of Prophetical Verses in a most artificial dress and composure, out of which (they say) the Poet Homer borrow'd many Verses for the adorning of his Poems. Being often in an Enthusiastical inspira∣tion from the God, she utter'd things that were Prophetical, and therefore (they say) she was call'd a Sibyl. For to be so inspir'd, is in the Greek Language to act the . Sibyl. The Epigonians thus prosperously succeeding in their Expedition, return'd at length (loaden with Spoyl) into their own Country. Among those Thebans that fled to Tilphosium, Tiresias dy'd, and was bury'd by the Cadmeans with great Funeral Pomp, and ador'd afterwards as a God. Some time after leaving the City Tilphosium, they invaded the Doreans, and o∣vercoming them in a Battel expell'd them out of their Country, and settl'd them∣selves for a while in their Rooms; but afterwards part of them return'd to Thebes in the Reign of Creon, the Son of Menaeceus, and the rest continu'd in Doris: But the expuls'd Doreans at length return'd into their Country, and inhabited Erineus, Citinius, and part of † Beotia. About this time Beotus the Son of Neptune and Arne, * In the Greek Euboea for Beo∣tia. came into the Country, then call'd Aeolis, (now Thessaly) and nam'd those that ac∣company'd him Beotians. Here it's necessary to give a distinct and particular Account of those things which Aeolians. we have gather'd out of the Rubbish of Antiquity, concerning these Aeolians. In former times, some of the Children of Aeolus (the Nephew of Deucalion and Helen) inhabited the Places before mention'd, but Mimas another Son reign'd in Aeolis, and Hippotes the Son of Mimas begat Aeolus of Menalippe: And Arne the Daughter of this later Aeolus had a Son by Neptune call'd Beotus. Aeolus not be∣lieving she was got with Child by Neptune, judg'd her guilty of Whoredom, and therefore deliver'd her to a Metapontinian Stranger (that was there by chance at that time) to be transported to A Town in Italy near Ta∣rentum. Metapontum; which he did accordingly, and there she was deliver'd of Aeolus and Beotus, whom the Metapontinian (being Childless) by direction of the Oracle, adopted for his own Sons. When they grew to Mens Estate, a Sedition being rais'd in Metapontum, they possess'd themselves P. 188. of the Kingdom by force of Arms. Afterwards Arne and Autolyte, the Wife of the Metapontinian falling together by the Ears, the Sons of Arne, in assisting their Mother, kill'd Autolyte; which cruel Fact the Metapontinian took most heinously, and therefore they got on Shipboard, and put to Sea with their Mother Arne and many other of their Friends. Aeolus possess'd himself of the Islands in the Tyrrhe∣nian Seas, call'd the Aeolides, after his Name, and built a City there which he call'd Lipara. But Beotus went to his Grandfather Aeolus, who receiv'd him as his Son, and he came afterwards to the Kingdom, and call'd the Country after his Mother Arne, but nam'd the People Beotians, after his own Name. Itonus the Son of Beotus begat Four Sons, Hippalcimus, Electrion, Archilicus and Alegenor: Hippalcimus had Peneleos, Electryon, Leitus, Algenor, Cloncus, Archilycus, Prothaenor and Ariesilaus, who were all Commanders in chief of the Beotians in the Trojan War. Having now set forth these Affairs, we shall endeavour to give an account of Of the Pro∣geny of Sal∣moneus and Tyro. Salmoneus and Tyro, and of their Progeny down to Nestor, who was one of the Grecian Commanders at the Siege of Troy. Salmoneus was the Son of Helen, Nephew of Aeolus, and Nephew's Son to Deu∣calion: He made an Expedition out of Aeolis, and possess'd himself of a Territory in Elis, upon the Banks of the River Alpheus, and there he built a City, which he call'd after his own Name Salomnia: He marry'd Alcidice the Daughter of A∣leus, and by her had a Daughter nam'd Tyro, who was an extraordinary Beauty. His Wife Alcidice dying, he marry'd another call'd Aderas. Siderone, who (after the man∣ner of Step-mothers) hated Tyro.
Afterwards Simoneus (being both cruel and unrighteous towards Men, and im∣pious towards the Gods) was hated by his Subjects, and at length for his Con∣tempt of the Gods, was by Jupiter struck dead with a Thunderbolt. About this time Neptune begat Two Sons of Tyro, Pelias and Neleus. Tyro be∣ing afterwards married to Cretheus, she had by him Amythaon, Pheretes and Ae∣sones. After the Death of Cretheus, Pelias and Neleus were at strife one with ano∣ther for the Kingdom. Pelias reign'd as King of Iolcus and the Neighbouring Countries, and being joyn'd with Melampus and Bias, the Sons of Amythaon and Aglaia, together with some Achaeans, Phthiots and Eolians, made an inroad with his Army into Peloponesus. At which time, in Argos, Melampus (being a Sooth-sayer) restor'd some Women to soundness of Mind, that through the Anger of Bacchus were struck with a raging Madness. And for this good Act he was re∣warded by Anaxagoras, King of the Argives, Son of Megapentheus, with Two parts of the Kingdom. Hereupon Melampus took his Brother Bias as his Asso∣ciate with him in the Government, and resided at Argos. Then marrying Iphia∣nira the Daughter of Megapantheus, he had by her Antiphates, Manto, Bias and Pronoes. Antiphates had by Zeuxippe the Daughter of Hippocoon, Oicles and Am∣phales. From Oicles and Hypermnestra, the Daughter of Thespius, descended Iphia∣nira, Polybaea, and Amphiaraus: And thus Melampus and Bias, and their Posterity injoy'd the Kingdom of Argos. Neleus likewise with those whom he conducted, enter'd. Messina, and built the City Pylus, which was given to him by the bordering Inhabitants; who reign∣ing here, married Chloris the Daughter of Amphion the Theban, and by her had Twelve Sons, of whom Periclimenus was the Eldest, and Nestor the Youngest, who went along with the rest to the Trojan War. But to the end we may keep within Bounds, this that has been said shall susfice concerning the Ancestors of Nestor. And now something is to be further added concerning the Lapithites and the Lapithites, Centaurs. Centaurs; most of whom were the Sons of Oceanus and Thetys (as the Mytho∣logists do report,) remarkable for their giving Names to Rivers; amongst whom was Peneus, from whom the River in Thessaly was so call'd. He was familiar with P. 189. the Nymph Creuta, and of her begat Hypseus and Stibes, of whom Apollo begat Lapithes and Centaurus. Lapithes resided near the River Peneus, and reign'd over the Neighbouring Territories. He marry'd Orsinome the Daughter of Eurynomus, and by her had Two Sons, Phorbas and Periphas, who afterwards reign'd in those Parts; and the whole Nation of the Lapithae, are so call'd from Lapithes. Phor∣bas one of the Sons of Lapithes, resided at Olenus: Whence Alector the King of Elis (fearing the power of Pelops) sent for him to his Assistance, and made him his Associate in the Kingdom. Phorbas had Two Sons, Egeus and Actor, who were afterwards Kings of Elis. Periphas the other Son of Lapitha, marry'd Astyagea, the Daughter of Hypseus, and by her had Eight Children; the Eldest of whom Antion, had Issue Ixion of Perimela, the Daughter of Amythaon. Ixion (they say) upon Promise to Hesioneus of a great Dowry and rich Gifts, marry'd his Daughter Dia, of whom he begat Perithous: But Ixion not performing his Promise made on the behalf of his Wife Hesioneus seiz'd his Horses in lieu of a Pawn. Ixion under colour of giving full satisfaction, desir'd his Father in Law to come to him; who coming accordingly, Ixion threw him into a Fiery Furnace. But because none could expiate him from the guilt of so heinous a Parricide, it's said that Jupiter did it. But growing afterwards in love with Juno (they say) he was so impudent, as to court her to play the Adulteress: Whereupon Jupiter turn'd a Cloud into the shape of Juno, with which Ixion gratify'd his Lust, and begat those Half Men, call'd Centaurs. At length, for his enormous Impie∣ty, he was fasten'd by Jupiter to a Wheel, and after his Death suffer'd Eternal Torments. Others say, that the Centaurs were bred up by the Nymphs in Pelion, and that when they grew up to Mens Estates, they ingender'd with Mares, and so begat a double shap'd Brood, call'd Both Horse and Man in their Natures Hippocentaurs. Others say, that the Cen∣taurs were the Issue of Nephele and Ixion, and because they were the first that attempted to ride upon Horses, therefore they were call'd Hippocentaurs, and feign'd to be of a double Nature, both Man and Horse. It's said that these Cen∣taurs being of the same Stock and Original, demanded of Perithous a share of
their Father's Kingdom; which being deny'd, they made War upon the Lapi∣thites; and that when the War was ended, Perithous marry'd Hippodamia the Daughter of Bystus, and invited Theseus and the Centaurs to the Marriage; and that the Centaurs (being Drunk, and inflam'd with Wine) attempted to ravish the Women that were then at the Marriage Feast: At which bold and wicked Prank, Theseus and the Lapathites were so incens'd, that they kill'd many of them, and drove the rest as Fugitives out of the City. And for this Reason, the whole Body of the Centaurs afterwards made War upon the Lapithites, and kill'd most of them, and forc'd the rest that had escap'd the Sword, to fly into Pholoe in Arcadia: But some got into Malea, and there continu'd. The Centaurs lifted up with this Success, often issu'd out of Pholoe, and robb'd all the Grecians that tra∣vell'd that way, and kill'd many of the Neighbouring Inhabitants. Having now done with these occurrences, we shall next speak of Aesculapius Aesculapius's Posterity. and his Posterity: They say he was the Son of Apollo and Coronis, and being of an acute and sharp Wit, earnestly bent his Mind to the study of Physick, and found out many Preservatives for the Health of Mens Bodies; and grew at length so famous, that curing many in a wonderful manner, whose Distempers were lookt upon to be desperate, he was judg'd to raise up many from the Dead: And therefore it's reported by the Mythologists, that Pluto complain'd to Jupiter of Aesculapius, that through his Cures the number of the Dead decreas'd; and ac∣cus'd P. 190. him for the weakning of his Empire in the Shades below: At which Ju∣piter was so incens'd, that he kill'd Aesculapius with a Thunderbolt. At whose Death Apollo was inrag'd to that degree, that he kill'd the Cyclops that made the Thunderbolt for Jupiter. Whereat Jupiter was again in wrath, and for a Punishment of his Offences, forc'd * Apollo to serve Mankind in a piece of con∣stant 4 The Sun. Drudgery. Aesculapius (it's said) had Two Sons, Machaon and Podalirius, who were skilful in their Father's Art, and went along with Agamemnon to the Trojan War; in which War they were very useful and serviceable to the Gre∣cians, for they cur'd them that were wounded in Fights with singular industry, and were in such esteem and favour among the Grecians, that by reason of their extraordinary usefulness in their Art, they were exempted from hazarding their Persons, and freed from all other publick Services. But here we shall conclude the History of Aesculapius, and his Sons; and shall now proceed to give an account of the Daughters of Asopus, and the Sons of Aeacus. Oceanus and Tethys (as some Stories have it) had many other Sons, which gave The Daugh∣ters of Asopus and Sons of Aeacus. Names to famous Rivers, besides Peneus and Asopus. The Residence of Peneus, was that Country which is now call'd Thessaly, who gave Name to that Famous River there call'd Peneus. Asopus dwelt at Phlias, and marry'd Medon the Daugh∣ter of Ladon, by whom he had Two Sons, Pelasgus and Ismenus, and twelve Daughters, whose Names were Cercyra, Salamis, Aegina, Pirene, Cleone, Thebe, Tanagra, Thespira, Asopis, Sinope, Oenia and Chalcis. Ismenus one of his Sons, came into Beotia, and seated himself near the River call'd after his own Name. Si∣nope one of the Daughters was forc'd away by Apollo to that Place where the City Sinope now stands; so call'd from her: From her and Apollo sprang Syrus, who reign'd over those People, from him call'd Syrians. Neptune transported Cercyra into that Island, now call'd from her Or Cercyra. Corcyra. He had by her a Son call'd Pheax, from whom the Phia, or Phea, a City in Elis. Pheans are so nam'd. This Pheax was the Father of Alcinous, who guided Ʋlysses into Ithaca: Salamis also was forc'd by Neptune, and carry'd away into the Island call'd after her own Name; by him she had Cenchreus, who was King of this Island, and a brave spirited Man; he kill'd a Serpent of a vast bigness, which had destroy'd many of the Inhabitants. Aegina was carry'd away by Jupiter from Phlias, into the Island Aegina, so call'd from her; and by her had Aeacus, afterwards King of that Island, whose Sons were Peleus and Telamon. Peleus by the throwing of an Hand-Stone, unfortunately kill'd his Half-Brother Phocus, being both of the same Father, but not of the same Mother; for this Fact he was banish'd by his Father, and fled into Phthia, a Province of that Country, now call'd Thessaly, where he was acquitted and purg'd of the Slaughter by King Actor, and succeeded him in the Kingdom, Actor dying without Issue. Achilles was the Son of Peleus and Thetis, and went along with Agamemnon to the War of Troy. Telamon likewise fled out of Egina, and arriv'd in Salamis, where he marry'd Glance the King's
Daughter, and by that means afterwards came to be King of that Island. After he Death of Glauce, he marry'd Eribaea of Athens, the Daughter of Alcathous, and by her had Ajax, another Associate in the Trojan War. Having given account of these things, we shall now speak of Pelops, Tantalus P. 191. and Oenomaus. And here it will be necessary to go higher, and treat distinctly of some things in time long before. In Pisa a City of Peloponesus, Mars begat Oenomaus of Harpina, the Daughter of Pelops, Tanta∣lus and no∣maus. Asopus: Oenomaus had one only Daughter, call'd Hippodamia, and consulting the Oracle how long he should live, the God answer'd that he should dye when his Daughter was Marry'd: Dreading therefore her Marriage, he resolv'd she should ever remain in a Virgin State, conceiving by this means only, he should avoid the danger foretold. But whereas many earnestly su'd to have her to Wife, he made a Proposal of a Horse-Race to the Suitors, with this Condition, that he who won the Race, should have his Daughter, and that he that lost, should be put to Death. The Course to be run was from Pisa to the Altar of Neptune, in the Isthmus of Corinth, and the manner of starting was thus: Oenomaus first sacrific'd a Ram to Jupiter; and in the mean time the Suitor makes speedily away in a Chariot drawn with Four Horses; and Oenomaus having at length finish'd his Sacrifice, mounts his Chariot driven by one Myrtilus, and with a Launce in his Hand, pursues the Suitor, and overtaking him, runs him through. And in this manner, by the swiftness of his Horses, always coming up to the Suitors (though they set out so long before him) he kill'd very many. But Pelops the Son of Tantalus coming to Pisa, and desiring to have Hippodamia for his Wife; as soon as he saw her, bribed Myrtilus (Oenomaus's Chariot-driver) to suffer him to be Victor; by which means he got to Neptune's Altar in the Isth∣mus, before Oenamaus; who concluding that what the Oracle had foretold, was now near to be fulfilled, through grief of Heart was so dejected, that he mur∣ther'd himself. Pelops thus gaining Hippodamia, with her likewise gain'd the Kingdom of Pisa; and being a Valiant and Prudent Man, and growing rich besides, subdu'd most of the Countries of Peloponesus signifies the Island of Pelops. Pe∣loponesus, and so called the whole Peninsula after his own Name. Since we have made mention of Pelops, it's fit to say something of Tantalus's Father, that we may not omit any thing worthy Remark. Tantalus the Son of Jupiter was a rich and renowned Prince, and had his Royal Seat in that part of Asia, which is now call'd Paphlagonia, and for the nobleness of his Birth, be∣ing the Offspring of Jove (they say) he was the very Darling of the Gods them∣selves. However he us'd not his Prosperity with that Moderation and Humility as became a Mortal; but being admitted to Familiarity and Feasting with the Gods, discover'd their Secrets to Men; for which he was not only punish'd while he was Living, but was thrust down among the Wicked and Impious (as the Histories relate) to suffer Eternal Torments after Death. This Tantalus had Pelops, and a Daughter nam'd Niobe, By Amphion, King of Thebes. who had Seven Sons, and as many Daughters, who were extraordinary Beauties: Being proud of the great number of her Children, she often boasted, that for her fruitfulness, she excell'd The Mother of Diana and A∣pollo. Latona her self: At which the Goddess they say, was so enrag'd, that she com∣manded Apollo with his Arrows, to kill the Sons, and Diana with hers, the Daughters; who executing their Mothers Commands, slew all the Children at once. So that Niobe who abounded with Children, was childless at one and the same moment. But because Tantalus being hated by the Gods, was expell'd out of Paphlago∣nia by Ilus the Son of Tros, something is fit to be said concerning Ilus and his Ancestors. The first that reign'd in the Country of Troas, was Teucer the Son of the River Ddanu's Psterity to Priam. Scamander, and the Nymph Idaea; he was a brave Man, and gave the Name of Teucri to the Inhabitants. He had a Daughter call'd Batea, whom Dardanus mar∣ry'd, and succeeded Teucer in the Kingdom; and ordered the People to be call'd P. 192. from him Dardanians; and built a City near the Sea Shore, and call'd it Darda∣num.
He had a Son nam'd Erichthonius, a Prosperous and Wealthy Prince; of whom the Poet Homer writes thus— , . None richer was of all Men under th'Sun, Whose brave Three Thousand Mares in th' Meads did run. Tros was the Son of Erichthonius, and of him the People were nam'd Trojans; he had Three Sons, Ilus, Assaracus and Ganimede; Ilus built a noble City in the Champain Country of Troas, which he call'd Ilium; the Son of Ilus was Lao∣don, whose Sons were Tithonus and Priam: Tithonus led an Army into the Eastern Parts of Asia, and pierc'd as far as to Aethiopia, whence rose the Story of Mem∣non, being the Son of Aurora; which Memnon brought aid to the Trojans, and was kill'd by Achilles. Priam marry'd Hecuba, and by her (besides many other Sons) had Hector, who was especially remarkable for his Valour in the Trojan War. Asaracus King of the Dardanians, had Capys his Son, the Father of Anchises, who of Venus begat Ae∣neas, a Famous Man among the Trojans. Ganymede lastly was extraordinary beau∣tiful, and is reported to be caught up to Heaven by the Gods to be Jupiter's Cup∣bearer. And now from these, we shall proceed to Daedalus and the Minotaur, and the Expedition of Minos into Sicily against King Cocalus. CHAP. V. Of Daedalus, and his Works in Crete, Sicily, and elsewhere. His Flight into Sicily: Minos invades Sicily; the manner of his Death there. The Famous Temple of the Curetes or Corybantes in Sicily, built by the Po∣sterity of the Cretians that came there with Minos. The Pedigree of A∣risteus; his Acts; his Son Acteon. of Eryx. Venus her Temple in E∣ryx in Sicily; the Fame of it. Of Daphnis the Shepherd. A Descrip∣tion of the Herean Mountains. Of Orion. Of the Streight of Mes∣sina. DAedalus was an Athenian, of the Family of the Ericthidae; for he was the An. Mund. 2732. Son of Metionon. Hymetion, the Son of Eupalamus, the Son of Erechtheus. He was extraordinary Ingenious, and very studious in the Art of Architecture, and was an excellent Statuary, and Engraver upon Stone, and improv'd those Arts with many notable Inventions. He made many wonderful Pieces of Work in several Parts of the World, and so far excell'd in the framing and cutting of Statues, that those that were long after him, report that the Statues he made, did re∣semble living Men even to the Life. For their Symmetry was so exact and per∣fect, that their Eyes, and frame of Motion, and the whole Composure of the Body, was a lively Representation of Living Creatures. For he was the first that in Statues exprest the direct and lively aspect of the Eyes, and the progressive Motion of the Legs and Thighs, and stretching forth of the Hands and Arms, and therefore was justly admir'd by all: For those Artists that were before him, fram'd their Images with blinking Eyes, Heads hanging down, as if they were glu'd to their sides. But though Daedalus was thus admir'd for his exquisite Skill in this Art, yet he was forc'd to fly his Country for a Murther committed upon the occasion fol∣lowing. | Talus Daedalus his Sister's Son, being but a Young Boy, was at that time bred * Call'd Calus, by Fausan, lib. 1. . 21. up with his Uncle, to learn his Trade. This Talus for Ingenuity excell'd his Master, and
invented the Potter's Wheel: He got likewise a Serpent's Jaw-bone, and with it saw'd a little piece of Wood asunder; then in imitation of the Tooth in the Jaw, he made the like in Iron, and so he found out an Instrument for the saw∣ing of the greatest Pieces of Timber, exceeding useful, and tending much to the furtherance and ease of all Architects. He invented likewise the Turner's Lath, and many other Tools for the use of Architects; upon which account he was in great Esteem and Reputation. Daedalus hereat burnt with Rage and Envy against the poor Boy, and fearing he would grow far more famous than himself, secretly murder'd him. Being seiz'd upon just as he was laying the Carcass in the Ground, he was askt what he was burying? He answer'd, that he was co∣vering a Serpent with Earth. Here it's very worthy of Remark, that the same Creature that was the occasion of making of the Saw, should be also the means of discovery of the Murther. Being therefore brought to his Trial at the Court of the Areopagites, and there condemn'd to dye for the Murder; he first fled to a sort of Of the Fa∣mily, or Tribe of Cecrops. People in Attica, who from him were call'd Daedalians: Thence he got into Crete, where he was much admir'd for his Art, and in great favour with King Minos. Afterwards (as it is commonly reported) Pasiphae the Queen, Minos his Wife, P. 193. burning in her Lust after a Bull, he fram'd an Engin like to a Cow, and helpt her by that means to satisfy her Lust. They say, that before that time, Minos Yearly sacrific'd the best and largest Bull in the Herd to Neptune; and once there being a most lovely Beast in the Herd, a worse was pickt out to be sacrific'd; at which Neptune was so incens'd at Minos, that he caus'd his Wife Pasiphae to go Mad for Love after the Bull; and by the Art of Daedalus, she prostituted her self to the Beast, and brought forth the Minotaur so famous in ancient Sto∣ries. They ascribe a double nature to this Creature, that from the Head to the Minotaur. Shoulders, he resembled a Bull, and in all his lower Parts was like to a Man. It's said, that for the keeping and feeding of this Monster, Daedalus built the La∣byrinth full of windings and turnings, this way and that way, impossible to be found out by any Stranger before unacquainted. Here it was that the Minotaur devour'd the Seven Boys, and the like number of Girls Yearly sent thither from Athens, as we have before declar'd. Daedalus being inform'd of Minos his Threats for making of the Cow, fearing the Rage of the King, by the help of the Queen got on Shipboard, and secretly escap'd out of the Island. Icarus his Son fled away with him, and both arriv'd at a certain Island, situated in the Ocean far off from any Land, where the Young Man being too rash, and hasty to Land, dropt into the Sea, and there perish'd; from whom it's call'd the Icarian Sea, and the Island Icaria. From hence Daedalus sail'd into Sicily, and landed there where Cocalus reign'd, who receiv'd him very courteously, and upon the account of his great skill, and the Fame that went of him, made him his Bosom Friend. Some report this Story concerning him, That Daedalus continuing still in Crete, was hid by Pasiphae; Minos in the mean time making diligent search after him, in order to punish him, but not able to find him out, he promis'd great Rewards to such as should discover him. Daedalus utterly despairing to get away by Shipping, made for himself and Son, artificial Wings, joynted and compacted in a wonderful manner with Wax, and fastn'd them to his own and his Son's Body, and with them Daedalus sud∣denly flew away, and got over the Cretian Sea: But Icarus soaring too high (such is the folly of Young Men) fell down into the Sea, the Sun melting the Wax wherewith the Feathers of the Wings were joyn'd together. But his Father fly∣ing low near the Surface of the Sea, and sprinkling his Wings in the Water, pass'd over safe into Sicily. Though this may seem an absurd Fable, yet we judg'd it not sit to be past by. Daedalus staid with Cocalus and the Sicilians a long time, and was highly ho∣nour'd and esteem'd by all for his excellent Art and Skill in his Profession: There are some Works of his there that remain to this day; for in the Territory of Megaris, he made a Fish-pond with wonderful Art, through which the great Ri∣ver 1. Colymbe∣thra. Alabone emptied it self into the Sea. He built likewise a City (now call'd Agrigentina in Camacus) upon a Rock so strong, that it was inexpugnable. The 2. A City. Passage to it was so straight and winding, that the Place might be easily defended
by Three or Four Men. Therefore Cocalus here built a Palace, and treasur'd up all his Wealth, as a Place (through this Architect's ingenious Contrivance) won∣derfully secure. In the Third Place, he made a Cave in the Territory of Sele∣menta, 3. A Soe, or Sweating-House; a Ban∣nion. P. 194. in which by Fire there under Ground, a warm Steam was so artificially rais'd, that by it's moderate heat, it caus'd a gentle Sweat, and gradually cur'd many that resorted thither of their Distempers, with a great deal of Pleasure, without any uneasiness from the Heat. And whereas there was a high and craggy Rock in the Country of Eryx, and no room to build but upon the highest and craggiest part of it, by reason of the strait and narrow Passages about the Temple of Venus, he drew a Wall round the very Top, and plain'd and inlarg'd it in 4. Plaining a Rock. a wonderful manner. They say, he likewise made a Golden Honey-Comb (de∣dicated to Venus Erycina) with such exquisite Art, and so like to a true and 5. Honey-Comb of Gold. real one, that none could ever be comparable to it. He wrought many o∣ther excellent Pieces in Sicily, which length of Time has worn out, and con∣sum'd. But Minos King of Crete, who had the Dominion at Sea, hearing that Daedalus was fled into Sicily, proclaim'd War against that Island. Having therefore rigg'd out a mighty Fleet, he set Sail, and arriv'd upon the Coasts of Agrigentum, which was from him call'd Minoa, where he landed his Men, and sent Messen∣gers to Cocalus, to demand the delivery up of Daedalus to Justice. Hereupon Mi∣nos and Cocalus came to an interview, and Cocalus promis'd to do all that Minos requir'd, and entertain'd him with all honourable Respect: But when he was in a Bath, Cocalus kept him there so long, that he was stiffl'd with the steam and heat. Afterwards he deliver'd his Body to the Cretians that came along with him, pretending he came to his Death, by slipping accidentally into the Hot and Scalding Baths. His Souldiers bury'd him with great Pomp, and built him a double Sepulcher, in the lower part whereof, in a Vault, they deposited his Bones, and near to the higher Part that was open to the view, they erected a Temple to Venus, which for many Ages after was so ador'd by the Inhabi∣tants, that they offer'd Sacrifices there, as in a Temple peculiarly consecrated to her. In later Times, when Agrigentum was built, it being then discover'd that the Bones were there bury'd, the Sepulcher was wholly ruin'd, and the Bones sent to the Cre∣tians, at the time when Thero was Sovereign Lord of Agrigentum. The Cretians that were thus brought over into Sicily, after the Death of Minos, having then no King, fell at odds one with another, and rais'd a great Tumult. But their Ships being all burnt by the Sicilians, Cocalus his Subjects, they were out of all hope ever to return into their own Country; and therefore resolv'd to settle themselves in Sicily. To that end, some of them built a City, which from the Name of their King they call'd Minoa. Another part of them went up into the heart of the Country, and possessing themselves of a Place naturally very strong, there built Engium, a City so call'd from a Fountain there. After the Destruction of Troy, they receiv'd Merion, with other Cretians that were cast upon Sicily; and because they were of the same Nation, they made them The Curetes or Corybantes. Members of their City. Afterwards making frequent Inroads into the Neigh∣bouring Country, from so strong a Fort, they subdu'd many of the Borderers, and got some small Territory; afterwards being grown wealthy, they built a Temple to the Call'd the Mother God∣desses in Crete. Curetes or Corybantes, and most religiously ador'd those Goddesses and adorn'd their Temple with many rich Gifts. They say, these Goddesses came into Cicily out of Crete, where they were most especially ador'd and honour'd. It's reported that they privatly bred up and conceal'd Jupiter from his Father Saturn. In reward of which Kindness, they were taken up into the Heavens and plac'd among the Stars, where they make the Constellation call'd The Bear. Arctos. Of whom Aratus (agreeable hereunto) in his Poem of the Stars, speaks thus— , , , .
Ʋpon their Shoulders him they bore away, If that we may believe what Stories say: From Crete great Jove advanc'd to th' Heavens clear, And plac'd the Curetes in the Northern Bear. For that from's Father Saturn him they hid, When young; and th' Youth out of all danger rid. It's not fit therefore that we should pass by in silence the piety of these Goddesses, P. 195. and their Fame and Reputation amongst all Men. For they are not only ador'd by the Inhabitants of this City, but several of the Neighbouring Countries wor∣ship them with pompous Sacrifices, and other Religious Services. And the Oracle at Delphos injoyn'd many Cities to give divine Honour to these Goddes∣ses; promising that by this means they should be bless'd both in their private and publick Concerns. And at length these Goddesses grew so Famous, that rich Gifts both of Gold and Silver were dedicated to them by the Inhabitants, and such Offerings are continu'd to the very time of writing this History. For they built to them a most sumptuous Temple, both for greatness of Structure, and Costly∣ness of Ornament. For in regard there was not Stone in that part of the Coun∣try fit for the raising such a Structure, they took care to have it brought from the Agyrinaeans, which was a About Fif∣teen Miles. Hundred Furlongs distance, and the way very rough and craggy, and hard to pass: And therefore to convey the Stones, they provided Gr. Carts with Four Wheels. Wagons, and a Hundred Yoke of Oxen; being the better inabled to bear the Charge, for that the Sacred Treasures were very large. For a little before our time, there were Three Thousand Oxen dedicated to those Goddesses, and so much Land as rais'd a vast Revenue: But having said enough of this, we shall proceed to the History of Aristaeus. Aristaeus was the Son of Apollo and Cyrene, the Daughter of Gypsaeus, who was Aristaeus his Original. the Son of Peneus. Of his Birth some tell this Story: They say that Cyrene was very beautiful, and brought up at Mount Pelion, and that Apollo fell in love with her, and transported her into Lybia, where in later time was built a City, call'd after her Name Cyrene. There Apollo committed his Son Aristaeus, begotten of Cy∣rene (then a young Infant) to the care of the Nymphs, to be brought up by them; who gave him Three several Names, Norricus, Aristaeus and Agreus. These Nymphs taught him how to To make Cheese. curdle Milk, to order and make Bee-Hives, and plant Olive-Yards; and by this means he became the first that directed all other Men in this Art: For which he was so honour'd, that all ador'd him as a God, as much as they did Bacchus. Afterwards they say, he went to Thebes, where he marry'd Autonoe, one of Cadmus's Daughters, by whom he had Actaeon, torn in Pieces (as the Mytholo∣gists Actaeon. say) by his own Dogs. Some give this Reason of his Misfortune, Because that he design'd Nuptial Imbraces with Diana in her Within the Consecrated Ground belonging to the Temple. Temple, dedicating to her what he got in hunting, for that Solemnity. Others say, because he boasted that in hunting, he excell'd Others say, because he look'd at her when she was Bathing. See Paus. Boetic. c. 2. Diana her self. And it is not improbable, but that the Goddess might be incens'd at either of these. For whether for the gratifying of his Lust by his Prey, he abus'd the Goddess, who was ever averse from Marriage, or that he dar'd to prefer himself in the Art of Hunting before her, who by all the Gods themselves was granted to excel all others in that respect, the Goddess was certainly most justly angry: It's therefore very probable, that being transform'd into the likeness of those Beasts he us'd to take, the Dogs when they were in pursuit of other Game, might tear him himself in Pie∣ces. After the Death of Actaeon, Aristaeus went to Apollo, the Oracle being call'd the Oracle of Apollo. his Father the Oracle at Delphos, and there it's said, he was commanded by the Oracle to remove into the Island Coos, who told him that he should be there highly honour'd, and in great esteem with the Coons. Thither therefore he sail'd; a Plague afterwards raging over all Greece, he sa∣crific'd to the Gods for the deliverance of the Grecians: When he had per∣fected his Sacrifice about the rising of the In August. Dog Star, at which time the Etesian
Winds began to rise, the Plague staid. This remarkable change (if it be se∣riously P. 196. considered) may justly be wonder'd at; for he who had his Son torn in Pieces with Dogs, allay'd the evil Influences of the Dog-Star (which common∣ly are pernicious) and at that time restor'd Health to many Thousands. Afterwards leaving his Children behind him, he went to Lybia, and from thence being furnish'd with Shipping by the Nymph his Mother, he sail'd into Sardinia, where being taken with the pleasantness of the Island, he feated him∣self, and improved the Ground with Planting and Tillage, and civiliz'd the In∣habitants who were before Rude and Barbarous. Here he begat Two Sons, Car∣mus and Calaecarpus. Afterwards he sail'd to other Islands, and staid for some time in Sicily, upon the account of its Fruitfulness both in Corn and Cattel, where he imparted several things to the Inhabitants that were of great Benefit and Ad∣vantage. Therefore it's said all the Sicilians, and especially those that had Olive-Yards, ador'd Aristaeus as a God. At last, they say, he went into Thrace to Bacchus, where he learnt the Rites The Feasts of Bacchus. of the Orgia, and through his familiar Converse with that God, was instructed in many other things, both useful and profitable. After he had liv'd for some time near Mount Between Thrace and Thessaly. Haemus, he vanish'd away, and never was seen more; and was afterwards honour'd as a God, not only by the Barbarians in those Parts, but by all the Gracians: But concerning Aristaeus, this shall suffice. Now to say something concerning Daphne and Eryx; it's reported that Eryx Daphnis, Eryx. was the Son of Venus and Butes King of Bithynia, call'd formerly Bebrycia in Asia. Butes, a Native, a most Famous Prince. This Eryx for the Nobleness of his Birth on the Mo∣thers side, was of great Esteem among the Inhabitants, and became King of part of the Sicily. Island, and built a City call'd after his own Name, upon a high and lofty Hill, upon the top of which within the City, he built a Temple to Venus, a∣dorn'd Venus's Temple in Eryx. with rich Oblations, and all other stately Furniture. The Goddess in reward of the Piety of the Inhabitants, and the devotion of her Son the Founder, exprest a special Love and Kindness for this City, and upon that nam'd her self Venus Erycina. When any seriously considers the Majesty of this Temple, he cannot but great∣ly admire it; for all other Sacred Structures, after they have been famous for some time, have often by the adverse Blasts of Fortune, been at length ruin'd and destroyd; but this has been so far (from the very first Dedication of it) from decreasing in its Glory, that it has grown still more and more in Reputation and E∣steem. For after the Consecration of it by Eyrx, Aeneas another Son of Venus, when he arriv'd in Sicily in his Voyage to Italy, beautify'd it with many rich Oblati∣ons, because it was Consecrated to his Mother; and after him the Sicilians for many Ages together (at great Cost and Expence) ador'd this Goddess with mag∣nificent Sacrifices, and further adorn'd her Temple with many great Oblations. The Carthaginians also in later times, when they conquer'd part of the Island, still continu'd the splendid Worship of this Goddess. And lastly, the Romans, when they became Masters of the whole Island, surpass'd all that were before 'em in the Worship of this Deity; and this they did upon good ground, for they de∣riv'd their Original from her, and by her means were prosperous in all their Affairs, and therefore in gratitude for so many Benefits, they return'd her the greater Honour and Esteem. For the Consuls and Praetors, and all that came as Governors into this Island, as soon as they came to Eryx, offer'd most mag∣nificent Sacrifices, and dedicated rich Gifts for the beautifying of this Temple; and by little and little laid aside their Austerity, and pleasantly convers'd both with the Women and Children in their Jollity, looking upon this to be the only way to ingratiate themselves into the favour of the Goddess. The Roman Se∣nate likewise out of their singular respect to this Goddess, decreed that Seven∣teen of the most considing Cities they had in Sicily, should make an Offering in Gold to Venus, and that the Temple should be continually guarded by Two Hun∣dred Soldiers. And thus though we have treated something largely of Eryx, yet the Account is not impertinent to the History of Venus.
We shall now endeavour to relate what the Mythologists report concerning Daphnis, He∣rean Moun∣tains. Daphnis: In Sicily they say, are Mountains call'd Herei, so pleasant for Situation, and of so sweet an Air, that no Place can be better pitcht upon than they, for Pleasure and Diversion in the Summer time: For there are many Springs of ad∣mirable sweet Water, and deckt with Trees of all sorts. There are whole Woods of tall and stately Oaks, which bear Acorns of a vast bigness, twice as many, and twice as big as in any other part of the World. There likewise grows abundance of Roots and Herbs, natural Vines, and un∣speakable number of Apples. Melons, so that a Carthaginian Army once ready to starve for want of Provision, was there reliev'd and preserv'd; and though so many Thousands were there fed, yet plenty remain'd in the Mountains still. In this Region there's a pleasant Valley, grac'd with Rows of Trees, affording a most , Divine Com∣liness. ravishing prospect to the Eye, and likewise a Grove dedicated to the Nymphs: Here they say Daphnis was begotten by Mercury upon one of the Nymphs, and gain'd that Name from the multitude of L. Daphne, , a Laurel, in Greek. Laurels that grow there. Being bred up by the Nymphs, and having many Herds of Cattel, he diligently follow'd the Shepherds Life; upon which account he was also call'd The Cow∣herd. Bubulcus; and be∣ing very skilful and ingenious in composing Songs and Tunes, he found out the Bucolick Poems, and Harmonious Notes which are much us'd, and highly esteem'd amongst the Sicilians at this Day. They say likewise, that he often hunted with Diana, and by his dutiful observance and attendance upon the Goddess, mighti∣ly gain'd her Favour, and with his Piping and Singing, wonderfully delighted her. It's likewise said, that a Nymph falling in love with him, told him, that if he lay with any other Woman but her, he should be struck blind; which after∣wards prov'd true, for lying with a King's Daughter who had made him drunk, he forthwith lost his Sight. But this concerning Daphnis shall suffice. Now we proceed in short to the Sto∣ry Orion. of Orion. It's said, that he was the biggest and strongest Man of all the He∣roes, and was much given to Hunting; and being so very strong, for the sake of Vain-glory, perform'd many great Actions. Amongst other things, by casting up a Mold, he made the Harbour call'd Acte, for Zanclus the Sicilian King, from whom the City was anciently call'd Zancle, but now Messina. But since we make mention of Messina, we conceive it no digression if we here subjoyn what is related concerning the narrow Sea, whereon it is seated. Some ancient Writers say, that Sicily was once a Peninsula, and afterwards The Straight at Messina. became an Island, in the manner following. The Sea beating violently upon each side of the narrowest part of the Isthmus, at length cut through and disjoyn'd one part from the other, and the place from thence was call'd Rhegium, where many Years after, was built the City now so call'd. Others say, that that narrow Neck of the Continent, was rent asunder by an Earthquake, and by that means the Sea burst into that part where the Convulsion was made. But the Poet Hesiod affirms the contrary; for he says, that the Sea being formerly broader, Orion rais'd up in the open Sea, the Pro∣montary Pelorus, and built upon it a Temple to Neptune, religiously ador'd by the Inhabitants. After the performing of these things, they report that he sail'd into Eubaea, and there resided. Afterwards for the glory of his Actions, being fix'd as a Constellation amongst the Stars, his Name became Famous to Eternity, of whom the Poet Homer makes mention in his Poem of the Dead, in these Words: , . , . Next vast Orion his appearance made, Hunting Wild Beasts within a Fruitful Mead, Which on th' wast Mountains he had kill'd before, When once a brazen Knotted Club he bore.
Where likewise he takes notice of his great Bulk; and a little after making mention of Aloiades, he adds, that at Nine Years of Age, he was Nine Cubits make Four Yards and a half. Nine Orgia make Eighteen Yards. Four Yards and an half in thickness, and Eighteen Yards in height. , . His Mother Earth his Body did so rear, That none for Height and Beauty might compare With him; except Orion who excell'd In both; and so him more than parallell'd. Having now treated sufficiently of the Heroes and Demy-Gods, according as we at first design'd, we shall here put an end to this Book.
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK V. The PREFACE. IT ought to be the special care of all Historians, not only in their Wri∣tings to observe whatever may be useful and profitable, but also to keep to a due Order and Method in the several parts of their History. This not only conduces much to direct and caution private Persons how to get and keep Estates, but is an extraordinary help to Writers, in composing of their Historical Treatises. For some there are, that though they are justly in high Esteem for their Eloquent Style, and Variety of Learning discover'd in their Writings, yet have been too careless in distributing their Matter under proper Heads; so that though the Readers may easily discern their great Pains and Industry, yet their manner of Writing deserves justly to be censur'd. Timaeus indeed was very exact in his Chronology, and extraordinarily industrious to abound in variety of Relations; but for his unseasonable and immoderate Cen∣sures P. 199. of others, may be justly tax'd and reprehended himself; who for his unbounded Liberty that he takes in this bitter Censuring, is call'd by some, the Epitiment Detracter. But Ephorus, on the contrary, in his Ʋniversal History, acts the part of an excellent Historian, both as to the Elegancy of his Style, and his accurate Method: For he divides his Books according to their several Subjects, keep∣ing close in every Book to things of one and the same nature. Which way and order of Writing, I approve above all others, and therefore shall endeavour to imitate him as well as I can.
CHAP. I. A Description of Sicily. The Aeolides or Lipari nds. Of Malta, Gaulus, Cercina, Corsica, Sardinia, Pityusa and the Baleares. HAving Stil'd it the Book of the Islands. design'd this Book for a Description of the Islands, we shall first begin with Sicily, being the chiefest and most remarkable for Ancient and Memorable Actions. It was anciently call'd Three cor∣ner'd like a Wedge. Trinacria, from its Shape. Afterwards by the Sica∣nians, the first Inhabitants, it was call'd Sicania; and at last it was call'd Sicily, from the Sicilians, who with all their People entirely transported themselves thi∣ther out of Italy. In Circuit, it's About Five Hundred For∣ty Five Mile. Four Thousand, Three Hundred and Sixty Furlongs: For one of the Three Sides, from the Promontory Pelorus to Lilibeum, is a Thousand and Seven Hundred Furlongs; the other from Lilibeum to Pachinum, a Promon∣tory of Syracuse, runs out in length a Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs. The rest contains a Thousand, One Hundred and Forty Furlongs. The Sicilians, the Inhabitants, from old Tradition, continu'd down to them from their Fore-fathers, say, that this Island is dedicated to Ceres and Proserpine. Some of the Poets feign, that at the Marriage of Pluto and Proserpine, this Island was given to the new Bride, by Jupiter for a † Pre∣sent. * For an Anacalypterium. These were Gifts bestow'd upon the Bride by the Husband and his Friends, when she pluckt off her Vail at her first being brought to her Husband. They were call'd . See Archaeo∣log. Att. lib. 4. c. 7. The most approv'd Authors say, that the Sicanians who were the ancient Possessors, were the first natural Inhabitants of this Isle; and that the Goddesses which we have before-mention'd, appear'd first in this Island; and that the fatness of the Soyl was such, that Corn first grew here of it self, which the most Eminent of all the Poets confirms in these Words— , , . Within this Island all things grow, Without the help of Seed or Plow, As Wheat and Barley; with the Vine, From whence proceeds both Grapes and Wine, Which with sweet Showers from above Are brought to ripeness by great Jove. For in the Territory of Leontium, and in many other Parts of Sicily, there grows up wild Wheat at this very Day. If it be ask'd in what part of the World these Grains were first known, before the use of Corn was found out; it's most probable that they were first brought to the best and richest Country, and there∣fore upon that Account, we see that the Sicilians most especially worship those Goddesses who were the first Discoverers of these Fruits. That the Rape of Proserpine was in this Country (they say) is most clear and evident from hence, that neither of these Ceres and Proserpine. This Rape the Ground of this Fable, was Ann. Mund. 2673, before Christ, 1275. Goddesses ever resided in any other Place, but in this Island, wherein they delighted above all others. The Rape, they say, was in the Meadows of Enna, not far from the City, a Place deck'd with Violets, and all sorts of other Flowers, affording a most beautiful and pleasant Prospect. It's said, that the fragrancy of the Flowers is such, that the Dogs sent out to hunt the Game, thereby lose the benefit of their Sense, and are made inca∣pable by their Scent to find out the Prey. This Meadow-ground in the middle and highest part of it is Champain, and well water'd, but all the Borders round are craggy, guarded with high and steep Precipices, and is supposed to lye in the very Heart of Sicily: Whence it's call'd by some the Navel of Sicily: Near
at hand are Groves, Meadows and Gardens, surrounded with Morasses, and a deep P. 200. Cave, with a Passage under Ground opening towards the North, through which they say, Pluto pass'd in his Chariot, when he forc'd away Proserpine. In this Place the Violets and other sweet Flowers flourish continually all the Year long, and present a pleasant and delightsom Prospect to the Beholders all over the flou∣rishing Plain. The say, that Minerva and Diana, who had both vow'd Virginity as well as Proserpine, were bred up together with her, and all Three wrought a Gown for Jupiter their Father, of the Flowers they had gather'd in Company one with an∣other. And that they were exceedingly delighted in the Island upon the account of the familiar Converse they injoy'd one with another; so that each of them chose out a particular Place for their several Residences. Minerva made choice of those Parts near Himaera, where the Nymphs for the sake of Minerva open'd the Hot Baths about the time of Hercules his coming thither. The Inhabitants likewise de∣dicated the City to her (to this Day call'd Athenaeum) with the Country round a∣bout. To Diana was allotted by the Goddesses the Island at Syracuse, which from her was call'd both by the Oracles of the Gods and by Men, Virg. 3 Aen. Ortygia. The Nymphs likewise to ingratiate themselves the more with Diana, made a mighty great Fountain in this Island, call'd Arethusa, wherein were bred many great Fishes, not only in Ancient Times, but there they remain to this very Day as Sacred and never toucht by any. But when some in time of War have made bold to feed upon 'em, they have suddenly by the apparent anger of the Goddess been afflicted with some remarkable Calamity, of which we shall write more fully in its proper Time and Place. Proserpine injoy'd the pleasant Meadows about Enna in Common, with the other two Goddesses, and had a great Fountain call'd Cyane, in the Territories of Syracuse, consecrated to her. For they say, that Pluto after the Rape, carry'd away Core, the Girl. Proser∣pine in a Chariot to Syracuse, and there the Earth opening, both of them descended into . Hell together, from which time in that Place arose the Spring and Lake call'd Cyane, where the Syracusians every Year celebrate a solemn Festival; at which they privatly Sacrific'd the lesser Victims, but publickly and openly they threw Bulls into the Cyane. Lake; which manner of Sacrifice Hercules introduc'd, when he went over all Sicily with the Herds of Geryon. After the Rape of Proserpine, they say, Ceres (not being able to find out her Daughter) lighted Firebrands at the Irrupti∣ons of Aetna, and wandred through divers Parts of the World to seek her, and did much good where she came, especially where she was courteously receiv'd, be∣stowing Wheat upon the Inhabitants in a grateful return of their Civility. And because the Athenians entertain'd this Goddess with the greatest civility; there∣fore next to Sicily, they were the First upon whom she bestow'd this Grain; for which the People of Athens honour'd this Goddess above all others with splen∣did Sacrifices, and sacred Mysteries at Eleusis, which for their antiquity and sanctity are greatly esteem'd every where. The Athenians generously communicated this Blessing of Corn to many others, and they imparted of the Seed to their Neighbours, so that by degrees the whole World was full of it. The Sicilians therefore being the First that had the use of Corn, by reason of their Familiar Converse with Ceres and Proserpine who dwelt among them, in∣stituted Sacrifices and Solemn Festivals to both these Goddesses, whose Names gave Reputation to the things; which Festivals were solemniz'd at such a time, as was most proper to point at the great benefit they had receiv'd: For they cele∣brated the Rape of Proserpine, in the time of Wheat Harvest, and perform'd these Sacrifices and Solemnities with that sanctity and application of Mind, as be∣came them, who were oblig'd to be thankful for being prefer'd before all other People in the World with the First reception of so great a Blessing. They had another Festival which they celebrated to Ceres at the time of Wheat Seedings; it continu'd for the space of Ten Days, and was remarkable for the Name of the Goddess; and during this time every thing was celebrated with great Pomp and Splendour; but the rest of the Worship was after the old way and Fashion. But it's a Custom among them during all these Ten Days, to use P. 201. Obscene and Fifthy Language in their Converse one with another, because the Goddess being put into dumps of Melancholy for the loss of her Daughter, is put to the Smile they say, by smutty Discourse. That the Rape of Proserpine
was in this manner, as we have before declared, many of the Ancients both Poets and Historians do generally affirm. For Carcinus the Tragaedian, who came often to Syracuse, observing how Zealous the Citizens were in celebrating the Sacreds and Festivals of Ceres, has these Verses in his Poems. , , , , . , , , . . Ceres most lovely Proserpine. Daughter, as they say, By Pluto's Crafty Snares was snatcht away, Who under Ground through darksom Caves convey'd To th' gloomy Shades below, the harmless Maid. Her mournful Mother wept and wrung her Hands, Seeking her Ravish'd Daughter in all Lands. Then Aetna's Flames through all the Land did roar, And Flakes of Fire spread the Island o're; And while the noble Maid was thus bemoan'd, For want of Corn the fainting Country groan'd: And hence it is, that to this very Day, Devoutly to these Goddesses they pray. It's not fit we should here omit giving an Account of the Kindness and Boun∣ty of this Goddess to Mankind: For besides that she found out Corn, she taught the Art of Husbandry, and instituted Laws, whereby Men govern'd their ac∣tions according to the Rules of Justice and Honesty: For which reason they say, she was call'd the . Law-maker And certainly none can bestow greater Benefits than these imparted by her, which include both Being and Well-being. But this concerning the Antiquities of Sicily shall suffice. But its necessary to say in brief something of the Sicanians, the first Inhabitants Sicanians. of Sicily, because several Historians differ in their Relations concerning them. For Philistus says they were a Colony transplanted from Spain. Iberia into this Island, and came thither from the River Sicanus from whence they were call'd Sicani. But Timaeus (condemning the Ignorance of this Writer) proves clearly and evident∣ly that they were the Original Inhabitants; whose Reasons to prove their Antiquity being many we conceive it needless to recite. The Sicanians anciently dwelt in Villages, and built little Towns upon Hills that were naturally strong, for their better Security against Thieves and Robbers. For they were not un∣der one General Monarch, but every Town had each a several Prince. And at first they injoy'd the whole Island, and liv'd by Tillage and improvement of the Ground: But after that Aetna burst out in Flames in many Parts of it, and streams of Fire even overflow'd the neighbouring Territory, the Country lay wast and ruin'd for a great space and Tract of Ground together. And in re∣gard the Fire continu'd thus to spoil the Country for many years together, the Inha∣bitants in a Consternation forsook the Eastern Parts of Sicily, and went down into the West. At length after many Ages the Sicilians with all their Families transpor∣ted themselves out of Italy, and setled in that part of the Island before forsaken by the Sicanians. Where out of a covetous desire to gain more, they incroacht still further, and made incursions into the neighbouring Countries, so that there were frequent Wars between them and the Sicanians, till by a mutual Compact and agreement they settl'd the Boundaries of each others Territories; of which we shall give a particular account in their Proper place and time. The last that sent Colonies into Sicily were the Grecians, and those very considerable, who built Cities
upon the Sea Coasts. By the multitude of Grecians that resorted thither and the frequent and ordinary Commerce with them, they learnt both the Language, and the Grecians way of living, and lost (together with their own barbarous Dialect) their very Name likewise, and were call'd Sicilians. Having said enough of these, we shall now pass to the Islands called the Eolides, which are seven in number The Eolide Islands. call'd Strongyle, Euonymus, Didyme, Phoenicusa, Hiera, Vulcania, and Lipara; in which last there's a City of the same name: These lie between Sicily and Italy P. 202. in a direct line from East to West, and are distant from Sicily about an hundred and fifty Furlongs: They are much of an equal bigness; the greatest of them is in Circuit an hundred and fifty Furlongs. They have been all subject to great eruptions of Fire, the Passages of which by the openings of the Earth are apparent and visible at this day. But in Strongyle and Hiera to this very time violent Vapours burst out of the Earth, with a roaring dreadful noise; abundance likewise of Sand and Fiery stones are Vomited out of the Ground; the like to which may be seen about Mount Aetna: For some affirm that from these Islands there are Ca∣verns within the Earth that run out as far Aetna, and so there's a Communication one with another, and therefore both these, and those Breaches and Casmas of the Earth at Aetna, cast forth their Flames at certain seasons by turns. They say that these Islands anciently were desert and uninhabited; and that afterwards Liparus Son of King Auson upon a sedition rais'd against him by his Brothers with a Long Ships, or Men of War. Fleet well man'd, Fled out of Italy into the Island, from him call'd Lipara, where he built a City of the same name, and till'd and cultivated the rest of the Islands. When he was old, Aeolus the Son of Hippotas, with some other of his Associats arriv'd in the Island, and marri'd Cyane the Daughter of Liparus; and in∣vesting the rest that he brought along with him, with the same Rights and Privileges that the natural Inhabitants injoy'd, he became supream Lord of the Island. Liparus afterwards having a desire to return into Italy, Aeolus assisted him in possessing the Country about Syrrentum, where (after he had reign'd with a general applause) he dy'd, and was bury'd in great state and funeral Pomp, and honour'd by the Inhabitants as a Demy God. This is that Aeolus (which they say) en∣tertaind Ʋlysses in his Wandrings; and was reported to be pious towards the Gods, righteous towards Men, and kind and courteous to Strangers. It's likwise reported that he taught Mariners the use of Sails; and by the di∣ligent observance of Fire foretold the rising of Winds; whence he was feign'd to have a Sovereign power over the Winds; and for his Piety was call'd the Friend of the Gods. He had Six Sons, Astyochus, Xuthus, Androcles, Pheroemon, Jocastes and Agathurnus, who were all in great Reputation and esteem upon the account of the Fame of their Father's Vertues. Amongst these Sons Jocastes reign'd as King over those Parts, lying upon the Sea-Coasts of Italy, as far as Rhegium. Pheroemon and Androcles injoy'd that Part of Sicily from the narrow cut of the Sea to Lilibaeum. That part of the Country that lyes Eastward was inhabited by the Sicilians; the other towards the West by the Sicanians, which several People were continually Quarrelling one with another: But they freely submitted to the Sons of Aeolus, for the sake of their Father's Eminent Piety, and their own gentle and sweet Dispositions. Xuthus reign'd in the Territory of Leontium, call'd from him Xuthia to this Day. Agathurnus pos∣sess'd the Region now call'd Agathynites, and built the City call'd Agathurnum, after his own Name. Astyochus was Sovereign Lord of Lipara; and all of them imitating their Fa∣ther's Piety and Justice, were in great Honour and Esteem. After the Posterity of Aeolus had reign'd successively for many Ages together, at last the Royal Line in Sicily was extinct. After which, the Sicilians were under an Aristocratical Government: But the Sicanians fell to odds one with another about the Sove∣reignty, P. 203. and for a long time together were imbroil'd in a Civil War. Many Years afterwards, when the other Islands (through the Severity of the Kings of Asia) were more and more empty'd of their Inhabitants, some of Cny∣dus and Rhodes determin'd to transplant themselves; to which end they created Pentathlus a Cnidian, their Captain (who deriv'd his Pedigree from Hippotes the Son of Hercules) and under his Conduct they transported themselves into Sicily, and arriv'd at Lilibaeum.
This fell out in the About Seven Years after the taking and destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadonozer. Ant. Chr. 585 Years. Fiftieth Olympiad, in which Epitili∣das the Laconian was Victor. At which time likewise it hap∣pen'd, that Aegestanes and Selinuntes were at War one with another; in which War (joyning with the Selinuntines) in one Battel, they lost many of their Men, and among the rest, their General Pentathlus. The Selinuntines being thus routed, those of these Strangers that surviv'd, determin'd to return Home; to which purpose they chose Gorgus Thestores and Epitherides, of the Houshold of Pentath∣lus, to be their Captains, who sail'd through the Tyrrhene Sea, to Lipara, where they were kindly receiv'd, and easily perswaded to enter into a League with the Inhabitants, and dwell among them, who were then scarce Five Hundred that remain'd of those that came over with Aeolus. Afterwards when the Tyrrhenians infested the Seas with their Pyracies, (be∣ing vext with their Incursions) they prepar'd a Fleet for their Defence; and di∣vided themselves into several Parts, some to till the Ground, and others to guard the Seas against the Pirats. Then injoying their Estates in Common, and feeding together in Societies, they continu'd for some time in this Community of Life. Afterwards they di∣vided Lipara (wherein was situated the Metropolitan City) amongst themselves; the rest of the Islands they Till'd and improv'd for the use of them all in Com∣mon. At last they divided all the Islands for the space of Twenty Years; and when that time was expir'd, they again made a Division by Lot. Afterwards they o∣vercame the Tyrrhenians in many Sea-Fights, and devoted the Tenths of the best of their Spoils to the Oracle at Delphos. It remains we should shew by what means the City of Lipara in succeeding A∣ges grew to that height of Wealth, that they were not only happy in them∣selves, but renown'd and glorious Abroad. This City is beautify'd by Nature with very large and fair Harbours, and fur∣nish'd with famous Baths; for they are not only Medicinal, but by reason of their singular Properties and Qualities, afford much Pleasure and Delight; and therefore many in Sicily that are taken with strange and unusual Diseases, pass over into this Island, and by washing themselves in the hot Baths, are restor'd pre∣sently to perfect Health, even to Admiration. And the Island it self to this Day, abounds in that famous Mineral of Al∣lom, which brings in a great Revenue both to the Liparians and the Romans; For being in no other part of the World, and so very useful, the Inhabitants (up∣on good Reason) have the sole vending of this Commodity, and by setting what rate they please upon it, they grow prodigiously rich. Only indeed in the Isle of Melos, there grows a sort of small Allom, but not sufficient to supply any considerable number of Cities. This Island of Lipara is not large, but reasonably well stor'd with Fruit, and abounds with every thing necessary for the Suste∣nance of Man's Life; for it plentifully supplies the Inhabitants with all sorts of Fish, and bears Fruit most delicious to the Taste. But this may suffice to be said of Lipara, and the rest of the Aeolid Islands. Next to Lipara Westward, lies a small Island uninhabited, call'd (upon a re∣markable Accident) Ostales. For at the time when the Carthaginians were in∣gag'd in great Wars with the Syracusians, they were furnish'd with considerable Forces both at Sea and Land; amongst whom were many Mercenaries out of several Countries, which were always a turbulent sort of Men, and commonly P. 204. accustom'd to raise many horrid Mutinies in the Army, especially when they re∣ceiv'd not their Pay at the Day when it was due. Some therefore there were at that time (about the number of Six Thousand) according to their usual In∣solency and rude Behaviour (not receiving their Pay) first got into a Body to∣gether, and then with rude Shouts and Clamours, assaulted their Commanders. And when for want of Money, they still delay'd to pay them, they threatned they would prosecute their Right against the Carthaginians with Force of Arms, and thereupon laid hold upon their Officers; and though they receiv'd a Check from the Senate for their unruliness, yet they were the more furious and out∣ragious. Whereupon the Senate privately order'd the Colonels and Officers to put all the Mutineers to Death; upon which Orders, they forthwith got them all on Ship-board, and (under colour of some Military Service to be perform'd)
transported them to the Island before-mention'd, and there landed them and left them: And though they storm'd and rag'd at this Misfortune, yet they were in no capacity to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians, but at length were all famished to Death: And being that so great a Number (as if they had been Captives of War) perish'd in so small an Island, this strait place was fill'd with the multitude of dead Mens Bones; and for this reason the Island was call'd as a∣foresaid. And in this manner these Mercenaries (by the fraud of their own Officers) were brought into these Extremities, and miserably perished for want of Food. Having now gone through the Aeolides, we shall next view those Islands that lie on both Sides of them. Southward over against Sicily, lie Three Islands, which have all safe and commo∣dious Harbours, and each of them a City. The first is Malta, about Eight Hundred Furlongs from Syracuse, furnish'd Malta, distant from Sicily a∣bout Sixty Miles. with very good Harbours; and the Inhabitants are very Rich; for it's full of all sorts of Artificers, amongst whom there are excellent Weavers of fine Linen. Their Houses are very Stately and Beautiful, adorn'd with graceful Eaves, and pargeted with white Plaister. The Inhabitants are a Colony of Phaenicians, who trading as Merchants as far as the Western Ocean, resorted to this Island upon the account of its commodious Ports, and convenient situation for a Sea-Trade; and by the advantage of this Place, the Inhabitants presently became famous both for their Wealth and Merchandize. The next is Gaulus, furnish'd with several safe Harbours, Gaulus, now call'd Gaudus, about Five Miles from Malta. and first inhabited by the Phaenicians. Then follows Circina, lying to the Coasts of Africa, in Cercina, now call'd Carcana. which is a handsom City, and most commodious Ports, where∣in may ride not only Merchant Men, but Men of War. Having spoken of the Southern Islands, we shall return to the rest near to the Lipari, which lye in the Tyrrhenian Sea; for near to Populonium (as it's call'd) a City of Hetruria, lies Aethalia, now call'd Zerbe, for∣merly Lotophagitis. Aethalia, distant from Lipara, near a Hundred Furlongs, so call'd from the great Aethalos in Greek, is a Mist, Smoak or Fog. P. 205. Mists and Fogs that rise there. This Island abounds with Iron Stone, which they dig and cut out of the Ground to melt, in order for the making of Iron; much of which Mettal is in this sort of Stone. The Workmen imploy'd first, cut the Stone in Pieces, and then melt them in Furnaces, built and prepar'd for the purpose. In these Furnaces, the Stones by the violent heat of the Fire, are melted into several Pieces, in form like to great Spunges, which the Merchants buy by Truck and Exchange of other Wares, and transport them to Dicearchia; and other Mart-Towns. Some of these Merchants that buy of these Wares, cause 'em to be wrought by the Copper Smiths, who beat and fashion 'em into all sorts of Tools, Instru∣ments and other shapes and Fancies; as some they neatly beat into the shape of Birds, others into Spades, Hooks, and other sorts of Utensils. All which are transported and carry'd about into several parts of the World by the Mer∣chants. There's another Island, by the Greeks call'd Cyrnon, and by the Romans and Corsica. Natural Inhabitants Corsica, Three Hundred Furlongs distant from Aethalia. It's an Island of an easy Access, and has a beautiful large Harbour, call'd Syrausium. There are in it two Cities Calaris and Nicaea. Cities. The Phoceans built Calaris, at the time they were possessors of the Island, but were afterwards ejected by the Tyrrhenians. Nicaea was built by the Or Tyrrhe∣nians. Hetrurians, when they Lorded it as Masters at Sea, and subdu'd all the Islands that lye near adjoyning to Hetruria. During the time the Cities of Corsica were subject to them, they exacted a Tribute from the Inhabitants, of Rozen, Wax and Hony, of which great plenty is produc'd in this Island. Corsican Bond-Slaves are naturally of such a Temper Servants. and Qualification, that for usefulness they are to be preferr'd before all others whatsoever. The Island is large, a great part of it Mountainous and Woody, and water'd with several small , for . Rivers.
The Inhabitants feed upon Milk, Honey and Flesh, which this Country affords plentifully, and exceed all other Barbarians in Justice and Humanity one towards another: For where any find Honey in hollow Trees in the Mountains, it's cer∣tainly his that finds it, without any further Dispute. The Sheep have all their Owners Mark set upon them, and that certainly secures the Property of their Masters, though there be no Shepherd to look after them. And in all other re∣spects in their Converse and way of Living, every one of them in their several Stations observe the Rules of common Right and Justice. A very strange thing there is among 'em concerning the Birth of their Children; for when the Woman is in Labour, there's no care taken of her in the time of her Travel; Men in Travel for their Wives. but the Husband goes to Bed as if he were sick, and there continues for certain Days, as if he were under the Pains of a Woman in Travel. Here grows in this Island abundance of extraordinary Box-Trees, which is the Reason that the Honey produc'd here, is many times very bitter. It's pos∣sess'd by Barbarians, whose Language is very strange and difficult to be under∣stood; they are above the number of Thirty Thousand. Next to this lies Sardinia, an Island as big as Sicily; it's inhabited by Barbarians, whom they call Iolaeians, sprung (as they they themselves suppose) from those few that inhabited the Country with Sardinia belongs to the King of Spain, Six Miles from Corsica; about an Hundred and Seventy Miles in length, and Eighty Miles broad. Iolaus and the Thespidae. For at that time that Hercules instituted those so much Olympick Games. Celebrated Games, having many Children by the Daughters of Thespius, by the Command of the Oracle, he sent them with a numerous Train, both of Barbarians and Grecians into Sardinia, to settle themselves in new Habitations. Their Captain Iolaus (Hercules his Nephew on his Brother's side) possess'd himself of the Island, and built in it several famous Cities; and dividing the Country by Lot, call'd the People from himself, Iolaeians. He built likewise publick Schools and Temples, and left other Monuments for publick use, and ge∣neral advantage, which remain to this Day. For the most pleasant Fields of the Country are call'd after him, The Fields of P. 206. Iolaus, or The Iolaeian Fields; and the People are still call'd Iolaeians from him. It was foretold likewise by the Oracle concerning his Colony, that if they were call'd after his Name, their Freedoms and Liberties should be secur'd to them for ever; and accordingly their Laws and Government have been preserv'd firm and unshaken to this Day. For though the Carthaginians, when they were in the height of their Power, took this Island, yet they could not inslave the People: for the Iolaeians fled to the Mountains, and made them Habitations under Ground, and kept and maintain'd many Herds and flocks of Cattel, which afforded them Food sufficient, both as to Milk, Cheese and Flesh. And thus leaving the Cham∣pain Parts of the Country, they were both freed from the Toyl of Plowing and Tilling the Ground; and besides, liv'd at ease in the Mountains, contented with a mean and moderate Provision, as we before said. And although the Carthaginians often assaulted them with great Armies, yet the difficulties of the Places were such, and the windings and turnings within these Sub∣terraneous Caves were so inexplicable, that they were ever the security of these Inhabitants from Bondage and Slavery. And lastly, the Romans, since they be∣came Masters of the Place, have often attempted to reduce them by force of Arms, but were never able to prevail, for the Reasons before alledg'd. But to return to the ancient Times; Iolaus after he had settled all the Concerns relating to the Colony, return'd into Greece. The Thespiades after they had been Lords of the Island for many Ages, were at length expuls'd, and driven into Italy, and seated themselves in the Parts and Places about Cuma: The rest of the People return'd to their former Barbarism, and making choice of the best Captains from among their own Countrymen, have defended their Liberties to this Day. Having said enough of Sardinia, we shall now go on with the other Islands. Next to the before-mention'd Island, is Pityusa, so call'd from the multitude Pityusa. of Pine-Trees growing there, lying in the midst of the Sea, Three Days, and as many Nights Sayl from Hercules's Pillars, one Day and Nights Sail from the Coast of Africa, and only a Days Sayl from Spain; as large as Corcyra, and rea∣sonably Fruitful. It bears some few Vines and wild Olive-Trees. Amongst other things it produces, it's most esteem'd for fine Wool. It's chequer'd with plea∣sant Champain Fields, and lovely Hills. There's a City in it call'd Ercsum, in∣habited
by a Colony of Carthaginians: The Island is grac'd with famous Ports, and high Walls, and a great number of stately Houses. Barbarians of several Nations inhabit there, but most are Carthaginians, a Colony of whom settled there about a Hundred and Sixty Years after the building of Carthage. There are other Islands over against Spain, which the Gre∣cians call Signifies naked. Gymnesiae, because in Summer-time the Inhabitants go naked. By the Natives and the Romans they are call'd Baleares, now call'd Majorca, and Minorca, . Ba∣leares, from casting of huge massy Stones out of Slings, where∣in the Inhabitants excel all other People. The Greater of these Islands is larger than all the rest of the In the Mediterranean. Islands, except these Seven, Sicily, Sardinia, Cyprus, Crete, Eubaea, Corsica, and Lesbos. It's one Days Sail distant from Spain. The Lesser lies more Eastward, and breeds and feeds all sorts of brave and large Cattel, especially , Half Asses. Mules, which for the largeness of their Bodies, and the exceeding noise they make in their Braying, are remarkable above all others. Both these Islands are of a good and fertile Soyl, and are Peopled with above Thirty Thousand Inha∣bitants. As to the Fruits of the Earth; they are altogether destitute of Wine; the want therefore of it makes 'em the more eager after it. Neither have they any Oyl amongst them; to supply which, they press out the Oyly part of Mastick, P. 207. and mix it and Swines-Grease together, and with this Composition anoint their Bodies. They love Women exceedingly, whom they value at such a Rate, that when the Pyrats bring any Women they have taken, thither, they'l give as a Ransom Three or Four Men for one Woman. They live in Caves hew'd in the Rocks, Habitations. and spend all their Days in these Holes, dug up and down in the steepest part of the Rocky Mountains, by which means they provide for themselves both shel∣ter and security. They make no use either of Silver or Gold Coyn, but prohibit the impor∣tation Coyn. of it into the Island; for which they give this Reason: For that Hercules in former times made War upon Geryon the Son of Chrysaores, for no other rea∣son but because he was rich in Silver and Gold; and therefore that they may live more securely, and quietly injoy what they have, they have made it a stand∣ing Law to have nothing to do with that Wealth which consists in those Me∣tals. According therefore to this Decree, when once heretofore in a War they as∣sisted the Carthaginians, they brought nothing of their Pay into their own Coun∣try, but laid it all out in Wine and Women. They have a filthy Custom likewise amongst 'em concerning their Marriages; Marriages. for in their Marriage Feasts, all their Friends and Houshold Servants, as they are in Seniority of Age, one after another, carnally know the Bride, till at length it come to the Bridegrooms turn, who has the honour to be last. They have another strange Custom likewise about the burying of their Dead; Burials. they cut the Carcass in Pieces with Wooden Knives or Axes, and so put up all the Parts into an Urn, and then raise up a great heap of Stones over it. Their Arms are Three Slings, one they wind about their Heads, another they tye about their Loyns, and the Third they carry in their Hands. In time of War, they throw much greater Stones than any other People, and with that Violence, as if a thing were shot out of an A Catapult. Engine; and therefore in the time of Assaults made upon Towns, they grievously gall those that stand upon the Bulwarks, and in Field-Fights break in pieces their Enemies Shields, Helmets, and all other de∣fensive Armour whatsoever; and are such exact Marksmen, that (for the most part) they never miss what they aim at: They attain to this Skill by contiual Ex∣ercise from their very Childhood, for while they are very Young, they are forc'd under the tutorage of their Mothers, to cast Stones out of Slings. For they fasten a Piece of Bread for a Mark to a Pole, and till the Child hit the Bread, he must fast, and then at length the Mother gives him the Bread to eat.
CHAP. II. Of Medera, Britain, Gallia, Celtiberia, Iberia and Tyrrhenia, and of the Inhabitants, and their Laws and Customs. SInce we have gone through the Islands lying Eastward, on this side within the Pillars of Hercules, we shall now lanch into the main Ocean to those that lye beyond them; for over against Africa, lies a very great This seems to be Madera. Island in the vast Ocean, of many Days Sayl from Lybia, Westward. The Soyl here is very fruitful, a great part whereof is Mountainous, but much likewise Champain, which is the most sweet and pleasant part of all the rest; for it's water'd with several navi∣gable Rivers, beautify'd with many Paradises. Gardens of Pleasure, planted with divers sorts of Trees, and abundance of Orchards, interlac'd with Currents of sweet Water. The Towns are adorn'd with stately Buildings, and Banquetting Houses up and down, pleasantly situated in their Gardens and Orchards. And here they recreate themselves in Summer Time, as in Places accomodated for Pleasure and Delight. The Mountainous part of the Country is cloathed with many large Of Oak. Woods, and all manner of Fruit-Trees; and for the greater Delight and Diversion of People in these Mountains, they ever and anon open themselves into pleasant Vales, watered with Fountains and refreshing Springs: And indeed the whole P. 208. Island abounds with Springs of sweet Water: Whence the Inhabitants not only reap pleasure and delight, but improve in Health and Strength of Body. There you may have Game enough in Hunting all sorts of Wild Beasts, of which there's such plenty, that in their Feasts there's nothing wanting either as to Pomp or Delight. The adjoyning Sea furnishes them plentifully with Fish, for the Ocean there naturally abounds with all sorts. The Air and Climate in this Island is very Mild and Healthful, so that the Trees bear Fruit (and other things that are produc'd there, are fresh and beautiful) most part of the Year; so that this Island (for the excellency of it in all respects) seems rather to be the Residence of some of the Gods, than of Men. Anciently by reason of its remote situation, it was altogether unknown, but afterwards discover'd upon this occasion. The Phaenicians in ancient Times undertook frequent Voyages by Sea, in way of Traffick as Merchants, so that they planted many Colonies both in Africa and in these Western Parts of Europe. These Merchants succeeding in their undertaking, and thereupon growing very rich, pass'd at length beyond the Pillars of Hercules, into the Sea call'd the Ocean: And first they built a City call'd Gades, near to Hercules his Pillars, at the Sea-side, in an Isthmus in Europe; in which, among o∣ther things proper for the Place, they built a stately Temple to Hercules, and instituted splendid Sacrifices to be offer'd to him after the Rites and Customs of the Phaenicians. This Temple is in great Veneration at this Day, as well as in former Ages; so that many of the Romans, famous and renown'd both for their Births and glorious Actions, have made their Vows to this God, and after Suc∣cess in their Affairs, have faithfully perform'd 'em. The Phaenicians therefore upon the account before related, having found out the Coasts beyond the Pil∣lars, and sailing along by the Shoar of Africa, were on a suddain driven by a furious Storm afar off into the main Ocean; and after they had lain under this violent Tempest for many Days, they at length arriv'd at this Island; and so coming to the Knowledge of the nature and pleasantness of this Isle, they were the first that discover'd it others: And therefore the Hetrurians (when they were Masters at Sea) design'd to send a Colony thither; but the Carthaginians oppos'd them, both fearing lest most of their own Citizens should be allur'd (through the goodness of the Island) to settle there, and likewise intending to keep it as a Place of Refuge for themselves, in case of any suddain and unex∣pected blasts of Fortune, which might tend to the utter ruin of their Govern∣ment. For being then Potent at Sea, they doubted not but they could easily (un∣known to the Conquerors) transport themselves and their Families into that
Island. Having now spoken sufficiently of the African Ocean, and the Islands belonging to it, we shall pass over to Europe. For over against the French Shoar, opposite to the Hircinian Mountains (which are the greatest of any in Europe) there lye in the Ocean many Islands; the greatest of which is that which they call Britain, which anciently remain'd untoucht, free Britain. from all Foreign Force; for it was never known that either Bacchus, Hercules, or any of the ancient Heroes or Princes, ever made any attempt upon it by force of Arms: But Julius Caesar in our time (who by his great Atchievments gain'd the Title of Divus. Divine) was the first (that any other makes mention of) that con∣quer'd the Island, and compell'd the Britains to pay Tribute. But these things shall be more particularly treated of in their proper time: We shall now only say something concerning the Island, and the Tin that's found there. In Form it's Triangular, like Sicily; but the Sides are unequal. It lies in an P. 209. Oblique Line, over against the Continent of Europe; so that the Promontory call'd Kent. Camb. Brit. 186. Cantium, next to the Continent (they say) is about a Hundred Furlongs from the Land: Here the Sea ebbs and flows; but the other Point call'd Cornwal Point, or the Land's End. Belerium, is Four Days Sail from the Continent. The last call'd Orcas, the furthest Point of Scot∣land Northwest, now call'd How∣burn. Camb. Brit. 949. Horcas or Orcas, runs out far into the Sea. The least of the Sides facing the whole Continent, is Seven Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs in length; the Second stretching out itself all along from the Sea to the highest Point, is Fifteen Thousand Furlongs, and the last is Twenty Thousand. So that the whole Compass of the Island is Forty Two Thousand, Five Hundred Furlongs. The Inhabitants are the Original People thereof, and live to this time after their own ancient manner and custom: For in Fights they use Chariots, as it's said the old Grecian Heroes did in the Trojan War. They dwell in mean Cottages, co∣vered for the most part with Reeds or Sticks. In reaping of their Corn, they cut off the Ears from the Stalk, and so house them up in Repositories under Ground; thence they take and pluck out the Grains of as many of the oldest of them as may serve them for the day, and after they have bruis'd the Corn, make it into Bread. They are of much Sincerity and Integrity, far from the Craft and Knavery of Men among us; contented with plain and homely Fare, Stran∣gers to the Excess and Luxury of Rich Men. The Island is very Populous, but of a cold Climate, subject to Frosts, being under the The Bear. Artick Pole. They are govern'd by several Kings and Princes, who for the most part are at Peace and A∣mity one with another. But of their Laws and other things peculiar to this I∣sland, we shall treat more particularly, when we come to Caesar's Expedition into Britain. Now we shall speak something of the Tin that's dug and gotten there. They that inhabit the British Promontary of Cornwal. Balerium, by reason of their Converse with Merchants, are more civiliz'd and courteous to Strangers than the rest are. These are the People that make the Tin, which with a great deal of Care and Labour they dig out of the Ground; and that being Rocky, the Meetle is mixt with some Veins of Earth, out of which they melt the Mettle, and then refine it: Then they beat it into Four-square Pieces like to a Dye, and carry it to a British Isle near at Hand, call'd Isle of Wight. Ictis. For at low Tide, all being dry between them and the Island, they convey over in Carts abundance of Tin in the mean time. But there's one thing peculiar to these Islands which lye between Britain and Eu∣rope: For at Full Sea, they appear to be Islands, but at low Water for a long Way, they look like so many Peninsula's. Hence the Merchants transport the Tin they buy of the Inhabitants, to France; and for Thirty Days Journey, they carry it in Packs upon Horses Backs through France, to the Mouth of the River In France, and falls into the Mediterranean. Rhosne. But thus much concerning Tin. Now something remains to be said of Amber. Over against Scythia above Gall in the Ocean, lies an Island call'd Basilia call'd Baltia, Three Days Sayl from Scythia. Basilea, upon which there's cast by the working of the Sea, abundance of Amber, not to be found in any other part of the World.
Many of the ancient Historians have written incredible Stories of this Amber, which since have been experienc'd to be false: For many Poets and other Wri∣ters report, that Phaeton the Son of The Sun. Sol, while he was but as yet a young Boy, prevail'd with his Father to give him liberty to drive his Chariot for one Day: P. 210. Which Request obtain'd, the Youth not being able to manage the Reins, the Horses scorn'd the Charioteer, and forsook their ancient Course, and ran wildly and disorderly through the Heavens, and first set them on Fire, and by that means caus'd that Tract call'd the  Milky Way; then burning up a great part of the Earth, many Countries were laid waste; at which Jupiter was so inrag'd, that he threw a Thunder-blot at Phaeton, and commanded Sol to guide his Steeds into their wonted Course: And that Phaeton himself fell down into the River Po, anciently call'd Eridanus; and that his Sisters greatly bewailing his Death, (through excessive grief) chang'd their Nature, and were transform'd into Pop∣lar Trees, which Yearly to this Day distil their Tears, and by Concretion (they say) becomes this Electrum or Amber, which for Beauty and Brightness, excels all others of its Kind, and is distill'd most in that Country, when the Deaths of Young Men are solemnly bewail'd. But forasmuch as they that have invented this Story, have turn'd their Backs upon Truth, and that later Ages have dis∣prov'd it by Experience of the Contrary, regard is rather to be had to true and Faithful Historians. For Amber is gather'd in this Island before-mention'd, and transported by the Inhabitants into the opposite Continent, from whence it's brought over to us in these Parts as is before declar'd. After this Account given of the Western Islands, we conceive it not imperti∣nent, if we briefly relate some things which were omitted in the former Books concerning the Neighbouring Nations in Europe. In Gall, now France. Celtica (they say) once rul'd a famous Man, who had a Daughter of a more Tall and Majestick Stature than ordinary, and for Beauty far beyond all others of her Sex. This Lady glorying much both in her Strength and Beauty, despis'd all that courted her, as judging none worthy of her Bed. It happened that Hercules at the time he was ingag'd in the War against Gallia, marcht into Celtica, and there built Now Arras. Alesia. When this young Virgin saw him, admiring both his Valour and stately Proportion, she readily admitted him to her Bed; yet not without the consent of her Parents. Of this Lady he begat Galetes, who for Virtues of Mind, and strength of Body, far excell'd the rest of his Nation. When he came to Man's Estate, and was possess'd of his Grandfather's Kingdom, he subdu'd many of the Neighbouring Countries, and perform'd many nota∣ble Atchievments by his Sword. His Valour being every where nois'd A∣broad, he call'd his Subjects after his own Name, Gauls. Galatians, and the Country Or Gallia, Gall. Gallatia, Gall. Having shewn the Original of the Name, something is to be said of the Coun∣try it self. Gall is inhabited by several Nations, but not all alike Populous: The greatest of them have in 'em Two Hundred Thousand Men, the least but Fifty Thousand. Of these there's one that has been an Ancient Ally of the Romans, and continues so to this Day. In regard it lies for the greatest part under the Artick Pole, it's very cold, and subject to Frosts; for in Winter in Cloudy Days, instead of Rain, the Earth is cover'd with Snow; in clear Weather, every Place is so full of Ice and Frost, that the Rivers are frozen up to that degree, that they are naturally cover'd o∣ver with Bridges of Ice. For not only a small Company of Travellers, but vast Armies, with their Chariots and loaden Carriages, may pass over without any P. 211. danger or hazard. There are many great Rivers run through Gaul, which by their various Wind∣ings and turnings cut through and parcel the Champain Grounds, some of which have their Spring-heads from deep Lakes, others issue out from the Mountains, and empty themselves either into the Ocean or into our The Medi∣terranean. Seas. The greatest that falls into our Sea, is the Rhosne, which rises out of the Alps, and at Five Mouths, disgorges itself into the Sea. Of those that empty them∣selves into the Ocean, the greatest are the Danube and the Rhine; over the last of which Caesar, call'd The God, or Divine. Divus, (in our time) to admiration, cast a Bridge, and past over his Forces, and subdu'd the Gauls on the other side.
There are many other Navigable Rivers in Celtica, to write of which particu∣larly would be tedious: Almost all of them are some times Frozen up, as if Bridges were cast over their Channels. But the Ice being naturally smooth, and therefore Slippery to the Passengers, they throw Chaff upon it that they may go the more firmly. In many Places of Gaul, there's something strange and very remarkable, which is not fit to pass over in silence. For the West and North Winds in Summer are so fierce and violent, that they fling into the Air great Stones as big as a Man can grasp in his Hands, together with a Cloud of Gravel and Dust. Nay, the violence of this Whirlwind is such, that it forces Mens Arms out of their Hands, rents their Cloaths off their Backs, and dismounts the Rider from his Horse. This excessive Cold and immoderate Temper of the Air, is the cause why the Earth in these Parts produces neither Wine nor Oyl; and therefore the Gauls to supply the want of these Fruits, make a Drink of Barley, which they call Xythus: They mix likewise their Hony-Combs with Water, and make use of that for the same purpose. They are so exceedingly given to Wine, that they guzle it down as soon as it is imported by the Merchant, and are so eager and inordinate, that making themselves drunk, they either fall dead asleep, or become stark mad. So that many Italian Merchants (to gratify their own Covetousness) make use of the Drunkenness of the Gauls to advance their own profit and gain. For they convey the Wine to 'em both by Navigable Rivers, and by Land in Carts, and bring back an incredible price: For in lieu of a Hogshead of Wine, they receive a Boy, giving Drink in truck for a Servant. In Gaul there are no Silver Mines, but much Gold, with which the nature of the Place supplies the Inhabitants, without the labour or toyl of digging in the Mines. For the winding Course of the River washing with its Streams, the Feet of the Mountains, carries away great pieces of Golden Ore, which those imploy'd in this business gather, and then grind and bruise these Clods of Golden Earth; and when they have so done, cleanse them from the gross Earthy part, by washing them in Water, and then melt them in a Furnace; and thus get together a vast heap of Gold, with which not only the Women, but the Men deck and adorn themselves. For they wear Bracelets of this Mettal about their Wrists and Arms, and massy Chains of pure and beaten Gold about their Necks, and weighty Rings upon their Fingers, and Croslets of Gold upon their Breasts. The Custom ob∣serv'd by the higher Gauls in the Temples of their Gods, is admirably remark∣able; for in their Oratories and sacred Temples of this Country, in honour of P. 212. their Gods they scatter Pieces of Gold up and down, which none of the Inha∣bitants (their superstitious Devotion is such) will in the least touch or meddle with, tho the Gauls are of themselves most exceeding Covetous. For Stature they are tall, but of a Weak. sweaty and pale Complexion, Red-Hair'd, not only Naturally, but they endeavour all they can to make it redder by Art. They often wash their Hair in a Water boyl'd with Lime, and turn it backward from the Forehead to the Crown of the Head, and thence to their very Necks, that their Faces may be more fully seen, so that they look like Satyrs and Hob∣goblins. By this sort of management of themselves, their Hair is as hard a Horse's Mane. Some of them shave their Beards; others let them grow a little. The Persons of Quality shave their Chins close, but their Mustaches they let fall so low, that they even cover their Mouths; so that when they eat, their Meat hangs tangling in their Hair; and when they drink, the Liquor runs through their Mu∣staches as through a Sieve. At Meal-time they all sit, not upon Seats, but upon the Ground, and instead of Carpets, spread Wolves or Dogs Skins under them. Young Boys and Girls attend them, such as are yet but meer Children. Near at Hand they have their Chimneys, with their Fires well furnish'd with Pots and Spits full of whole Joynts of Flesh Meat; and the best and fairest Joynts (in a way of due honour and regard) they set before the Persons of best Quality: As Homer introduces the Grecian Captains entertaining of Ajax, when he return'd Hom. Iliad. lib. 7. ver. 321. Victor from his single Combat with Hector, in this Verse— But Agamemnon as a favouring Sign, Before great Ajax set the lusty Chine.
They invite likewise Strangers to their Feasts, and after all's over, they ask who they are, and what's their Business. In the very midst of Feasting, upon any small occasion, it's ordinary for them in a heat to rise, and without any re∣gard of their Lives, to fall to it with their Swords. For the opinion of Pytha∣goras prevails much amongst them, that Mens Souls are Immortal, and that there is a Transmigration of them into other Bodies, and after a certain time they live again; and therefore in their Funerals they write Letters to their Friends, and throw them into the Funeral Pile, as if they were to be read by the De∣ceas'd. In their Journeys and Fights they use Chariots drawn with Two Horses, which carry a Charioteer and a Souldier, and when they meet Horsemen in the Battle, they fall upon their Enemies with their A kind of Dart. Saunians; then quitting their Cha∣riots, they to it with their Swords. There are some of them that so despise Death, that they'l Fight naked, with something only about their Loyns. They carry a∣long with them to the Wars for their Servants Freemen. Libertines, chosen out of the poorer sort of People, whom they make use of for Wagoners, and Pedees. When the Army is drawn up in Battalia, it's usual for some of 'em to step out before the Army, and to challenge the stoutest of their Enemy to a single Combat, bran∣dishing their Arms to terrify their Adversary. If any comes forth to fight with them, then they sing some Song in commendation of the valiant Acts of their An∣cestors, and blazon out their own Praises: On the contrary they vilify their Ad∣versary, and give forth slighting and contemptuous Words, as if he had not the least Courage. When at any time they cut off their Enemies Heads, they hang 'em about their Horses Necks. They deliver their Spoils to their Servants, all besinear'd with Blood, to be carry'd before them in Triumph, they themselves in the mean time singing the triumphant A Trium∣phant Song. Paean. And as the chief of their Spoils, they fasten those that they have kill'd, over the Doors of their Houses, as if they were so many Wild Beasts taken in Hunting. The Heads of their Enemies that were the chiefest Persons of Quality, they carefully deposite in Chests, emblaming them with the Oyl of Ce∣dars, P. 213. and shewing them to Strangers, glory and boast how that some of their Ancestors, their Fathers or themselves (though great Sums of Money have been offer'd for them) yet have refus'd to accept 'em. Some glory so much upon this account, that they refuse to take for one of these heads its weight in Gold; in this manner exposing their barbarous Magnani∣mity. For it's brave and generous indeed not to sell the Ensigns of true Valour; but to fight with the dead Bodies of those that were Men like our selves, resem∣bles the cruelty of wild Beasts. Their Garments are very strange; for they wear party coloured Coats, inter∣woven here and there with divers sorts of Flowers; and Hose which they call Brac. They make likewise their Cassocks of † Basket-work join'd together with Laces on the , Lac'd under, or fram'd above the Lace. inside, and chequer'd with many pieces of work like Flowers; those they wear in * , Cassocks of Rods. Winter are thicker, those in Summer more slender. Their defensive Arms are a Shield, proportionable to the height of a Man, garnish'd with their own Ensigns. Some carry the shapes of Beasts in Brass, artifically wrought, as well for De∣fence as Ornament. Upon their Heads they wear Helmets of Brass, with large Pieces of Work rais'd upon 'em for ostentation sake, to be admir'd by the Be∣holders; for they have either Horns of the same Mettal joyn'd to them, or the shapes of Birds and Beasts carv'd upon them. They have Trumpets after the Barbarian manner, which in sounding make a horrid noise, to strike a terror fit and proper for the occasion. Some of them wear Iron Breast-plates, and hookt; but others, content with what Arms Nature affords them, fight naked. For Swords, they use a long and broad Weapon call'd Spatha, which they hang cross their right Thigh by Iron or Brazen Chains. Some gird themselves over their Coats, with Belts gilt with Gold or Silver. For Darts they cast those they call Launces, whose Iron Shafts are a Cubit or more in length, and almost Two Hands in breadth. For their Swords are as big as the A sort of Dart. Saunians of other People; but the Points of their Saunians are larger than those of their Swords; some of them are straight, others bow'd and bending backwards, so that they not only cut, but
break the Flesh; and when the Dart is drawn out, it tears and rents the Wound most miserably. These People are of a most terrible Aspect, and have a most dreadful and loud Voice. In their Converse they are sparing of their Words, and speak many things darkly and * figuratively. They are High and Hyperbolical in trumpet∣ing † , Synec∣dochically. out their own Praises, but speak slightly and contemptibly of others. They are apt to menace others, self-opinionated, grievously provoking; of sharp Wits, and apt to learn. Among them they have Poets, that sing melodious Songs, whom they call Bards. Bards, who to their Musical Instruments like unto Harps, chant forth the praises of some, and the dispraises of others. There are likewise among them Philosophers and Divines, whom they call Druids; for Saronidae or Saro∣nids, are of the same signification with Druids, the one of an Oak, the other of an hollow Oak. Saronidae, and are held in great Veneration and Esteem. Prophets likewise they have, whom they high∣ly honour, who foretel future Events, by viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices; and to these Soothsayers all the People ge∣nerally are very observant. When they are to consult of some great and weighty matter, they observe a most strange and incredible Custom; for they sacrifice a Man, striking him with a Sword near the Diaphragma cross over his Breast, who being thus slain, and falling down, they judge of the Event from the manner of his Fall, the Convul∣sion of his Members, and the Flux of Blood; and this has gain'd among them (by long and ancient usage) a firm credit and belief. It's not lawful to offer any Sacrifice without a Philosopher; for they hold that by these, as Men acquainted with the nature of the Deity, and familiar in their Converse with the Gods, they ought to present their Thank-Offerings, and by these Ambassadors to desire such things as are good for them. These Druids and Bards are observ'd and obey'd, not only in times of Peace but War also, both by Friends and Enemies. P. 214. Many times these Philosophers and Poets stepping in between Two Armies, when they are just ready to ingage near at Hand, with their Swords drawn, and Spears presented one against another, have pacify'd them, as if some wild Beasts had been tam'd by Inchantments. Thus Rage is master'd by Wisdom, e∣ven amongst the most Savage Barbarians; and Mars himself reverences the Muses. And now it will be worth while to declare, that which Multitudes are al∣together ignorant of. Those who inhabit the Inland Parts beyond Marseilles. Massylia, and about the Alps, and on this side the Pyrenean Mountains, are call'd Celts: But those that inhabit below this part call'd Celtica, Southward to the Ocean and the Mountain Hyrcinus, and all as far to Scythia, are call'd Gauls. But the Ro∣mans call all these People generally by one and the same Name, Gauls. The Women here are both as Tall and as Couragious as the Men. The Chil∣dren for the most part from their very Birth are gray-headed; but when they grow up to Mens Estate, their Hair changes in Colour like to their Parents. Those towards the North, and bordering upon Scythia, are so exceeding Fierce and Cruel, that (as Report goes) they eat Men, like the Britians that inhabit Some part of Britain, then so call'd, Steph. Iris. They are so noted for a fierce and warlike People, that some have thought them to be those that anciently overran all Asia, and were then call'd Cimme∣rians, and who are now (through length of time) with a little alteration call'd Cimbrians. Anciently they gave themselves to Rapine and Spoil, wasting and destroying other Countries, and slighted and despis'd all other People. These are they that took Rome, and rob'd the Temple at Delphos. These brought a great part of Europe and Asia under Tribute, and possess'd themselves of some of the Coun∣tries of those they subdu'd. Because of their mixture with the Grecians, they were at last call'd Gallo-Grecians. They often routed and destroy'd many great Armies of the Romans. According to their natural Cruelty, they are as impious in the Worship of their Gods; for Malefactors after that they have been kept close Prisoners Five Years together, they impale upon Stakes, in honour to the Gods, and then with many other Victims upon a vast Pile of Wood, they offer them up as a burnt
Sacrifice to their Deities. In like manner they use their Captives also, as Sacri∣fices to the Gods. Some of them cut the Throats, burn or otherwise destroy both Men and Beasts that they have taken in time of War: Though they have very beautiful Women among them, yet they little value their private Society, but are transported with raging Lust to the filthy act of Sodomy; and lying up∣on the Ground on Beasts Skins spread under them, they there tumble together, with their  Catamites lying on both sides of them. And that which is the most abominable is, that without all sense of Shame, or regard to their Reputation, they'l readily prostitute their Bodies to others upon every occasion. And they are so far from looking upon it to be any fault, that they judge it a mean and dishonourable thing, for any thus caress'd, to refuse the favour offer'd them. Having spoken of the Celts, we shall now give an account of their Neighbours Celtiberians, Spaniards. the Celtiberians. The Two Nations Celts and Iberians, heretofore breaking forth into a War about the Boundaries of their Countries, at length agreed to inhabit together promiscuously, and so marrying one with another, their Issue and Po∣sterity (they say) afterwards were call'd Celtiberians. Two Potent Nations being thus united, and possess'd likewise of a rich and fertil Country, these Celtiberians became very famous and renown'd; so that the Romans had much ado to subdue them after long and tedious Wars with them. These Celtiberians bring into the Field not only stout and valiant Horsemen, but brave Foot, both for strength and hardiness able to undergo all manner of Labour and Toyl. They wear black rough Cassocks made of Wool, like to Goats Hair. Some of them are arm'd with the P. 215. Gauls light Shields, others with Bucklers as big as Shields, and wear Greaves a∣bout their Legs made of rough Hair, and brazen Helmets upon their Heads, a∣dorn'd with Red Plumes. They carry Two-edg'd Swords exactly temper'd with Steel, and have Daggers beside, of a Span long, which they make use of in close Fights. They make Weapons and Darts in an admirable manner, for they bury Plates of Iron so long under Ground, till the Rust hath consum'd the weaker part, and so the rest becomes more strong and firm: Of this they make their Swords and other Warlike Weapons; and with these Arms thus temper'd, they so cut through every thing in their way, that neither Shield, Helmet, nor Bone can withstand them. And because they are furnish'd with Two Swords, the Horse when they have routed the Enemy, light and joyn with the Foot, and fight to admiration. There's another strange and wonderful Custom they have amongst 'em; for though they are very nice and curious in their Diet, yet they have a very for∣did and filthy Practice, to wash their whole Bodies over with Urin, and rub their very Teeth with it, which is counted a certain means of Health to their Bodies. As to their Manners, they are very cruel towards their Enemies and o∣ther Malefactors, but very Courteous and Civil to Strangers: For to all such from what Place soever they come, they readily and freely entertain them, and strive who shall perform the greatest Office of Kindness and Respect. Those who are attended upon by Strangers, they commend and esteem them as Friends of the Gods. They live upon all sorts of Flesh in great Plenty, and their Drink is Their Diet. made of Honey, their Country abounding therewith: But they buy Wine also of the Merchants that Traffick thither. Of those that border upon them, the most civiliz'd Na∣tions are the People of the higher Province of Spain. Vaccaei, who every Year divide the Lands a∣mong them, and then Till and Plow it, and after Harvest, distribute the Fruits, allotting to every one their Share; and therefore it's Death to Steal, or underhand to convey away any thing from the Husbandman. Those they call Lusitanians. Lusitania, now call'd Portugal. Lusita∣nians, are most valiant of all the Cimbri in the Greek, not Celti∣berii, as in the Latin. Cimbri. These in Times of War carry little Targets made of Bowel Strings, so strong and firm, as compleatly to guard and defend their Bodies. In Fights they manage these, so nimbly whirling them about here and there, that with a great deal of Art they avoid and repel every Dart that's cast at them. They use hookt Saunians made all of Iron, and wear Swords and Helmets like to those of the Celtiberians. They throw their Darts at a great distance, and yet are sure to hit their Mark, and wound deeply: Being of active and nimble Bo∣dies,
they can easily fly from, or pursue their Enemy, as there is occasion: But when they are under Hardships, they cannot bear near so much as the Celtibe∣rians. In time of Peace, they have a kind of a light and airy way of Dancing, which requires great agility and nimbleness of the Legs and Thighs: In time of War they . march observing time and measure; and sing the Paeans when they are just ready to charge the Enemy. The Iberians, especially the Lusitanians, are singular in one thing that they do; for those that are young and prest with ant, but yet are strong and coura∣gious, get together upon the Tops of the Mountains, and furnish themselves with Arms; and having made up a considerable Body, make Incursions into Iberia, and heap up Riches by Thieving and Robbery; and this is their constant Practice in despite of all hazard whatsoever; for being lightly arm'd, and nimble of Foot, they are not easily surpriz'd. And indeed steep and craggy Mountains are to P. 216. them as their natural Country, and to these they fly for shelter, because there's no way in those Places for great Armies to pass. And therefore though the Ro∣mans often set upon them, and in some measure have curb'd them, yet they were never able wholly to put an end to their Thieving and Robbing. Having related what concerns the Iberians, we conceive it not impertinent to say something of their Silver Mines. For almost all this Country is full of such Mines, whence is dug very good and pure Silver; from whence those that deal in that Mettal, gain exceeding great Profit. And in the former Book we have spoken of the Pyrenean Mountains in Iberia, when we treated of the Acts and Atchievements of Hercules: These are the highest and greatest of all others; for from the South-Sea, almost as far as to the Northern Ocean, they divide Gall from Iberia and Celtiberia, running out for the space of About 400 Miles. Three Thousand Fur∣longs. These Places being full of Woods, and thick of Trees, it's reported that in ancient time this Mountainous Tract was set on Fire by some Shepherds, which continuing burning for many Days together, (whence the Mountains were call'd † Pyrenean) the parch'd Superficies of the Earth swet, abundance of Silver and † Signifying Fiery in Greek. the Ore being melted, the Metal flow'd down in Streams of pure Silver, like a River; the use whereof being unknown to the Inhabitants, the Phaenician Mer∣chants bought it for Trifles given for it in Exchange, and by transporting it into Greece, Asia and all other Nations, greatly inricht themselves; and such was their Covetousness, that when they had fully loaded their Ships, and had much more Silver to bring Aboard, they cut off the Lead from their Anchors, and made use of Silver instead of the other. The Phaenicians for a long time using this Trade, and so growing more and more wealthy, sent many Colonies into Sicily and the Neighbouring Islands, and at length into Africa and Sardinia: But a long time after the Iberians com∣ing to understand the nature of the Metal, sunk many large Mines, whence they dug an infinite quantity of pure Silver (as never was the like almost in any o∣ther place of the World) whereby they gain'd exceeding great Wealth and Re∣venues. The manner of working in these Mines, and ordering the Metal among the Iberians is thus; there being extraordinary rich Mines in this Country, of Gold as well as Silver and Brass, the Labourers in the Brass take a Fourth part of the pure Brass dug up, to their own use, and the common Labourers in Silver have an Euboick Talent for their Labour in Three Days time; for the whole Soil is full of solid and shining Oar, so that both the nature of the Ground, and the industry of the Workmen is admirable. At the first every common Person might dig for this Metal; and in regard the Silver Ore was easily got, ordinary Men grew very rich: But after that Iberia came into the Hands of the Romans, the Mines were manag'd by a throng of Italians, whose Covetousness loaded them with abundance of Riches; for they bought a great number of Slaves, and deliver'd them to the Task-masters and Overseers of the Mines. These Slaves open the P. 217. Mouths of the Mines in many Places, where digging deep into the Ground, are found Massy Clods of Earth, full of Gold and Silver; and in sinking both in length and depth, they carry on their Works in undermining the Earth many Furlongs distance, the Workmen every way here and there making Galleries un∣der Ground, and bringing up all the Massy Pieces of Ore (whence the Profit and Gain is to be had) even out of the lowest Bowels of the Earth.
There's a great difference between these Mines and those in Atica; for be∣sides the Labour, they that search there are at great Cost and Charge; and be∣sides are often frustrated of their hopes, and sometimes lose what they had found, so that they seem to be unfortunate to a Proverb: But those in Iberia that deal in Mines, according to their Expectations, are greatly inricht by their Labours; for they succeed at their very first sinking, and afterwards by reason of the ex∣traordinary richness of the Soyl, they find more and more resplendent Veins of Ore, full of Gold and Silver; for the whole Soil round about is interlac'd on every hand with these Metals. Sometimes at a great depth they meet with Rivers under-ground, but by Art give a check to the violence of their Current; for by cutting of Trenches under ground, they divert the Stream; and being sure to gain what they aim at, when they have begun, they never leave till they have sinished it; and to admiration they pump out those Floods of Water with those Instruments call'd Aegyptian Pumps, invented by Archimedes the Syracusian, when Aegyptian Cochleans. he was in Egypt. By these with constant pumping by turns, they throw up the Water to the Mouth of the Pit, and by this means drain the Mine dry, and make the Place fit for their Work. For this Engin is so ingeniously contriv'd, that a vast Quantity of Water is strangely with little Labour cast out, and the whole Flux is thrown up from the very bottom, to the Surface of the Earth. The Ingenuity of this Artist is justly to be admir'd, not only in these Pumps, Archimedes. but in many other far greater things, for which he is famous all the World o∣ver, of which we shall distinctly give an exact narration, when we come to the time wherein he liv'd. Now though these Slaves that continue as so many Prisoners in these Mines, incredibly inrich their Masters by their Labours, yet toyling Night and Day in these Golden Prisons, many of them by being over-wrought, dye under Ground. For they have no rest nor intermission from their Labours; but the Task-masters by Stripes force them to intollerable hardships, so that at length they dye most miserably. Some that through the Strength of their Bodies, and vigour of their Spirits are able to endure it, continue a long time in those Miseries, whose Calamities are such, that Death to them is far more eligible than Life. Since these Mines afforded such wonderful Riches, it may be greatly admir'd that none appear to have been sunk of later Times: But in answer hereunto, the Covetousness of the Carthaginians, when they were Masters of Iberia. Spain, open'd all: And hence it was they grew so Rich and Potent, and hir'd so many Va∣liant Soldiers, by whose assistance they carry'd on so many great Wars, that they neither trusted to the Soldiers rais'd from among their own Citizens, nor to those of their Confederates, but involv'd the Romans, Sicilians and Africans in extream Hazards, almost to their utter Ruins, by conquering all with their Monies dug out of the Mines. For the Carthaginians were ever of old excessive∣ly thirsting after Gain, and the Italians came not one jot behind any of them, but were as eager to ingross all. In many Places of Spain there's found also Tin; but not upon the Surface of P. 218. Portugal. the Ground, as some Historians report, but they dig it up, and melt it down as they do Gold and Silver. Above Lusitania there's much of this Tin Metal that is in the Islands, lying in the Ocean over against Iberia, which are therefore call'd Cassiterides; and much of it likewise is transported out of Britain into Gaul, the opposite Continent, which the Merchants carry on Horse-backs through the heart of Celtica to Marselles, and the City call'd Narbo, which City is a Roman Colony, and the greatest Mart Town for Wealth and Trade in those Parts. But now having done with the Gauls and Celtiberians, we shall pass to the The Ge∣noans. Li∣gurians. Ligurians. They inhabit a rough and barren Country, and live a toylsom and trou∣blesom Life in their daily Labour for their common Sustinence; for the Country being Mountainous and full of Woods, some are imploy'd all Day long in cutting down Trees, being furnish'd with strong and great Hatchets for that purpose. The Husbandman's business for the most part lies in hewing and breaking Rocks, the Soyl is so very rough and craggy; for there's not a Clod of Earth they can dig up without a Stone; and though they continually thus conflict so many Hard∣ships, yet Custom has turn'd it to a Second Nature; and after all their Labour
and Toyl, they reap but very little Fruit, scarce sufficient to supply their Ne∣cessities. Daily Toil therefore, and scarcity of Food, is the reason they are so Lean, and nothing but Sinews. The Women share in these Laborious Tasks as much as the Men: These People hunt often, and take many wild Beasts, by which they supply the want of Bread. Being therefore accustom'd to range the Snowy Mountains, and climb the rough and craggy Hills, their Bodies are very strong and brawny. Some of them for want of Corn and other Fruits, drink Water; and feed upon Locusts and wild Beasts, and cram their Bellies with such Herbs as the Land there produces; their Country being altogether a Stranger to those desirable Deities, Ceres and Bacchus. In the Night they lie in the Fields, and very seldom so much as in the meanest Huts or Cottages; but most commonly in hollow Rocks, and natural Caves, where∣soever they judge there may be a convenient shelter for them; and much after this manner they do in all other things, living after the old fordid and barba∣rous manner. In short, the Women here are as strong as Men, and the Men as Beasts; and therefore it's reported, that in their Wars, sometimes the biggest Men among the Gauls, have been foyl'd and slain in a single Combat upon a Challenge, by a little slender Ligurian. They are lighter arm'd than the Romans, for they defend themselves with a long Shield, made after the fashion of the Gauls, and their Cassocks are girt a∣bout them with a Belt: They wear wild Beasts Skins, and carry a Sword of an ordinary length: But some of them conversing much with the Romans, have chang'd their ancient manner of arming themselves, and have imitated their Lords and Masters. They are bold and daring, not only in times of War, but upon all other occasions. For in their Traffick they sail through the Adriatick, from Sardona, a Ci∣ty of Liburnia, now Croatia. Sardonian and African Seas, exposing themselves to great Hazards in little Skiffs, less than the ordinary Ships, without the help of any other Vessels; in which notwithstanding they'l boldly (to admiration) venture to weather out the greatest Storms and Tempests. Now it remains we should speak of the Hetrurians or Tuscans in Italy, now under the great Duke of Tus∣cany. Tyrrhenians: They were anciently very valiant, and injoy'd a large Country, and built many Famous Cities; and having a great Navy, were long Masters at Sea, and call'd the Sea lying under Italy the P. 219. Between Sicily and Sardinia, formerly the lower Sea on the South-West side of Italy, the Adriatick or Gulf of Venice, being call'd the Higher Sea, on the North-East of Italy. Tyrrhenian Sea, after their own Name. Amongst other things wherewith they furnish'd their Land Army, they found out the most useful Instrument for War, the Trumpet, which from them is call'd Tyrrhena. To the Generals of their Ar∣my they gave these Badges of Honour; they allow'd them an Ivory Throne, and a Purple Robe. They were the first that invented Portico's or Galleries to their Houses, to avoid the trouble and noise of a croud of Servants, and other Hangers-on; most of which being imitated by the Romans, and brought into their Commonwealth, were af∣terwards improv'd to a great degree of Curiosity. They gave themselves much to Learning, especially to the study of natural Philosophy; and amongst natural Events, mightily intent (above all others) to find out the nature of Thunder and Lightning: And therefore to this Day, they are admir'd by all Princes all the World over, who make use of them to interpret all the Prodigious effects of Thunder. They injoy a very rich Country, and well Till'd and Improv'd; and so reap abundance of all sorts of Fruits, not only for their necessary Food, but for Plea∣sure and Delight. They had their Tables spread twice a Day, furnish'd with all sorts of Va∣rieties, even to Luxury and Excess. Their Foot-Carpets are interwoven with Flower-works, and abundance of Sil∣ver Cups, and great variety of them they make use of. Of Houshold Servants they have great numbers, some of whom are very beautiful, and others exceeding rich in Apparel, above the Condition of Servants. Both Servants and Freemen have several Apartments allow'd them, compleatly furnish'd with all manner of Adornments. At last they threw off their former Sobriety, and now live an idle and debaucht Life, in Riot and Drunkenness; so
that it's no wonder that they have lost the Honour and Reputation their Fore-fathers gain'd by Warlike Atchievments. The goodness of the Soyl does not a little add Fuel to their Luxury, for they injoy a most Fertile Country, rich Land, whence they reap abundance of all sorts of Fruits: For Hetruria is second to none for Fertility of Soil, being a large Champain Country, yet distinguish'd with rising Hills here and there, fit and commodious likewise for Tillage: It's water'd also with moderate Showers, not only in the Winter, but in the Summer Season. CHAP. III. Of Gredosia. Of the Isles of the Arabian Sea. Of the Holy Island. Of Pan∣chaea. Of Samothracia. Of Naxus, Syme, Nausus, Calydna, Nisy∣rus, Carpathus. Of Rhodes, and of Chersonesus. HAving gone through the Western and Northern Countries, and the Islands of the Ocean, we shall now describe the Southern Islands lying in the Arabian Ocean, on the East part of Arabia next to A Country of Asia now call'd Tarse, a Province of Persia. Gredosia. This part of Arabia is a Country full of Villages, and considerable Towns, some of which are situated upon high Hills, others upon rising Grounds, or something higher than Champain Fields. Their greatest Cities have stately Royal Palaces, and are very wealthy and Populous: The Country abounds with all sorts of Cattel, and is of a very fruitful Soyl, affording plenty of rich Pasture for the Flocks and Herds: Many Rivers run through it, watering the Fields, to the great increase of the Fruits of the Earth. And therefore this part of Arabia which excels the rest in richness of Soil is justly call'd Arabia the Happy. Over against the utmost point of this Country near the Ocean, lye many Islands but there are but Three that are worth remark: The First is call'd the Holy Island, The Holy or Sacred Island. wherein it's unlawful to bury the Dead: But not far from this, about Seven Furlongs distant, there's another wherein they bury: The Sacred Isle chiefly pro∣duces Frankincense, and in that abundance, as suffices for the Service and Wor∣ship of the Gods all the World over; it has likewise Plenty of Myrrhe, with o∣ther P. 220. odoriferous Spices of several sorts, which breath out a most fragrant Smell. The nature of Frankincense, and the manner of getting it is thus: The Tree is very small, like to the white Egyptian Thorn, and bears a Leaf like to the . Wil∣low: It puts forth a Flower of a Golden Colour; from the Bark of this Tree by incision made, distils the Frankincense in Drops like Tears. The Myrrhe-Tree is like to the Mastick-Tree, but bears a more slender Leaf, and grows thicker upon the Branches. The Myrrhe flows forth, by digging up the Earth round about the Roots. Those that grow in a rich Soyl, bear twice a Year, that is, in the Spring and Summer: That in the Spring-time, is of a red colour, caus'd by the Dew; the other nearer Winter, is white. There they got likewise the Fruit of the It grows in Africa, bears a red Fruit. Vlid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 13. c. 19. Paliurus Tree, very wholsom both in Meat and Drink, and good against a Dissentery. The Land is divided amongst the Inhabitants, of which the best part is allotted to the King, who has likewise the Tenths of the Fruits. They say the breadth of the Island is about Two Hundred Furlongs, inhabited by them they call Panchaeans, who transport the Myrrhe and Frankincense into Foreign Parts, and sell it to the Arabian Merchants, from whom others buy these and other such like-Merchandise, and convey them to Phaenicia, Coelo-Syria and Egypt; and from those Places they are carried by the Merchants over all parts of the World.
Besides these, there's another large Island about Thirty Furlongs distance from this last mention'd, lying to the East many Furlongs in length. For they say, from a Promontory thereof running out towards the East, may be seen India like a Cloud in the Air, the distance is so great. There are many things observable in Panchaea, that deserve to be taken notice of. Panchaea. The natural Inhabitants are those they call Panchaei; the Strangers that dwell a∣mong them are * People of the Western Parts, together with Indians, Cretians,  and Scythians. In this Island there's a Famous City, call'd Panara, not inferior to any for Wealth and Grandure. The Citizens are call'd the Suppliants of Jupiter Triphylius, and are the only People of Panchaea, that are govern'd by a De∣mocracy, without a Monarch. They choose every Year the Presidents or Go∣vernors, that have all Matters under their Cognizance, but what concerns Life and Death; and the most weighty Matters they refer to the College of their Priests. The Temple of Jupiter Triphylius is about Sixty Furlongs distant from the City, in a Champain Plain. It's in great veneration because of it's Antiquity and the Stateliness of the Structure, and the Fertility of the Soyl. The Fields round about the Temple are Planted with all sorts of Trees, not only for Fruit, but for Pleasure and Delight; for they abound with tall Cypresses Plane-Trees, Laurels and Myrtles, the Place abounding with Fountains of run∣ning Water: For near the Temple there's such a mighty Spring of sweet Water rushes out of the Earth, as that it becomes a Navigable River: Thence it divides it self into several Currents and Streams, and Waters all the Fields thereabouts, and produces thick Groves of tall and shady Trees; amongst which in Summer abundance of People spend their time, and a multitude of Birds of all sorts build their Nests, which create great delight both by affecting the Eye with the variety of their Colours, and taking the Ear with the sweetness of their Notes. Here are many Gardens, sweet and pleasant Meadows deckt with all sorts of Herbs and Flowers, and so glorious is the Prospect, that it seems to be a Paradise wor∣thy the Habitation of the Gods themselves. There are here likewise large and Fruitful Palms, and abundance of Walnut-Trees, P. 221. which plentifully Furnish the Inhabitants with pleasant Nuts. Besides all these, there are a multitude of Vines of all sorts, spiring up on high, and so curiously interwoven one amongst another, that they are exceeding plea∣sant to the view, and greatly advance the delights of the Place. The Temple was built of White Marble, most artificially joynted and cemented, two Hundred Yards in length, and as many in breadth, supported with great and thick Pillars, curiously adorn'd with with Carved Work. In this Temple are plac'd huge Statues of the Gods, of admirable Workmanship, and amazing largeness. Round the Temple are built Apartments for the Priests that attend the Service of the Gods, by whom every thing in that Sacred Place is perform'd. All along from the Temple, is an even course of Ground, Four Furlongs in length, and a Hundred Yards in breadth; on either side of which, are erected vast Bra∣zen Statues, with Four-square Pedestals; at the end of the Course, breaks forth the River from the Fountains before-mention'd, from whence flows most clear and sweet Water, the drinking of which, conduces much to the Health of the Body. This River is call'd the . Aqua Solis. Water of the Sun. The whole Fountain is lin'd on both sides, and flag'd at the bottom with Stone at vast Expence, and runs out on both sides for the space of Four Fur∣longs. It's not lawful for any but the Priests to approach to the brink of the Fountain. All the Land about for Two Hundred Furlongs round, is consecrated to the Gods, and the Revenues bestow'd in maintaining the publick Sacrifices, and Service of the Gods: Beyond these consecrated Lands, is an high Mountain, dedicated likewise to the Gods, which they call the Throne of Celus and Tri∣phylius Olympus; for they report that Call'd Cae∣lum in Latin. Ʋranus, when he govern'd the whole World, pleasantly diverted himself in this Place; and from the top of the Mount observ'd the motion of the Heavens and Stars, and that he was call'd Tri∣phylius Olympus, because the Inhabitants were compos'd of Three several Nations, Panchaeans, Oceanites and Doians, who were afterwards expell'd by Ammon; for it's said that he not only rooted out this Nation, but utterly destroy'd all their Cities, and laid Doia and Asterusia even with the Ground. The Priests every Year solemnize a Sacred Festival in this Mountain, with great Devotion.
Behind this Mount, in other Parts of Panchaea, they say there are abundance of wild Beasts of all kinds, as Elephants, Lions, Leopards, Deer, and many o∣ther wonderful Creatures both for Strength and Proportion. In this Island there are Three chief Cities, Hyracia, Dalis and Oceanis. The whole Country is very Fertile, and especially in the production of all sorts of Wine in great Plenty. The Men are Warlike, and use Chariots in Battles, after the ancient manner. The whole Nation is divided into Three Parts: The First Class is of the Priests, with whom are joyn'd the Artificers. The other Tribe consists of the Husband-men; and the Third are the Militia and the Shepherds. The Priests govern all, and are the sole Arbitrators in every matter; for they give Judgment in all Controversies, and have the Power and Authority in all publick Transactions of State. The Husbandmen Till the Land, but the Fruit is brought into the Common Treasury, and who is judg'd the most skilful in Hus∣bandry, receives the largest share of the Fruits for a Reward in the First Place; and so the Second, and the rest in order to the Tenth, as every one merits less or more, receives his Reward by the Judgment of the Priests. In the same man∣ner the Shepherds and Herdsmen carefully bring into the publick Stock, the Victims and other things both by number and weight, as the nature of the things are; for it's not lawful for any to appropriate any thing to themselves particularly, except a House and a Garden. For all the young Breed of Cattel, and other things, and all the Revenues, are receiv'd by the Priests, and they justly distribute to every one as their necessity does require; only the Priests have a double Proportion. P. 222. They wear soft and fine Garments; for their Sheeps Wooll is much finer here than any where else; both Men and Women likewise deck themselves with Golden Ornaments; for they wear Necklaces of Gold, and Bracelets about their Arms, and like the Persians have Rings hanging in their Ears. Their Shooes are such as others wear, but richly beautify'd with divers sorts of Co∣lours. Their Soldiers for ordinary Pay, defend the Country, fortifying themselves within Camps and Bulwarks; for there's a part of the Island infested with most daring Thieves and Robbers, who often lurch and surprize the Husband-men. To conclude, these Priests for Delicacy, State and Purity of Life, far exceed all the rest of the Inhabitants: Their Robes are of white Linen, and sometimes of pure soft Wooll. They wear likewise Miters, imbroider'd with Gold. Their Shoes are Sandals curiously wrought with exquisite Workmanship, and in their Ears hang Golden Ear-rings like to the Womens. They attend chiefly upon the Service of the Gods, singing melodious Songs in their Praises, setting forth their glorious Acts and Benefits bestow'd upon Men. The Priests say they came originally from Crete, and were brought over into Panchaea by Jupiter, when he was upon Earth, and govern'd all the World; and alledge their Language for a Confirmation of this Assertion, in as much as they retain many Words of the Cretian Speech among them. And further say, that they deriv'd from their Ancestors that Civility and kindness wherewith they entertain the Cretians, the Fame and report of their ancient Consanguinity de∣scending continually in a perpetual Succession to their Posterity: They shew like∣wise a Record written, as they say, by Jupiter's own Hand, at the time when he was on Earth, and laid the Foundation of the Temple. There are in this Island likewise Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron, but not lawful for any to export them. Nay, it's not lawful for any of the Priests to go out of the Verge of the Consecrated Ground; and if any do, it's lawful for any Man that finds 'em to kill 'em. They have under their Charge, innumerable vast Ves∣sels, and other Consecrated things, both of Gold and Silver, which have been laid up there in honour of the Gods for many Ages. The Gates of the Temple are of admirable Workmanship, beautify'd with Gold, Silver, Ivory and Thyne Wood. The Whereon he lay at Meals. Bed of the God is Six Cubits long, and Four broad, of massy Gold, most curiously wrought in every part; and near adjoyning, stands the Table, as large, and of the like Materials and Workmanship with the other in every re∣spect.
In the middle of the Bed, is plac'd a great Golden Pillar, whereon are Let∣ters inscrib'd, call'd by the Egyptians, Sacred Writing, expressing the famous Ac∣tions of Ʋranus, Jupiter, Diana and Apollo, written they say, by Mercury himself. Celus. But this may suffice concerning the Islands lying in the Ocean over against A∣rabia. We shall now speak of those in the Aegaean Sea, near to Greece, beginning Samothracia. with Samothracia. It's said this Island was anciently call'd Samos, and after∣wards Samothracia, to distinguish from one near to it, call'd Samos, built by Sa∣mus. The Inhabitants are those that have ever been originally there, so that there's nothing certain handed down to Posterity, concerning the first Inhabitants and Governors of this Place. Some there are notwithstanding, that report, that it was anciently call'd Samos, and afterwards Samothracia, from Colonies that settl'd there out of Samos and Thrace. The natural Inhabitants had anciently a peculiar kind of Speech, some Marks P. 223. whereof remain in the Worship of their Gods at this Day. The Samothracians themselves report, that before there was any Flood in any other Nations, there was a great one amongst them. The first Irruption was at the Mouth of the Two Rocks in the Thracian Bosphorus. Cyneae, and the other made through the Hellespont: For they say, that the Pontick Sea being once a standing Pool, was so swell'd by the falling in of Rivers, that being overcharged with Wa∣ter, it empty'd it self into the Hellespont, and overflow'd a great part of the Coasts of Asia, and laid a considerable part of the Champain Country of Samo-thracia under Water. And as a manifestation of this, some Fishermen of later time have brought up with their Nets, the Heads of Stony Pillars, certain Signs of the Cities being overflow'd and ruin'd by the Waters. The Inhabitants that escap'd (they say) fled to the higher parts of the Island, but the Sea rising still higher, they made their Addresses to their Gods, and thereupon being deliver'd from the imminent Danger they were in, they compass'd in the Bounds of those Places wherein they were preserv'd throughout the whole Island, and there erected Al∣tars, where they sacrifice to their Gods at this Day: Whence it's apparent, that they inhabited Samothracia before the last Deluge. Afterwards one Saon an Islander, the Son (as some say) of Jupiter and Nympha, but (as others, of Mercury and Rhena,) gather'd the Inhabitants (before living scatter'd and dispers'd) into a Body; and made Laws for their better Govern∣ment, and divided them into Five Tribes, calling them after the Names of his Sons, but nam'd himself Saon, after the Name of the Island. The Government being thus setled, it's said, that Dardanus, Jasion and Harmonia, the Children of Jupiter and Electra, one of the Daughters of Atlas, were born among them. Of these, Dardanus (being a bold and brave Spirited Man) pass'd over in a Pin∣nace into Asia, and first built the City Dardanus, and erected the Kingdom of Troy (so call'd, from Troy built afterwards,) and call'd the People Darda∣nians. He Reign'd (they say) over many other Nations besides in Asia, and that the Dardanians above Thrace, were a Colony setled there by him. It's further said, that Jupiter desiring likewise to advance his other Son to a high degree of Honour and Reputation, discover'd to him the Rites of the Sa∣cred Mysteries anciently observ'd in that Island, but then newly reviv'd, which it was not lawful for any to hear, but those that are initiated. But he seems to be the first that initiated Strangers; whence these Rites and Ceremonies became more noted and famous. About this time, Cadmus the Son of Agenor came thither to seek after Europa, Cadmus. and being initiated into these Sacred Mysteries, married Harmonia the Sister of Jasion, not the Daughter of Mars, as the Greeks report: They say, that this was the first Marriage that was celebrated in the presence of the Gods, where Ce∣res in love with Jasion, presented him with Corn, Mercury with a Harp; Mi∣nerva bestow'd that famous Necklace, Vail and Pipe. Electra taught him to ce∣lebrate the Sacred Mysteries of the great Mother of the Gods with Cymbals, Timbrels and Dancing. Apollo play'd upon his Harp, and the Muses upon wind Instruments, and the rest of the Gods celebrated the Nuptials with joyful Accla∣mations.
Cadmus afterwards (as he was commanded by the Oracle) built Thebes in Beotia; and Jasion marry'd Cybele, of whom they say he begat Coxybas; after Jasion was re∣ceiv'd into the Number of the Gods, Dardanus, Cybele and Coripas travelling into Phrygia brought over the sacred Mysteries of the Mother of the Gods into Asia; then Cybele Marry'd Olympus, the first, and bore Alces, and call'd this Godess Cybele after her own Name. Corybas call'd those that celebrated the sacred Mysteries of his Mother (in a furious Rage like Madmen) after his own Name, Corybantes, and marry'd Thebe the Daughter of Cilix the Son of Phelix whence Celi∣cid. Cilix; and thus Pipes were brought over into Phrygia, and Mercury's Harp into Lyrnesus; which when the City was taken, was carry'd, away by Achilles. It's reported likewise that Pluto was the Son of Jasion and Ceres, which rose from this real Truth, that Ceres at the Marriage of Haermonia bestowed upon Jasion upon the account of her Familiarity with him, Plutos is rich in Greek rich Presents P. 224. of Corn: But what are particularly acted in the Celebration of these sacred My∣steries, it's granted are only known by those that are initiated. It's commonly said, that these Gods are always present, and afford their help and assistance to those that are Initiated, and call upon them, when they fall into any sud∣dain and unexpected Distress; and that these Worshipers grow more and more Pious and Righteous, and still exceed themselves in Goodness; and therefore the most famous of the Ancient Heroes and Demygods greatly coveted to be initiated into these sacred Rites and Ceremonies: For it's believ'd, that Jasion, Dioscurus, Her∣cules and Orpheus (who were Members of this Society) through the favour of these Gods prosper'd in all their Wars. Having now finish'd what concerns Samothracia, the Course of the History leads us to Naxus. This Island was formerly call'd Strongyle. The Thracians were the first that Naxus. setl'd here, upon the occasion following. It's said, that Boreas had two Sons, Butes and Lycurgus, of several Mothers. Butes the younger Plotted to Murther his Brother, which being plainly discover'd, the Father appointed no greater a Punish∣ment to be Executed upon his Son, but only commanded him, with his Accomplices to take Shipping and be gone, and seek out for themselves some other Habitations: Upon which, Butes with a Number of Thrasians (his fellow Criminals) went a∣board, and in a direct Course made their way through the Cyclade Islands, and ar∣riv'd at Strongyle, and thus possess'd of the Island, robb'd all by their Piracies that pass'd that way. But being in want of Women, they rov'd about here and there, and forcibly carry'd them away where ever they could find them. Some of the Ciclade Islands at that time were wholly desolate, and others of them but very thinly inhabited. Running out therefore a long way off, and being repuls'd at Eubaea, they arriv'd at Thessaly; and there landing, they met with the Nurses of Bacchus at the Mountain call'd Diros, Celebrating the Mysteries of the Gods in Achaia Phthiotis; being then ready to seize upon the Women, some of them cast away their Offerings and fled to the Sea, and others to the Mountain before men∣tion'd: But Butes seiz'd upon Coronides, and Ravish'd her, which dishonour she bore so hainously, that she call'd upon Bacchus to revenge her Disgrace, and there∣upon he struck Butes with Madness, who in his Mad mood cast himself into a Pit and so perish'd. The rest of the Thracians seiz'd upon other Women, amongst whom were two Noble Ladies, Iphimedia the Wife of Aloeas, and his Daughter Pancratis; with these they return'd to Strongyle. In the room of Butes they Crea∣ted Agassamenus King of the Island, and Marry'd him to Pancratis the Daughter of Aloeas, a Lady of an admirable Beauty: For (before whom he took her to be his Wife) Siculus and Hecaterus, two of the most eminent Commanders, fought a Duel, and Wounded one another. Agassamenus bestow'd Iphimedia upon one of his intimate Friends, whom he had made General of his Army. In the mean time Aloeas sent his two Sons, Otus and Ephialtes, to seek after his Wife and Daughter, who inva∣ding Strongyle, fought with the Thracians, routed 'em, and took the City by Storm. Not long after Pancratis dy'd, Otus and Ephialtes possess'd themselves of the Island, and ousted the Thracians, and call'd it Dia. Shortly after they fell out and fought a set Battel, wherein many were kill'd on both sides, and the two Brothers kill'd one another, whom the Inhabitants afterwards ador'd as Demygods. After the Thracians had held the Island for above two hundred Years, at length a Drought and Famin forc'd 'em to leave the Place. After them the Carians (being expuls'd Lamia) possess'd themselves of it, whose King Naxus, the Son of Polemon, afterwards order'd the Island should be call'd Naxus, after his own Name. This
Naxus was a very famous and good Man, and left behind him a Son, call'd P. 225. Leucippus, whose Son Smardius afterwards reign'd in the Island; in whose Reign Theseus coming out of Crete with Ariadne, landed here; and in his Sleep saw Bacchus threatning him with Ruin, if he did not forsake Ariadne; with which Vision being terrify'd, he left her, and withdrew himself out of the Island. Then Bacchus in the Night led away Ariadne to the Mountain Arius, and then imme∣diately disappear'd, and not long after Ariadne was no more seen. The Naxians have many Stories amongst them concerning this God; for they say he was bred up with 'em, and therefore that this Island was lov'd by Bacchus more than any other, and by some call'd Dionysiades. For Jupiter (as the Story goes) (Semele before the Birth of Bacchus, being struck with a Thunderbolt) took the Infant Bacchus out of his Mother's Womb, and clapt him within his Thigh: But when the full time of his Birth was at Hand, to conceal him from Juno, he was brought forth in Naxus, and there committed to the care of the Nymphs, Philias, Coronidis and Cleidis, to be educated by them; and that Semele was there∣fore before his Birth kill'd by Lightning, to the end that Bacchus not being born of a Mortal, but of Two immortal Deities, might from his Birth be of an Im∣mortal Nature. Upon the account therefore of the kindness shew'd him in his Education, he express'd his gratitude to the Inhabitants so far, as that he ad∣vanc'd them to a high degree of Wealth and Power, and furnish'd them with a brave Fleet of Ships; and that they being the first that made a defection from Xerxes, (they say) he assisted 'em to vanquish the Barbarians in a Sea-Fight, and that he gave a clear Evidence and Token of his Concern with them in the Battel at Platea; and that the excellency of their Wine, was an apparent demonstra∣tion of the Kindness of this God to their Island. The First that inhabited Syme (which before lay waste and desolate) were Syme. those that came thither with Triops, under the Conduct of Chthonius, the Son of Neptune and Symes, from whom the Island was so call'd. Nireus, the Son of Charopus and Aglaies, was in after-times King of this I∣sland; he was a very comely and beautiful Man, and went along with Aga∣memnon to the War against Troy; and together with this Island, was Lord of Cnidus. After the end of the Trojan War, the Carians possessed themselves of this Place at such time as they were Masters at Sea; afterwards forc'd thence by an excessive Drought, they settl'd themselves in Ʋranopolis, in Mount Athos. Ʋ∣ranium. From that time it lay desolate, till the Fleet of the Lacedemonians and Argives arriv'd there, and then it was Planted with new Colonies in this manner. Ausos, or Auson, the Son of Ʋlysses and Calypso. Nausus, one of the Companions of Hippotas, taking a∣long with him those that came too late, at the time when the Of Argos. Country was divided by lot, possessed himself of Syme, which then lay desolate, and afterward receiv'd others (that came there under the Conduct of Xuthus) to share with him both in the Privi∣ledges of the City, and Commodities of the Country, and possess'd the Island equally among them. They say, that both Cnidians and Rhodians made up part of this Colony. The Cares anciently possess'd Calydna and Nisyrus; and afterwards Thessalus, the Calydna, Nisyrus. Son of Hercules, was Lord of both the Islands; and therefore Antiphus and Phi∣lippus Kings of Coos (when they were ingag'd in the War of Troy) were Gene∣rals of those Forces that were sent out of these Islands. In their return from the Trojan War, Four of Agamemnon's Ships were by a Storm cast upon Calydna, and the Men that were on Board, continu'd there intermixt with the other Inha∣bitants. But the ancient Inhabitants of Nisyrus, were swallow'd up by an Earth∣quake. After which, the Coons added it to their Dominion, as they had done Ca∣lydna before. After them, the Rhodians sent a Colony thither; all the former Inhabitants being wholly swept away with a Plague. As for Carpathus, that was first seiz'd upon by some of Minos his Soldiers, at Carpathus. P. 226. such time as he was Master at Sea, and lorded it over the Grecians. Many Ages after, Ioclus, the Son of Thymoleon of Argos, by the Command of the Oracle, brought over a Colony thither.
The Island of Rhodes was anciently inhabited by those call'd Telchines; who (as Rhodes. an old Story goes) were the Offspring of † Thalassa, and with Caphira the Daugh∣ter * The Sea. of Oceanus brought up Neptune, who was committed to their care by Rhea. It's said, they invented several Arts, and found out many other things useful and conducing to the well-being of Man's Life. It's reported, they were the first that made Statues of the Gods, and that some of the ancient Images were denominated from them; for amongst the Lindians, Apollo is call'd Apollo Telchi∣nius: Amongst the Ialysians, Juno and the Nymphs were call'd Telchiniae; and a∣mongst the Camiraeans, Juno was call'd Juno Telchinia. But these Telchines were likewise reported to be Conjurers, for they could raise Storms and Tempests, with Rain, Hail and Snow, when ever they pleas'd; which the Magi. Magicians (as is related in History, were used to do. They could likewise transform themselves into other Shapes, and were envious at all that learnt their Art. Neptune they say, fell in love with Halia, the Sister of the Telchines, and of her begat several Children, Six Sons, and one Daughter call'd Rhoda, from whom the Island was call'd Rhodes. In those Days there were Giants in the Western Parts of the Island. Then likewise Jupiter having conquer'd the Titans, fell in love with a Nymph nam'd Hamalia, and of her begat Three Sons, Spartaeus, Cronius and Cytus. About the time they were grown up to Mens Estate, Venus in her Passage from Cythera to Cyprus, arriv'd at this Island; but being hinder'd from landing by the Sons of Neptune, together with proud and impious Language, the Goddess was so pro∣vok'd, as that she struck 'em mad, and caus'd 'em in their raging mood to ravish their own Mother, and commit many other outrages upon the Inhabitants. Nep∣tune coming to the Knowledge of this vile Fact, sunk his Sons under Ground for their Wickedness. Whence they were call'd the Oriental. Eastern Daemons. Halia threw her self into the Sea, and after was ador'd by the Inhabitants as a Goddess by the Name of Leucothea. Afterwards the Telchines foreseeing an Inundation com∣ing upon Rhodes, forsook the Island, and were dispers'd and scatter'd Abroad. Of whom Lycus went into Lycia, and built the Temple of Apollo Lycius, near to the Banks of the River Xanthus. When the Flood came, it rose so high, that besides destroying those that re∣main'd in the Island, all the flat and Champain part of the Country (with Showers that pour'd down continually) was like a standing Pool of Water: Some few that fled to the higher Grounds were preserv'd, amongst whom were the Sons of Jupiter. But Sol (as the Story is) falling in love with Rhoda, call'd the Island after her Name Rhodes, and cleared the Island of the Inundation. But the truth coucht in the Fable is this: In the first Generation of all things, when the Island lay in Mud and Dirt, the Sun dry'd up the Moisture, and made the Land productive of Living Creatures; whence sprang the Seven Heliades, so call'd from In Greek, Helios. the Sun, and other Men, the Original Inhabitants. And hence it is, that they account the Island to be consecrated to the Sun, and the Rhodians in after-times constantly worship'd the Sun above all other Gods, as the Parent from whence they first sprang. The Names of his The Helia∣des. Seven Sons are Ochimus, Ceraphus, Macir, Astis, Tenages, Triopas and Candalus; Sol, the Sun. he had only one Daugh∣ter call'd Electryo, who dying a Virgin, became ever after ador'd by the Rho∣dians as a Demy-Goddess. When the Heliades attain'd to Mens Estate, Sol told 'em, that which soever of them first sacrific'd to Minerva, should ever enjoy the presence of the Goddess. The same thing it's said, was promis'd and foretold at the same time to the Athenians. Hereupon it fell out that the Heliades, through P. 227. too much hast, forgot to put Fire under the Altars, before they laid the Sacrifices upon them: Cecrops they say, then reign'd in Athens, and was later than the o∣ther in slaying the Burnt-Offering, but was before them in burning the Victim; for which Reason there's a peculiar That is, laying the Victim upon the Altar be∣fore the Fire. Ceremony us'd in Rhodes in their Sacred Mysteries to this Day, and the Image of the Goddess is set up there. These things some have related concerning the Antiquities of the Rhodians, a∣mong whom is Zenon, who wrote their History. The Heliades, as they were in station above other Men, so they excell'd others in Learning, and especially in Astrology. They were the Persons that first found out the Art of Navigation, and the dividing of the Day into Hours. Tenages was the most ingenious of any of them, and therefore through Envy was
Murdered by his Brothers; Upon discovery of the Fact, both the principal. Au∣thors and their Accomplices fled for it. Macer got to Lesbos, and Candalus to Coos. Actis fled into Egypt, and there built Heliopolis, calling it after the Name of his Father; and from him the E∣gyptians learnt the Science of Astrology. Afterwards, when most of the Inhabitants of Greece were destroy'd by the Flood, and all Records and ancient Monuments perish'd with them; the E∣gyptians took this occasion to appropriate the study of Astrology solely to them∣selves; and whereas the Grecians (through Ignorance) as yet valu'd not Learn∣ing, it became a general Opinion, that the Egyptians were the first that found out the Knowledge of the Stars. And so even the Athenians themselves, though they built the City Sais in E∣gypt, yet by reason of the Flood, were led into the same Error of forgetting what was before. And therefore it's believ'd, that many Ages after, Cadmus the Son Cadmus. of Agenor, brought the Knowledge of Letters out of Phaenicia first into Greece; and after him, it's suppos'd the Grecians themselves added some Letters to those they learn'd before; but a general Ignorance however still prevailed amongst them. Triopas, another Son, past over into Caria, and possessed himself of the Pro∣montory there, call'd from him Triopium. The rest of Sol's Sons, having had no hand in the Murder, staid behind in Rhodes; and afterwards built the City A∣chaia, and dwelt in Ialysia. But the Regal Power was in Ochymus the Eldest Son, who marry'd Hegetoria, one of the Nymphs, and of her begat a Daughter call'd Gydippe, who afterwards went by the Name of Cyrbias, by marrying of whom Cercaphis his Brother came to the Kingdom; after whose Death, Three of the Sons, Lindus, Ialysus and Camirus reign'd together; in whose time a great Inun∣dation laid Cyrbe waste and desolate. These Three Brothers divided the Coun∣try amongst themselves, and each built a City, and call'd them after their own Names. At this time Danaus fled out of Egypt with his great number of Daughters, Danaus. and landed at Lindus in Rhodes; where being receiv'd by the Inhabitants, he built a Temple to Minerva, and consecrated to her an Altar. During this Tra∣vel of Danaus, Three of his Daughters dy'd in Lindus, and the rest pass'd over with their Father to Argos. Not long after, Cadmus, the Son of Agenor, being commanded by the King to Cadmus. seek after Europa, made for Rhodes; and in the Voyage being overtaken with a violent Storm, made a Vow to build a Temple to Neptune. Having therefore escap'd the danger (according to his Vow) he dedicated a Temple to this God in the Island, and left some of the Phaenicians to be Overseers of the Sacred My∣steries, who were made Members of the City with the Ialysians, and out of their Families (they say) from time to time were chosen the Priests. Cadmus at that time devoted many rich Gifts to Minerva Lindia, amongst which, was a Brass Cauldron, a most excellent piece of curious ancient Workmanship; it had an Inscription upon it in Phaenician Letters; which were therefore called Phae∣nician, P. 228. because (they say) they were first brought out of Phaenicia into Greece. In after-times, vast Serpents bred in Rhodes, which destroy'd many of the In∣habitants; those therefore that remain'd, sent to Delos, to consult the Oracle what was to be done for the removal of the present Calamity they suffer'd un∣der, who return'd answer, That they should admit Phorbas and his Followers to share with them in the Island. He was the Son of Lapithas, and was then with many of his Friends in Thessaly, seeking for a convenient Place wherein to settle themselves. The Rhodians hereupon (according to the direction of the Oracle) sent for Phorbas, and receiv'd him as a Proprietor with them in the Island, who destroy'd all the Serpents, and freed the Country from their former fears; and from thenceforth continu'd in Rhodes, and was after his Death ador'd as a Demy-God, having approv'd himself a Good Man in several other respects. Afterwards Althaemenes the Son of Catreus King of Crete, consulting the Oracle Althaemenes. concerning some Affairs, was answer'd, that it would be his Fate to kill his own Father; to avoid which Misfortune, he voluntarily forsook Crete, with many o∣thers who of their own accord went along with him, and pass'd over to Ca∣mirus, the Metropolis of Rhodes, and there built a Temple upon Mount Atamirus,
to Jupiter Atamirus, which is in great Veneration and Esteem at this Day. It's situated upon the very Top of the Mountain, whence may be had a clear Prospect of Crete. Althamenes with his Followers, thus setl'd in Camirus, liv'd in great Honour and Esteem among the Citizens. But his Father Catreus having no issue Male, and exceedingly loving his Son, undertook a Voyage to Rhodes, longing to find out his Son, and bring him back to Crete. And now his unalterable Destiny was near at Hand, for landing at Rhodes in the Night, with some others of his Attendants, forthwith there was a Conflict between them and the Islanders; whereupon Althamenes run in hastily to their Assistance, and (unknown to him) kill'd his Father with a Dart; which when he came to understand, he was so overwhelm'd with Sorrow, he ever after a∣voided all manner of Society, and wander'd up and down in the Deserts, and at last dy'd of Grief: But by the Command of the Oracle he was afterwards ho∣nour'd by the Rhodians as a Demy-God. After this, a little before the Trojan War, Tlepolimus the Son of Hercules, fled voluntarily from Argos, by reason of his Killing of Licymnius, whom he slew unawares; and upon inquiry having receiv'd an Answer from the Oracle con∣cerning the planting of a Colony, he pass'd over with a few People into Rhodes, where being receiv'd, he settled: And being afterwards created King of the Island, he divided the Country into equal Shares by Lot; and during his Reign, order'd all other Matters according to the Rules of Justice and Equity. At length preparing to go along with Agamemnon, in the Expedition against Troy, he committed the Government into the Hands of Butas, who fled with him from Argos. And after he had gain'd much Glory and Renown in that War, he dy'd in the Country of Troas. Now because some things of Chersonesus, are intermix'd with the Affairs of Chersonesus. Rhodes, over against which it lyes, we conceive it not amiss here to give an ac∣count of it. Some are of Opinion it's call'd Chersonesus, from the nature of the Place, being like to an Istmus, or as others write, from one Chersonesus, once a Petty Prince there. Not long after whose time (it's said) Five of the Curetes came there; which Curetes were the Posterity of those that brought up Jupiter (born of the Mother Goddess Rhea) in the Mountains of Ida in Crete. After their ar∣rival in Crete (with a considerable Navy) they expell'd the Cares, the ancient In∣habitants, and divided the Country into Five Parts, and each of them built a City, and call'd them after their own Names. P. 229. Not long after, Inachus King of Argos, sent Cyrnus, one of his Noblemen and Commanders, with a considerable Fleet, to find out his Daughter Io, and not to return till he found her. After he had rov'd about into several Parts of the World, and could not find her, he at length arriv'd at Caria in Chersonesus, and there settled himself, despairing ever to return to his own Country; and afterwards partly by Force, and partly by Perswasions, he reign'd as King over part of the Country, and built a City, and call'd it Cyrnus, after his own Name; and govern'd so well, to the advancement of the publick Good, that he was greatly belov'd and honour'd by the Citizens. Afterwards Triopas, one of the Sons of Sol and Rhoda, fled into Chersonesus, for the Killing of his Brother: But being cleared and acquitted by King Melisseus, he sayl'd into Thessaly, to the assistance of Deucalion's Sons, and helpt to expel the Pelasgians thence, and they divided the Country call'd Dotion among them. He there cut down the Grove of Ceres, and made use of it for the Building of himself a Palace; for which he was hated of the People, and forc'd to fly out of Thessaly, and sayl'd away with some of his Followers to Cnidia; where he built a City call'd after his own Name Triopium. Leaving this Place, he gain'd Cherso∣nesus, and a great part of Caria adjoining to it. Many Writers, and especially the Poets, much differ about the Descent of Prio∣pas. Some derive his Descent from Canace (the Daughter of Aeolus) and Nep∣tune, others say, his Parents were Lapitha, the Son of Apollo, and Stibes the Daughter of Pineus. In Castabus in Chersonesus, there's a Temple dedicated to Hemithea; what is remarkable concerning her, is not fit to be omitted. Although there are many various Stories related of her, yet we shall only give an Account of what is generally granted and agreed upon by the Inhabitants to be true.
Staphylus and Chrysothemides had Three Daughters, Molpadia, Rhoeo and Parthe∣nos. Rhoeo was got with Child by Apollo, at which her Father was so incens'd, thinking she had play'd the Whore with some Mortal Man, that he lockt her up in a Chest, and threw her into the Sea, and the Chest was afterwards cast up upon the Island Delos, where she was deliver'd of a Son, whom she nam'd Ar∣rius. Being thus wonderfully preserv'd, she laid the Child upon the Altar of Apollo, and pray'd to him, that if he was the Child's Father, he would save and defend the Infant: Upon which the Story goes, that Apollo hid the Child; but afterwards took care to have him carefully brought up, and endued him with a Prophetick Spirit, and advanc'd him to great Honour and Reputa∣tion. Molpadia and Parthenos, the other Sisters, having the Charge of their Father's Wine (the use of which was then but newly found out) with Drinking too much, fell fast asleep; in the mean time, a Sow which they fed, coming into the Place, threw down the Hogshead and spilt all the Wine. When the poor Ladies per∣ceiv'd what was done, they so dreaded the Severity of their Father, that they fled to the Sea Shoar, and threw themselves headlong from the Top of a high Rock into the Sea: But Apollo for the sake of their Sister, took them up safe, and brought them to some Cities in Chersonesus. Where Parthenos at Bubastus was ador'd as a Goddess, and had a Temple erected in honour to her. Molpadia was brought to Castabus, and for the special Revelations she had from the God, she was call'd Half a God∣dess. Hemithea, and was in great honour and esteem among all the Chersonesians. In the Celebration of her Mysteries, (in remem∣brance of the Misfortune concerning the Wine) they offer Drink-Offerings of Water and Honey mixt together; and he that has toucht a Swine, or eaten of Swines-Flesh, is not permitted to enter into her Temple. This Temple of Hemithea, in following times grew so Famous, that not on∣ly P. 230. the Inhabitants ador'd it, but Strangers far and near resorted to it with great Devotion, and with many rich Presents and magnificent Sacrifices; and that which is most observable is, that the very Persians themselves when they destroy'd all other Temples throughout all Greece, only spar'd the Temple of Hemithea. Thieves and Robbers likewise that spoyl and waste all before them, have still from time to time spar'd this Temple, though it stand open and naked, without the defence of a Wall to secure it. They say, that the Cause of the flourishing Condition of this Place is, the great Kindness of this Goddess to all Men whatsoever; for she appears to those that are sick, in their Sleep, and directs them to proper Remedies for the recovery of their Health; sach as are in desperate Distempers, and resort thither, she perfectly cures and restores. Women likewise that are in hard Labour, she safely delivers, and frees from the pains and hazards of Child-bearing, and therefore that Temple is full of ancient Relicts and Donations safely kept and preserv'd to this Day, not by Guards or Walls, but only by the Religious Devotion observed in this Place. But let this suffice concerning Rhodes and Chersonesus; it remains we should now treat of Crete.
CHAP. IV. Of Crete: The First Inhabitants. Of the Idaei Dactyli: Of Jupiter, Sa∣turn, Hyperion, Prometheus, Mnemosyne, Themis, Ceres, Neptune, Pallas. Jupiter's Race; as the Muses, Vulcan, Mars, &c. Of the an∣cient Hercules, Britomartis, Pluto. Rhadamanthus's Justice. Of Lesbos. Deucalion's Flood. Of the Blessed Islands. Of Tenedos, and the Cy∣clades. THE Inhabitants of Crete affirm, that the most ancient People of Crete are the Eteocretes, whose King, whom they call Creta, found out many very useful things, conducing much to the support and comfort of Man's Life. They say, likewise, that many of the Gods were born amongst them, who for their Bene∣fits conferr'd upon Mankind, were eternally honour'd as Deities. Of which things we shall here distinctly treat, as they are deliver'd to us by the most approv'd Authors that have writ the History of Crete. The first Inhabitants of Crete (of whom there's any remembrance) were the Idaei Dactyli, in Mount Ida: Some say there were a Hundred others, but Ten in number, call'd Dactyli, from the Ten Fingers on Mens Hands. Some affirm, and amongst those Ephorus, that the Idaei Dactyli had their Ori∣ginal from Mount Ida in Phrygia, and pass'd over with Minos into Europe; and that they were Conjurers, and gave themselves to Inchantments, and Sacred Rites and Mysteries; and abiding in Samothracia, greatly amus'd and astonish'd the People of the Island. At which time it's said, Orpheus (who was naturally of a prompt Wit to Musick and Poetry) was their Scholar, and the first that brought over the Rites and Ceremonies of their Mysteries into Greece. The Dactyli more∣over (as is said) found out the use of Fire; and discover'd the nature of Iron and Brass, to the Inhabitants of the Antisapterians, near to the Mountain Bere∣cynthus, and taught the manner of working of it: And because they were the first discoverers of many things of great use and advantage to Mankind, they were ador'd and worship'd as Gods: One of them, they say, was call'd Hercules; a Person he was of great Renown, and he that instituted the Olympick Games, which were thought by Posterity to have been appointed by Hercules the Son of Alcmena, led into that Error by the Identity of Names. An Evidence of these things, they say, remains to this Day, in that the Wo∣men chant the Songs formerly sung by this God, and wear about them certain Amulets, in imitation of him who was a Magician, and taught sacred Rites and Ceremonies: All which were different from the Manners of Hercules the Son of Alemena. After the Idaei Dactyli (they say) there were Nine Curetes, some of which are feign'd to be the Offspring of the Earth, and the rest to descend from the Idaei Dactyli. They dwelt in the Mountains, under the shade of thick Trees, and in P. 231. Caves, and other Places that naturally afforded them a shelter and covering, the building of Houses not being then found out. They were very Ingenious, and therefore invented many things very useful and profitable: For they were the first that taught how to manage Flocks of Sheep, and to tame and bring up o∣ther Cattel, and how to gather Honey; and that they were the first that shew'd how to cast Darts, and to Hunt; and that order'd Men into Societies and Com∣munities, and sociably eating one with another, and brought Men into a peaceable and orderly Course of Life: They invented likewise Swords and Helmets, and dancing in Arms, and by the great noise they made, deceiv'd Saturn. For it's said, that by them Jupiter (whom his Mother Rhea, to hide him from her Fa∣ther Saturn committed to their Care) was secur'd and brought up: But being willing to treat of this more particularly, we must go a little higher with ou Relation. The Cretians say, that the Titans were contemporary with the Curetes: They dwelt in the Country of the Gnosians, where now may be seen the ancient Foun∣dations and Courts of the House where Rhaea inhabited, and an old Sacred Grove
of Cyprus Trees. They were in number, Six Men and Five Women, the Issue of Heavens and Earth. Ʋranus and Terra, as some affirm; but as others say, the Offspring of one of the Curetes and Titaea, and call'd Titans after the Name of their Mother. The Sons were call'd Saturn. Cronus, Hyperion, Coeus, Japetus, Crius and Oceanus; the Sisters were Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phaebe and Thetis; every one of whom were the Inventers of something useful and profitable to Man's well-being, and as a Re∣ward of their Deserts, are by all Men honour'd with an everlasting Remem∣brance. Saturn the Eldest, obtained the Kingdom, and reduc'd his Subjects from a wild and barbarous, to a more civil Course Saturn, held for good Reasons to be Noah. See before. of Life, both as to Food and Manners. Having therefore upon that account gain'd much Honour and Reputation, he went into many Parts of the World, and perswaded all wherever he came, to Justice and Integrity of Heart; and therefore it's brought down as a certain Truth to Posterity, that in the times of Saturn, Men were plain and honest, free from all sorts of wicked Designs or Practices; yea, that they were then happy and bles∣sed. He chiefly reign'd over the Western Parts of the World, and was advanc'd to the highest Pinacle of Honour and Renown; and therefore of later Times, both the Romans and Carthaginians (while their City stood) and other Neigh∣bouring Nations, ador'd this God with magnificent and splendid Festivals and Sacrifices; and many Places up and down are call'd after his Name: And be∣cause at that time the Laws were strictly observ'd, no act of Injustice was com∣mitted, but all submitting to his Authority, liv'd happily, and injoy'd Pleasure and Content without any Molestation; which is attested by the Poet Hesiod, in these Verses. , , , , , , , : , . Whilst Saturn reign'd, those then his Subjects were, Who liv'd the lives of Gods without all care; Who Sorrow, Labour, nor Old Age opprest, But soundness both in Hands and Feet them blest; With joyful Vigour to their Feasts they went, Free from all Ills, their Deaths did represent Sound Sleep; to them flow'd down what e're was good, And without Toyl, the Earth did yield them Food, And from her Fruitful Womb did them afford Her Fruits most freely of her own accord. Rich in their Flocks, and to the Gods most dear, During this Reign, these happy People were. And these are the things they reported of Saturn. As to Hyperion, they say, that he was the first that by his own Industry found Hyperion. out the Motions of the Sun and Moon, and other Stars, and the Seasons and Di∣stinctions of Time measur'd out by them, and afterwards imparted his Knowledge to others. And therefore he was call'd the Father of those Planets, as he that first taught the Knowledge and nature of them. Latona, they say, was the Daughter of Coeus and Phebe; and that Prometheus was the Son of Japetus, who (as some feign) stole Fire from the Gods, and bestow'd P. 232. it upon Men.
But the truth of the Story is, he found out the way how to strike Fire out of Flint or Stone. Mnemosyne they say, found out the Art of Logick, and gave Mnemosyne. proper Names to every thing, by which, whatever is discours'd of, might be di∣stinctly known and understood: But some attribute this to Mercury. They as∣cribe likewise to this Goddess every thing conducing to the help of Man's Me∣mory, from whence she has her Mnemosyne. Memory in Greek. Themis. Name. Themis taught the Art of Divination, and instructed Men in Holy Rites, and prescrib'd Laws for the Service and Worship of the Gods, and for preservation of Peace and good Government amongst Men; and therefore we call those that keep and take care of the Sacred Laws both of Gods and Men, Thesmophylacae, and Thesmothetae. And when Apollo himself is to give his Answer at the Oracle, we say, To act the part of The∣mis. Themisteum, because he was the first that practiz'd Divination. These Gods therefore having thus greatly benefited Mankind, were not only ador'd with Divine Honours, but were accounted to be the first that after their Deaths were translated to Olympus. Heaven. Vesta, Ceres, Juno, Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, are said to be the Children of Saturn and Rhea. Vesta invented the Building of Houses, and upon this account almost every Vesta. Body sets up her Statue in their Houses, and adore her with Divine Ho∣nours. Ceres was the first that discover'd the use of Bread-Corn, finding it by chance Ceres. growing of it self amongst other Plants and Herbs; and taught the way of Housing and Baking it, and how to sow it. For she found out Corn before Proserpina was born; after whose Birth and Rape by Pluto, she was so incens'd at Jupiter, and in such grief for the loss of her Daughter, that she set all the Corn on Fire. But when she had found out Proserpina, she was reconciled to Jupiter, and gave Seed-Corn to Triptolemus, with order to impart it to all People, and teach them how to order it, and make use of it. Some say, she made Laws, to direct Men to deal justly and truly one with an∣other; and from hence she was call'd Thesmophoron: For these great Advantages to Mankind, she was likewise highly honour'd; and not only Grecians, but the Barbarians almost every where, that partook of these Fruits, ador'd and wor∣ship'd her with Solemn and Magnificent Festivals and Sacrifices. There are many Controversies and Differences concerning the first finding out of this Fruit, for some say, this Goddess first saw it, and taught the nature and use of it before any other. For the Egyptians say, that Isis and Ceres were one and the same Person, who first brought Seed-Corn into Egypt, the River Nile watering the Fields, and washing the Country at proper Seasons, much advancing thereby the growth and increase thereof. But the Athenians say, that although Corn was first found out amongst them, yet it was transported from other Places into Attica. The Place where it was first seen, they call Eleusina, because that Seed-Corn was first brought thi∣ther. The Sicilians likewise who inhabit the Sicily. Island, specially dedicated to Ceres and Proserpina, say, it's most reasonable to conclude, that this great Gift was first bestow'd upon them who till'd and improv'd that Country which was most be∣lov'd of this Goddess. For it's a most unreasonable thing this Place should be reported the richest Island of the World, and yet to judge it the last in sharing of this great Blessing, as if it had been no part of their Fertility, especially when Ceres resided there her self; and all agree that Proserpina was ravish'd in this Place; and that this Island is a Country most proper for Corn of any other in the World, as the Poet testifies. P. 233. Hom. Odys. lib. 9. ver. 109. . Within this Island all things grow, See before c. 1. Without the help of Seed or Plow, As Wheat and Barley— Of Ceres therefore thus they say In Stories of her—
As to the other Deities, they say, that Neptune was the first that us'd Naviga∣tion, and rigg'd out a Navy, and was appointed Admiral by Saturn; and there∣fore it was a common Tradition afterwards, that all Sea-Affairs were under his Rule and Government, and upon that account Mariners worship him with So∣lemn Sacrifices. They say moreover, that Neptune was the first that manag'd Horses, and taught the Art of Horsemanship, whence he was call'd A Horse-man. Hip∣pius. Pluto (they say) first shew'd the way of Sepulchres and Pompous Funerals, Pluto. whereas before no regard was had to any of these; which was the reason he was accounted Lord of the Dead, and Prince of the Infernal Of Hell. Jupiter. Shades. There are many differing Opinions concerning the Genealogy and Kingdom of Jupiter. There are some of Opinion, that after the Death of Saturn, he succeeded in the Kingdom, not advanc'd to that dignity by a forceable Expulsion of his Father, but by a just and lawful Succession. Others report, that Saturn being forewarned by the Oracle concerning Jupiter, that a Son of his to be afterwards born, would oust him of his Kingdom by force, kill'd his Children one after another, as soon as they were born; at which Rhea was so griev'd (not being able to work upon her Husband's obstinate Humour) that she forthwith upon his Birth hid Jupiter in Ida, recommending his Education to the Care of the Curetes, who inhabited that Mountain: And that they again lodg'd him in a Cave, and intrusted him with the Nymphs, intreating them to be very careful of him; who fed him with Milk and Hony mixt together, and for his better nourish∣ment suckled him at the Paps of a Goat, call'd Amalthaea: For there are many Tokens of his Birth and Education in this Crete. Island to this Day. For when he was a young Infant, and carried away by the Curetes, they say, that the Navel String fell from him at the River Triton, whence that part of the Country, sacred to this God, is call'd Omphalus, A Navel in Greek. Omphalium, and the Region adjoyning, Omphaleus. In Ida likewise, where this Goddess was educated, the Cave where∣in he was hid, is not only consecrated to him, but the Ports near to that Pro∣montory are under his Guard and Protection. But here is not to be omitted a wonderful Story that's related concerning the Bees: For they say, the God to preserve an eternal Memory of his familiarity with the Bees, chang'd their colour into that of Brass or Copper, washt over with Gold: And whereas the Place is exceeding high, and subject to stormy Winds, and us'd to be cover'd over with depths of Snow, he fortify'd the Bees with an Impassibility, so that they were able to feed and gather Honey in the most stormy and coldest Places. Amongst other Honours attributed to the Goat that gave him suck, he be∣stow'd this, that he himself from her, assum'd the Name of The Goat∣holder. Aegiochus. When he was grown up to Man's Estate, he first built a City at Dicta, where he was born, the Ruins whereof are to be seen at this Day. This God excell'd all the other in Valour, Prudence, Justice, and all other Virtues: And therefore after the death of his Father, when he came to reign, he conferr'd many and great Benefits upon Mankind. For he was the first that instructed Men how to punish Injuries, and to deal justly and honestly one with another, to forbear Force and Violence, and bring their Differences and Con∣troversies orderly before Tribunals and Courts of Justice, there to be ended and decided. In sum, he did whatsoever was necessary for the making of good Laws, and Preservation of Peace among Men; stirring up the Good by wholsom Ad∣vice to their Duty, and restraining the Bad through fear of severe and due Pu∣nishment P. 234. for their Offences. It's reported, he travell'd through the whole World, putting to Death Thieves, Robbers, and other Impious Persons, establishing Commonwealths and Democra∣cies in every Place wherever he came. About that time he slew several Giants with their Adherents, as Mytinus in Crete, and Typhon in Phrygia. Before the Battel with the Giants in Crete, upon Jupiter's sacrificing of Oxen to Sol, Coelus, Terra, i. e. To the Sun, Hea∣ven and Barth. Sol, Coelus and Terra, in all the Intrals appear'd evident Signs of what was decreed by the Gods: Their Victory especially was portended; and a defection of some from the Enemy, as it prov'd in the issue of the War; for Musaeus fled and revolted from them, for which he was highly honour'd.
At length, all that fought with the Gods were every one cut off, and de∣stroy'd: But he was afterwards ingag'd in a new War against the Giants at Pallene in Macedonia, and anciently in the Plains of Italy, call'd Phlegraei, from Plin. Nat. His. lib. 3. l. 5. the Conflagration the Country once suffer'd, but now call'd In Campania near Cumas. Cumaei. The reason why Jupiter destroy'd the Giants, was their Violence and Oppres∣sion, making use of their strength and massy Bodies to inflave their Neighbours; and for that they were lawless, and not to be kept within any bounds of Ju∣stice, made War upon them; who for their doing good, and being beneficial to Mankind, were reputed for Gods by all People whatsoever. And he not only rooted up the Wicked and Impious, but rewarded the best of the Gods, Heroes and Men, with due Honours according to their several Deserts. The great Au∣thority therefore and good Deeds of Jupiter were such, that to him was attri∣buted an eternal Habitation and Kingdom in In Heaven. Olympus. And more splendid Sacri∣fices by his Command are offered to him than to any of the other Gods; and since his passing from Earth to Heaven, a strong Perswasion is sixt in the Hearts of all those he was kind unto, that he has the Command and Government of all that's done in Heaven; and is supream Lord of Storms, Thunder and Light∣ning; and therefore they call him In Greek, Zein, is to live. Zena, because he seem'd to be the Preserver of Mens lives, by affording fruitful Seasons to ripen the Fruits of the Earth. They call him likewise Father, not only upon the account of his e and Kind∣ness to all Mankind, but likewise for that it's generally believ'd all Men were o∣riginally his Offspring. He's call'd likewise the Supream King, by reason of the Majesty and Excel∣lency of his Kingdom; and moreover The good and wise Counsellor. Eubuleus and † Metietes, by reason of his Wisdom and Prudence in Counsel. It's said also, that Minerva was the Daughter of Jupiter, born in Crete, at the Spring-heads of the River Triton, and therefore she was call'd Or Tritona. Tritogenea; and now at this Day there stands a little Chappel dedicated to this Goddess at the Place where she's said to have been born. They say likewise, that the Marriage of Juno and Jupiter was solemniz'd in the Country of the In Crete, the Territory of the City Gnosus. Gnosians, near the River Therone, where there's now a Temple, in which the Priests offer an anniversary Sacrifice and Festival with great Devotion, imitating the Nuptial Rites according as by Tradition they have receiv'd them. The Daughters of Jupiter, it's said, were the Goddesses, Venus, the Graces, Lucina and her Servant Diana, together with those call'd Ho∣rae, that is to say, Eunomia, Dica, Irene, i. e. Good Laws, Justice and Peace. Eunomia, Dica, and Irene. The Gods he begot; were Vulcan, Mars, Apollo and Mercu∣ry: To every one of these (they say) Jupiter imparted the knowledge of things invented and perfected by himself, and attributed the ho∣nour of the Invention to them, desirous to perpetuate their Memories, and ad∣vance their Reputation and eternal Praise amongst all Men. To Venus he committed the care of the mature Age of Virgins; at which time Venus. they ought to Marry, and the oversight of other things us'd at Nuptials, toge∣ther with Sacrifices and Drink-offerings, which are solemnly offer'd to this God∣dess; but all first Sacrifice to Jupiter the Perfector, and to Juno the Perfectris, because they are the Authors and Inventors of all, as a little before we have P. 235. declar'd. To the Graces was given power to beautify the Face, and to give a Comely The Graces. Shape and Proportion to all the Members of the Body, and to do good where-ever they pleas'd, and to cause the Persons to be grateful and thankful for what they receiv'd. To Lucina he committed the care of them that were in Travel and Child-bearing, Lucina. and easing of them in their Pains; and therefore Women in these ha∣zards chiefly at that time, call'd upon her for help and assistance. Diana shew'd the way how to nurse up little Infants, and to provide Food for Diana. them suitable to their tender Age; upon which account she was call'd the Chil∣drens Nurse. To every one of the Horae, is allotted an Office agreeable to their several Horae. Names, to the great advantage of Mankind, for the Government of themselves in the Course of their Lives. For there's no greater blessed∣ness in this Life, than Eunomia, Good Laws. Good Laws, Dica, tice. Peace and Irene, Peace. Justice.
To Minerva he committed the Care of Olive-Yards, and planting of Olive-Trees, Minerva. and extracting of Oyl. For before the Birth of this Goddess, this Tree grew wild, disregarded among other Trees of the Wood. But the use and cul∣ture of them (as is now practis'd) was not then known. The making of Garments likewise and Architecture, and many other Arts was discover'd to Men by this Goddess: She invented Pipes, and the manner of Wind Musick, and many ingenious Tools and Instruments for Handicrafts; whence she was call'd The Work woman, or Goddess of Crafts. Muses. Ergana. To the Muses, their Father allotted the Invention of Letters, and the Com∣posing of Verses, call'd Poetry. But there are some who attribute the Invention of Letters to the Syrians, from whom the Phaenicians learnt them, and communicated them to the Grecians when they came along with Cadmus into Europe; whence the Grecians call'd them Phaenician Letters. To these that hold this Opinion, it's answer'd, that the Phaenicians were not the first that found out Letters, but only chang'd the Form and Shape of them into other Characters, which many afterwards using, the Name of Phaenician grew to be common. Vulcan they say, found out the working of Iron, Brass, Silver and Gold, and Vulcan. all other Metals that require forging by Fire; and that the general use of Fire in all other cases, was found out by him, and discover'd not only to Artificers, but to all other Men; and therefore all the Masters of these Arts, pay their Devotions, and offer their Sacrifices chiefly to this God; and both they and all others, call Fire Vulcan, to the end that this great Good bestow'd upon all Man∣kind, might be for ever remembred, to his eternal Honour and Praise. Mars they say, first taught the making of all sorts of Weapons, and how to Mars. furnish Soldiers both with offensive and defensive Arms, and to fight with Cou∣rage and Resolution, destroying all them that were Enemies to the Gods. To Apollo is attributed the invention of the Harp, and that sort of Musick; Apollo. and 'tis said, he discover'd the Art of Physick, which is practis'd by Revelation from him, by which the Sick heretofore were commonly restor'd to Health: He found out likewise the use of the Bow, and taught the Inhabitants to shoot; and therefore the Cretians delight much in Shooting, and call the Bow Scy∣thicus. Aesculapius was the Son of Apollo and Coronides; he was instructed by his Fa∣ther Aesculapius. in the Art of Physick, and found out Chirurgery, and the making up of Me∣dicines, the Vertues of Roots and Plants, and improv'd to that degree in his Art, that he was reputed the first Founder and Author of it, and likewise the Prince of Physitians. To Mercury they attribute the Invention of Messages in Times of War, by Mercury. P. 236. Trumpets and Heralds, of Truces and Leagues; and as a Sign, they were sent to treat with the Enemy, they carry'd a Mercury's Rod. Rod before them; and there∣fore were suffered safely to come and go. Hence they were call'd the Com∣mon Mercury, because both sides injoy'd the equal benefit of a Peace after a War. They say, he was the first that invented Weights and Measures, and getting of Wealth by Merchandize, and the way of Cheating and Cozening of others. He was accounted the Herald of the Gods, and the best Messenger, because he was quick and ingenious in declaring particularly every thing he had in Com∣mand. Whence he was call'd Hermes the Interpreter. Hermes. He was not the Inventer of Names and Words, as some say, but excell'd in clear and eloquent Expression, and delivery of his Message. He was likewise the Author of the Games of Wrestling, and invented the Harp made of a Tor∣tois Shell, after the Contest between Apollo and Marsyas; in which (they say) Apollo was Victor, and reveng'd himself of his Adversary, to a greater degree than was fit; for which he was afterwards so griev'd, that they say, he broke the Strings of his Harp, and for some time forbore to play upon that Instru∣ment. The Cretians say, that Bacchus found out the use of the Vine, and the manner Bacchus. of planting and pruning of it, and the making of Wine, and the way of laying up the Summer Fruits; by which means they were preserv'd for Mens use and sustenance for a long time.
It's further reported, that this God was the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, and born in Crete; and Orpheus in his Sacred Rites and Mysteries, says, he was torn in pieces by the Titans: But there were many of this Name Bacchus, of which we have more largely and particularly given an account already; but of this Dio∣nysius or Bacchus his being born in Crete, they endeavour to shew evident Signs, as Arguments to prove it; for they say, there are Two Islands form'd by him, near Crete, in a part of the Sea call'd the Double Gulfs; to which Islands he gave the denomination of Dionysiadae, which he never did in any other part of the World. As to Hercules, it's said, that there was one of that Name, the Son of Jupiter, The Ancient Hercules. born many Years before him, that was begotten of Alcmena in Argos; but who was the Mother of this Hercules is uncertain: Only this is certain, that there was no Man comparable to him for Strength; that he travell'd through the whole World, inflicting just and deserv'd Punishment upon the Wicked, and destroy'd wild Beasts that infested the Countries, and made them desolate: That he deli∣vered Men every where out of Bondage and Slavery, and that yet he himself (notwithstanding so many hazards and difficulties) was never worsted, remain∣ing still unconquerable and invulnerable; for which renown'd Actions, he is by all Men ador'd with eternal Honours. But that Hercules, who was the Son of Alcmena was much later; but because he was like unto this ancient Hercules in his noble Acts, he likewise attain'd im∣mortal Glory, and in after Ages (being of the same Name) * This Hercules is held to be Jo∣shua. Gale's Court of the Gentiles, Part 1. Book 2. c. 5. was accounted to be the same Person, and (through the ig∣norance of the Vulgar) the Deeds of the former were ascrib'd to the later. They say, that the Praise and Renown of this elder God, for his famous Actions, continues in Egypt to this Day, where he built a City. Britomartis, otherwise call'd Dictynna (they say) was born in Caenon in Crete, Britomartis, Dictynna. and was the Daughter of Jupiter, begotten on Carmes, the Daughter of Eubulus, the Son of Ceres. It's said; she invented the Hunters Toyls and Nets, and thence was call'd Dictyon in Greek, signi∣fying a Net. Dictynna: She was very familiar with Diana, and therefore it was thought by some, that Dictynna and Diana were one and the same Person, which Goddess is ador'd and honour'd in Crete both with Temples and Sacrifices. Those are very much mistaken, who say that Dictynna was so call'd, from her flying and hiding her self in the Fishers Nets to avoid Minos, who would have forc'd and ravish'd her. For it's not reasonable to imagine, that a Goddess (the Daughter of the most Supream God) should be reduc'd to so low a Condition, as to stand in need of Humane help; nor is it just to imagine, that Minos, who (by the general Consent of all) was reputed a righteous and upright Man, and P. 237. liv'd a good Life, should be guilty of such an horrid Impiety, and grand piece of Wickedness. Pluto (they say) was the Son of Jasion and Ceres, and born in Tripolus in Crete; Pluto. and of his Descent there's a double Relation in History. For some say, that Jasion so improv'd and cultivated the Land, that it brought forth Fruit in that abundance, that they that saw it, impos'd upon it a Name proper to the abundance of the Fruits, and call'd it , Riches. Pluto; and therefore Poste∣rity afterwards us'd to say, That he who had more than enough had Pluto. Others say, that Jasion and Ceres had a Son nam'd Pluto, who first taught Men a more orderly and careful way of Living, and how to gain and treasure up Wealth. Whereas a provident Care of getting and keeping of Estates, was al∣together neglected. And these are the things which the Cretians say of those Gods which they pretend were born among them. Moreover they say, the man∣ner of Worshipping and Sacrificing to the Gods, and other Rites and sacred My∣steries came from them to other Nations, and they bring in this as a most cer∣tain and undeniable Argument, as they suppose. For they say, the Rites and Ini∣tiations practis'd by the Athenians in Elusina, which are almost the most famous of any other, and those in Samothracia, and in Thracia among the Cidonians (of all which Orpheus was the Institutor) are celebrated darkly and Mystically; but in Crete at Gnosus (by an ancient Law) the very same sacred Mysteries are celebrated plainly and openly, and whatever is done in secret by others, none amongst them conceals from any that have a desire to know them; for many of the Gods (they say) went out from Crete, and travell'd through many parts of the World, and were Benefactors to all sorts of Men, and communicated to them the Benefit
and Advantage of such things as they themselves had found out and invented. For Ceres sail'd into Attica, and from thence into Sicily, and at length into E∣gypt; in which Places, after she had deliver'd them Corn, and taught them how to sow it, she was highly honour'd amongst them: So Venus dwelt near Eryx in Sicily, in the Island Cythera, at Paphus in Cyprus, and in Syria in Asia; and because she was often seen, and continu'd long among the Inhabitants of these Places, she was call'd Venus Erycina, Cytherea, Paphya and Syria. Apollo likewise continu'd long in Delos, Lycia and Delphos; and Diana in Ephesus, Pontus, Persia and Crete; and therefore from the Places and things done there by them, Apollo was call'd Apollo Delius, Lycius and Pythius; and she was stiled Diana Ephesia of Cresia, Tauropolia and Persia; although both of them were born in Crete. This Goddess Diana is highly honour'd by the Persians, and the same Myste∣ries and Sacrifices that are celebrated and offered to her by others, the Barba∣rians themselves at this very day, celebrate in honour of Diana Persia. To this purpose they give an Account of the rest of the Gods, which as they are easie for the Reader to understand, so they are too tedious for us to recite. Moreover they say, that many Ages after the Birth of the Gods, there were many Heroes among them, of whom the most Eminent were Minos and Rha∣damanthus, who were the Progeny of Jupiter and Europa (the Daughter of Age∣nor) whom they report by the Providence of the Gods, to be carried over into Crete upon the Back of a Bull. Minos they say, who was the Elder, obtain'd the Kingdom, and built in the Island many Cities; amongst which, Three were most Famous; Gnosius, situated in that part of the Island that look'd towards A∣sia; Phaetus, lying Southward upon the Shoar; and Cidonia situated in the We∣stern Part over against Peloponesus. Many Laws they say, were made by him for P. 238. the Government of the Cretians, receiving them from Jupiter his Father, who us'd to converse with him privately in a Cave. He had a great Fleet, and con∣quer'd many of the Islands, and was the first of the Greeks that gain'd the Do∣minion of the Seas; and after he had arriv'd to a high pitch of Glory and Ho∣nour by reason of his Justice and Valour, he dy'd in Sicily, in undertaking a War against Cocalus, of which we have before given a particular Narrative, when we treated of the Affairs of Daedalus, who was the occasion of this War. Rhadamanthus they say, was the most Just Man in the World, for in executing Rhadamanthus. of Justice upon Thieves, Robbers and other Impious and Wicked Persons, he was inexorable. They report likewise, that he gain'd several Islands, and many of the Ma∣ritime Coasts of Asia, all voluntarily submitting to him upon the account of his eminent Justice. He gave the Kingdom to Erythro, one of his Sons, who call'd themselves Erythri, from him. To Oenopion the Son of Minos and Ariadna, they say he allotted Chius: Others say, he was the Son of Bacchus, and was taught how to make Wine by his Father. He rewarded likewise each of his Captains, either with some Island or City: Upon Thoantes he bestow'd Lemnos; on Engyeus, Cyrnus; to Pamphilus he gave Peparathus; to Euambeus, Maronea; to Alcaeus, Parus; to Arrion, Delus; to An∣dreus the Island Andros, so call'd after his Name. And because he was so remarkably Just, he's feign'd to be the Judge of Hell; and to distinguish between the Pious and Impious, the Good and the Bad: They say likewise that Minos is Copartner with him in that dignity, upon the ac∣count of his Uprightness, and his just and righteous Reign. Sarpadon, the Third Brother, they say, past over with an Army into Asia, and Sarpadon. possest himself of Lycia and the Neighbouring Territories. His Son Evander suc∣ceeded him in the Kingdom of Lycia, who marrying Deidamia, the Daughter of Bellerophon, of her begat Sarpedon, who went to the Trojan War with Agamem∣non, and is call'd by some the Son of Jupiter. Deucalion and Molus (they say) were the Sons of Minos: Deucalion had a Son call'd Idomeneus, and Molus ano∣ther nam'd Merion, who (as is said) assisted Agamemnon a∣gainst Troy with a Fleet of  in the Margent, confirm'd by Hom. Iliad. 11. vers. 652. Fourscore Sail, and afterwards return'd and dy'd in their own Country, and were honou∣rably bury'd and ador'd as Gods: They show their Sepul∣cher in Crnosus in Crete. Gnosus, whereon is this Inscription.
Idomeneus in this Tomb doth lye, Who born in Gnosus was; and him hard by, I Son of Molus rest, Merion call'd. These Two are ador'd as Demy-Gods by the Cretians, for they offer Sacrifice to them, and in their Wars call upon them for aid and assistance. Having given an Account of these things, it remains we should now speak of the Nations that are intermixt with the Cretians. That the Aeteocretians were the first Inhabitants of this Island, and reputed to have been there from the be∣ginning, we have before declar'd. Many Ages after, the Pelasgi planted among them a Nation inur'd continually to Arms, and wandring up and down from their ancient Habitations, seiz'd upon that part of the Island where they land∣ed. The Third Nation that came thither (they say) were the Dorienses, under the Conduct of Teutamus, one of the Posterity of Dorus. It's said the greatest part of his Colony he brought from the Neighbouring Parts of Olympus, and some part from the Achaians in Laconia; for that Dorus gather'd his Colony out of the Parts and Territories near to Malea. A Fourth sort of People that pour'd into Crete, were a promiscuous Compa∣ny of Barbarians from several Parts round about, who notwithstanding in pro∣cess of time, spoke the same Language with the ancient Cretians, the natural In∣habitants. But after the power of Minos and Rhadamanthus became prevalent and considerable, all these Nations were reduc'd into one Body, as one People throughout the whole Island. And at length after the return of the Heraclidae, the Argives and Spartans sent Colonies, and possess'd themselves likewise of other Islands, and both in this and those other built several Cities, of which we shall P. 239. treat more fully in due and proper time. But since that almost all the Historians of the Cretian Affairs, differ among themselves, it's not to be wonder'd at if we do not agree with them all in every thing we relate; for we follow them who give the most probable Account, and are esteem'd to be of most credit. For sometimes we follow Epimenides the Theo∣logist, and sometimes Dosiadas, Sosicrates and Leosthenidas. Having therefore treated thus largely of Crete, we shall now apply our selves to speak of Lesbos. This Island was anciently inhabited by many several Nations one after ano∣ther, Lesbos. by reason it was so often left and forsaken: The first that seis'd upon it, were the Pelasgi when it lay desert and uninhabited. For Xanthus the Son of Trio∣pas Prince of the Pelasgians that came from Argos, seated himself in a part of Lycia, which he had possessed himself of, and there reign'd over the Pelasgians that came thither with him; whence he sail'd over to Lesbos, which at that time lay desolate, and divided the Country amongst the People, and call'd the Island Pelasgia, which before was call'd Isa. In process of time, after the Seventh Generation, many People were destroy'd by Deucalion's Flood, and Lesbos likewise at that time was by Deucation's Flood. Chataracts of Showers laid waste and desolate. But after∣wards Macarius happening to touch there, and considering Deucalion's Flood, An. Mun. 2436, Eighteen Years before the Israelites departure out of Egypt. Orige's Flood, 248 Years before this, while Jacob was with Laban, An. Mund. 2189. the pleasantness of the Island, there seated himself. This Macarius was the Son of Crinacus, the Son of Jupiter (as Hesiod and some other of the Poets say) and dwelt in the City Olanus, then call'd Jados, and now Achaia. He got together a great Company of Ionians, and multi∣tudes from several other Nations flockt in to him; in the first place he possessed himself of Lesbos; afterwards growing more powerful, through the richness of the Island, and his own Justice and Humanity, he gain'd many Neighbouring Islands, and divided the Lands amongst his Countrymen and Followers. About that time Lesbos, the Son of Lapithas, the Son of Eolus, the Son of Hippotas (by the Direction of the Oracle at Delphos) arriv'd in this Island with new Colonies, and marrying Methymna the Daughter of Macareus, seated him∣self
and his Followers there, and injoy'd an equal Interest with them that were there before him; and afterwards becoming a Man of great Renown, he call'd the Island Lesbos, after his own Name, and the People Lesbians: For Macareus had Two Daughters, Mytylene and Methymna, from whom two of the chiefest Cities of the Island were so call'd. Macareus having a design to possess himself of some of the neighbouring Islands, ordered one of his Sons to carry over a Colony first into Chius; afterwards he sent another into Samos, nam'd Cycholaus, who seated himself there, and divided the Lands by Lot amongst those of his Colony, and rul'd over them as King. The Third Island Peopl'd by Macareus, was Coos, over which he appointed Neander King. After this, he sent a large Colony with Leucippus into Rhodes, whom the Rho∣dians (by reason of the small number of Inhabitants that were left among them) willingly receiv'd, and suffered them to have and injoy the Lands equally with them. But about that time, the Continent over against these Islands, lay under most The Macarian Islands. pressing and grievous Calamities by reason of the late Deucalion's Flood. Flood; for in regard all the Fruits of the Earth by the Inundation and Excess of Rain were rotted and spoil'd for a long time together, Famine exceedingly prevail'd, and through Corruption of the Air, Plague and Pestilence depopulated and laid the Towns and Cities waste. But in the mean time, the Islands lying more open to the Winds, and so partaking of their healthful Gales, were loaded with the Fruits of the Earth, and the Inhabitants had fulness of all things, and in a short time were in a happy and prosperous State and Condition; and by reason of the great Plenty that was amongst them, they were call'd the Islands of the Blessed, or  The Blessed Islands. But some say, that they were call'd the Macarean Islands, from Macareas and Ion, two Sons of one of the Princes that formerly rul'd there. And indeed these Islands for richness of Soyl and plenty of all things, did not only excel all the neighbouring Countries in ancient Time, but do so even to this Day. For the fertility of the Soyl, the pleasantness of the Situation, and P. 240. the healthfulness of the Climate is such, that they are not without cause call'd, but are really and in truth, Blessed and Happy Islands. Lastly, Macareus King of Lesbos, made the first Law among them, which was so beneficial and advantagious to the Publick, that he gave it the Name of the Lion, because of the strength and force of that Beast. A considerable time after this Colony planted in Lesbos, another was brought into the Island Tenedos in this manner. Tennes was the Son of Cyrnus, King of Colone in Troas, and was a Man renown'd Tenedos. for his Valour; he brought over a Colony out of the opposite Continent, and possess'd himself of the Island Leucophrys, at that time desolate. After he had divided the Country by Lot amongst his Subjects, and had built a City, he call'd it Tennus, after his own Name. By his good and upright Go∣vernment he gain'd upon the Hearts of his People, and was highly honour'd while he liv'd, and after his Death was ador'd as a Demy-God: For they built a Temple in honour of him, and offered Sacrifices to him as a God: Which Re∣ligious Veneration was continu'd to Times not long since. But we are not here to omit what the Islanders report concerning Tennes, the Founder of the City Or Tennus. Tenedos. They say that Cygnus, the Father of Tennes, giving Ear to the false Suggestions and Calumniations of his Wife, lockt his Son in a Chest, and caus'd him to be thrown into the Sea, and that the Chest was cast up by the Waves upon Tencdos; and being thus strangely preserv'd by the special Providence of God, became King of the Island, and afterwards growing renown'd for his Justice and other eminent Virtues, he was at length honour'd and ador'd as a God. And because his Stepmother hir'd a A Minstrel. Piper by a false Oath to support her own Calum∣ny, it's a Law amongst them of Tenedos, That no Piper shall come into the Temple. Afterwards when Tennes, was kill'd by Achilles in the time of the Trojan War, and Tenedos then laid wast by the Grecians, the Tenedeans, made another Law, that it should not be lawful so much as once to name Achilles in Tennes his Temple. These are the things related of Tenedos and it's ancient Inhabitanas. Having now given an Account of the most considerable Islands, we shall pro∣ceed in the next place to the lesser.
The Cyclade Islands were Formerly desolate and uninhabited: But Minos the The Cycladae Islands. Son of Jupiter and Europa, King of Crete, having a strong Army at Land, and with a powerful Navy, Master at Sea, sent many Colonies out of Crete, and Peopled many of the Islands of the Cyclades, and divided the Lands to the People by Lot, and subdu'd a great part of the Sea-Coasts of Asia; and therefore the Sea-Ports and Havens of Asia, and of the Islands, have the same Names with those in Crete, and are call'd Minoi. Minos being now grown great and powerful, began to envy his Brother Rhadamanthus his Copartner in the Kingdom, for the ho∣nour and reputation he had gain'd by his Justice. Willing therefore to remove him as far from him as possibly he could, he sent him into the furthest parts of his Dominions. Whereupon Rhadamanthus abiding in the Islands over against Ionia and Caria, caus'd Erythrus to build a City in Asia after his own Name, and made Oenopion, the Son of Ariadna the Daughter of Minos, Lord of Chius. These things were all done before the Trojan War: But after the destruction of Troy, the Cares grown rich and wealthy, gain'd the Dominion at Sea, and subdu'd the Cyclades, some of which they took into their own hands, and rooted out the Cretians; others they injoy'd in Common with the ancient Cretian Inhabitants. But in process of time the Grecians growing strong and powerful, the barba∣rous Carians were ejected out of most of the Cyclades, and the Islands fell into the hands of the Greeks. Of which we shall give a more particular Account here∣after in proper Time and Place. D. G. The following Books, that is to say, the VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, are lost.
THE Last Ten Books OF THE HISTORICAL LIBRARY OF Diodorus the Sicilian, CONTAINING, The Affairs of the WORLD for the space of 179 Years, from the Expedition of Xerxes into Greece, to Seleucus his coming into Cappadocia with his Army, and the other Confederate Princes into other Parts against Antigonus, in the 3d Year of the 119th Olympiad. Together with The Fragments of PHOTIUS his BIBLIOTHECA, and others, Published by L. Rhodomannus. AND The Fragments Published by H. Valesius, and by F. Ʋrsinus. WITH A SUPPLEMENT. Made English, By GEORGE BOOTH, of Chester, Esq; LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in Pater-Noster-Row: 1700.
ANTIENT SICELE ACCORDING TO THE Description of Philip Cluuerius
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XI. The PREFACE. THE Book next before this, being the Tenth in the whole Composure of our History, ends with things done in the Tear immediately before the Descent of Xerxes into Europe, and with those Debates in the General Assemblies of the Grecians at Corinth, concerning the admission of Gelo into the Grecian Confederacy. In this to proceed (as things were done) in a continued Series of the Hi∣story, we shall begin with Xerxes's Expedition into Greece, and end the Year immediately before the Army of the Athenians, under Cymon their General, invaded Cyprus. CHAP. I. Of Xerxes his Expedition into Greece, and the Battel of Thermopyle, and the Sea Fight at Salamis. CAllias being Archon or chief Magistrate of Athens, Spurius Cassius, and Proclus Virginius Tricostus, Consuls at Rome, in the Seventy Fifth Olympiad, celebrated at Elis, (in which Asyehus. Asylus the Syracu∣sian Olymp. 75. Ant. Chr. 478. was Victor) Xerxes (for the reason after mention'd) rais'd an Army against the Grecians. He married Artozostra the Daughter of Darius; and was him∣self the Son of Gobrias, whose Daugh∣ter Darius married. Herod. lib. 6. c. 43. and lib. 7. c. 5. Mardonius the Persian was Cousin German, and by Marriage likewise nearly related to Xerxes, of great esteem among the Persians for his Valour and Prudence. This Man prompted forward by the greatness of his Spirit, and the heat of his Youth, burned with Ambition, to be General of so great an Army as that Expedition requir'd; and therefore persuaded Xerxes that he would bend all his power to subdue the Grecians, those implacable Enemies of the Persians. Being brought over to close with this Advice, he determin'd utterly to destroy and root them up: And to that end sent Embassadors to Carthage, to treat with them concerning the joining of their Forces together: Whereupon it was thus
agreed between them, That Xerxes should Land his Forces in Greece, and that the Carthaginians at the same time should with a great Army invade the Greeks in Italy and Sicily. According to which Compact the Carthaginians raised a great sum of Money, and hired many Soldiers out of the Provinces of Liguria in Italy France. Gallia and Spain. Iberia; and raised Men of their own throughout all Lybia, and out of Carthage it-self. In which preparations were spent Three Years, and an Army of Three Hun∣dred Thousand Men were mustered, and Two Hundred Ships fitted out. On the other part Xerxes stirr'd up by the Industry of the Carthaginians, (by way of Emulation) as far exceeded them in Warlike Preparations, as he did in Dominion and Empire. He commanded Ships to be built every where upon the Sea-Coasts within his Dominions, as Egypt, Phaenicia, and Cyprus, and like∣wise through Cilicia, Pamphilia, Pisidia, Licia, Caria, Misia, Troas, the Cities of the Hellespont, Pontus and Bithynia, and in Three Years time (as the Carthaginians had done) set forth above Twelve Hundred Long Ships: Ships of Burden were call'd Olcades, and were built in a round form; the first were Gal∣lies, using Oars chiefly, the other Sails. Gallies. And this was the better accomplished by means of the Preparations of those great Forces rais'd by Darius his Father in his Life time. For Datis, Darius his General, being not long before o∣vercome by the Athenians in the Battel of Marathon, Darius ever afterwards bore an implacable hatred against them: But just as he was ready to pass over into Greece, he was prevented by Death. Xerxes, therefore incourag'd both by his Father's Assistance, and the Advice of Mardonius (as is before related) resolved to invade the Grecians. When all things were prepared, he commanded the Officers of his Navy to randezvouze his Fleet as * Cyme, and Phocea. † Cuma in Eolia. And he himself with the whole Army, both of Horse and Foot, rais'd out of every Province of his Dominion, marched from Susa; and advancing to Sardis, forthwith sent Heralds, P. 243. into Greece, commanding them to go to all the Cities and de∣mand in the Name of the King Earth and Water were Badges and Tokens of Subjection and Sla∣very; . Earth and Water. There dividing his Army, part he sent (sufficient as was conceiv'd) to make Of Ships from Abidos to the other Side, Seven Furlongs, about a Mile, Herod. lib. 7. c. 34. a Bridge over the Hellspant, and another part to cut a Way through the Mountain Through a Neck of Mount A∣thos, Twelve Furlongs over, for his Ships to pass, Herod. lib. 7. c. 22, 23, 24. Athos, both judg∣ing it safe for his Soldiers to have so short a Cut for their March, and hoping likewise by such an extraordinary Work upon the first Attempt, to strike a Terror into the Grecians. They therefore that were sent, having so great a multitude of Hands at work, speedily dispatcht the Business. But the Grecians being now alarum'd with the vast Army of the Persians, sent Ten Thousand , Men in Armour Others were call'd , naked or light arm'd, that wore no Ar∣mour, such as Archers, Darters. Men at Arms into Thes∣saly, to possess themselves of the Passages or Posts of Tempe. The General of the Lacedemonians was Synetus, and of the A∣thenians Themistocles: These sent Messengers to all the Cities, to require them to raise Soldiers for the defence of the Pas∣sages at the common Charge; for they made it their Business with all Expedition to interest all the Cities of Greece in the War, that so the Persians might be op∣posed by the combin'd Force of all Greece together. But when they heard that the greatest part of the Thessalians, and those that in∣habited the Straits, had submitted unto the Kings Delegates or Commissioners, they return'd home, despairing to make any effectual Defence at Tempe. And here it will not be from the purpose to declare what part of Greece assist∣ed the Barbarians, that (deservingly branding them with disgrace) Traitors to the Common Liberty of their Country may out of a sense of shame and Dishonour be deterr'd from the like practice. We say therefore, that the Dolopians, Aenians, Milesians, Perrhaebians, and * Magnesians, sided with the Barbarians; and even † Bordering upon Thessaly. while the Guards were in Tempe, the Achaeans, Phthiotians, Locreans, and Thessalians joyn'd with them; and after they were withdrawn, most of the Beotians, went over to the Persians. Hereupon the Grecians, in a common Assembly at the Istmos, decreed, that if they should be victorious, those Grecians that sided with the Persians, should be sacrificed to the Gods every Tenth Man. And they order'd Embassadors to be sent to such as at present stood neuter, to stir them up forth∣with to take up Arms for the Common Liberty.
Of these, some without delay, heartily joyn'd themselves to the common Interest; others promis'd to do it in due time, though in truth by delay they were willing to have some prospect of the Issue of the War before they hazarded themselves. They of Argos by their Embassadors in the Common Council, declared that they were ready to join in Arms with the rest of Greece, if they might have some share of the supream Command in the Army: To whom Answer was given by the Council, that if they thought it a greater Grievance to Fight under a Grecian General for the Common Liberty, than to be Slaves to a Barbarian, they do wisely to forbear to take up Arms: But if through their Ambition they aspire to the Command of Greece, it were just that they should first signalize themselves by such noble Actions, as might justly deserve so great an Honour. After this the Grecian Cities, generally gave Answer to the King's Embassadors (that went through Greece) in such a manner as plainly demonstrated at how high a Rate they prized the common Liberty of the Country. When Xerxes understood that the Bridge over the Hellespont was finished, and a Passage made through the Mountain Athos, he forthwith marched from Sardis, determining to make his Way to the Hellespont. And when he came to Abidos, he pass'd his Army over the Bridge into Europe; then marching through Thrace, he increased his Army by the Thracians and other Borderers. When he came to Doriscus, he commanded his Fleet should sail thither, that his Forces both by Sea and Land might joyn. There he numbred his Army, in which it is reported there Cornelius Nepos says Seven Hun∣dred Thousand Foot, and Four Hun∣dred Thousand Horse. were inroll'd above Eight Hundred Thousand Foot, more than Twelve Hundred Gallies, Three Hundred and Twenty of which were Greek Ships. The Ships themselves were pro∣vided at the Charge of the King, but furnished with Soldiers and Mariners by the P. 244. Grecians within his Dominions. All the rest were Ships fitted out by the Barba∣rians. Of these, Two Hundred were built and man'd by the Egyptians; Three Hun∣dred by the Phaenicians; the Cilicians, Fourscore; the Pamphilians Forty; and the Licians as many: Besides, the Carians Fourscore; and from Cyprus an Hun∣dred and Fifty. As to those from the Grecians, the Doreans inhabiting about Caria, together with them of Rhodes and Coos, sent Forty; the Ionians with them of Samos and Chius, an Hundred; the Eolians with Lesbos and Tenedos, Forty: They of the Hellespont, with them that inhabited about Pontus, Fourscore: The Islanders Fifty. For the King had secured to himself all the Islands between Cyaneas, Triopion and Sunium. Such was the number of the Men of War in the Navy besides Eight Hundred and Fifty prepared for transporting of Horses, and Three Thousand Ships of Burden of Thirty Oars a-piece. Thus Xerxes was imploy'd at Doriscus in num∣bring his Army; but the General Council of Greece, being informed that the Forces of the Persians did approach; it was ordered that the Grecian Fleet, should forthwith sail to Artemesium in Now call'd Negropont. Eubaea, judging that to be the most con∣venient place to oppose the Enemy: And a Guard of Men at Arms are sent to Thermopile, sufficient (as was conceived) to secure the Straits and Passages, and repel the Barbarians: For it was determined with all haste and speed to defend on every side all those that took part with the Grecians, and with their Forces every way to preserve their Confederates. Euribiades a Lacedemonian, was Ad∣miral of the whole Fleet; Leonidas Or King. General of Sparta, commanded the Forces sent to Thermopile, a brave Man and an excellent Soldier. Leonidas taking upon him the Command, chose only a Thousand Men out of the Army to follow him in this Expedition. But the The Council, or Parliament of Sparta. E∣phori or Common Council advising him to take a greater num∣ber against so powerful an Enemy, yea, commanding him so to do, he in an intricate and perplexed Speech made Answer, That in truth that number was too few to keep the Pass against the Barbarians, but that he needed no more to accomplish that Design which they were going about to effect. Receiving this dark Answer, they asked him whether he led out the Army upon any slight and inconsiderable Attempt? He return'd in Answer, that in Words and Talk he was to lead them to defend the Passages: But in truth and in the Event to dye for the Common Liberty. Therefore if these Thousand which he had chosen might go along with him, the Fame of Sparta would be advanced even by their Destruction: But if all the Lacedemonians should
go thither, the very Lacedemonian Name would be utterly extinct, they being Men never used to fly to save themselves. Upon this there were allotted to him a Thousand Lacedemonians, Three Hun∣dred Spartans, and Three Thousand out of the rest of the Army: So that he marcht away with Four Thousand Soldiers to Thermopile. But the Locrians who inhabited near the Passages, had given Earth and Water, signs of Sub∣jection. Vid. Antea. Earth and Water to the Persians, and had promis'd to seize the Passes. But when they perceiv'd Leonidas to advance to Thermopile, they revolted and joined themselves to the Greciau Army; and so a Thousand Locrians, as many Milesians, and near a Thousand Phocians marched with him to Thermopile; besides Four Hundred Thebans, of a different Faction sided now with Greece: For the Thebans that were in Confederacy with the Persians were divided amongst themselves. This then is the utmost number of the Army which under Leonidas their Ge∣neral came to Thermopile, and there prepared themselves to bear the brunt of the whole strength of the Persians. Xerxes having now numbred his Forces, march'd From Doriscus in Thrace, upon the Banks of Hebrus. P. 245. away with his whole Army to the City Acanthus, his Fleet sailing near at hand over against him; thence his Navy pass'd through the Ditch or Sluce cut through the Isthmus of Mount Athos. Istmos, and by that means he pass'd his Fleet into the other That lyeth before the Town. Sea by a short and safe Cut. When he came to the Bay of Not of Elis, as the Greek is, , mistaken for , near Thermopyle. Melus, he was inform'd that all the Passages were possessed by the Enemy: Upon which he again increas'd his Forces, and join'd to them little less than Two Hundred Thousand Men more, which he had raised as his Confederates out of Europe. So that besides his Naval Forces, his Land Army consisted of no less than a A Hundred Myriads is a Mil∣lion. Hundred Myriads. And the rest that were in his Fleet (what in his Men of War, and what in his Transport Ships and Shipping for other Necessaries) were judged to be no way inferior for number to his Land Forces. Therefore what we find reported concerning the Number he brought with him is not to be wondred at. For it's said, that , never fail∣ing Rivers. great Rivers were drunk up by that multitude, and that the Sea it self was even cover'd over by the spreading forth of the Sails of the Ships: So that the Forces of Xerxes have been by all reputed the greatest that e∣ver any History made mention of. The Persian Army now incamping at the River Sperchius, Xerxes sent Messen∣gers to Thermopyle, both to find out with what Resolution he was likely to be oppos'd, and likewise to declare that the King commanded them to lay down their Arms, and return in safety to their own Countries, and become Friends and Confederates to the Persians; which if they yielded to, then he faithfully pro∣mis'd that he would bestow upon them both larger and richer Countries than those they did then inhabit. This Message being heard, those with Leonidas returned this Answer; that they were in a better Posture to be the Kings Confederates being arm'd, than if they were disarm'd; and if it happen'd that they must fight, then they could more gallantly and couragiously venture their Lives for their Liberties. As for the Countries which the King promis'd them, they bid them tell him, that it was not the manner of the Grecians, by any base and dishonourable means to plant themselves in any Country, or to gain Lands and Estates but by Virtue and Va∣lour, and being so gain'd by the same Valour to defend them. Xerxes having receiv'd this Answer, presently sent for Demaratus the Spartan (who was banished from his Country, and fled to him) and in a scoffing manner ask'd the Laconian, whether the Grecians could run faster than his Horses? or whe∣ther they durst ingage with so great an Army? Demaratus is reported to have answer'd the King thus: You are not O King, unacquainted with the Valour of the Grecians, forasmuch as your Majesty ever made use of them to reduce your Rebellious Subjects upon all occasions: And do not think that these, who have done more than the Persians in the Defence of your Majesty's Sovereignty, will approve themselves with less Valour, for the preservation of their own Liberties against the Persians.
At which words, Xerxes laughing him to scorn, commanded him to follow him, that he might presently see the Lacedemonians taking to their Heels. And now Xerxes dislodging his Army, marched to the Straights of Thermopyle, placing the Medes in the Front of the Battel, either because they were esteem'd Men of greatest Courage, or that he desir'd to have them all cut off, for they were still proud and haughty in regard the Sovereign Power not long before was wrested from their Ancestors, and many there were likewise in the Army whose Kindred perish'd in the Battel of Marathon. Xerxes therefore orders the Brothers and Children of those that were slain in that Battel, to be plac'd in a Body in view of the Medes, conceiving this would be a means to exasperate 'em to a fiercer Revenge upon the Grecians. The Medes therefore being put in the Front (as before said) made a fierce Charge upon the Thermopylean Guards. But Leonidas (being well prepar'd) had plac'd his Men in a close Body, in the straightest part of the Passages: Now both sides are hotly engaged, for the Barbarians having their King both the Spectator and Witness of their Valour on the one hand, and the thoughts of danger of losing of Liberty, together with the Commands of the General firing the Grecians on the other, the Fight was amazing. And now setting Foot to Foot, fighting P. 246. close at hand, and being lockt together, Wounds were given on both sides, in∣somuch as the Battel was doubtful a long time, till at length the Grecians through their Resolution, and the greatness of their Shields getting ground, the Medes with much ado fell off, and began to flag, a great part of them being kill'd, and many others wounded. The Medes thus baffled, the Caesii and Sachae (counted ex∣cellent Soldiers) continu'd the Fight; and although they were fresh Men and un∣touched, against Men almost tired out, yet they were hew'd down and quickly put to flight, and many kill'd by Leonidas his Soldiers: For the Barbarians being guarded with short Shields and Bucklers, were fitter for Fight in the open Field, (where they could by reason of the lightness of their Arms move as they pleas'd,) than in narrow Passages, where they could not well touch the Bodies of their E∣nemies standing so close together, and being likewise defended with large Shields. On the other hand, the Barbarians being but lightly arm'd, lay the more open to all the Darts and Blows of the Assailants. Xerxes now seeing the Passages strowed with the Carcases of his Soldiers, and that the Barbarians were not able to withstand the Grecian Valour, sent against them the chiefest of the Persians, such as were call'd Immortal and Invulnerable, Men of far stronger Bodies than any of the rest of the Army. Of these the Gre∣cians made a quick dispatch, for they fled presently, and Night now coming on, gave a present Cessation of Arms, with a great Slaughter of the Barbarians, few being lost on the Grecians side. Xerxes fretting at the late Misfortune of his Arms, so cross to his hopes and expectations, the next day chose out of all his Regiments, such as were most ap∣proved for Strength and Valour; and after many earnest Entreaties, he told them that if they broke in upon the Grecians, and drove them out of the Passages, he would remunerate them with large Rewards; but that Death should be the Wa∣ges of them that fled. Upon which, they made a fierce and violent Charge in one Body upon the Army of the Grecians. The Soldiers of Leonidas on the other hand closing together in a Body like a strong Wall, with great resolution resisted the furious shock of their Adversaries, and were so earnest in Fight, that they would not suffer the usual fresh Aids to succeed to their Assistance; but over∣coming all difficulties by Resolution, they beat down and destroy'd most of the choicest of the Barbarians; every one striving who should spend most of the day in signalizing his own Valour: For the Courage of the Young Men, put on the Old and Experienc'd Soldiers to a higher strain of Valour than ordinary; and the Glory formerly gain'd by the Old, stirr'd up the Young Men to Emulation of Honour. At length this brave and choice Army of the Barbarians was routed and put to flight: In their flight they were stop'd by a strong Body of Men appointed for that purpose, who drove them back upon the Enemy, and so forced them to re∣new the Fight. But the King being astonished and in great fear, conceiving none durst make any further Attempt upon the Grecians, one Or rather a Trachinian call'd E∣phialtes. Pausan. lib. 1. c. 4. Trachinius an Inhabitant of the Country (to whom all the secret and by-ways in the Mountains were by
use very well known) came to Xerxes, and promis'd him to lead the Persians through a certain straight and difficult This was over Mount Oeta. Pausan. ibid. Pass, that the Troops sent along with him might come up∣on the Backs of Leonidas his Soldiers, and by this means the Grecians being fought both behind and before, might easily be cut off. At the hearing of this, the King greatly rejoyc'd, and amply rewarded the Trachinian, and forthwith sent along with him in the Night Twenty Thousand Men. But one Tyrastiades of Cuma in the Persian Army, , a lover of truth and honesty. an upright Man of honest Principles, in the Night privately convey'd himself from the Watch or Centinels of the Persians, and came to Leonidas, and discover'd what the Trachi∣nian had contriv'd; which being known, a Council of War was call'd at Mid∣night, where they advised together what was to be done in the present immi∣nent danger and state of Affairs. There were some that were of Opinion, That it was best forthwith to leave the Passages, and to return to the rest of their As∣sociates while it was yet well with them, for that there was no hopes of safety if they continu'd there. But Leonidas the Lacedemonian General minding to appropriate Immortal Ho∣nour P. 247. to himself and his Spartans, commanded all the rest to depart, and reserve themselves for better Times, and for further help to the Greeks hereafter; en∣joyning only the Lacedemonians to stay, and not to desert the defence of the Straights, for that it became the Generals and Commanders of Greece resolvedly to be vi∣ctorious, or to dye valiantly upon the Spot. The Council then breaking up, all the rest presently march'd away: And Leo∣nidas being now left upon the Place only with his Citizens, was resolved with them to perform wonderful and Heroical Actions: For the Lacedemonians being but very few (for he kept the Thespians only with him, so that all of them to∣gether did not exceed Five Hundred Men) he prepar'd himself bravely to dye for the Liberty and Glory of Greece. In the mean time, they that were sent with Or the Trachinian. Trachinius, led about through the steep Passes, had beset those with Leonidas on every side: But the Grecians who had before cast off all Thoughts of Deliverance, and had preferr'd Honour be∣fore Life, with one Voice desir'd their General that he would lead them out a∣gainst the Enemy before it were known to the Persians that they were sur∣rounded. Leonidas hereupon commending the Courage of his Soldiers, commanded them that they would with all speed go to their Dinners with that chearfulness as those that must be with the , Sup with them below, or with the Infernal Spirits. Gods at Supper: And he himself presently commanded Meat to be brought to him, and fell to eating: For by this means he said they would be more able to endure, and longer to abide the Dangers and Toyls of such an Ingagement. After they had all refresh'd themselves, and were ready attending upon their General, he commanded them to follow him, and break into the Enemies Camp to kill all that they met, and make to the King's Pavilion: At which word of Command, in one Body in the Night under their General Leonidas, they should rush into the Camp of the Persians. The Barbarians being amaz'd at so suddain and unexpected an Alarum, every where run out of their Tents in great disorder and confusion. And supposing that all those that were sent with the Trachinian were cut off, and that all the Grecian Forces were amongst them, they were every where seiz'd with fear and astonish∣ment: A great Slaughter therefore was made amongst them by the Soldiers of Leonidas, but much more by the Persians among themselves, they not knowing who was Friend or Foe: The Mistake likewise being advanced by the Darkness of the Night, in which none could be distinguish'd, dread and horrour prevail'd all over the Camp, so that it was no wonder that a terrible Slaughter was made a∣mong them: For they killed one another, since now there was neither Time nor Place to be at any certainty, for that none knew whose Commands, or what Captain to follow, or what Colours or Ensigns to hasten to: But their Minds were in a continual Distraction. And if the King had then been in his Pavilion, he had been easily destroy'd amongst the rest by the Grecians, and in that moment had an end been put to so great a War: But Xerxes presently at the beginning of the Tumult, hasten'd, and speedily got out of harms way. The Grecians
breaking into his Pavilion, cut off the Heads almost of all they found there, and diligently sought for Xerxes (while the Night favour'd them) in all parts of the Camp. But when the Day brake, and Light began to make a Discovery, the Persians then perceiving the Grecians to be very few, began to despise them, but durst not make strait upon them, being terrify'd by their amazing Courage. Therefore they compass'd them round, and gauling them every way, both in the Flank and Rear, they were all destroy'd with Darts and Arrows. And this was the end of those sent with Leonidas to guard the Passes in Thermopyle, whose Valour who can sufficiently admire? who were also unanimous not to desert their Post assigned them, but undauntedly sacrific'd their Lives for the common safe∣ty of Greece, and chose rather to dye valiantly and in Honour, than to live as Slaves and in Disgrace. On the other hand, this Terror and Amazement of the Persians, cannot but be very probable; for which of the Barbarians could ever suspect so incredible an P. 248. Attempt? Who could have imagin'd, that Five Hundred should have that Confidence, as without Fear to set upon A Hundred Myriads a Million. Just. lib. 2. says Five Hundred Thou∣sand. Orosius Six Hundred Thousand. a Hundred Myriads? So that we may conclude that Posterity cannot but fix upon these Men as a Pattern and Example of Valour for ever; who though compassed about with inextri∣cable Dangers, and wearied out in their Bodies with overcoming, yet in their Minds were unconquerable. These therefore are the only Men (we read of) that became more famous by their being overcome, than others by their most glorious Victories; for we ought not to make a Judgment of Mens Virtues by the Event, but by their solid and well-grounded Resolutions: For Fortune is the Mistress of the First, but every Man's Reason is the Advocate for the other. For who can judge there were ever braver Men than these? who though they were not the Thousandth part of their Enemies, yet were acted with such brave Spirits, as to dare to try their Courage with an incredible Multitude; not that they had the least hope or expectation of overcoming upon so unequal Terms, but resolving with undaunted Resolutions and noble Souls to surpass all that e∣ver was done in former Ages. They knew indeed they were then to fight with Barbarians: But yet they concluded, that thereby they should be sharers in Fame and Glory with all that ever were before them. For they were the only Men (since the Memory of Man) that chose rather to defend the Laws of their Coun∣try, than to preserve their own Lives, even with a Contempt of Dangers that were insuperable; judging it more desirable for Men of Valour so to signalize themselves. To these the common Liberty of Greece ows more than to those that afterwards overcame Xerxes in following Battels; for the Barbarians being astonished with such an extraordinary and unheard of Attempt, were afterwards much discou∣rag'd, and had little heart to Fight. The Spirits of the Grecians on the other side, were inflamed with the desire of gaining the like honour with their Coun∣trymen. To conclude, these alone seem'd to have born away with them the im∣mortal Memory of an unparallell'd Valour, above all before them: And there∣fore their Praises have been set forth not only by Historians, but by many Poets, amongst whom, that famous Of Melus in Thessaly. Milean Poet Simonides Ceus, a Lyrick Poet, in the time of Xerxes. Simonides has described this noble Action, with high Strains of Commendation worthy of their Valour, thus— At fam'd Thermopyle these brave Souls got, An honourable Death, and Noble Lot; Their Tomb an Altar bears, which doth record Their Ancestors; and Death doth Life afford Ʋnto their Fame, nor Rust, nor Times Teeth shall Devour the Trophies of their Funeral, The Praise of Grecian Heroes to maintain, Their Countrys Freedom that were Slain, This Chappel doth contain. Leonidas above the rest, The Spartan King will this attest; Who gave proof to Posterity, That real Valour cannot dye.
Having now said enough of these Gallant Men, we shall return where we broke off. Xerxes thus possess'd of the Passes, obtain'd (according to the Proverb) only in a A Cadmean Victory. The Pro∣verb and Reason, Erasm. Adag. 375. Paus. in Boetic. 729. c. 9. Cadmean Victory, lost a great num∣ber of his Soldiers, with the Destruction of a very few of his Enemies in comparison. And having now gain'd the Straights, and made his way open, he determin'd to try his Fortune in a Sea-Fight: To that purpose he forthwith sent for Megabates the Admiral of his Navy, and commanded him to make up to the Grecian Fleet, and with the whole strength of his Navy to join Battel with them; who without delay obeys the King's Command, and looses from Pydna in Macedonia with the whole Fleet, and sails to the utmost Coasts or Promontory of Magnesia call'd Sepias, where meeting with a violent Storm and Tempest, he lost Three Hundred of his Ships of War, and a great number of his Transport Ships. When the Storm was over, he made away, and arrived at Aphetas, a City of Magnesia. From thence he sent forth Three Hundred Sail, and commanded the Officers that they should sail about, and make to the Right Hand of the Island Vid. Antea. Eubea, and so surround the Enemy. The Grecians in the mean time lay at Anchor at Ar∣temesia in Eubea, whose Navy was at the most not above Two Hundred and Fourscore Sail, whereof an Hundred and Forty were fitted out by the Athenians, and the rest by the other Grecians. Euribiades, a Spartan, was Admiral of the Fleet; and Themistocles the Athenian took care of all other things relating to it. P. 249. This Man by reason of his singular Prudence and Military Experience, was not only in great Reputation and Authority with the Grecians in the Fleet, but even with Euribiades himself; and all were ready at his Command. When the Sea-Officers were in Consultation where was the most commodious Place to join Battel; whilst all the rest were for abiding where they were, and to receive the Enemy as they then lay; only Themistocles was of a contrary Opinion, and declared, that that Party ever had the advantage, who in good order made the first Onset upon the Enemy: For if they then in a Body fell upon the Enemy, who was at that time in Disorder and Confusion, by coming out of several Ports, and at a great distance one from another, the Attack would probably be successful and prosperous. The Counsel and Advice of Themistocles prevailing, the whole Grecian Fleet in order of Battel, set sail against the Persians, who coming out of their several Ports, as they were dispers'd and out of order, were met by the Navy of The∣mistocles, who sunk many of 'em, and forc'd as many more upon the Shoar. In the mean time, the Fleets of both Parties now come together, and Battel join'd, some parts of the Fleets prevail'd here and there on both sides, without absolute Victory on either, till Night put an end to the Contest. Presently fol∣low'd a most dreadful Tempest, whereby many Ships of the Persian Fleet were forc'd out of their Harbours, and lost. So as God dimself seem'd to fight for the Grecians, by reducing the Barbarians to a less number, that the Grecians might be an equal Match for them, and better able to bear the brunt of a Sea-Fight. Hence it was, that the Grecians grew more and more confident and couragious: And on the other Hand, the Barbarians ever more fearful in all Attempts. But after the Storm was over, having again brought together their Navy, they Another Sea-Fight. made down upon the Enemy with their whole Fleet: The Grecians inforc'd with Fifty Athenian Ships, made ready, and undauntedly receiv'd the Barbarians. And here the manner of the Fight was almost like that at Thermopyle, for the Persians endeavour'd to charge through the midst of the Grecians, and so to pass into The Straight between Eu∣bea and Beo∣tia. Euripus: But the Grecians, with the help of their Confederates in Eubea, de∣fended the Straights; upon which, there was again a fierce Engagement, and both sides lost many of their Men of War: But Night drawing on again, both Parties were forc'd into their Harbours. It's reported that the Athenians on the Grecian side, and the Zidonians on the other, bravely behav'd themselves in both Battels. The Grecians afterwards hearing of the Defeat and Slaughter made at Thermo∣pyle, The Grecians transport themselves at Salamis. and being certainly informed, that the Persians were marching towards A∣thens, were in great consternation, and therefore sailing back to Salamis, they there lay. And now the Athenians seeing the extream Hazard all were in, who remain'd in Athens, put on Board their Wives and Children, and all Necessaries, and whatever else they could, and transported 'em into Salamis. Then the Ad∣miral of the Persian Fleet, understanding that the Enemy was withdrawn from
their former station, presently with his whole Fleet made for Eubaea, and there first takes the City Istiea by Storm, and raz'd it, and then wasts and destroys the whole Country before him. In the mean time Xerxes marches from Thermopyle through the Consines of Pho∣cia, Xerxes har∣raseth Greece. razes all the Towns far and near, and wasts and spoils all before him. That part of the Phocians who sided with the Grecians, not being able to Con∣test with so great a Multitude, forsook their Towns, and with all their Inhabi∣tants betook themselves to the difficult Passages and Defences of the Mountain Parnassus. Afterwards the King entring the Country of the Doreans, forbore from Pil∣lage and Spoil, and commanded that no Injury should be done there, because they were his Friends and Associates. But part of his Forces left there, he com∣manded to invade Delphos, and to burn the Temple of Apollo, and to rob and carry away all that they found there; and he himself in the mean time, led the rest of his Army into Beotia, and there incamp'd. When those that were sent to spoil the Delphian God, were advanc'd as far Xerxes his Ar∣my punished at Delphos, P. 250. as the Temple of Pallas, there arose a sudden and incredible Tempest, and Storm of Hail and Wind, with dreadful Thunder and Lightning, wherewith great Rocks were rent asunder, and fell upon the Heads of the Persians, and destroy'd them by Heaps. The rest that surviv'd, being terrify'd with this Portent of the Immortal Gods, ran away with all haste and speed. And thus by Divine Pro∣vidence, the Oracle of Delphos was preserv'd from Ruin and Robbery. They of Delphos, that they might continue the Memory of this wonderful Appearance of the Gods to Posterity for ever, erected a great Trophy or Monument near the Temple of Pallas, on which they engraved this Elogy— A grateful Gift to Jove, the Delphians Me Have rais'd, proud Monument of Victory. By Phoebus help, who Medean Bands confound, Peserv'd the The Roof cover'd with Brass. See Pausan. lib. 10. . 5. he says the Temple was made of Brass. Temple that with Brass was Crown'd. Xerxes passing through Beotia, wasted the Country of the Thespians, and burnt Platea, forsaken before of its Inhabitants. For the People of these Parts, with their Families and all their Concerns, had withdrawn themselves into Peloponesus: From thence he passed into Attica, con∣tinuing still his Devastation and Ruin of all things: And Athens it self he razes Athens raz'd. to the Ground, and burns the Temples. Whilst Xerxes was thus imploy'd, his Fleet (having first spoil'd Eubaea and the Coasts of Attica) loos'd from Eubaea, and came to Attica. About the same time the Corcyreans lay about Peloponesus, with Threescore Gallies, because they could not (as they pretended) recover the Cape or Promontory of Malea. But other Writers say, that this was rather done out of Policy, that they might observe how the issue of the War was like to succeed, and submit to the Persians if they were Victors; and that the Grecians, if they were Conquerors, might believe they came so far in order to assist them. But when News was brought to the Athenians that were at Salamis, that their Country was burnt up, and the Temple of Pallas laid in Rubbish, they were ex∣treamly griev'd and dejected. An exceeding fear likewise seiz'd the other Gre∣cians, seeing themselves besieged (as it were) by the Enemy on every side, coopt up together within Peloponesus. And therefore it was determin'd that the Leaders Consultations among the Grecians con∣cerning Fight∣ing at Sea, and Officers should consult and give their Opinion what place was fittest and most convenient wherein to try their Fortune in a Sea-Fight. Many and various Opinions were proposed and bandied to and fro in this matter: The Pelopone∣sians, as those who only minded their own security, advised that the Fight might be near the Isthmus: For Fortifying the Isthmus with a strong Wall, if things did not succeed, they might presently withdraw themselves into Peloponesus, as into a Place of greatest Safety and Defence: But if they should be penned up in the little Island Salamis, they should run into Mischiefs inextricable. But Themistocles advised to fight at Salamis, for that within the Straights they were sure to have the Advantage, where they might fight with a few Ships a∣gainst many. On the other hand, he made it out, that to fight near the Isthmus, would be great disadvantage to them, for they must fight in the open Sea, where
the Enemy would have room to make use of the whole Fleet, by which a few Vessels (as they were) would soon be destroyed by such a Multitude. These Reasons, and many others to the same purpose in reference to the Bu∣siness in Hand, being seasonably and wisely offer'd by Themistocles, brought over all the rest to his Opinion. It being now therefore determin'd in this General Council, to Fight within the Straights of Salamis, the Grecian Captains with all speed prepared themselves for Battel against the Persians: Euribiades therefore, together with Themistocles, began to encourage the People against the Danger approaching: But they were P. 251. struck with such Terror and Fear of the great Power of the Persians, that they regarded not the Advice or Commands of their Leaders and Officers; but every one to save himself, hasted with all speed to pass over from Salamis to Pelopo∣nesus. Neither were the Grecian Forces by Land, seized with less Fear and Terror, by rea∣son of the great Power of the Enemy, being likewise much dejected by the Slaughter of those valiant Men at Thermopile: And then the misery of the Atheniaus, was e∣ver before their Eyes, which amazed them, and put a damp upon all their Hopes. Upon which the In Pelopo∣nesus. General Council discerning the Tumult and distracting Fears among the People, made an Order for the Inclosing of the Isthmus with a Wall; and thereupon many Hearts and Hands joining together, the Work was com∣pleated: And so the Peloponesians, defended themselves by a Wall drawn out along from A Port of Corinth. Lecheum to Cenchrea Five Miles. Forty Furlongs. But now the Fleet at Salamis, was in a Mutiny, and in that degree of Fear, that none would obey their Officers. Themistocles therefore perceiving that Euribia∣des, the Admiral of the Fleet, was not regarded, and that the Violence of the Furious Popularity could not be restrained; and considering likewise that the Straits and Difficulties of the Places at Salamis were of great Advantage in or∣der to obtain the Victory, resolved upon this Project: He commanded one chosen A Stratagem of Themistocles. out for that purpose, to go privately as a Deserter to the King, to let him know that the Grecians had resolved to pass over with all their Fleet from Sala∣mis into the Isthmus. Xerxes gives credit to what was related, as a thing very probable, and therefore resolved with all haste and diligence, to prevent the Land and Sea-Forces of the Grecians from joining; and to that purpose com∣manded the Ships he had from Egypt, forthwith to possess themselves of the Straits and narrow Seas between Salamis and Megaris, and orders the rest of his Navy to make for Salamis, and there without delay to Fight the Enemy. The King's Gallies were drawn up distinctly, according to their several Natiòns, that being all of one and the same Language, they might more readily aid and assist one another. The Fleet setting forth in this Order, the Phaenicians were in the Right Wing, and the Grecians joyn'd with the Persians were plac'd in the Left. In the mean time, the Officers of the Ionians sent with great Secrecy a certain Samian unto the Grecians, to acquaint them what the King determined, and in what Method and order all things were hastning forward, and that they themselves (as soon as the Battel was join'd) were resolved to desert the Barbarians. All which, when the Samian had thus privily discover'd to Euribiades, The∣mistocles The Sea Fight at Salamis. (his Matters succeeding according to his Hearts desire, and as he had contrived,) with great Joy encourag'd the Navy to Fight. The Grecians reco∣vering their Spirits at the Message sent by the Ionians, and (stirred up with fresh hope by the present Circumstances of Affairs to Fight) against their former De∣terminations, loosed from Salamis with great Resolution. And now the Fleet be∣ing disposed in order of Battel by Euribiades and Themistocles, the Left Wing was committed to the Lacedemonians and Athenians against the Phenicians, the Enemy's Right Wing. The Phenicians were at that time in great Reputation for Maritime Affairs, as well by reason of the multitude of their Shipping, as for their singular and an∣cient Skill in Navigation. The Of the I∣sland Aegina. Aegineans, and those of Megara, were plac'd in the Left Wing, for these were conceived (next to the Athenians) to be the best Seamen; and it was concluded that they would fight with the greatest Ob∣stinacy and Resolution, in regard they had no where to fly with the rest of the
Grecians for Security, if they were put to the worst. The middle Battel was supplied by the rest of the Grecians. Things being thus order'd and prepar'd, they forthwith set sail and possess'd themselves of the Straits and Passages between Salamis and Heraclea. As for the King, he commanded the Admiral of his Fleet, that without any stop or delay, he should set upon the Enemy: And he plac'd himself upon an Emi∣nence over against the Island of Salamis, from whence he might see all the Passages of the Battel. The Persians, indeed at the First, while they could sail in the open Seas, every P. 252. one kept his station: But when they began to enter the Straits, many of the Ships were Forc'd out of their Order, which occasion'd a great Tumult, and Confusion amongst the rest. Then the Admiral, who led the Van, fell in First with great Valour upon the Enemy, and was sunk at the First Charge, upon which, a great Terror seized the whole Fleet; for upon the Death of the Admi∣ral many took upon e'm to command, and gave out several and different Orders; so that they durst not proceed further but tackt about and made to Sea. The Athenians perceiving the Terror and Confusion of the Barbarians, fierce∣ly pursu'd them; some of their Ships they struck through with the Beaks of their Vessels, and brusht off the Oars of others: And many of the Barbarians Gallies in the Flight, lying open with their Broad-sides to the Beaks of the Gre∣cian Ships, by multitude of strokes were pierc'd through and through; So that now, not having time to turn the Heads of their Gallies, they fled as well as they could with their Fled back∣ward. Oars revers'd. The Phenicians, and Cyprian Ships being now dispersed by the Athenians, and forc'd to Fly, the Cilicians, Pamphylians, and Lycians, who were next to them, fought indeed at the First very obstinately; but when they saw the best and stout∣est of the Ships routed, and making away, they hasted also out of the Danger. In the other Wing, the Fight was for some small time doubtful, the Contest being vigorous on both sides; but the Phenicians and Cyprians being driven a-shoar, and the Athenians making Head upon the other, the Barbarians not able to bear the Shock, fled, and lost many of their Ships in the Flight. And thus the noble Grecians got a glorious Victory at Sea over the Barbarians. In this Battel, Forty Ships of the Grecian Fleet were lost; but above Two Hun∣dred Gallies of the other were sunk, besides those that were taken with their Ships and Men. The King being thus unexpectedly overcome, in a Rage slew the Phenicians, as the first that fled; threatning the rest, that in due time he would measure out Pu∣nishments for them proportionable to their Demerits; who terrify'd with the King's Threats, forthwith made for Attica, but the Night following they sailed into Asia. And now Themistocles, justly esteem'd the Author of this Victory at Sea, con∣trives Another Stra∣tagem of The∣mistocles. another Stratagem not inferior to the former; for the Grecians being ter∣rified, and not daring to fight at Land against so many Thousands of Men, he thus diminishes the Forces of the Enemy. He sends his Childrens School-master to the King, with Instructions to acquaint him, that the Grecians were hasting with their Fleet to the Bridge, in order to pull One Sicinus a Persian, Plut. in Themist. it down. This Message thè King believ'd, as very probable, and thereupon was in a ter∣rible Fright, lest the Grecians, who had then the whole Command of the Seas, should block up his Passage into Asia, so that he could not return; he resolv'd therefore to be gone with all speed, and to leave Mardonius behind him, with an Army both of Horse and Foot, consisting of no less than Four Hundred Thou∣sand Men. These Two pieces of Military Policy contriv'd by Themistocles, crown'd the Grecians with the renown of Two glorious Victories: And thus stood the Affairs of Greece. But now having declared sufficient for the present, the things that were transacted in Europe, we shall go on to those done elsewhere in Foreign Parts.
CHAP. II. How the Carthaginians invaded Sicily, and were routed by Gelon. THE Carthaginians (as it was before agreed between them and the Persians, that they should at the same time set upon the Greeks in Sicily) had made great preparation for War: And now all things being in readiness, they chose Amilr General of their Army, a Man of great Authority amongst the Citi∣zens; who being furnish'd both with Sea and Land Forces, looses from Carthage. The Land Army was no less than Three Hundred Thousand, and his Fleet above Two Thousand Sail, besides Transport Ships for the carrying of Provision, which were above Three Thousand. But Sailing through the Libian Sea, by the violence of a Storm, he lost his Ships, wherein the Horses and Chariots were on Board: And when he came P. 253. to Pannormus, the Port of Sicily, he was heard to say, that there was now an end of the War; for he was much afraid, that the Sicilians by the favour of the Sea, had escaped the Danger. There he lay for the space of Three Days, re∣freshing his Army, and repairing his Ships; and then marched by Land against Himera, his Fleet sailing over against him near the Shoar. When he came to the City, he plac'd his Army in Two Camps, in the one his Land, and in the other his Naval Forces. Under all his Long Ships or Gallies, he caus'd deep Trenches to be drawn, and to be barracado'd round with Timber. His Land Forces he encamped in Front, over against the City, Extending the Fortifications from the Barracado of his other Camp to the Hills that overtopt the City. When he had thus blockt up the Place on the West side, he unladed all the Ships of Burden, of the Meat and Provision, and sent away what Ships he had left, for Corn, and what other Provision and Victuals they could buy, to be brought to him from Africa and Sardinia: But he himself march'd towards the City with a choice part of the Army, and routed the Himerians that came sorth to oppose him, by which the struck a great Terror into the Besieg'd. Hereupon Theron Prince of the Agrigentines, though he had aid sufficient with him for the Defence of Himera; yet being now in a great Fright, sent with all speed to Syracuse to Gelon for Succours; who being prepared with his Forces be∣forehand, and understanding the fear the Himerians were in, without delay, marched out of Syracuse, with no less than Fifty Thousand Foot, and Five Thou∣sand Horse, and with a swift March came to Himera. Upon which, he reviv'd the Spirits of the Himerians, and freed them from all Fear of the Carthaginian Army; for he encamped near the City, and fortified himself both with a Wall and deep Trench, and then sent forth all his Horse to seek out the Enemy, who were at that time dispersed, forraging all over the Country. These Horse set∣ting upon the Carthaginians roving and disorderly dispers'd, took as many Pri∣soners as each of them could carry back; for above Ten Thousand were brought into the City. By which Exploit, the Authority and Glory of Gelon was much advanc'd; and now the Himertans began to contemn their Adversaries. Afterwards (with no less courage) he perform'd other things; for all the Gates that Thero before (for fear of the Enemy) had built, he on the other Hand (in contempt of the Carthaginians) caused to be pull'd down, and furnish'd the Place with others that were of absolute necessity. To sum up all, Gelon being an ex∣pert  Soldier, and prudent in Management, set his Head at work how he might by some Stratagem deceive the Barbarians, and destroy their Forces without any Dan∣ger to himself or his Army: Which Device of his was much forwarded by an Accident that then happen'd, for as things then stood, resolving upon burning the Enemy's Fleet, it fortun'd Amilcar being then in the Camp with his Navy, preparing for a great Festival Day to Neptune, some of the Horse-men brought to Gelon a Crier taken in the Fields, who brought Letters from the Selim∣tans, in which was written, that they would send the Horse-men to him at the Day that he had appointed; which was the Day whereon he had determin'd the Sacrifice Upon the same Day therefore Gelon sends Horse-men of his own, com∣manding them, that conveying themselves privately in the Night to Places nearest
and most convenient, as soon as it was Day, they should go to the Enemy's Naval Camp, as if they were the Selinutian Confederates; and being receiv'd within the Wall and Fortification, should first kill Amilcar, and then set Fire to the Ships. He gave moreover in Charge to those that were as Spies upon the next Hills, P. 254. that as soon as the Horsemen were admitted into the Fortification, they should give notice of it by lifting up the Sign. And he himself at Break of Day (with his Army drawn up) waited when the Sign would be given. The Horse being come to the Carthaginians Camp about Sun-Rising, they were admitted by the Watch for Confederates; being entered, without delay they make up with a fierce Charge to Amilcar, who was then Sacrificing, and both killed him, and fired the Ships. And presently the Sign being given by the Spies, Gelo with all his Forces in Battalia, fell into the Camp of the Carthaginians. Where∣upon the Officers presently drew forth all their Forces out of the Camp to en∣counter the Sicilians, and with Ensigns advanc'd, fought with great obstinacy. And now the Trumpets in both Armies sounded a Charge, and in Emulation each endeavour'd to exceed the other in Noise and Clamour. In conclusion, great was the Slaughter on both sides, with little or no advantage to either; when presently the Flame mounting up from the Ships, and News brought of the Death of the General, the Grecians (now encouraged) doubled their Shouts, in certain hope, and confidence of Victory; but the Carthaginians altogether discou∣raged Gelo routs the Carthaginians. and in Despair, betook themselves to Flight. And because Gelo had com∣manded that no Prisoners should be taken, the Slaughter in the Pursuit was very grievous; at last no less than an Hundred and Fifty Thousand were Slain. The rest gain'd a Place by Nature Fortify'd, and this gave the first stop to the Fury of the Pursuers: But because they wanted Water (through Extremity of Thirst) they were forced to deliver up themselves to the Conqueror's Mer∣cy. Gelo's Name was now renown'd upon the account of so great a Victory ob∣tain'd meerly by his own prudent Contrivance; and his Praise was advanc'd to the very Heavens, not only by the Sicilians, but by all others. For I may truly say, that we have no History of any General, that ever before him put in Exe∣cution, so prudent and remarkable a Stratagem; or ever slew more of the Bar∣barians in one Battel, or took so many Prisoners. And there∣fore some Writers account this Battel nothing inferior to the A Comparison of the Battel at Himera, with the Battel at Platea. Fight by the Grecians at Patea, and equal this Project of Gelo to the Contrivances and Intreagues of Themistocles. But the highest Commendations (because they were both so remarkable and eminent) are by some attributed to this, and by others to that. For whereas both the Greeks and Sicilians before Fighting, were terrify'd with the multitude of the Barba∣rians, the News of Gelo's Victory, (the Sicilians first prevailing) inspired the Grecians with greater Courage. But the Fortune of the Generals on either side was much different; for it's most certain, that the Persian King with many Thousands more escaped; but not only the Generals of the Carthagi∣nians, but even all the whole Army were so slaughtered and destroyed, that (as it is reported) not one escaped to Carthage to carry the News of the Defeat. Add moreover, that the most Noble of the Grecian Commanders, Pausanius and The∣mistocles, were most unworthily dealt with, even by their own Countrymen; the one for his Covetousness and Treason, was killed by his Fellow Citizens, and the other (Banished Greece) was forc'd to fly to his greatest Enemy Xerxes, and there live in Exile. Gelo, on the contrary (after his Success, advanced to more P. 255. Honour by the Love and Favour of the Syracusians,) reigned till he was old, and died admired and honoured of all. And such was the Esteem and grateful Re∣membrance the Citizens had of him, that the entire Government was continued in his Family Three Descents. Those therefore who have thus highly merited, challenge from us likewise their due Honour and Praise. But to return where we left. The same Day that Gelo routed the Carthaginians, Leonidas at Thermo∣pyle with his Grecians, broke into the Camp of Xerxes with more than ordinary Valour; as if the Gods on purpose had contrived and effected at one and the same moment of time, a glorious Victory in one Place, and an honourable Death of the Grecians in another.
After the Fight at Himera, Twenty Long Ships, which Amilcar had , kept out of the Bracad. drawn out, occasionally for necessary Services, made their Escape, and only they of the whole Army, made an Attempt to return to their own Country, the rest being either Kill'd or Taken. But being overloaded with the Multitude of them that fled, and meeting with cross Winds and Tempests, they were all Shipwrackt and lost, save only a few that escaped in a small Boat, and arriv'd at Carthage; and there with a doleful Cry, declared how all the Army that was carry'd over into Sicily, was destroy'd. The Carthaginians were so terrify'd with the unexpected Slaughter of their Men, that they all watcht Night and Day, for the Guard of the City, as if Gelo had been just then ready to enter into Carthage with his whole Army. The num∣ber of those that were Slain, affected the whole City with Lamentations; and private Houses and Families were full of Tears and Complaints; while some enquired after their Children, others after their Brothers: A great number of Orphans now bereft of their Parents, with miserable Cries, bewailed both their Deaths, and their own Misery, who were now left naked and destitute of those that should take care of them. The Carthaginians therefore fearing lest Gelo should hasten into Africa, sent unto him Plenipotentiaries, Men both of great Eloquence and Discre∣tion. In the mean time, he honourably rewarded the Horsemen that destroy'd A∣milcar, and upon all others that had done any remarkable Service, he bestow'd the Marks of his Favour. The chiefest of the Spoils, he kept himself, with an intent to Dedicate them as Ornaments to the Temples at Syracuse: Many of the rest he gave to be set up in the Temples of the Himereans: What remain'd, together with the Captives, he distributed amongst his Souldiers, proportionably to every one's Merit. And those Captives that fell to the share of the Cities, were in all those Places (with their Legs shackl'd) imploy'd in publick Works for the Common Good. They of Agrigentum having gotten many Captives for their share, enriched both their City and Country round about with their La∣bours; for they had so many Prisoners, that many of the private Citizens had Five Hundred a-piece. And the Multitude of their Captives and Slaves was advanced, not only be∣cause The Works at Agrigentum by the Captives. they sent great Assistance to the War, but likewise by reason many of the Barbarians, when their Army was routed, fled up into the Mid-land and Borders of Agrigentum, who being all taken alive, fill'd the City with Prisoners. The greatest part were set apart for the Publick Service, and appointed to cut and hew Stone; of which, they not only built the greatest of their Temples, but made Water-courses or Sinks under-ground, to convey Water from the City, so great and wide, that though the Work it self was contemptible, yet when done and seen, was worthy of Admiration. The Overseer and Master of the Work, was one Pheax, an excellent Artificer, from whom these Conduits were called Phea∣ces. The Agrigentines likewise sunk a Fish-Pond, with great Costs and Expences, Seven Furlongs in Compass, and Twenty Cubits in Depth. Into this, Water was brought both from Fountains and Rivers, and by that means sufficiently supplied with Fish of all sorts, both for Food and Pleasure. P. 256. And upon this Pond, fell and rested great Multitudes of Swans, which gave a most pleasant and delightful prospect to the Eye; but by neglect of succeeding Ages, it grew up with Mud, and at last through length of Time, turned whol∣ly into dry Ground. But the Soil there being very fat and rich, they have planted it with Vines, and replenished it with all sorts of Trees, which yields to them of Agrigentum, a very great Revenue. When Gelo had dismiss'd his Confederates, he marched back with his Army to Syracuse. And for his notable Victory he was not only had in great Honour and Esteem by his own Citizens, but even by all the Sicilians. For he got so many Priso∣ners and Slaves, that the Island seem'd to have all Africa under her Domi∣nion. Ambassadors came continually from all the Cities and Princes of the Adverse Party, begging Pardon for their Error, and promising Observance to all his Commands for the future. But as for Gelo, he carry'd himself with great Com∣placency The praise of Gelo.
towards all, and enter'd into a League with them; and in the time of his Prosperity, behav'd himself with great Modesty and  Humanity; not only towards the Sicilians, but even towards his most implacable Enemies, the Carthaginians. For when Embassadours came from Carthage, with many Tears begging his Fa∣vour, he receiv'd them very . Courteously, and made Peace with them, upon Condition that they should pay Two Thou∣sand Talents of Silver for the Expences of the War: And that they should build . Sir Walter Rawleigh says, Two Arm'd Ships, as Pledges of the Peace; which I rather incline un∣to. Two Temples, where the Articles of the League might be kept as Sacred. The Carthaginians being thus safe beyond their hopes, freely consented to the Demands, and promised a Crown of Gold to Damareta, the Wife of Gelo: For by making their Addresses unto her, she was chiefly instrumental for the procuring of the Peace. And after she receiv'd the Crown from the Carthaginians, which was of the value of an Hundred Talents of Gold, Gelo coin'd it into Money, and call'd it from her, Damaretum, every Piece worth Ten Three Pounds Fif∣teen Shillings. Attick Drachmas, called likewise of the Sicilians, Pentecontralitrons, from their being Fifty Pounds in weight. Gelo carry'd himself thus graciously to all, chiefly prompted thereunto by his own generous Disposition, yet not without some Design to engage all by Kind∣ness. For he had a purpose to pass with his Army over into Greece, and to joyn with them against the Persians: But when he was ready to transport his Fleet, Messengers from Corinth brought him the News of the Victory by the Grecians at Salamis, and that Xerxes with a great part of his Army had left Europe. Up∣on which News he altered his Resolution, and commending the forwardness of his Souldiers, called a General Assembly, with a Command that all should meet Arm'd: He himself when the Assembly was met, came in amongst them, not only without any Arms, but without a Tunick, a Souldier's Coat. Tunick, covered only with a Cloak or Mantle, and in a Speech set forth the whole Course of his Life and Actions to the Syracusians; the People giving evident Testimony of their Approbation to every Word that he said, and admiring that he should so expose himself a∣mongst Armed Men, to the Will of every Person that might have a Design a∣gainst his Life; every one was so far from offering him any Violence, as a Ty∣rant, that had oppressed them,. that all with one Voice proclaim'd him their Benefactor, their King, and the Deliverer of their Country. After these things, he built Two Magnificent Temples, one to Ceres, and an∣other to Proserpina out of the Spoils: And caused a A Three-footed Stool or Chair. Tripode to be made of Sixteen Talents of Gold, which he dedicated as a Token of his Gratitude to Apollo at Delphos. He afterwards determin'd to build a Temple to Ceres in Mount Etna, which so far proceeded, as that the Image of the Deity was placed in her Shrine; but by Death he was interrupted in his Design, and the Work left im∣perfect. The Death of Gelo. Pindar the Poet. About this time, Pindar the Lyrick Poet flourished. And these are all the things that were done this Year worthy of any Remark.
CHAP. III. The Victory of the Greeks over Mardonius at Platea. XAnthippus being Archon of Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and Serrius Cornelius Cossus, Roman Consuls, the Persian Fleet (all but the Phaenicians) af∣ter P. 257. the Battel at Salamis, lay about Cuma: And there continuing all Winter, at the Spring passed over to Samos to guard the Coasts of Ionia: The Fleet con∣sisted of Four Hundred Sail; and because they were jealous of the Ionians, they kept a strict Eye upon the Cities there. In Greece, upon the great Success of Salamis, which was chiefly owing to the Valour and Conduct of the Athenians, all were of Opinion that the Athenians (bering lifted up) would now contend with the Lacedemonians for the Dominion of the Seas: And this the Lacedemonians foresaw, and therefore used all their Arts and Endeavours to keep them under. And for that reason when they were to take notice of the Noble Actions in that Fight, and to distribute Rewards accordingly, the Lacedemonians prevailed by their Interest, that the Honour of the Day should be given to them of Aegina, and among the Athenians to A∣mynias, the Brother of Aesculus the Poet; because that he being General of the Gallies, first charg'd the Admiral of the Persians, and sunk both him and his Ship together. But when the Athenians shewed their Resentment that they were so undeser∣vedly Jealousies be∣tween the A∣thenians and the other Gre∣cians. slighted, the Lacedemonians were afraid, lest Themistocles (being provoked with the Indignity) should contrive some considerable Mischief against them and the rest of the Grecians: Therefore to stop his Mouth, they rewarded him dou∣bly above all the rest. But when the People of Athens understood that he had accepted what was given him, they were much incens'd, and remov'd him from his Place as General, and put Xanthippus, of the Family of Ariphron, into his stead. And now the Distaste given by the Grecians to the Athenians being spread A∣broad, Embassadors came to Athens, both from the Persians and the Grecians. The Persian Embassadors spoke to this effect: That if the Athenians would side with the Persians; they should have what part of Greece they would chuse; that Mardonius the Persian General would rebuild their Walls and their Temples; and that the City should have and enjoy its former Laws and Liberties. On the other Hand, the Lacedemonian Embassadors earnestly intreated them, that they would not make any League with the Barbarians, but preserve their an∣cient Amity with the Grecians, being so near one with them, both in Nation and Language. To the Barbarians the Athenians gave this Return, That the Persian had no Country so rich, nor Gold so heavy, which could tempt them to forsake their Confederates the Grecians in their necessity. And to the Lacedemonians they commanded Answer to be given, That as heretofore their care had been to preserve Greece, so for the future to their utmost Endeavour they would de∣fend it. And in the mean time, desired that they would forthwith with all their Forces pass into Attica, in regard it was very apparent, that Mardonius when he came to understand the Athenians to be so Resolved against him, would invade Athens with all his Force: And so it came to pass; for Mardonius En∣camping in Beotia, first endeavour'd to draw the Cities of Peleponesus to a De∣fection, by sending Monies here and there to the Governors and Chief Men. And after when he received the Answer return'd him by the Athenians, he rag'd like a Mad Man, and forthwith marched with all his Army into Attica: For besides those which Xerxes left with him, he rais'd many out of Thrace and Macedonia, and other Confederate Cities, to the number of Two Hundred Thou∣sand Men and upwards.
And now Attica being invaded by so great a Multitude, the Athenians sent Mardonius in∣vades Attica. Messengers to the Spartans, and desired their Aid, who were so slow that the E∣nemy violently broke in upon the Country, so that the Athenians were reduced to great Streights, and now a Second time, with their Wives and Children, and all other things that they could in that Distraction and Hurry carry away, left their Country, and fled to Salamis. Mardonius greatly inrag'd, destroy'd and wasted all the Country, levelling the City to the Ground, and utterly demolished all the Temples that were left untouch'd in the former Desolation. Upon his returning thus to Athens with his Forces, it was determined in the P. 258. general At the Isth∣mus. Assembly of the Grecians, that they would all join with the Athenians, and march to Platea, and there join Battel with the Persians for the Liberty of their Country. And made Solemn Vows to the Gods, that if they became Vi∣ctors, they would celebrate and set apart a Festival Day, and institute Sports to the Goddess Libertas at Platea. At the General Rendezvous in Peleponesus, they took an Oath to oblige one another to the Prosecution of the War, to the end their League might be in∣violably observ'd, and that all Difficulties might be undergone with undaunted Courage. The Form of the Oath was thus,—I will not prefer Life before Liber∣ty. The Oath of the Consede∣racy. I will not desert my Officers, whether they live or dye, but that I will bury my Fel∣low-Souldiers that shall fall in the War, how many soever they may be. If I be victo∣rious in this War, I will not destroy or spoil any City of my Confederates. I will not rebuild any of the Temples that are burnt or ruin'd, but leave them as Monuments of the Impiety of the Barbarians to Posterity. When they had thus sworn, they march'd over the Mountain Citharon into Beo∣tia, and incamp'd at the Foot of the Hill, near the City Erythra. Aristides was the Commander of the Athenians, and Pausanias the Tutor of Leonidas (who was under Age) was General of the whole Army. When Mardonius understood that the Enemy was enter'd Beotia, he march'd from Thebes, and pitcht his Tents at the Ante Chr. 478. River Near Platea, and Thebes. The Fight with the Persians at E∣rybra. Aesopus, and fortify'd himself with a deep Trench, inclosing his Camp round with a Wall of Timber. The Grecians were an Hundred Thousand, but the Persians were Five Hundred Thousand. The Barbarians began the Fight, who all the Night long, roving up and down with all their Cavalry, set upon the Grecians in their Camp: The first that felt the Brunt were the Athenians, who forthwith in good order valiantly oppos'd them; so that the Fight was very hot. At length the rest of the Grecians put all to Flight that made the Onset on them; only the Ma∣gareans, who had to deal with the General and best of the Persian Horse, were over-press'd, yet gave no ground, but sent with all speed to the Athenians and the Lacedemonians for Succors. When Aristides understood their Distress, he forth∣with sent the chief of such Athenians as were then about him, to their aid; who joyning with the other, made such a Charge upon the Barbarians, that they soon freed the Magareans from their Dangers, killing the General of the Persian Horse, with many others, and put the rest to flight. This happy success at the beginning of the War, fill'd the Grecians with hope of absolute Victory in the Conclusion. Af∣terwards The great Battel with the Persians at the River Asopus near Platea. they remov'd their Camp out of the Plain, next un∣der the Foot of the Mountain, into another Place more con∣venient for obtaining a perfect Victory. For on their Right Hand was an high Hill, and on their Left the River Asopus for their Defence: Between these Two they encamp'd, thus guarded by a natural Fortification. The straitness of the Place thus chosen by the Grecians, was of great advantage, and did much con∣duce to the Victory: For the Persians could not enlarge their Front as otherways they might, by reason whereof so many Thousands of the Barbarians became useless and unprofitable. The Generals, Pausanias and Aristides having now so fair an Opportunity, drew out their Forces, and advanced in Battalia as the Ground would give them leave. Mardonius on the other Hand, being forc'd to march up in a close Body, drew up his Men to the best advantage he could devise, and with a great Shout meets the Grecians, and with the choicest of his Men, who were his Life-Guard, makes the first Charge upon the Lacedemonians, who were plac'd in Front to receive
him. He fought with an high Resolution, and made great Slaughter amongst the Greeks; but the Lacedemonians stoutly stood their Ground, contemning all Danger, and destroy'd likewise Multitudes of the Barbarians, who (as long as P. 259. Mardonius was in the Head of the Army) bore the Brunt with great Courage; but as soon as he fell (valiantly behaving himself) and that they discern'd the choice of the Army with him, were all either kill'd or wounded, their Hearts The Persians routed. fail'd, and they betook themselves to Flight, and were as hotly pursu'd by the Grecians; however the most of them got within the Timber Wall. The rest (being Grecians that sided with Mardonius) fled to, and shelter'd themselves with∣in the Walls of Thebes. The Remainder of the Army, to the number of Forty Thousand and upwards, fled another way, with Artabazus (a Man of great ac∣count amongst the Persians) who came with them back by a shorter Cut into Phocis. This Dispersion of the Persians caus'd the Forces of the Grecians likewise to be scatter'd, and divided into several Parties; for the Athenians, Plateans and Thes∣pians fiercely pursued those that fled to Thebes. The Corinthians, Sicyonians and Philasians, and some few others, follow'd close upon the back of those that fled with Artabazus. The Lacedemonians with the rest of the Army, besieged and assaulted those that were forc'd within the Wall. The Thebans receiving those that fled, issu'd forth, and join'd with them against the Athenians their Pursuers; upon which there was a fierce and bloody Fight before the City Walls, the Thebans bravely standing to it, so that many were kill'd on both sides. But at length the Athenian Courage drave the Thebans back into the City. Then the Athenians march'd back to the Lacedemonian Camp, and join'd with The Persians Camp forc'd. them in assaulting the Persians within the Wall; where the Fight was maintain'd with great Obstinacy on both sides; the Barbarians on the one Hand, within a place of Strength defending themselves with great Courage, and the Grecians on the other, with all their Might, endeavouring to force the Wall, the Fight was pursu'd without regard or fear of Death; so that many were wounded, and great numbers, with Showers of Darts were there Slain. But neither the Wall, though strongly Fortify'd, nor the number of the Barbarians could withstand the fierce Assault of the Grecians, but whatever was in their way, they bore down all before them. The Grecian Generals, the Lacedemonians and Athenians out of Emulation and desire of Glory, strove to exceed each other, encouraged both by their former Victories, and prickt forward by their own natural Valour. At length the Persians Camp was entred and taken by Storm; and though the Bar∣barians cried for Quarter, yet they found no Mercy. For Pausanias consider'd the great number of the Enemy, insomuch as he was afraid lest through their Number (which far exceeded the Grecians) some unexpected and suddain Mis∣chief should happen, and therefore commanded that they should take no Priso∣ners. Whereupon an incredible Slaughter was made in a short time, and was Above 100000 Persians put to the Sword in the Camp. scarce ended, when more than an Hundred Thousand were already put to the Sword. When the Battel was ended, the Grecians apply'd themselves to the Bury∣ing of their Dead, which were above Ten Thousand. Then they divided the Spoil amongst the Souldiers, and appointed Judgment to be given con∣cerning every thing that was done with more than ordinary Valour and Cou∣rage in that War. By the Decree of Charitides, amongst the Cities, the greatest Honour was attributed to Sparta; and amongst the Men to Pausanias. In the mean time Artabazus with swift Marches pass'd through Phocis into Macedonia, with those Forty Thousand Persians that fled with him, and brought them all over safe into Asia. The Grecians dedicated a Tenth of the Spoils, and made thereof a Tripode of Gold, and placed it in the Temple of Delphos, and engraved upon it this Elogy; The stout Defenders of Great Greece this gave, From Bondage when its Cities they did save. And another was Engraven by the common Consent of all, to the Honour of those Lacedemonians who died at Thermopyle, in these Words—
Of Pelops Country one Four Thousand brave Men, to , Two Hundred Thousand My∣riads. Mistaken it seems. P. 260. Two Millions base repulse once gave. And another by a Private Hand thus,— Good Stranger tell the Spartans here we lye, Stoutly their Laws while we maintaining dye. After the same manner did the People of Athens adorn the Sepulchers of those that fell in the Persian War; and then were first instituted the Funeral Games, and a Law was then made, that the Valorous Exploits of those that were buried at the Publick Charge of the City, should be thenceforth set out by the best of their Orators. Afterwards Pausanias the General, causing all his Army to return to their se∣veral Colours, marched against the Thebans, and required the first Authors of the Defection to the Persians, to be delivered up to Justice. The Thebans being discouraged both with the Multitude and Valour of their Enemies, the chief Au∣thors of the Confederacy with the Persians, yielded themselves up to Mercy, and were all put to the Sword by Pausanias. CHAP. IV. Of the Fight with the Persians by the Grecians in Ionia at Mycale. THE same day that the Battel was fought at Platea, there was another great Fight with the Persians in Ionia, which I shall relate from the begin∣ning. Leotychidas the Lacedemonian, and Xanthippus the Athenian Admirals of the Na∣vy, after the Battel at Salamis, came with their Fleet to Aegina, where staying some few Days, they fail'd thence to Delos with Two Hundred and Fifty Gal∣lies. While they staid there, Ambassadors came to them from Samos, en∣treating that they would be assistant to the Inhabitants of Asia, to regain their Liberty. Leotychidas hereupon calling a Council of War, it was there determined to as∣sist them; and to that end, with all speed they loos'd from Delos. The Officers of the Persian Fleet being then in Samos, hearing of the Expedition the Grecians intended against them, departed from Samos with their whole Fleet, and came to Mycale in Ionia, and judging themselves not strong enough to encounter the Grecians, they hal'd all their Ships ashore, and compass'd 'em in both with a Wall and a deep Trench. And in the mean time, they sent with all speed for Land-Forces from Sardis, and other Neighbouring Places, so that an Hundred Thou∣sand Men were presently Mustered together, and they procur'd all other things necessary for the War, as far as was possible, being jealous that the Ionians were ready to revolt. Leotychidas with his whole Fleet well provided, sail'd with a straight Course against the Barbarians at Mycale, and sent before him a Ship, with an Herald or Cryer in it, one of greater Voice than any of the rest of his Army, and gave him in charge, that when he approached the Enemy, he should proclaim with a loud Voice, That the Grecians that had routed the Persians at Platea, were now at Hand, resolv'd to restore the Greek Cities in Asia to their Liberty; which was done by those with Leotychidas, because they conceiv'd that upon the News, the Grecians in the Army of the Persians would revolt, and great Tumult, and Dis∣order would be made amongst them; which happened accordingly. As soon as the Cryer came up to the Persian Fleet, and had executed his Com∣mands, the Persians grew jealous of the Grecians, and the Grecians began to con∣sult together of a Revolt. The Officers of the Grecian Fleet having well debated
and considered all things relating to the present Affair, landed their Forces. The next Day, when all things were ready for the Onset, a Rumor was on a suddain spread in the Army, that the Grecians had overcome the Persians at Platea. Upon which, Leotychidas and his Collegues drew up the Army in a Body, incouraging them to fight, making use of several Arguments to that purpose, and withall singing among them Songs of the Victory at Platea, thereby the more to stir up and inflame their Spirits to the present Encounter. But the Circumstances of Affairs were then very remarkable; for it's certain both Armies fought on one and the same Day; the one at Mycale, and the other at Platea. Therefore since Leotychidas could not then know any thing of the Victory at Platea, we may con∣clude that this Report was a Stratagem invented by him on purpose; especially considering the great distance of Places, the News could not possibly arrive in P. 261. so short a time. But the Persians, now no longer confiding in the Grecians, took away their Arms, and deliver'd them to their Confederates, and encouraged their Souldiers, telling them, that Xerxes was at hand with a great Army for their Assistance, whereby they rais'd up their Spirits. Both Armies being now drawn up in Batalia, and advancing one towards the other, when the Persians saw the inconsiderable Number of the Grecians, they de∣spised them, and forthwith charged upon them with a great shout. In the mean time the Samians and Milesians, determin'd to assist the Grecians, with all the strength they could make, and to that end with a swift March made towards the Enemy. And the Ionians conceiv'd that when they came in sight of the Grecians, they would be thereby more incouraged, which fell out otherwise; for those with Leotychidas being seis'd with a pannick Fear, upon the apprehension and suspition that Xerxes, was at hand with all his Forces from Sardis, there was nothing but Confusion and Distraction, through various Surmises and Opinions amongst them. Some were for retiring forthwith to their Ships, others were for standing their Ground, and fighting valiantly to the last Man. Whilst they were in this Terror Disorder and Confusion, the Persian Army advanced in order of Battel, and in a terrible manner with great shouts fell in upon the Grecians, who were forc'd to receive the Charge, having now no time left for further Consultations. The Battel being now join'd, great Courage, and Resolution was shewn on all hands, and a long time the Fortune of the Day was doubtful, and many fell on both sides. But as soon as the Samian and Milesian Armies appear'd, the Courage of the Grecians was reviv'd, and the Persians so flag'd and fail'd that they forthwith fled, and were pursu'd with a very great Slaughter; for the Souldiers of Leoty∣chidas and Xanthippus follow'd them close at their Heels, to their very Tents. In the mean time the Aeolians and many other of the Inhabitants of Asia, came in to the assistance of the Grecians though then almost Conquerours: For a general and ardent desire of Liberty possess'd all the Asian Cities, and therefore many neither regarded Leagues made, or Hostages given, but together with the other Grecians with the same Rage hew'd down and slew the flying Persians. And thus the Persians, were routed and dispers'd with the slaughter of Forty Thousand Men; of the rest some of them escap'd to their Camp, and others fled to Sardis. Xerxes being inform'd both of the Slaughter of his Men at Platea, and of the routing of his Army at Mycale, leaving part of his Forces to carry on the War, in a great Fright fled with the rest to Ecbatana. When all was over, Leotychidas and Xanthippus sail'd back to Samos, and then receiv'd the Ionians and Aeolians as their Confederates in the War. And some time after used many persuasive Arguments to them, to leave Asia, and come o∣ver into Europe, promising them to bestow upon them the Estates of all those that Ant. Chr. 477. had confederated themselves with the Persians. For if they continued in Asia, they would be in continual Alarms by Enemies that far excell'd them in strength, and that were near to them; and that their Friends by reason of the distance by Sea, could not be assistant to them so opportunely, and at such Seasons as their Necessity might require. Upon which Promises the Ionians, and Aeolians were persuaded, and in observance of the Grecians Desires, prepar'd themselves to take Shipping for Europe. But the Athenians afterwards changing their Minds, now persuaded them to remain where they were, and faithfully promis'd that though now if the rest of Greece should assist them, yet that they would from time to time, send them aid, as being they who were only oblig'd so to do, by reason
of their Kindred and Relation to them. For the Athenians were jealous that if the Ionians settled in new Habitations, by the common concurrence of the Grecians, they would not for the future own Athens as their Metropolitan City and place of their Original. Whereupon the Ionians upon second thoughts determin'd not to remove out of Asia. Things thus accomplished, the Grecian Army divided: The Lacedemonians Olymp. 75. 2. Ant. Chr. 477. Ann. Mund. 3471. P. 262. sail'd back into Laconia; the Athenians with the Ionians and Islanders, made for Sestos; which Xanthippus the General took at the first Assault; and after he had put a Garrison into it, and discharg'd his Confederates, he return'd with his Ci∣tizens to Athens. And this was the event and issue of the Medean War (as it was call'd) after it had continu'd for the space of Two Years. Herodotus the Historian began his History with some things before the War of Troy, and relates in Nine Books, whatever happen'd of Moment almost in all parts of the World; and concludes his History with the Fight at Micale, and the Herodotus ends his Hi∣story. Siege, and taking of Sestos. During these Transactions, the Romans had great Wars, and shed much Blood amongst the Volsians. Spurius Cassius the Year be∣fore Consul, being convicted of Treason, for aspiring to the Supream Govern∣ment, was put to Death. And these were the things done this Year. CHAP. V. The Death and Commendation of Gelo King of Syracuse; and the Rebuilding of Athens by the Policy of Themistocles. TImosthenes being Archon or Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Cesus Fabius, and Lucius Aemilius Mamerchus Roman Consuls, there was a setled Peace throughout all Sicily; for the strength of Anno Mundi, 3472. Olymp. 75. 3. Ant. Chr. 476. the Carthaginians was utterly broken, and Gelo govern'd the Sicilians with that Justice and Equity, that the Laws flou∣rished in every City, and Plenty every where abounded. The Syracusians making a Law against extravagant Pomps of Fu∣nerals, Law in Syracuse, against Funeral Pomp. and not only taking away those usual vast Expences upon the Dead, but forbidding all manner of Curiosity upon that account; Gelo willing in all things to confirm what the People agreed upon, confirm'd this new Law by his own Example; for falling sick, and lying upon his Death-bed, he gave up the Kingdom to Hiere his eldest Brother, and com∣manded that the Law should be strictly kept in reference to his Funeral. After his Death, his Successor in burying of him, observ'd his Commands. His Body was laid in his Wife's Inheritance, within the Nine Towers (as they were call'd) Places of great and sumptuous Workmanship. The whole City accompany'd the Body to the Place, which was about , Five and Twenty Miles. Two Gelo's Funeral Hundred Stages distant: And the Citizens erected a stately Monument over him, and commanded he should for ever after be honour'd with the Honours due to the Ancient Heroes. This Monument was in after-times destroy'd by the Carthagians in their War against the Syracusians: And the Places call'd the Nine Towers (through Envy) were demolished by Agathocles. But yet nei∣ther Ante Chr. 476. the Hatred of the Carthaginians, nor the Envy of Aga∣thocles, The Commendation of Gelo and them that rule well. nor the Force nor Fraud of any other Person, was able to eclipse the Glory of Gelo. For History has justly pre∣serv'd his Fame, and will for ever hand it down to Posterity. For as it is just, and tending much to correct the Irregularities of Humane Conversation, to fix a Brand and Mark of Disgrace upon those that have used their Power wickedly and mischievously, so on the other hand, it is as just to perpetuate the Memory of those who have rul'd justly and honourably to the good of others. For this will be an Inducement to Men to behave themselves so, as to merit Commenda∣tion
from those that come after them. Gelo reign'd only Six Years: Hiero his Brother and Heir, Eleven Years and Eight Months. After the Victory at Platea, the Athenians brought back their Wives and Chil∣dren The Athe∣nians repair their Walls. from Troezen and Salamis to Athens, and forthwith set upon the Repairing of their Walls, and spared neither Cost nor Pains in that, nor in any other thing necessary for their Defence. But the Lacedemonians considering that the Athenians had much advanced their Reputation by their Strength at Sea, fearing lest they should grow too strong, determin'd to forbid the building of their The Lacedemonians endeavour to hinder the building of the Walls of Athens. Walls; and therefore sent Embassadors with all speed to A∣thens, to let them know, that it was not for the common good and interest of Greece, that Athens should be walled; for if Xerxes should make upon them a Second Invasion with fresh and greater Forces, if he should gain Cities out of Peloponesus ready wall'd, he might from thence, as out of Forts and Castles, make suddain Incursions upon them, and thereby with ease subdue the Grecians. But when the Embassadors were not much regarded, they imperiously commanded the Carpenters and Smiths to P. 263. cease from the Work. Whereupon the Athenians not knowing what to re∣solve Themistocles his Stratagem to build the Walls of A∣thens. upon, Themistocles (who was then in great Favour and Authority) advis'd them, that they should not at present make any Noise or Stir about the matter. For if they should contend, the Lacedemonians would easily hinder them in the Work, by making an Inrode upon them with the Forces of Peloponesus. But he intimated to the Senate privately, that he (with such others, as they should appoint) would go as Embassadors to the Lacedemonians, and there argue the Case with them concerning the Fortification of the City. And he gave in charge to the Magistrates, that if any Embassadors came from Lacedemon, they should detain them till his return from thence; and in the mean time they should with the assistance of the whole City go on with the Work, and that was the very way (he told them) to effect their Design. The Athenians all approv'd of his Advice, and Themistocles with those join'd in Embassy with him, set forth for Sparta. In the mean time the People of Athens set upon the Work with might and main, sparing neither House nor Sepulchre for Materials: Women and Children, Strangers and Servants were all imploy'd, and none permitted to be idle. The Work went on beyond expectation, and through the multitude of Hands, and diligence of those imploy'd, advanc'd to Admiration; which being nois'd abroad, the Lacedemonians were very hot with Themistocles concerning the Fortifying of the City. But he denied all, and wish'd them not rashly to believe every little Story spread Abroad, but rather to send some faithful Messengers, who might bring them a certain account of the truth, how Matters went; and for further Assurance, he deliver'd up himself and his Associats as Hostages to the Spartans. The Lacedemonians at present pacify'd and perswaded by what Themistocles Ante Chr. 476. had said, took him and his Associates into Custody, and forthwith sent some of the chief of the Citizens to Athens, to make strict inquiry and observation how Affairs were. In the mean time, the Athenians in a short space, advanc'd their Walls to their just height. The Spartan Embassadors as soon as they entred in∣to Athens, being very turbulent, and sharply threatning the Athenians for what they had done, they committed them all to Prison, declaring they should not be set at Liberty, till Themistocles and the rest of their Embassadors were sent Home. By this Trick the Laconians being deluded, were forc'd to redeem their own Embassadors by the discharge of the Athenians. And this Policy of Themistocles in procuring the walling of the City, both with effectual speed and safety, pur∣chased the great Love and Honour of the Citizens. Whilst these things were acting in Greece, the Romans made War upon the Tuscans, and got a great Victory, with the Slaughter of many of their Enemies, and afterwards took Tusculum by Storm, and reduced the City of the Escula∣neans.
CHAP. VI. The inlarging of the Haven at Athens by Themistocles. The Treason of Pausanias, and the Justice of Aristides. AT the end of the Year, Adimantus was chosen Archon of Athens, and Fa∣bius Vibulanus, and L. Valerius were Consuls of Rome. At this time Themi∣stocles for his excellent Government and ingenuity in state Policy, was in great esteem, not only at Athens, but over all Olymp. 75. 4. Ante Chr. 475. Greece. Being hereby encouraged, he made it his Business (by further and greater Services) to enlarge the Bounds and Ann. Mund. 3473. Sovereignty of his Country: For confidering that there was no Haven at the Pyreum, and the Athenians were forced to Themistocles his Project to enlarge the Haven Pyreum at Athens. make use of Phaleron for their Port, which was strait and in∣commodious, he contriv'd to turn that into an Harbour, which would require the least Charge, and yet would be the most beautiful and spacious Haven in all Greece, which being accomplished, he hop'd would con∣duce to the making the Athenians Masters of the Seas; who then had a great Fleet, and were famous for their many Victories at Sea. By this means he hop'd the Ionians (being defcended from the same Ancestors) P. 264. would be brought over to them, and so by their Assistance he should be able to restore all the Grecians in Asia to their Liberty, and thereby for ever oblige them to be Friends to the Athenians. Moreover he concluded that the Islanders mov'd with the Athenians strength at Sea, would presently join with them, who were judg'd Persons that might be of great advantage or prejudice to them. And he very well understood that the Lacedemonians were very considerable at Land, but understood little of Sea-Affairs; but yet he kept all private to himself, being assured that the Lacedemo∣nians would never suffer it to be done. Therefore in a Publick Assembly, he told the Citizens that he had found out Ant. Chr. 475. something of very great moment and advantage to the Commonwealth; but that it was not at present expedient to make it publick; being of that nature, that the fewer that were acquainted, the better; and therefore wished the People to chuse Two whom they could best trust, to whom he would discover the whole Design. The People hereupon chose Two, Aristides and Xanthippus, not only because they were Men of Integrity and honest Principles, but that they emulated The∣mistocles, and secretly envy'd him for the Glory and Reputation he had amongst the People. When they had privately heard what he had design'd, and his Rea∣sons, they made report unto the Assembly, that what Themistocles had contriv'd, was not only great, but of extraordinary advantage to the Commonwealth, and with ease to be effected. The People were presently taken with great admiration of the Man; and yet as soon struck with a suspition, lest by these Inventions and great Designs, he aim'd at the Sovereignty. Therefore they commanded he should forthwith discover his Purposes. But he told them again and again, that it was not for the publick good openly to reveal them. The People now more admiring the Courage and Constancy of the Man, com∣manded him to reveal the business to the Senate privately; and if the Senate did judge that it was a matter feasible, and of certain advantage to the Publick, then whatever was necessary for the Execution of his Design should be granted to him. Upon which, when he had informed the Senate of the particulars, and when upon the Relation, all was judg'd both easie, and of highest Concern and Advantage to the Commonwealth, every thing at length was granted to him which he desired (in order to the effecting of his Design) with the approbation and consent of the People. The Assembly then broke up with great admiration of Themistocles, every Ant. Chr. 475. one expecting what would be the issue of their Counsels. And now being fur∣nished with all things necessary, both as to Men and Money, he contriv'd how to delude the Lacedemonians a Second time; for he was assur'd, that as they had
oppos'd the repairing of the Walls, so they would with all their power and might obstruct the making of the Port. He sent therefore Embassadors to Sparta, who should let them know how much it tended to the advantage of Greece, in case of future Invasions by the Grecians, to have in some Place or other a commodions Haven. By this Contrivance gi∣ving a check and stop to any hasty opposition by the Lacedemonians, he forth∣with sets upon the Work. And all Hands being imployed in the business, the Port was finished upon a suddain, and beyond all expectation. Then he advis'd the People that they would add Twenty Gallies more every Year to the Fleet they had, and that they would priviledge with freedom from all Impositions all Strangers and Artificers, that by that means both the City might become Po∣pulous, and store of Workmen and Tradesmen might be had with little pains; for he conceiv'd both necessary, not only for the increase, but the support of their power at Sea: And thus the Athenians were imploy'd. The Lacedemonians now commanded Pausanias who was their General at Pla∣tea, to free the Greek Cities from the Persian Garrisons which still remain'd amongst them; whereupon he sail'd from Pe∣loponesus Pausanias ordered to free the Gre∣cian Cities from the Persians. Ante Chr. 475. P. 265. (with Fifty Gallies, and from Athens with Thirty, of which Aristides was Admiral) to Cyprus, and there deli∣ver'd the Cities from the Garrisons that were fixt amongst them. Thence sailing back to the Hellespont, he took Byzan∣tium, then under the Persian Yoke, and freed the City; some of the Barbarians being put to the Sword, and others taken Prisoners; amongst whom, some of the Persians of great Quality were taken and deliver'd to the care and custody of Gongylus of Eretria, under pretence to reserve them for Punishment, but in truth to return them safe to Xerxes: For he had contracted a private Confederacy with the King, and was to marry the King's Daughter for his Reward, in un∣dertaking to betray Greece. All these Matters were transacted by Messengers and Interpreters between him and Artabazus the Persian General, who secretly fed Pansanias with Money, with which he corrupted such Grecians as were for his Purpose. But the Treason was discover'd, and the Author fell under just Punishment in Pausanias his Treason. this manner: Giving himself up to Persian Luxury and Excess, and carrying it with great Insolency and Tyranny towards those that were committed to his Charge, all highly resented his Pride and Haughtiness, especially those that had born any Office and place of Magistracy in the Commonwealth. The Souldiers therefore every where murmuring, and in all their Meetings, complaining one Ant. Chr. 475. to another of these things, and of the Pride and Tyranny of Pausanias, the Pe∣loponesians at length deserted him, and return'd into their own Country, and sent Messengers to Sparta, to accuse him. But Aristides the Athenian making use of the present occasion in all publick Meetings and Assemblies, stirr'd up the Cities, and by fair and smooth Words so far wrought, as to prevail with them to put themselves under the Protection of the Athenians. And that which help'd forward the matter to the advantage of the Athenians was this that follows. Pausanias had agreed with Artabazus, that he should not suffer any to return that brought him Letters from himself, lest their Intreagues should be discovered: Whereupon all such Messengers were kill'd to prevent their Return; which being taken notice of, and suspected by One Argilius his Catamite. Cornel. Nep. one imploy'd in that Affair, he open'd the Letters deliver'd to him, and by the Contents being now confirm'd in his former Opinion of the Destruction of the other Letter-Carriers, he deliver'd the Letters to the Ephori; who not be∣ing fully satisfied of the truth by those Letters which were very dark; but in∣sisting upon further and clearer Evidence, the Messenger told them he would find out a way how they might convict him of his Treason, by Testimony out of his own Mouth. Whereupon the Messenger forthwith went to Tenarus, to pay his Devotion in the Temple of Neptune, where he wrought a double A Room with a Partition built in some part of the Ground belonging to the Temple; for the Greek Word is Hiero, which is the Temple or any of the Consecrated Ground. The Word Temenos, is properly the Temple it self. Tent, one within another, within one of which were con∣ceal'd The manner of the Discovery of Pausanias his Treason. some of the Ephori and other Spartans. Pausanias hastens
thither, and inquires of him, what was the ground and cause of his Earnestness in his Addresses; who complain'd, that he by his Letters had determin'd his Death notwithstanding his Innocency. Upon which, Pausanias declar'd he was very sorry for what he had done, and begg'd his Pardon, and entreated him to conceal the matter, and promised he would bountifully reward him: And so they parted. But the Ephori and those with them took little notice at that time of the bu∣siness; but a while after, the Lacedemonians with the authority of the Ephori, consulted together to seize him, and bring him to his Tryal; which he fore∣seeing, fled to the Temple of Minerva Chalcidica. The Lacedemonians being at a stand, whether it were lawful for them to force him out of the Temple, it's said his Mother went thither, and plac'd a Tile she brought with her before the Gate of the Temple, and without doing or say∣ing any other thing, return'd to her own House; which when the Lacedemo∣nians understood (according to the Mother's Sentence) they made up the Gate of the Temple, and by this means he was famish'd to Death. His Body indeed was deliver'd to his Friends to be bury'd; but the Deity was highly in∣cens'd for the Violation of the Sanctuary: For when the Spartans went to en∣quire P. 266. at the Oracle of Delphos, concerning some other matters, they were com∣manded to restore the Suppliant to the Goddess: Which Command being im∣possible for them to observe, there were many and great Consultations among 'em what was best to be done. At length they came to this Resolve, to set up and dedicate Two Brazen Statues of Pausanias in the Temple of Minerva, which was done accordingly. And now according to our usual manner, through the whole Course of our History, as we have used to advance the just Praises of them that were vertuous The Censure of Pausanias. and deserving, and on the other hand, to perpetuate the dishonourable Actions (after their Deaths) of such as acted wickedly, so we shall not let pass the de∣testable Malice and Treason of Pausanias, without Censure. For who could not but admire the madness of this Man? who after his Victory obtain'd at Platea, and by other noble Actions, being grown so deservedly famous and popular a∣mong Ante Chr. 475. the the Grecians, did not only neglect to preserve what honour and au∣thority he had gain'd, but in a sordid manner (thirsting after the Riches and effeminate Delights of the Persians,) wickedly stain'd all his former Glory by Treason. Grown proud by success, he grew weary of the plain Laconian way of Living, and gave himself up to the Luxury, Voluptuousness, and softness of the Persians, whom it less became of all other Men to imitate. For he knew (not by relation from others) but by his own Experience, how much the severe Discipline of his own Country did exceed the soft Manners of the other, as to the advancement of Vertue and Courage: And therefore his Treason not only brought upon himself just punishment, but likewise was the occasion that all his fellow Citizens were deprived of the Admiralty at Sea. For the great care and integrity of Aristides in the management of Martial Af∣fairs being taken notice of, as likewise his Courtesie and Moderation towards all All submit to Aristides. that were under his Command (and that managed with an apparent demon∣stration of all manner of Virtuons Qualities) all with one consent chose to sub∣ject themselves to the Athenians. The Captains and Officers therefore sent from Sparta, no longer regarding Pausanias, but all admiring Aristides, submitted in every thing to him, by which means he got the Sovereignty of the Sea without Blows. Aristides therefore forthwith propounds to his Confederates, That it might be decreed by the general Consent of the People in their Publick Assemblies, that from thenceforth a common Fond or Treasury should be appointed at Delos, where all the Money collected for publick Service should be kept. In pursuance of which Counsel, for the better managing of the War against the Persians (wherewith they were then threatned) all the Cities were commanded to con∣tribute Aristides his Justice. according to their several Abilities; which was so liberally done, as the Sum amounted to no less than Five Hundred and Sixty Talents; which he so equally and justly disposed of (being made Lord Treasurer) that he gain'd the entire consent and approbation of all the Cities to whatsoever he thought fit to be done.
And now having accomplished that, which above all other things seemed to be most difficult; for his Justice and Integrity, he got the Name of Aristides the Just. And so the very same time that Pausanias by his Wickedness depriv'd his Citizens of the chief Command at Sea, Aristides by his Virtue gain'd for the Athenians that Sovereignty which they never had before. And these were the Actions of this Year. CHAP. VII. Hiero King of Sicily prepares to besiege Agrigentum; discovers the Treason of them of Himera to Thero their Prince. Expells the Cateneans and Naxians. WHen Phedon was Archon of Athens, the Seventy Sixth Olympiad was per∣form'd, Olymp. 76. Ant. Chr. 474. in which Scamander of Mitylene was Victor; the Consuls of Rome were Cesus Fabius and Spur. Furius Medullinus. About this time died Leotichidas King of Sparta, in the Two and Twentieth Year of his Reign, to whom suc∣ceeded Archilaus, who reign'd Two and Forty Years. At the same time died Anaxilaus King of Rhegium, and Zancles after he had governed Eighteen Years, and Micychus (a faithful Trustee) was admitted into the Government, upon Con∣dition that he should restore all to the Children of the deceased King when they P. 267. came of Age. Hiero King of Syracuse, after the Death of Gelo, had a jealous Eye towards Hiero King of Syracuse. his Brother Polyzelus, because of his great Interest and Esteem among the People; and therefore contriv'd how to take him out of the way; to which end, he im∣ploys all Mercenaries and Strangers about him for his Guard, judging that to be the surest way for the keeping Possession of the Kingdom. And when the A People of Sybaris in Greece. Sybarites were besieged by the A People of Croton in Italy. Croto∣nites, and desir'd assistance from him, he rais'd a great Army, and committed the charge of the War to Polyzelus, with a purpose that he might fall in the Battel. But Polyzelus suspecting the Design, refused the Command; at which the King fell into a great Rage against his Bro∣ther, who fled to Thero King of Agrigentum; whereupon Hiero makes all pre∣paration Ante Chr. 474. and speed to besiege them both. In the mean time, Thrasideus the Son of Thero being Governor of Himera, by Thrasideus his Oppression. his harsh and severe Government, quite lost the Hearts of the People. But they not daring to complain to his Father, (not looking upon him as an impartial Judge) sent Embassadors to Hiero, with great Accusations against Thrasideus, and offer both to deliver up their City, and to assist him against Thero. But Hiero (judging it better for his purpose to deal with Thero in a calm and peaceable manner) secretly betrays the Himerians and their Plots against him. All things being made apparent and plain, Thero is not only reconcil'd to Hiero, but like∣wise The Treason of the Hime∣rians disco∣ver'd by Hie∣ro. Hiero expels the Cataneans. restores Polyzelus to his Brother's former Love and Favour, and puts to death many of the Traitors of Himera. About the same time Hiero expelled the Cataneans and Naxians from their own Country, and planted the Cities with new Colonies of Five Thousand Men out of Peloponesus, and as many from Syracuse, and call'd Catana Aetna; and distributed not only the Country of Catana, but many large Tracts adjoyning, by Lot a∣mongst the Citizens, which were Ten Thousand. And this he did, both to have Succors at hand upon any Pressing occasion, and likewise that he might be ho∣noured after his Death, as the Founder of so great a City, (wherein were con∣tained Ten Thousand Inhabitants. The Cataneans and Naxians he transplanted into the City of the Leontines, commanding them to abide there in common free∣dom with the rest of the Inhabitants.
Thero in like manner considering how Himera was in a great measure depopu∣lated, planted the Doreans there, and ordered that whosoever would, should be inroll'd Citizens of that Place. These govern'd the Commonwealth with great Commendation for the space of Fifty Eight Years: Not long after which time, the Carthaginians raz'd the City to the Ground, which hath continu'd ruin'd and in its Rubbish to this Day. CHAP. VIII. The Lacedemonians quarrel with the Athenians for the Dominion of the Sea. WHen Dromoclides was Archon of Athens, and Marcus Fabius, and Caius Man∣lius Olymp. 76. 2. Anno Mund. 3497. Ant. Chr. 473. Consuls of Rome, the Lacedemonians were highly concern'd for their loss of the Sovereignty of the Sea, and therefore being greatly exasperated a∣gainst the Grecians, who had deserted them, they breath'd out Revenge, with just Indignation against them. A General Council therefore being call'd, they advis'd together concerning War to be proclaim'd against the Athenians, in order to the Recovery of their Dominion at Sea: And in several other Assemblies of the People, most of them (especially the Young Men) were very hot and eager for the War, vaunting every where how rich they should be if they succeeded in their Design, and how all would be encouraged in the Service of their Coun∣try, when every private Family hath had such advantages and occasions to en∣rich and advance themselves. And they call'd to mind an old Prophesie from the Oracle, which bid them P. 268. beware of having but an half Empire, which could signifie nothing else (as they alledg'd) but the present Circumstances they were in. For being there were Two Sovereignties, the one at Land, and the other at Sea, if they lost the one, they must needs be Masters but of a Lame Government. The whole City almost being of the Opinion for a War, the matter was a∣gain referr'd to the Senate, supposing none would dare to contradict the gene∣ral Sense of the Citizens. But one of the Senators, of the Family of Hercules, Ant. Chr. 473. call'd Hetaemaridas, (a Man of great Esteem among the Citizens for his Virtue) advised quite otherwise, and declar'd his Opinion that they should suffer the A∣thenians quietly to enjoy the Dominion of the Sea, for that it was not the Cu∣stom of the Commonwealth of Sparta, to contend about that Sovereignty. And urging many Reasons for the confirmation of his Opinion (which was not at first very grateful) he at length prevail'd both with the Senate and People to wave the War. And so it was concluded, according to his Advice, as most advantagious to desist. The Athenians at the first were in great fear of a bloody War with the Spar∣tans about this Command at Sea, and therefore they built many Gallies for that purpose, and provided a great Mass of Treasure, and sought to gain all their Neighbours and Confederates with the greatest Demonstrations of kindness and courtesie imaginable. But hearing of what was resolv'd and determin'd by the Lacedemonians, all fear of War being now vanish'd, they wholly bent their Minds to advance the power and greatness of their City.
CHAP. IX. Hiero breaks the power of the Hetruscans by Sea. WHen Acestoridas was Archon of Athens, and Cesus Fabius, and T. Virginius Olymp. 76. 3. An. Mu. 3498. Ante Chr. 472. Consuls of Rome, at that time Hiero King of Syracuse (at the Request of the Citizens of Cuma in Italy by their Ambassadors who were greatly annoy'd by the Hetruscans) sent a considerable Fleet to their Assistance, who joyning Battel with the Hetruscans of Tyrenia, in a Sea-Fight sunk several of their Ships, and obtain'd a compleat Victory, and so the power of the Hetruscans being broken, they return'd to Syracuse. CHAP. X. The War between the Tarentines and the Japigians. MEnon being Archon of Athens, L. Aemilius Mamercus, and C. Cornelius Ln∣tulus, Consuls of Rome, broke out a War between the Tarentines and the Olymp. 76. 4. Ant. Ch. 471. Japiges, concerning the Limits of their Lands. At the first there were but little Skirmishes, and taking Booties one from another: But the Enmity increasing by degrees, and in the mean time Slaughters being committed far and near on both sides, at length it broke out into open War. The Japiges, of their Citizens and Confederates, bring into the Field above Twenty Thousand Men. The Taren∣tines understanding the great Preparation made against them, both with their own Citizens and Confederates of Rhegium, likewise take the Field. A bloody Battel was fought, and after many kill'd on both sides, at length the Japiges became absolute Victors; and in the Pursuit, the Tarentines were scattered, and broken into Two Parties, whereof one fled back towards Tarentum, the other were furiously driven towards Rhegium. The Japiges likewise divided themselves into Two Parties, of which, the one pursu'd close upon the back of the Ta∣rentines; and in regard the distance of Place was but very small, there was a very great Slaughter made. The other Party so hotly pursu'd them of Rhe∣gium, that they fell in pell-mell with them into the City, and so took and pos∣sessed it.
CHAP. XI. The Death of Thero Prince of Agrigentum, and the Tyranny of his Son Thra∣sydeus, who Abdicated the Government, and kill'd himself. Three Hun∣dred of the Family of the Fabii slain at one time. THE next Year, Chares was Archon at Athens, and at Rome, Titus Memius, and P. 296. Caius Horatius were Consuls. Then were celebrated the Olympian Games at Elis, being the Seventy. Seventh O∣lympiad, An. Mund. 3500. Olymp. 77. 1. in which Dancles of Argos was Victor. About this Ant. Chr. 470. time, Thero King of Agrigentum died, in the Sixteenth Year Thero King of Agrigentum dy'd. of his Reign, and Thrasydeus his Son succeeded. Thero governed with great Moderation and Justice, and The Commendation of Thero. therefore was greatly loved and honoured by his Subjects: And at his Death was reverenced as a Divine Heroe; but his Son even in his Father's Life-time, appeared to be of a violent and bloody Disposition. And after his Father's Death, throwing aside all restraint of the Laws, he rul'd arbitrarily and tyrannically: For which Thrasideus King of Agrigentum his Cruelty. reason his Subjects combin'd against him, as one not fit to be intrusted with the Government, and perfectly hated by all. Ant. Chr. 470. And therefore within a little time after he came to an end suitable to his Deserts. For after the Death of his Father, he rais'd a great Army of Mercenaries, and of his own Subjects of Agrigentum and Himera, to the number of above Twenty Thousand Horse and Foot, and with these went against the Syracusians. But Hiero furnish'd with a considerable Army, The Fight of the Agregentines and Syracusians. wasted the Borders of Agrigentum, and after join'd Battel with the Enemy, in which most of the Grecians on both sides being drawn up one against another, were slain. But the Syracusians got the Day, with the loss of Two Thousand Men; of the other side were kill'd above Four Thousand. Thrasideus by this ill Success, perplexed in his Mind, Abdicated his Govern∣ment, and fled to the Megarians call'd Miseans, and being there condemn'd to Dye, slew himself. The Agrigentines af∣ter Thrasideus abdicates the Govern∣ment, and kills himself. they had restor'd and setled their Democratical Govern∣ment, sent an Embassador to Hiero, to strike up a Peace. At the same time in Italy, the Romans had War with the Veians, and in a great Bat∣tel at Cremera were routed; and amongst others, Three Hundred of the Fabii, all of one Family, were slain every Man. And these were the Affairs and Events of this Year.
CHAP. XII. The Malice of the Lacedemonians against Themistocles, and his Banishment. His Praise. THE next Year Praxiergus being Archon of Athens, Aulus Virgilius Tri∣costus, An. Mu. 3500. Olymp. 77. 2. Ante Chr. 9. and C. Servilius, Roman Consuls; the Eleans who before lived dis∣pers'd in several little Villages, now imbody'd themselves into one City, call'd Elis. The Lacedemonians observing how Sparta was contemn'd and evil spoken of by reason of the Treachery of Pausanias, and how the Name of Athens grew famous for their Loyalty and Faithfulness one to another, endeavour'd all they could to stain the Athenians with the same Blot of Ignominy. And therefore for as much as Themistocles was a Man of great Repute and Esteem amongst the Athenians, they accuse him of Treason, as if he consulted with Pausanias how Themistocles accus'd. to betray Greece to Xerxes. And the more to provoke the Enemies of Themisto∣cles, and to stir them up to accuse him, they made use both of Bribes and false Insinuations, affirming that Pausanias discover'd his Treasonable Design of be∣traying Greece unto Themistocles, and solicited him to join with him both in Counsel and aid other ways: But though Themistocles would not then agree to do that, yet he did not look upon himself obliged to discover his Friend. How∣ever (notwithstanding the Potency of his Adversaries) Themistocles was clearly ac∣quitted, Themistocles acquitted. and his Name grew more famous amongst the Athenians, for he was greatly beloved by the Citizens for the former eminent Services he had done the Commonwealth. But afterwards (when by reason of his Popularity, he be∣came suspected by some, and envy'd by others) unmindful of his former De∣serts) they determin'd both to weaken his Authority, and to bring down the height of his Spirit. In the first place therefore, they Ba∣nish'd him the City, by the Judgment of Ostracism. This Themistocles Banished. P. 270. Law was instituted at Athens, after the Tyrants were ex∣pell'd out of the City by Pisistratus: And the Law was thus; Every Citizen writ the Name of him in a Shell, whom they The Law of Ostracism. most suspected to be in a capacity. (by reason of his Power and Interest) to overturn the Popular Government; and he whose Name was writ in most of the Shells, was forthwith Banished for the space of Five Years. And this Law was used at Athens, not so much as a punishment for any particu∣lar Ant. Chr. 469. Offence, as to humble the Spirits of proud and aspiring Men, and by their Banishment to reduce them to more Moderation and Submission. Themistocles thus banish'd from his Country, went to Argos; which when known by the Lacedemonians (supposing now they had a fair opportunity to ruin him,) they sent again Embassadors to Athens, to accuse him as being in Conspiracy with Pausanias in his Treason; alledging that those Injuries which did concern all Greece in general, should not be determin'd by the Athenians only, but by a Common Council of Greece, which was wont upon such occasions to be assem∣bled at Sparta. Themistocles considering that the Lacedemonians were resolv'd to expose the Athenians to Shame and Contempt, and that they of Athens were as ready to oppose them, in defending their Country against the Crime objected, he concluded that the matter concerning him, would be agreed to be heard in a Common and General Assembly of the Grecians at Sparta: And he had had ex∣perience, that the Lacedemonians were guided more by Interest and Favour, than by the Rules of Justice, as by a late Experiment was apparent in a Judgment they lately gave, in a Cause between them of Argos and Athens: For they that were Judges in that Assembly, were so envious against the Athenians, that though the Athenians provided more Ships for the late War, than all the Grecians be∣side; Ant. Chr. 469. yet they judg'd them worthy of no more Honour than any of the rest of the Greeks: For these Reasons he judg'd it not advisable to trust to that Assem∣bly at Sparta; for from his late defence made at Athens, they took occasion to renew their Accusation; for in his Justification he had confess'd he had received Letters from Pausanias, to perswade him to joyn with him in his Treason, con∣ceiving this would be a strong Argument for the support of his Innocency; in
as much as it might be concluded, that Pausanias would never have used such earnest intreaty, unless he had before disallow'd of Pausanias his Treasonable Designs. For these Reasons, Themistocles fled to Admeius King of the Of Epirus. Themistocles flies to the Molossians. Molossians, and at his Court humbly prayed for Protection. The King at the first receiv'd him courteously, and promis'd that he would take care of his safety: But when the Lacedemonians sent some of the Nobility to him to demand Themistocles, calling him Traytor, and the ruin of Greece, and denouncing War against the King by all the Grecians, unless he did deliver him: The King at length mov'd with their Threats, and yet pitying his late Suppliant on the one hand, and desiring to a∣void the imputation of ignominy, of harbouring a Traitor on the other hand, advis'd Themistocles with all speed to be gone as privately as he could, and fur∣nish'd him with a great Sum of Money for his support in his Flight. Having receiv'd the Money, and all other Supplies necessary, provided by the King for Ant. Chr. 469. him, he fled in the Night from the Molossians, and finding Two Young Mer∣chants of Liguria, who were well acquainted with the Voyage, he fled with them, and by the advantage of the Night, and the unwearied care and industry of the Two Young Men, he deceiv'd the Lacedemonians, and came safe into Asia, Themistocles flies into Asia. where he had a special Friend call'd Lysithedas, a Man of great wealth and interest, and with him he abode. This Man was in great favour with Xerxes the Persian P. 271. King, and had nobly entertain'd his whole Army as they pass'd that way: By which means he became very familiar and endear'd to the King. The Man pity∣ing the present condition of Themistocles, endeavour'd all he could to prefer him, and promis'd to do him all the service that was in his power. But when Themistocles desir'd him to bring him to the King; he at first re∣fused, alledging if he did, the King would take off his Head, because he had done so much Mischief to the Persians. Yet when he found that Themistocles was in earnest and pressing, he yielded to him, and in a short time, procur'd him a safe Conduct into Persia. It was a Custom there, that when any of the King's Con∣cubines Themistocles convey'd into Persia. were brought to him, they were carried in a Chariot close cover'd, and it was not lawful for any, either to spie or inquire who was so carried. Lysi∣theidas made use of this to effect what he design'd, for he procur'd a Chariot sumptuously adorn'd with Flags and Streamers, and put Themistocles into it, and with all secresie brought him safe to the King; who had first promis'd Lysithei∣das Ante Chr. 469. in private, that none should do him any Injury. After he came into the King's presence, and in an elegant and fluent Discourse, had satisfied him, that he had not been any ways injurious to the Persians, he was fairly discharg'd and acquitted. And being thus safe by the favour of an Enemy, he fell presently into a new and far greater danger, which was thus— Mandona, the Daughter of Darius that destroy'd the Magi, and Sister of Xerxes, The further danger The∣mistocles fell into. was of high esteem among the Persians; she lost all her Children in the Sea-Fight, where the Persians were routed; which she could not bear without great trouble, which mov'd all to pity her: She hearing that Themistocles was come to Court, in a Mourning Habit, and with many Tears, petitioned the King her Brother, that he would kill Themistocles; but not being able to prevail, she solicited the Nobility to the same purpose, and at length rais'd a tumultuous Multitude, to demand Justice against him; who rush'd with great Clamours and Noise into the Palace, crying out for Justice against Themistocles. The King told the No∣bility, that he would call a Senate, and whatever they ordered should be effected. Themistocles had time sufficient given him to prepare for his Trial; within which time he perfectly learnt the Persian Language, and did so manage and plead his own Cause before the Senate, that he was acquitted both of Guilt and Themistocles deliver'd. Punishment. The King rejoic'd at his Discharge, and honour'd him with many rich Gifts: For he gave to him in Marriage a Virtuous Persian Lady, of Noble Birth, and ex∣cellent Beauty: And order'd him many Servants to wait upon him, and gave him all sorts of drinking Vessels, and Ant. Chr. 469. The King of Persia's Bounty to Themistocles. things for daily use, not only for necessity, but for delight and pleasure. He bestow'd likewise upon him, Three Cities for his Support and Maintainance: Magnesia near the River Meander (the richest City of Asia for Corn) to provide him Bread. Mynutes for
Meat and Victuals, being near the Sea, where much Fish was caught; and Lamp∣sacus full of Vines for his Drink. Themistocles now free from all fear of the Grecians (by whom he was undeserved∣ly banish'd after all the good Services he had done for them, and richly pro∣vided for by them, whom he had afflicted with grievous Slaughters,) lived in these Cities with great plenty of all things. At length he died at Magnesia, Themistocles his Death. where he was Buried, and a Sumptuous Monument there set up for him, which remains to this day. Xerxes long'd to renew the War against Greece, and requir'd Themistocles to P. 272. be General of the Army: Who assented, upon Condition that Xerxes would swear that he would not undertake the War without him. Upon which a Bull was sacrifi'd, and at the Solemnity the King swore accordingly. Then Themi∣stocles drunk off a Cup of the Bull's Blood, and immediately fell down Dead. Thus was Xerxes diverted, and Themistocles (by the manner of his Death) left behind him a remarkable Evidence of his Sincerity in the Management of the Affairs of his Country. And now we are come to the Death of the bravest Man amongst the Gre∣cians, of whom it may be justly doubted whether he fled to the Persians, with Ant. Ch. 469. The Praise of Themistocles. the stain of any Guilt or Treachery against his Country, but rather believ'd that the Athenians and the rest of the Grecians, ingrateful for all the good Services he had done, forc'd him most unjustly into extream Hardships and Dangers. For if we impartially and without Envy, examine the Temper and Actions of the Man, we cannot but judge him in every respect, to be the bravest and most accomplished Person of any we have before mention'd. Therefore it may be justly admir'd, that the Athenians should wilfully deprive themselves of so ex∣cellent a Person: For when Sparta was in greatest power above all the other Ci∣ties, and Eurybiades the Spartan was High Admiral of the Fleet, who but he by his Counsels and Management, robb'd all the Spartans of their Glory? Whom have we ever heard of that by one Action did accomplish that which advanc'd his Honour above all Generals, and his City above all Greece, and Greece it self a∣bove all the Barbarians? What General ever had less Advantages, and yet sub∣ject to greater and more eminent Dangers? Who ever obtain'd so glorious a Victory, opposing the combin'd strength of all Asia, with the Citizens of a poor ruin'd City? Who ever advanc'd his Country to such a height and extent of Power by his honourable Actions in time of Peace? Who ever so preserved his Ant. Ch. 469. Country in the greatest heat of a devouring War? By one well laid Stratagem of pulling down a Bridge, he ruin'd the Enemies Land-Forces, causing them to divide one half from the other, and by that means making it more easie for the Grecians to destroy the rest. Therefore if we seriously consider the things done by him, and exactly and particularly examine them, it will evidently appear, that he was most unworthily dealt with by a City that he had by his Virtue and Valour advanc'd to the highest pitch of Glory; and that that City which was esteemed and reputed the Justest and Wisest, was to him most Cruel and Un∣just. Though this may seem a long digression in the praise of Themistocles, yet we conceiv'd it an inexcusable neglect, slightly to pass over his excellent and in∣comparable Virtues. During these Times, Micythus Prince of Rhegium, and Zan∣cles built Teuxuntum in Italy.
CHAP. XIII. Cymon the Athenian General, gains many Places for the Athenians; routs the Persians by a Stratagem at Eurymedentum. DEmotion or Dromodides being Archon at Athens, the Romans chose P. Valerius Olym. 77. 3. Ant. Ch. 468. Publicola, and Naulius Rufus Consuls. During the Government of Demotion, the Athenians chose Cymon, the Son of Miltiades, to be their General, and with a great Army commanded him to pass Cymon General of the Atheni∣ans. over into Asia, to aid the Confederate Cities, and to free them that were as yet garrison'd by the Persians. He came with a Fleet to Bizantium, and took the City Eion from the Persians; and forced Scyrus, where the Pelasgi and Delopes inhabi∣ted; and appointing one amongst the Athenians to see the Repair of it, he divi∣ded the Country by Lot. From hence (with his Mind and Thoughts full of great Projects) he sail'd back Ant. Ch. 468. to the Pyreum, and being furnished with more Ships and sufficient Provision, he puts forth again with a Navy of two hundred Sail. At length with the Ionians, and other Confederates, he got together a Fleet Cymon's Victo∣ry both by Sea and Land. of three hundred Sail, and made for Caria. And when he came there, all the Grecian Cities upon the Sea-Coast, immediately revolted from the Persians. The rest (which were filled with the natural Inhabitants, and with Persian Garrisons) P. 273. Cymon took by Storm. All being thus brought under his Power in Caria, Lycia wholly submitted and came under his Protection. By those that came in to the Athenians the Fleet was greatly encreased. Hereupon the Persians prepared Land-Forces of their own Country, but their Seamen were of Phenicia and Cilicia: Tithraustes, Xerexs his Bastard Son, was General of the Persian Army. Cymon having Intelligence, that the Persian Fleet lay at Cyprus, makes straight The Sea Fight at Cyprus. thither, and joyns Battle with his Two hundred and fifty Ships, against Three hundred and forty of the Persians. It was fought stoutly and bravely on both sides; at length the Victory fell to the Athenians, who (besides many that were sunk and destroyed) took above a Hundred Ships with their Men. The rest flying to Cyprus, the Souldiers left their Ships and ran ashore, and the empty Vessels afterwards came into the Hands of the Enemy. Cymon being not yet satisfied with this Victory, forthwith sail'd away with his whole Fleet, with a Design to fall upon the Land-Army of the Persians, who were then encamp'd at Eurymedon, contriving to delude them by a Stratagem; Ant. Ch. 468. he fill'd the Ships he had taken with the stoutest of his Men, with Turbans and Cymon routs the Persians at Land by a Stratagem. other Ornaments attired like the Persians, who deceiv'd by the Make and Fur∣niture of the Persian Ships, took them for a fresh Supply, and received the Athenians as Friends. Cymon when Night came, landed his Men, and being taken as a Friend, he rushed into the Camp of the Barbarians, now fill'd with Confusion and Terror, (his Soldiers killing all before 'em, and amongst the rest, Pheredates in his Tent, the King's Nephew on his Brother's side, another General of the Persi∣ans Army.) At length the whole Army through the sudden and unexpected Assault, were totally routed and put to flight; and such a Fear and Consterna∣tion surprized the Persians, that many of 'em knew not by whom they were broken; for they could not in the least imagine, that they were assaulted by the Grecians, who had no Land-Army as they were verily perswaded; but thought that the Pisideans their Neighbours, who had been a little before provoked, had risen in Arms against them. Supposing therefore this Impression upon them, to be made from the Land, they fled to their Ships as to their Friends; and because the Night was very dark, the Mistake was the greater, and more mis∣chievous, none knowing certainly what to do. When the Persians in this Con∣fusion were slaughtered on every side, Cymon having before directed his Soldi∣ers, Ant. Ch. 468. that as soon as he should lift up a burning Torch, they should all repair thither, gave the Sign near to the Fleet, fearing some Disaster might happen by his Men being scatter'd and dispers'd in seeking after the Pillage of the Field; at the Sight of the Torch they left off pillaging, and all return'd to their Ships.
The next day they set up a Trophy near the place, and sail'd back to Cyprus, P. 274. fraught with two glorious Victories, the one at Sea, and the other at Land. For it was never before known, that such great Things both by Sea and Land were ever done by one and the same Army. From this time Cymon for the great Atchievments he had bravely and wisely perform'd, both by his Valour and Policy, was highly advanc'd in Reputation, not only amongst his Fellow-Citizens, but all the rest of the Grecians: For he took Three hundred and forty Ships, Twenty thousand Prisoners, and a vast Sum of Money. The Persians greatly perplexed with this dreadful Blow, fell a Building a greater Number of Ships than they had before; for the great Successes of the Athenians after this struck them with Fear and Terror; and from this time, the City increas'd both in Wealth and Power, and became famous abroad for the Glory of their Arms. The Athenians dedicated the Tenths of the Spoil to their Gods, with this Epigram; Since Seas from Europe, Asia did divide, And Mars first rag'd with bloody Hand, Among Mankind the Sun hath not espy'd So sad a Fight from Sea or Land. From the Phenician Fleet when strongly man'd, An Hundred Ships were took, these slew Thousands of Medes, made Asia sighing stand Sad, and oppress'd with th' Armed Crew. These were the things done this Year. CHAP. XIV. A great Earthquake in Sparta; the War upon them by the Helots and Missenians. PHedon was now Archon of Athens, and Lucius Furius Medullinus and Marcus Manlius Vulso Consuls of Rome, when a most sad and unexpected Calamity Olym. 77. 4. Ant. Ch. 467. happened to the Spartans; for by an Earthquake there, not only the Houses were wholly overturn'd, but above Twenty thousand Souls buried in the Rubbish. A great Earth∣quake in Sparta. The City shak'd for a long time together, and many by the violent Fall of the Walls of the Houses miserably perished; and the Houshold-goods and Riches of all sorts were by this dreadful Shake swallow'd up. Thus were they punished as by some angry Deity taking Vengeance upon their Crimes. And were afterwards brought under many other Calamities, by the Hands of Men upon the Accounts following. The Helots and Missenians (inraged not long before against the Lacedemonians) The Helots conspire a∣gainst Sparta. bridled their Anger for a time, whilst they fear'd the Power and Grandeur of the City of Sparta. But when they observ'd that the greatest part of the City and Inhabitants were destroyed by the late Earthquake (setting light by them that were left) they enter'd into a League, and with joint Force made War upon the Spartans. But Archidamus King of Sparta by his Prudence had pre∣serv'd many of the Citizens from the late Ruin, and with these resolutely goes forth against the Enemy. For while the City was in the height of this terri∣ble Convulsion, Archidamus suddenly headed his Army, and hasten'd into the open Field, and commanded the rest to follow him; by which means this rem∣nant Ant. Ch. 467. was preserv'd. Having then marshal'd his Men, he prepared for Battle. The Helots with the Missenians in their first Heat, with great Confidence march'd against Sparta, supposing there was none to make any Defence. But when they understood that Archidamus was ready with the Citizens that were left, to defend the City and Country, they desisted from their Design. After∣wards P. 275. from a Fort they had in Missenia they made daily inrodes into Laconia. The Spartans send to the Athenians for Aid, who furnish'd them with Sup∣plies: The War be∣tween the Mes∣senians & La∣cedemonians. And at length, by their Diligence in procuring Assistance from the rest
of their Confederates, they got together an Army equal to their Enemies: Nay, at the beginning of the War, they were far superior; but afterwards they dismis'd the Athenians, in truth, suspecting that they favour'd the Messenians, but pretending that the Forces of the other Confederates were sufficient for the present Service. The Athenians looking upon it as a Slight and an Affront, departed grumbling, full of Indignation, with their Hearts boyling with Re∣venge against the Lacedemonians; which Hatred increased every day more and more; and this was the first Cause of the Enmity between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, which afterwards broke out into open Hostility, and fill'd the Cities with Cruelty and Bloodshed, and all Greece with Misery and Cala∣mity: But we shall write of these things distinctly in their due place. After this the Lacedemonians, with the Forces of their Confederates, besieged Ithome. In the mean time all the Helots revolted from the Lacedemonians, and join'd with the Messenians. And now though the War had continued ten Years compleat, wasting one another with various Successes, yet they could not de∣cide the Controversy. CHAP. XV. The War between the Argives and the Mycenians. WHen Theaginidas was Archon of Athens, and Lucius Emilius Mamercus and An. Mu. 3504. Olymp. 78. 1. Ant. Ch. 466. Lucius Vopiscus Julius, Consuls of Rome, began the Seventy Eighth Olym∣piad, wherein Parmenidas Possidoniates was Victor. At that time the War broke out between the Argives and the Mycenians upon the following Occasion. The Mycenians by reason of the ancient Renown and Glory of their Country, would never submit to the Government of the Argives, as all the rest of the Cities in the Territory of Argos did, but were still governed by their own Laws distinct from them of Argos. They contended likewise with the Argives, concerning the Holy Rights of the Temple of Juno, and to have the sole Management of the Nemean Games. Besides, when the Argives made a Law, that none should aid the Lacedemonians at Thermophyle, unless the Spartans would relinquish and give up part of their Country to them of Argos, they of Mycena only of all the other Cities in the Territories of Argos join'd with the Lacedemonians. And lastly, they of Argos were jealous, lest by the Growth of their Power, their an∣cient Courage should so revive as to contend with them for the Sovereignty. For these Reasons they had an evil Eye to the Mycenians, and some time not long before had a longing Desire to ruin their City. And now they thought a fit Oc∣casion and Opportunity was offer'd them, to accomplish what they before de∣sign'd, in regard the Spartans seemed not to be in a Condition, by reason of their late Calamity, to aid and assist them. To this end they marched against 'em Ante Chr. 466. with a great Army both from Argos and their Confederates; and having routed 'em, drove 'em within the Walls, and besieg'd their City. The Mycenians made a stout Defence for a time, but wearied out and wasted by Famine, (the Laccdemonians partly thro' Wars of their own, and partly thro' the late Ruins by the Earthquake unable to assist 'em, and the help of the other Confederates failing) they became a Prey to the Conquerors. The Argives made all the Citizens Cap∣tives, and consecrated a Tenth of the Spoil to God, and laid the City even with P. 276. the Ground. Such was the End of Mycena, a City in former times flourishing Mycena in Greece ruin'd. in all Prosperity, that had bred and brought up Men famous in their Generati∣ons, that had been glorious in the World by brave and noble Actions, and now lies wast and forsaken unto this day. These were the Affairs of this Year.
CHAP. XVI. The Death of Hiero. LYsiatus being Governour or Archon of Athens, the Romans chose Lucius Pi∣narius Mamercinus, and Lucius Furius Fusus their Consuls. At this time Hiero King of Syracuse invited to him with many rich Presents the Sons of Anaxalius, Prince of Zancles, now Messina in Sicily, and put them in mind how kind Gelon had been to their Father, and advis'd 'em now they were come to Mens Estate, to call Micythus their Tutor to account, and to take the Sovereign Power and Government into their own Hands. Being return'd to Rhegium, they forthwith demanded an Account of Micythus of his Administration; who, being a just and honest Man, call'd together all the Friends of the two young Men, and gave so full and clear Account of his Trust, that The Justice and Honesty of Micy∣thus, Tutor and Governor of the Prince of Zancles. all then present admir'd his Justice and Faithfulness. The Youths now sorry for what they had done, desir'd him to take upon him again the Government, and as their Father, to order and dispose of all Affairs as he thought fit. But Micythus utterly re∣fus'd to be any longer concern'd; but giving up all, ship'd his Goods, and sail'd forth from Rhegium, with the general Love and Favour of the People, and made Rhegium in Italy. for Greece, where he lived the rest of his Time in great Repute at Tegea in Arcadia. Hiero dyed at Catena, a City repeopled by him, and was there buried with great Pomp and Solemnity after he had reigned Eleven Years. He left his Kingdom to Thrasybulus his Brother, who reigned only one Year. CHAP. XVII. Thrasybulus King of Syracuse depos'd by Force of Arms for his Tyranny. NOw was Lysanias Archon of Athens, and Appius Claudius, and Titus Quintus Olymp. 78. 3 Ant. Chr. 464. Capitolinus, Roman Consuls, during whose Governments, Thrasybulus lost the Kingdom of Syracuse: Concerning whom, inasmuch as it is our purpose par∣ticularly and distinctly to write, it is necessary to look a little back, that so things may be more clearly understood from the beginning. Gelo, the Son of Dinome, a Man for Valour and Military Discipline excelling all the rest, by a notable Stratagem (as you have heard) routed the Carthaginians. And using his Victory with all Moderation towards them he had subdued, and dealing kindly and courteously with all his Neighbours, was greatly honoured among the Sici∣lians; and for the Sweetness of his Disposition, liv'd belov'd of all in Peace and Quietness to the end of his days. Hiero the eldest of his Brothers succeeded him in the Kingdom, but far un∣like him in his Government. For he was covetous, cruel and altogether a Stran∣ger to the Candor and Sincerity of his Brother, by reason whereof many were inclin'd to a Defection and Revolt; but the Memory of Gelo's Generosity and general Kindness to all the Sicilians, restrain'd them from outward Force and Violence. But when Hiero was dead, Thrasybulus his Brother advancing to the P. 277. Crown, exceeded his Predecessor in all Vice and Wickedness: For being more cruel and bloody in his Nature, he slaughtered the Citizens against all Law and Ant. Ch. 264. Justice; and by false Accusations banished many others, and consiscated their Estates. At last hating his People, and the People on the other hand, hating him for the Injuries they had suffer'd, he rais'd a Standing Army, to defend him∣self against the fear'd Revolt of his Subjects. And now growing every day more and more into the Hatred of his People, abusing some, taking away the
Lives of many others; the People not able longer to endure his Cruelties, made a general Defection, and rose up in Arms, to procure their Liberty by the Sword, and shake off that Yoke of Slavery and Tyranny they were under. Thrasibulus seeing the whole City of Syracuse in Arms against him, first endeavour'd to cool them by fair words; but when he saw they were so incens'd, that there was no opposing them, he rais'd Forces from Catana, a Colony not long before plac'd there by Hiero, and by other Confederates and Mercenaries, he got together an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men, and possessed himself of that part of the City call'd Acridina, and the Island which was strongly Fortify'd, from whence he made many Sallies and Incursions upon the Enemy. The Syracusians at first kept that part of the City call'd Ithica, and from thence annoy'd Thrasibulus: And sent Embassadors to Gela, Agrigentum, Selenunte and Himera, and to the rest of the Cities in the Heart of Sicily, desiring aid and assistance for the recovering of their Liberty. These readily answered their Re∣quest, and sent them seasonable Supplies, some Regiments of Foot, others Troops of Horse, others Ships furnished with all necessaries for War: Thus in a short time having a considerable Force both of a Fleet at Sea, and an Army by Land, the Siracusians offer'd Battel to the Enemy, both by Sea and Land. But Thrasi∣bulus being forsaken of his Confederates, and having now none to trust unto Ant. Ch. 464. but his Mercenaries, betook himself only to Acridina, and the Island, and left the rest of the City wholly to the power of the Syracusians. Afterwards he fought with them at Sea, and was beaten, losing many of his Ships, and fled with those that escaped into the Island. Presently after he drew out his Men from Acridina, and joined Battel with them in the Suburbs of the City, where he was again routed, with the loss of many of his Men, and retreated a Second time within his Post in Acridina. At length being out of all hope to regain his Sovereignty, Thrasibulus abdicates the Govern∣ment. he sent to the Syracusians, and came to terms of Agreement with them, and so departed into A City in Magna Grecia in I∣taly. Locros. The Syracusians thus freed from Slavery, suffered the Mercenaries to march away peaceably. They freed likewise the rest of the Cities from such Garri∣sons as were put upon them, and restored to every place the Democracy. From thenceforth the Syracusians lived in great Peace and Prosperity, and injoy'd a popular Government for the space of Threescore Years, till the Reign of Diony∣sius. This Thrasibulus receiv'd a well order'd and constituted Kingdom, but base∣ly lost it by his wickedness; and spent the rest of his Days at Locris as a private Man. While these things were done in Sicily, Rome first created Four to be Tri∣bunes P. 278. of the People, Caius Sicinius, Lucius Numitorius, Marcus Duillius, and Spu∣rius Aquilius. CHAP. XVIII. The Murder of Xerxes by Artabanus. AT the end of this Year, Lysitheus was made Chief Governor of Athens, and Olymp. 78. 4. Ant. Chr. 463. Lucius Valerius Publicola, and Titus Aemilius Mamercus, Consuls of Rome. In their times Artabanus of Hircania, in great esteem with Xerxes, and Captain of his Guard, contriv'd to gain the Kingdom by the Murder of the King. He reveals his Design to Mithridates the Eunuch, one of the King's Chamberlains (whom he most consided in, as being his near Kinsman, and whom he had ob∣lig'd by many instances of his Favour.) Mithridates presently complies with him, and brings Artabanus privately in the Night into the Bed-Chamber, and being entred, without delay murthers the King: And in the heat of the Fact runs to the King's Sons, Two of whom, Darius the Eldest, and Artaxerxes, were then at Court: Hytaspes the Third at that time, was Governor of Bactria. Artabanus in the dead of the Night, hastens to Artaxerxes, and tells him that Darius had murther'd his Father to come to the Crown: And therefore perswades Artaxerxes that he should not slothfully suffer his Brother to settle himself on the Throne,
but revenge his Father's Death, and take upon himself the Sovereignty. For the effecting whereof, he promis'd him to bring in the King's Guards for his Assistance. Artaxerxes was easily persuaded, and with the Assistance of the Guards kills his Brother. Artabanus seeing his Treachery to succeed according to his hearts De∣sire, now boasts before all his Sons that the time was come for his advancement to the Kingdom, and forthwith came to Artaxerxes with his Sword drawn, and Ant. Chr. 463. Wounds him. The King not being much hurt, bravely Defends himself, and kills Artabanus upon the place. Having thus not only preserv'd himself, but reveng'd Artaxerxes kills Artaba∣nus. the Murther of his Father, he was established in the Throne of Persia. This was the end of Xerxes after he had reign'd Twenty Years. But his Successor continued Forty Four. CHAP. XIX. The War between the Athenians and the Aegineans. THE following Year wherein Archimedes was Archon of Athens, Aulus Vir∣gilius, Olymp. 79. Ant. Ch. 462. and Titus Numitius, Roman Consuls; was the first Year of the Se∣venty Ninth Olympiad, at which Xenophon the Corinthian won the Prize: At this time the Thrasians revolted from the Athenians, through the Differences arising concerning the Mines, but were reduc'd by force to their Obedience. The Ae∣gineans likewise rebell'd, and being subdued, the Athenians besieg'd their City, which was grown proud, not only through their great Successes and Victories at Sea, but their Riches at Land, and having a brave and well furnished Navy, were ever Enemies to the Athenians; who therefore entred the Aegina, near Pelopone∣sus in the Ae∣gean Sea. Island with an Army, laid waste the Country, and resolv'd to raze the City Aegina to the Ground: Hereupon now grown great in power, they carried not themselves with that Humanity and Courtesie towards their Confederates as they were used to do, but domineer'd every where with a proud and high Hand. This impe∣rious way of theirs, caus'd many of their Confederates to enter into Consulta∣tions for a general Defection, and some particular Places determin'd it of their Ante Chr. 462. own accord, without flagging for, or expecting the results of a General Assem∣bly. While these things were acting, the Athenians (being now every where P. 279. Masters at Sea) sent a Colony of Ten Thousand Men to Amphipolis (chosen partly out of the Citizens, partly from among the Confederates) and divided the Country by Lot: For sometime they kept under the Thrasians that bordered upon them; but when they attempted to proceed further into the heart of the Country, those that enter'd Thrace were wholly cut off by the A People of Thrace, near the Moun∣tain Edon. Edones. CHAP. XX. The Egyptians revolt from the Persians. New Troubles in Sicily: TLepolemus being Governor of Athens, the Roman Consuls were Titus Quin∣tius, Olymp. 79. 2. Ante Chr. 461. and Quintus Arbilius Structus. Artaxerxes now newly come to the Throne of Persia, first put to Death all those that had an Hand in the Murther of his Father, and then setled Affairs so as he This is Artaxerxes Longimanus, who forbad the Building of Jerusalem. From his Seventh Year, began Da∣niel's Seventy Weeks, which is 490 Years to the Death of Christ. thought most conducing to the interest of the Government: For he remov'd those Governors of the Provinces whom he most suspected, and plac'd others whom he most confided in, in their room. He took care to store up all manner of Provisions, and to furnish his Army with all things necessary; and ruling with all Justice and Equity, he grew into high Esteem among the Persians. In the
mean time the Egyptians hearing of the Death of Xerxes, and the Troubles in Persia occasion'd thereby, fell a plotting how to recover their Liberty; and to that The Egyptians revolt from the Persians. end on a sudden rose against the Persians, and drave the Questors or Persian Treasurers out of Egypt. Then they set up one Inarus to be their King; who first had an Army of the Inarus set up in Egypt. natural Inhabitants, and afterwards increas'd his Forces by Mercenary Foreigners. He sent likewise Embassadors to Athens, desiring their aid, with Promises that if they regain'd their Liberty, the whole Kingdom should be for their Service and Advantage as well as his; and he should be ever and in every thing grateful to them. The Athenians conceiving it to be much to their advantage, if by what force they could make, they might drain the Persians of their Money, and gain likewise the Egyptians to their interest, to be ready to serve them upon all occa∣sions, determin'd to send to their Assistance a Navy of Three Hundred Sail; and Ant. Ch. 461 to that end, all Hands were at work to make ready a Fleet. Artaxerxes recei∣ving the News of the Revolt of the Egyptians, resolved to exceed them both in number of Men, and Provisions of War; and for that purpose forthwith rais'd Souldiers out of all the Provinces of the Kingdom, rigg'd out his Fleet, and o∣mitted nothing necessary in the present Juncture. And thus stood the Affairs of Asia and Egypt at this time. In Sicily after they had cast off the Kingly Government, and restored all the The flourish∣ing state of Sicily after the deposi∣tion of Ty∣rants. Cities to liberty, the whole Island greatly flourished; for having a rich and fer∣tile Soyl, and Peace on every side, they grew very rich in a short time, the Land abounding in Labourers, Cattel, and all other Conveniences, for the comfort and happiness of Man's Life, much being now laid up, and nothing expended in Wars. But they continu'd not long thus, but again broke forth into Wars and Seditions upon the account following. Thrasibulus being deposed, they call'd a General As∣sembly, to consult about the manner of a Popular Government, and there it was unanimously decreed, that a Statue should be erected to Jovi Libe∣ratori. Jove the Deliverer, as high as a Colossus, and that there should be Yearly upon the Day that they were rid of the Tyrant, and regain'd their Liberty, Sacrifices offered, and Solemn Games celebrated: At which Solemnities they likewise vow'd to sacrifice Four Hundred and Fifty Oxen, and therewith to feast all the People, and that all the P. 280. Magistrates (according to the ancient Custom) should be chosen out of the chiefest Citizens; and that none of the Strangers who were made Denizens by Gelon, should be admitted to these Honours, looking upon them either as unworthy, or Ant. Chr. 461. fearing lest they (being always inur'd to Monarchy) should endeavour a change of Government, which was no vain conception, as the Event after made evident. For Gelon had infranchis'd above Ten Thousand Mercenaries, of whom, above Seven Thousand remain'd at that time. These being inraged thus to be excluded, and made incapable of being chosen New Stirs in Sicily at Syra∣euse. Magistrates, began to plot, and at length joining together, seiz'd upon Acridina, a part of the City, and the forementioned Island, both of which Places were strongly wall'd and fortify'd. On the other side in this Confusion, the Syracusians possessed themselves of an∣other part of the City, especially towards the Epipole, defending themselves with a Wall and strong Guards. The Seditious were so penn'd up, that they grew scant in their Provisions. And though they were far less in number than the Citizens, yet they were much better Souldiers; and therefore when ever they made any Sallies, in every Skirmish they went off with Success. But being so close shut up, they were nigh famished. And this was the state of Sicily at this time. This Year Conon was Archon of Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and Tibe∣rius Olymp. 79. Ant. Chr. 46. Aemilius Mamercus were Roman Consuls. At this time Artaxerxes King of Persia, made Archemenes the Son of Darius his great Uncle, General of his Ar∣my intended against Egypt, which consisted of above Three Hundred Thousand Horse and Foot: With these he march'd into Egypt, and incamp'd near the River Nile, and as soon as he had refresh'd his Army, prepar'd for Battel. The Egyptian Forces were made up of Africans and Egyptians, and waited in ex∣pectation of further Aid from the Athenians; who at length arrived with a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail, and joining with the Egyptians, the Battel began with great Resolution on both sides. The Persians indeed were far more in number; The Persians routed in E∣gypt. but the Athenians with great Valour and Courage breaking in upon that Wing of
the Persians that was plac'd against them, and killing and destroying many of them, the rest of the Barbarians fled, and in the pursuit, most of the Army was cut off, and the rest fled to a place call'd the The Third part of Memphis, the other Two Parts being taken by the Athenians, Usher's Annals, 136. Thu∣cidides, lib. 1. 37. Memphis now call'd Grand Cairo. White Wall. The Athenians by whose Valour the Victory was obtain'd, follow'd close after them to the place, and Besieged it. But Artaxerxes having intelligence of the Overthrow of his Ar∣my, sent some he could most confide in, to the Lacedemo∣nians, with a great Sum of Money, to induce the Spartans to make War upon the Athenians, thinking by that means to force them back, for the necessary defence of their own Country. But the Lacedemonians would neither accept of the Money, nor hearken to any other Proposals of the Persians. Being thus without hopes of Aid from the Lacede∣monians, Artaxerxes prepar'd a new Army, and made Artabazus and Megabysus, both very Valiant Men, Generals, and sent them against the Egyptians. CHAP. XXI. The Persians Expedition into Aegypt. Wars in Sicily. AT Athens, Euippas was Archon, and Quintus Servilius and Spurius Posthumus P. 281. Olymp. 79. 4. Ant. Chr. 459. Artabazus and Megabyzus sent Generals into Egypt. Albus, Consuls at Rome. At which time Artabasus and Megabyzus appoint∣ed Generals for the Aegyptian War, marched away for Aegypt with above Three hundred thousand Horse and Foot. When they came to Cilicia and Phenicia, they refresh'd the Army, and commanded the Cyprians, Phenicians and Cilicians to set forth a Fleet, who furnished out Three hundred Sail fitted both with Men, Provisions and all other things convenient and necessary for a Sea-Fight. In Preparations for the War, training of the Souldiers, and imploying them∣selves in other Acts of Military Discipline, they spent almost a whole Year. The Athenians in the mean time closely besieg'd the Persians at the White Wall, which was valiantly defended and not likely to be taken after a Years Siege. In Sicily the Syracusians at War with the before-named Revolters daily assaulted A Fight be∣tween the Sy∣racusians and the Seditious. Acridina with the adjoyning Island; and tho' they overcame the Rebels at Sea, yet they could not drive them out of the City, they were so fortify'd. But af∣terwards when both Armies were drawn out into the open Field, the Fight be∣ing obstinate, many were killed on both sides, but the Victory was at length gain'd by the Syracusians. After the Battle the Syracusians crown'd Six hundred Men who were most active in the Fight, and gave to every one a * Mina in Money, as a Reward of his Valour. During these Combustions, Deucetius Ge∣neral About 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. of the Sicilians, began a War against the Inhabitants of Catana, for with∣holding the Lands of the Sicilians, in which the Syracusians likewise ingaged a∣gainst A War against them of Cata∣na. Catana. The Cataneans had these Lands divided to them by Lot, when they were first plac'd a Colony there by Hiero the late King. And therefore defended their Right with all the Force and Power they could. But being overcome in seve∣ral Battles, they were forced at length to leave Catana, and possessed themselves The Cities of Sicily freed from Fo∣reigners. of the City Etna, formerly call'd Eunetia; and the ancient Inhabitants of Catana after a long time of Banishment, return'd to their own Country, and former Habitations. After this, all others that were driven out of their own proper Cities in the times of Hiero, with the Assistance of their Neighbours, were forth∣with Ant. Chr. 459. restored, and the Usurpers were every where ejected, as the Gelones, Acra∣gentines and Himereans. The Rhegians and Zancleans likewise threw off the re∣gal Power of the Sons of Anaxilas, and asserted the Liberty of their Country. After this the Gelones seating themselves at Camerina, again divided the Land by Lots. At length almost all the Cities determining to root up all those they took for their Enemies, confederated together (by virtue of a public Edict) against all the Foreigners, and restored those that had been banished, to their ancient Ci∣ties; transplanting all the Strangers (that had before usurped) to Messena. In this manner all the Seditions and Tumults through the Cities of Sicily were ap∣peased,
and almost all were forced from the Power of Foreigners, and reduced to the ancient Form of a Common-wealth, and all the public Lands divided by Lot to the Citizens. P. 282. Now Phasiclides was Governour of Athens, and the Eightieth Olympiad was cele∣brated, Olymp. 80. 1. Ant. Chr. 458. in which Tharillus the Thessalian was Victor. And at Rome were chosen Quintus Fabius, and Titus Quintius Capitolinus, Consuls. In Asia, the Persian Com∣manders now in Cilicia had got together a Fleet of Three hundred Sail, well An Expedition into Egypt by the Persian Generals. man'd and furnish'd in every respect for the War, and march'd with the Land-Army through Syria and Phenicia, and came at length to Memphis, (the Fleet sailing all along by the sides of them, near the Shoar) where they forthwith rais'd the Siege at the White Wall; both the Aegyptians and Athenians being amaz'd at the Approach of such an Enemy: Hereupon the Persians presently call a Coun∣cil of War, and prudently resolved to decline fighting, but rather to endeavour to make an end of the War by some politick Stratagem. And to that end know∣ing that the Athenian Fleet lay at Anchor at an Island call'd Or Prosopis in Aegypt, in that Part called Delta. Prosopitis, they diverted the Course of the River (which encompassed the Island) by deep Trenches made in the ad∣joyning Continent, and by that means joyn'd the Island to Main-land. The Aegyptians as soon as they discern'd all the Ships, stood upon dry Land, struck with Amazement, forsook the Athenians, and submitted themselves to the Persians. The Athenians thus The Athenian Fleet ruined by a Stratagem in Aegypt by the Persians. forsaken, and seeing the Fleet made useless, set Fire to all the Ships, that they might not come into the Power of the Ene∣my. And nothing terrify'd with their present Circumstances, they encourag'd and advis'd one another, that they should not do any thing that should be a ble∣mish and disgrace to the Courage and Valour they had before shewn in former Encounters. Soaring therefore above the Valour of those that lost their Lives at Thermopole, for the safety of Greece they resolv'd to fight. But the Commanders of the Per∣sians, Artabazus and Megabizus seeing the Courage of the Athenians, and conside∣ring their former Losses of so many thousand Men, they made Peace with the Peace made with the A∣thenian Army. Athenians upon this Condition, That they should depart out of Aegypt without Hurt or Prejudice. The Athenians thus preserv'd (thro' their own Valour) leave Aegypt, and marching thro' Africk to Cyrene, from thence they all came safe (beyond their hopes) unto their own Country. During these things, Ephialtes Son of Simonidas, Tribune of the People at Athens, stir'd up the Rabble against Ante Chr. 458. A Tumult a∣gainst the Magistrates in Athenis. the Areopagites to take away the Power from the Senate in Mars Hill, and to overturn the ancient and laudable Laws of the Country. But such wicked De∣signs went not unpunish'd, for he was kill'd in the Night, not known by whom, and so ended his days in Dishonour. CHAP. XXII. The War between the Epidaurians and the Athenians. THE former Year ended, Philocles governed Athens the next, and at Rome, Aulus Posthumius were Consuls: In their times was begun the War by Olymp. 80. 2. Ant. Chr. 457. the Corinthians and Epidaurians against the Athenians, who in a sharp Battel, overcame the other, and with a great Fleet made out against the Halienses, and invaded Peloponesus, where they slaughter'd and destroy'd many of their Enemies. The Peloponesians make Head again, and with a great Army sight them at Cerryphalia, where the Athenians again rout them. Grown now con∣sident with these Successes, and observing the Aegineans (puffed up with the Victories that they had obtain'd) to carry it as Enemies towards them, they de∣termin'd to make War upon them; and in Execution thereof, sent forth against them a great Fleet: They of Aegina on the other hand, trusting to their Skill War between the Athenians and them of Aegina. Ant. Chr. 457. and former Successes at Sea, despised the great Forces of the Athenians, and with a small Navy, and some few other Ships lately built, venture a Sea-Fight,
but were beaten, with the loss of Seventy of their Vessels; so that now they were wholly discouraged and dejected, and therefore were forced to submit P. 283. themselves to the Athenians. These things were done by Leocrates, the Athenian Admiral, in the space of Nine Months War with the Aeginetes. In the mean time, Deucetius King of Sicily (very Rich, and of a Noble Family) built Mene∣num, and divided by Lot the adjacent Lands, amongst them of the Colony brought thither. Then he Besieged the Famous City Morgantina, and was high∣ly honour'd by all his Countrymen. CHAP. XXIII. The War between the Corinthians and Megareans. THE next year Bion was Archon at Athens, and Publius Servilius Structus, and Olym. 80. 3. Ant. Ch. 456. Lutius Aebutius Eliuas, Roman Consuls. During their Government, broke out the War between the Corinthians and Megareans about the Limits of their Country. At the first they made inroads into one anothers Country, and then proceeded with little Skirmishes. At length the difference growing higher and hotter, the Megarians (suspecting their own weakness) made a League with the Athenians, by which means they ballanced their Enemies in Strength and Power. And when the Corinthians sent a considerable Army from Peloponesus against Ma∣gera, the Athenians sent Aids to the Magerians under Myromides their General, a very Valiant Man. The Armies presently ingag'd, and great Valour and Obsti∣nacy was shew'd on both sides, insomuch as the Success was very doubtful a long time; till at length the Athenians got the day, with the Slaughter of Mul∣titudes of the Enemy. And a few Days after, the Athenians were Victors in an∣other Battel fought at Cimolia, where they likewise kill'd many. Within a few Days after, a Third Battel was fought.—Here something seems to be want∣ing Ant. Chr. 456. in the Greek Copy. The Phoceans made War against the Doreans, who were originally Lacedemo∣nians, and inhabited Three Cities lying under Mount Parnassus, Erybium. Cytinium, Boium and Erineus. At the first, the Doreans, (being overcome) lost their Cities to the Boion. War between the Phoceans and Doreans. other. But the Lacedemonians being of the same Blood, afterwards sent them aid under Nicomedes, formerly General of Cleomedes, who led forth an Army of Fifteen Hundred Lacedemonians, and rais'd as many more out of Peloponesus as made up Ten Thousand; with these he march'd to the Defence of the Dores, he being Tutor and Governor of Pleistonactis their King, who was then a Child. Having conquered the Phoceans, and recover'd the Cities, he put an end to the War, upon Articles of Peace between the Two Nations. When the Athenians understood that the Lacedemonians had made an end of the Phocean War, and were ready to return home, they consulted how to cut them off in their Passage by the way. To this end, having resolv'd upon the attempt, they took to their aid and assistance the Argives and Thessalians, and so making out against them with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, man'd with above Fourteen Thousand Souldiers, they stopt the Passages through Grarenea, a Ridge of a Hill lying before the Entrance into the Isth∣mos. The Athenians contrive to cut off the Lacedemonians in their return Home. Ant. Chr. 456. Gera∣nea. The Lacedemonians hearing of the Contrivances of the Athenians, turn'd out of the way towards Tanagra in Beotia: But the Athenians march'd swiftly after them, and at length the Two Armies join'd Battel; and although the Thessalians (in the very heat of the Fight) deserted the Athenians, and joyn'd with the Spartans, yet they and the Argives stood manfully to it, and after many were kill'd on both sides, the Night put an end to the Dispute. After this, there being sent much Provision out of Attica to the Athenians, which was understood by the Thessalians, they conceiving this to be now a fit opportunity to do some notable Service, (having refreshed themselves) in the Night marched out to meet the Carriages: And be∣ing that the Guard that attended them, never suspected any Design, but admitted the Thessalians as Friends, the Contest grew hot whether should get or lose
all. For the Thessalians (being at first thus admitted) kill'd all they met, and P. 284. being well prepared, and the other taken at unawares, made a great Slaughter. The Athenians that were encamp'd, hearing of what mischief the Thessalians had done, hasten'd to the Relief of their Countrymen, and fell with great Rage upon the Thessalians, and routed them at the first Charge with a great Slaughter. In the mean time, the Lacedemonians came in to the and of the Thessalians, and both Armies being now drawn up in Battalia, it came to a general Battel, which was fought with great Resolution, and many kill'd on both sides. The issue and event being doubtful, both the one side and the other suspected the loss of the Day; but Night growing on, and the Victory still remaining doubtful, Messen∣gers were dispatch'd one to another, and a Truce at length agreed upon for Four Months. CHAP. XXIV. The War between the Athenians and the Beotians. THIS Year ended, Mnesitheides was chosen Archon of Athens, and Lucius Olym. 80. 4. Ant. Ch. 455. Lucretius, and Titus Viturius Cicurinus were Roman Consuls. In the time of their Governments, the Thebans being brought low by reason of their League with Xerxes, endeavour'd by all the Artifices they could, to regain their former Power and Sovereignty; for being greatly despis'd by all the Beotians who had shaken off their Authority, they apply'd themselves to the Lacedemonians, to as∣sist them in recovering the Government of Beotia: And for this Kindness they The War be∣tween the A∣thenians and the Thebans. promis'd that they would be at all the Charge of the War then begun against them by the Athenians, and that the Spartans should not need to bring any Land-Forces out of Peloponesus. The Lacedemonians judging it to be much to their advantage, to gratifie the Thebans in their Request, conceiving that if they were thus strengthen'd and supported, they would become a Bulwark against the Athenians, especially the Thebans having at that time a great and well disciplin'd Army at Tanagra, they enlarg'd the Bounds and Circuit of the City of Thebes, and compell'd all the Beo∣tians to the subjection of the Thebans. The Athenians to obviate the Designs of the Lacedemonians, rais'd a conside∣rable Army, and made Myronides the Son of Callias, General. Having chosen a competent number of the Citizens, he told them the Day wherein he intended to march out of the City. When the Day came, many of the Souldiers (not∣withstanding the Command given) did not appear; yet with those he had, he made for Beotia. Some of his Friends and Officers of the Army, persuaded him to stay, till the rest of the Souldiers came up to them. But Myronides be∣ing both a Prudent and Valiant Commander, answer'd, That it did not become a General to Loyter, for it was a shrew'd Sign, that they who were slow and dilatory in their March towards their Enemy, would be Cowards in the Fight, and would prefer their own safety before the good of their Country. For they (said he) that readily ap∣pear'd at the Day appointed, gave an evident Testimony of their Valour, that they were resolv'd not to shrink in the Day of Battel. Which by the Sequel did appear; Ant. Ch. 455. The Thebans routed by My∣ronides. for he march'd against the Thebans with an Army far less in number of Men, but much excelling in Prowess and Valour, and by the brave Resolution of his Souldiers, utterly routed the Enemy; which Victory was not inferiour to any that were ever obtain'd by the Athenians in former Times. For neither that at Marathon, nor at Platea against the Persians, nor any other Exploit of the A∣thenians, did exceed this of Myronides against the Thebans. For the former, some of them were obtain'd against Barbarians, others by the help of their Confe∣derates. But this was gain'd by the Athenians themselves alone, against the P. 285. most Valiant of the Greeks. For the Beotians were ever accounted for stoutness and hardyness, not inferior to any in Greece; which in after-times was confirm'd; for at Leuctra and Mantinea, the Thebans alone fought both with the Lacedemonians
and their Confederates, and purchas'd to themselves great Renown, and became reputed (and that not unworthily) the best Commanders of all Greece. Although this Battel was one of the most Famous, yet no Author has writ any thing of the manner or order of it. However by this glorious Victory over the Beotians, Myronides has equaliz'd his Memory with those illustrious Generals, The∣mistocles, Miltiades and Cimon. Immediately after the Fight, he took Tanagra by Storm, and demolisht it. And running over all Beotia, wasted all before him, and divided the Spoil and Riches of the Country amongst his Souldiers. The Beotians inraged with the wasting and destroying of their Country, came together from all Parts, and with a great Army march'd against their Enemies. Another Bat∣tel with the Thebans. Ant. Chr. 455. The Fight began amongst the Vineyards of Beotia, and both sides being fully re∣solved, the heat of the Battel continued a whole Day, but at length with great difficulty the Valour of the Athenians prevail'd. Myronides shortly wan all the Cities of Beotia, except Thebes. Then he rais'd The Acts of Myronides. his Camp, and march'd with his Army against the Locrians (call'd Opuntians) routed them at the first Onset, and upon their submission took Hostages, and then broke into Pharsalia, and with as much ease overcame the Phoceans, as he did the Locrians, and receiving Hostages, marched for Thessaly, and charging them with Treason, commanded them to recall those they had Banished. But the Pharsalians refusing to obey, he besieged the Pharsalos. City, which (after a long and stout Defence) he was not able to take by Force, and therefore raised his Siege, and return'd to Athens; where he was receiv'd with great Acclama∣tions of Praise, for the noble Acts he had in so short a time accomplish'd. These were the Remarks of this Year. CHAP. XXV. The Athenians invade the Spartans by Tolmides. THE Eighty First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, wherein Polymnastus Olymp. 81. An. Mu. 3516. Ant. Chr. 454. Cyreneus was Victor, at the time when Callias was Archon of Athens, and Servius Sulpitius and Publius Volumnius Amintinus were Roman Consuls. Then Tol∣mides the Admiral of the Athenian Fleet out of Emulation to the glory of My∣ronides, Tolmides's De∣sign to invade Laconia. made it his Business to do something more than ordinary remarkable. And therefore for as much as none before had ever attempted to invade Laconia, he advis'd the People of Athens to make an Inroad into the Country of the Spartans, undertaking that if he might have but a Thousand Armed Men Aboard his Ships, he would waste Laconia, and bring an Eclipse upon the Spartans Glo∣ry. Having got the Consent of the People, and designing privately to get more His Strata∣gem to raise Souldiers. Men than he at first required, he conceiv'd this Project: All were of opinion that a choice should be made of the strongest, young and most spriteful Men in the Army. But Tolmides designing far more than the Thousand yielded to him for his intended Enterprize: He goes to every one of the ablest Men, and tells 'em each singly, that he intended to chuse him for the War, and that it was far more for their Credit and Reputation, to offer themselves of their own accord, than being chosen to be compell'd to the Service. When by this means he had persuaded above Three Thousand to give in their Names of their own accord, and discern'd the rest to be backward, he then proceeded to the choice of the Thousand granted to him by the Consent of the People. And when all things P. 286. The acts of Tolmides. were ready for the Expedition, he set Sail with Fifty Ships, and Four Thousand Souldiers, and arriving at Methon in Laconia, took it; but by reason of the speedy Succour sent by the Spartans, he was forc'd to quit the Place, and made for Gythium, a Port Town of the Lacedemonians, which he likewise took, and there burnt and destroy'd all the Shipping and Naval Provisions, wasting the Ant. Chr. 454. Country round about. Thence he bent his Course for Zacynthus in Cephalania, and possess'd himself of that City, and after he had brought all the Towns in Ce∣phalania to a submission, he sail'd with the whole Fleet to Naupactus, on the
opposite Shore, which he gain'd at the first Assault, and there plac'd a Colony of the Noblest Families of the Messenians, who had been before (upon Agree∣ment) dismis'd by the Lacedemonians. For about this time in a War against the Messenians and the Helots, the Lacedemonians had reduced most of them to their former Subjection. And them of Ithomea they discharg'd upon Articles of Sub∣mission, as is before said: And as for the Helots, those of them that were the Authors and Ringleaders of the Defection, they had put to Death, and made the rest Slaves. Sosistratus now Pretor of Athens, the Romans chose for Consuls, Publius Vale∣lerius Olymp. 81. 2. An. M. 3517. Ant. Chr. 453. Publicola, and Caius Clodius Rhegillanus. During their Government, Tolmi∣des continued in Beotia. But the Athenians made Pericles the Son of Xanthes Ge∣neral of a select number of Men, and committed to him Fifty Ships, and a Thousand Souldiers, with a Command to invade Peloponesus. Hereupon he wasted Pericles made General. a great part of it, and passed into Acarnania, near the Island Oeniades, and there brought all the Cities to a Submission. So that during this Year, the Athenians gain'd many Cities, and became famous for their Military Discipline, and many glorious Successes in their Wars. CHAP. XXVI. The War in Sicily between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans. The Custom of writing upon an Olive-Leaf the Names of such as were to be banish'd in Sicily, call'd Petalism. IN this Year Ariston was Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibu∣lanus Olymp. 81. 3. An. M. 3518. Ant. Ch. 452. and Lucius Cornelius Curetinus, Consuls of Rome. In the time of their Government, a Peace was made between the Athenians and the Peloponesians for Five Years, by the mediation of Cimon the Athenian. In Sicily a War broke out between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans concern∣ing A War be∣tween the Aegestines and Lilybeans in Sicily. some Lands near to the River Mazarus: After a sharp Battel fought, and many kill'd on both sides, they began to cool for some time; but after an ac∣count of the Citizens was taken in every City, and a new division of the Lands was made by Lot, and that every one was to take his share as it fell, the shares fell so confus'd, that the Cities broke out again into Civil Discords and Dis∣sentions, by which Mischiefs the Syracusians greatly smarted. For one call'd Tyndarides, a rash conceited Fellow, who protecting and feeding many poor People, Tyndarides's Treason in Syracuse. by that means sought to make a Party to further his Design in obtaining of the Principality: But when it was evident, that he aim'd at the Sovereign power, he was brought to his Trial and condemn'd to dye. And when they were bring∣ing him back to the Goal, he was by the Party he had before prepared, as a∣foresaid, by Force rescu'd out of the Hands of the Officers. This rais'd a Tu∣mult through the whole City, and caus'd the chief and soberest part of the Ci∣tizens to join together against them; who presently apprehended the Innova∣tors, and put them, together with Tyndarides to death. When several Attempts were made of this kind, and many were infected with this itch of Dominion, the Syracusians were at length forc'd after the Example of the Athenians, to make The Law of Petalism made in Syracuse. a Law not much differing from that of Ostracism at Athens: For there every Ci∣tizen was to write in . a Shell the Name of him whom they conceiv'd to be most powerful to possess himself of Sovereignty. So the Syracusians were to write the Name of him who was thought to be most potent upon an  Olive-Leaf; and when the Leaves were counted, he whose Name was upon most of the Leaves, was Banish'd for Five Years. By this means they conceiv'd they should bring down the aspiring Minds of P. 287. Ant. Ch. 452. the great ones to some moderation; for they did not hereby intend the punish∣ment of any Crime that was committed, but the prevention of Mischief, by im∣pairing the Estates, and weakning the interest of them that might be ambitious.
That therefore which the Athenians call'd Ostracism, from the nature of the thing, the Syracusians call'd Petalism. This continu'd long amongst the Athenians, but was abolished within a short Petalism a∣bolish'd. time after by the Syracusians, for these Reasons: For when several of the chief and best deserving Men were by this Law banish'd the City, the rest who were beloved by the Citizens, and were Men of great use in the Service of their Country, withdrew themselves from all publick business, and out of fear of the Law, betook themselves to private Lives: But minding thus their own private Concerns, at length they fell into all manner of Profuseness and Luxury. In the mean time, the basest of the Citizens taking upon them the Government, stirr'd up the Common People to Innovations and Disturbances in the Commonwealth; and so all things ran a Second time into Sedition and Confusion, and a conti∣nual and mighty Storm of Trouble and Disorder shook the City. For there arose many Ringleaders and Seducers of the People, especially Young Conceited Men, who thought none spoke like themselves, nor no Wisdom like theirs. In Sum, many instead of the Principles of the ancient Justice and Honesty, instill'd Ant. Chr. 452. nothing into the People, but wicked Notions, both in Manners and Practice. In time of Peace, it was their only business to heap together Riches, but had no regard at all to Amity and Justice amongst Men. The Decree therefore of Petalism, upon more mature Consideration, was repeal'd within a short time after it was put in execution. And thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at this time. CHAP. XXVII. Pericles makes an Inrode into Peloponesus. Besieg'd Scycion. Phaylus in Sicily made Admiral against the Tyrrhenian Pirats; is corrupted and banish'd. The Original of the Palici: And the Stories of the Temple, and Wonders of the Craters in Sicily. WHen Lysicrates was Governor of Athens, Caius Nausius Rutillius, and Lucius Olymp. 81. 4. Ante Chr. 451. Minutius Augurinus, were celebrated Consuls at Rome. During their times, Pericles the Athenian General made an Inrode into Peloponesus, and wasted the Pericles makes an inrode into Peloponesus. Country of the Scycions. The Scycions march'd out with a great Army against him, and Battel being join'd, Pericles routed them, and kill'd many in the Pur∣suit, and having driven the rest within the Walls of the City, laid Siege to the Place. But after he had made a valiant Assault, and saw he could not Scycion Be∣sieged. win the Place, in regard the Lacedemonians had sent Aid to the Besieg'd, he withdrew his Army from Scycion, and march'd into Acarnania, there wasting the Country of the Oeniades; and having loaded himself with Booties and Plunder, left Acarnania. After this, he march'd into Chersonesus, and divided the Country by Lot amongst a Thousand Citizens. And in the mean time Tol∣mides the other General made a Descent into Eubea, and divided the Country of the Naxians amongst another Thousand of the Citizens. As for Sicily, the The Hetrurians in Italy. Tyrrhenians infesting the Sea with Py∣racies, the Syracusians chose one Phaylus to be Admiral of the Fleet, and commanded him to make a Descent upon Hetruria. The Affairs of Sicily. Tyr∣henia. Being furnish'd with a Fleet well provided, upon the first attempt, he wasts the Island of Aethalia; but being corrupted by the Hetruscans with Money, he return'd into Sicily, without doing any thing memorable. But the Syracusians banish'd him Ante Chr. 451. for his Treason, and chose another call'd Apelles, and sent him with Threescore Ships against the Hetrurians. Tyrrhenians. Upon which he wasts the Sea-coasts of Tyrhe∣nia, and sails to Corsica, then subject to the Hetruscians, and harrased and de∣stroy'd a great part of the Island; and having wholly subdued Aethalia, return'd to Syracuse, with a multitude of Prisoners and much spoil.
After this, Ducetius Prince of the Siculi, reduced all the Cities of the same Nation (except Hybla) into one Society and Communi∣ty. This Man being both Wise and Valiant, bent his Mind Ducetius Prince of the Sicilians, or Siculi. for the accomplishing of something great and unusual; for having a rich Treasury, he remov'd the City Neas, the Place P. 288. of his Birth, into a plain Champain Ground, and built a fa∣mous City near the Temple of the Gemini Fatres Jovis Filii, ex Nympha Thalia. Palicon built in Sicily. Palici (as they are call'd) from whom he call'd the City Palicon. And because those Deities now fall in our way, it's not fit we should al∣together pass by the strange and indeed incredible Stories that are related concerning this Temple, and especially that great wonder there call'd the i. e. Pots or Caldrons. Craters. For they say, that this Temple is to be preferr'd before all others, both for Antiquity and Religious Worship, especially for the strange and wonderful things done there. And first in this Temple, there are hollows in the Earth, call'd Craters, not The Wonders of the Craters in Sicily. very large in compass, but of incredible depth, from whence break out great sparks of Fire and Water, like as from boiling Pots or Caldrons. The Water cast forth, resembles so many Streams of Fire; but there's no certainty what it is, for none hitherto ever durst approach it: For the violent irruption of the Fiery Matter is so wonderful, that it seems to be the immediate effect of some divine Power. It smells like Brimstone, as most predominant, and the bot∣tomless Gulf roars and makes a most dreadful and horrible noise. And that which is far more to be admir'd is this, That this River of Fire neither flows nor makes any stay upon the Land, but in a continual motion, with an ama∣zing force, hurls it self up into the Air. This Place therefore by these won∣derful Ant. Ch. 451. instances of some Divine Presence, being accounted Sacred, the most So∣lemn and Sacred Oaths were used here to be taken, and due Punishments were without delay executed by the Deity, upon the Perjur'd Person; For it hath been observ'd, that many such have been struck blind as they have gone out of the Temple. And the great Veneration that Persons have had for the Place, has often been the occasion that matters of great Controversy (where Might was likely to overcome Right) have been decided by an Oath in this Place. This Temple likewise at some times, is a Place of Refuge, and a special help for injured Servants to protect them against the cruelty of their Severe Masters. For they who fly thither, cannot be drawn thence, but continue safe there, till by the Mediation of Friends they are reconcil'd to their Masters, and mutual Oaths taken for the faithful Performance of what is promis'd on both sides. And it was never known, that ever any broke his Faith with his Servant in such a case, such an . awe (through the fear of the Gods) was upon them. This Temple is situated in a most pleasant Plain, adorn'd with beautiful Porches, Galleries and other stately Buildings, becoming the dignity of the Gods. But of this sufficient is said. And now we return to what we were before relating. Deucetius after he had wall'd in his new City Palicon, divided the Country ad∣jacent among the Inhabitants. They grew wonderfully rich in a short time, Ant. Chr. 451. Palicon de∣stroy'd. both by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil, and the multitude of the People. But this Sun-shine lasted not long, for destroy'd it was, and lies waste and desolate to this Day. The reason of which shall be declared in its proper Place. In Italy, after the Sacking of Sibaris by the Crotonians, one Thessalus, about Eight and Fifty Years after getting together the remnant of the Sibarites, re∣built Sibaris, situated between two Rivers, Sybaris and Crathis. But the Sibarites growing rich suddenly by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil, possess'd the City only Six Years, and were again ejected; which we intend to relate more fully in the following Book.
CHAP. XXVIII. The Contests between Deucetius and the Agrigentines. His strange Sub∣mission to the Syracusians, who sent him to Corinth, with promise to sup∣ply him with Necessaries. WHen Antidotus was Governor of Athens, the Romans chose Lucius Publius Post∣humus, Olymp. 82. 2. An. M. 3521. Ant. Chr. 450. P. 289. Agrigentines routed by Deucetius. and Marcus Horatius Consuls. In their time, Deucetius the General of the Siculi took Aetna, whose Prince was kill'd by Treachery. Afterwards he led his Army into the Country of the Agrigentines, and besieg'd Motyum, a Garrison of the Agrigentines. They of Agrigentum sent aid to them of Motyum, but his Army fought and routed them, and took the Place. The Winter approaching, all return'd to their several Cities. The Syracusians put to Death Bilco, the General of the Army, the Au∣thor (as was supposed) of that ruin that was brought upon them in this Battel, and who was judg'd to have had secret Correspondence with Deucetius. At the Return of the Year, they made another General, committing to him an Army well ap∣pointed Fight between the Siculi and Deucetius, a∣gainst the Sy∣racusians. in all respects, with strict Orders to ruin and destroy Deucetius. To which end he led forth the Army, and found Deucetius encamp'd near . Nomae, where a Battel was fought, and after many kill'd on both sides, the Siculi after a valiant Resistance at last fled, but a great slaughter was made of 'em, in the Pursuit. Many of those that escap'd, fled to the Forts and Strong Holds, for few had Hearts and Courage enough to run the same Fortune with Deucetius. Whilst these things were thus acting, the Agrigentines retook the Castle of Motyum taken by the Agri∣gentines. Motyum by force, wherein at that time was a Garrison of Deucetius; then they march'd to the Victorious Syracusians, and both encamp'd together: But Deu∣cetius having lost all his Treasure in the last Battel, was brought near to the utmost extremity, partly through the Treachery of some, and partly through the Cowardize of others of his Souldiers who deserted him. At length seeing matters brought to so desperate a Condition, that his Friends A remarkable Passage of Deucetius. who were yet about him were ready to lay violent Hands upon him, to pre∣vent the execution of their Treacheries, he fled with all speed in the Night to Syracuse, and whilst it was yet dark, came into the Market-place, and fell down before the Altars, and as an humble Suppliant, gave up both himself and his Country into the Hands of the Syracusians. The strangeness of the thing brought a great Concourse of People together into the Market-place. Upon which, a General Assembly of the Magistrates was call'd, and there it was debated what was to be done in this matter. Some who were used and lov'd to speak much to the People, persuaded them to take him as an Enemy, and for his many Acts of Hostility against them, to punish him accordingly. But the Wiser sort of the Senators who were then present, declar'd that the Suppliant was to be preserved, and that a reverend regard was to be had to the Providence of God; The genero∣sity of the Sy∣racusians in sparing Deu∣cetius. Ant. Chr. 450. and that they should not have respect so much to what Deucetius deserved, as seriously to consider what was fit and just for them to do in such a case. To kill one whom Providence had laid as a Suppliant at their Feet, was unjust, but to preserve and keep to the Rules of Piety towards God, and Humanity towards Men that submit to Mercy, greatly became the Generosity of the Syracusians. Hereupon the People unanimously cried out, Let the Suppliant be safe. Deucetius thus deliver'd, the Syracusians sent him back to Corinth, and commanded him there to continue the rest of his Days, with a Promise to supply him with all things necessary for his comfortable support. And now having perform'd our Promise in setting forth those things that happened the Year next before the Athenian Expedition into Cyprus under Cymon their General, we conclude this Book.
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XII. The PREFACE. HE who seriously considers the incertainty and instability of Humane Affairs, must needs be struck with great admiration; for he'll find that nothing which amongst Men is accounted Good, is purely such; nor any thing that is esteemed Bad, is perfectly or absolutely evil, without some ingredient of Profit and Advantage: Which Lesson we may learn from what is before Related, if we ponder and digest things well. For the Ex∣pedition of Xerxes the King of Persia into Greece by reason of his vast Ar∣my, terrify'd the Grecians to the highest degree, who were by that War in great danger to be brought into absolute Slavery, and might justly fear that Greece was likely to fall into the same condition with the Greek Cities in Asia, who were not long before brought under the power of the Persians. But beyond all expectation, the event of this War, was wonderful, for the Grecians were not only deliver'd from this threatning Storm, but by that occasion gain'd an everlasting Renown, and every City in Greece thereby a∣bounded with so much Wealth, that their suddain Turn of Fortune into such a height of Prosperity was admir'd by all: For Fifty Years together from that time, Greece flourished in all Felicity; in which time, by the Wealth that abounded amongst them, all good Arts were highly improv'd, and excellent Artists are recorded to have flourished in this Age; amongst whom was Phidias that famous Statuary; and several other Arts and Sciences Phidias the Statuary. then advanced to an extraordinary degree. But the great honour of Greece was Philosophy and Oratory, and chiefly among the Athenians, Those that were eminent for Philosophy, were Socrates, Plato and Aristotle: For Ora∣tory, Pericles, Isocrates and his Scholars. There were others no less fa∣mous for Military Discipline and excellent Commanders, as Miltiades, The∣mistocles, Aristides, Cimon, Mironides, and many others, of whom it would be too tedious to give a particular account. For the Athenian Name was highly honoured almost through all parts of the World; for they so enlarged
their Dominion that by their own strength without the help of the Lacede∣monians, P. 292. and them of Peloponesus, they routed the mighty Armies of the Persians, both by Sea and Land; and did so weaken that great Empire, that they compell'd it upon Treaties to set free all the Grecian Cities in Asia: The particulars whereof are distinctly and at large related in the former Book, and in this we have at present in hand. And now we are come to the Matters design'd to be treated of, endeavouring (as near as we can) to fix the time when things were done. We began the Book next before this with the Passage of Xerxes into Greece, and continued it with an account of affairs every where happening from that time to the Year next before the Expedition of the Athenians against Cyprus under Cymon their General. In this we shall begin with that Expedition, and proceed to the VVar decreed by the Athenians against the Syracusians. CHAP. I. Cymon the Athenian Admiral. his Expedition into Cyprus. Peace con∣cluded between the Persians and Athenians. Cymon dyes in Cy∣prus. EƲthydemus being chief Governor of Athens, Lucius Quintus Cinnatius and Mar∣cus Fabius Vibulanus Roman Consuls, Fortune frown'd upon the Athenians; Olymp. 82. 3 An. Mu. 3520. Ant. Ch. 448. for in assisting the Egyptians against the Persians, they lost all their Ships in the Island An Island in Egypt in that part call'd Del∣ta. Prosopis; but not long after a new War was Determin'd against the Per∣sians for the Liberties of the Grecian Cities in Asia. For this purpose the Athenians rigg'd out a Navy of Two Hundred Gallies, and made Cymon the Son of Miltiades Admiral, and order'd him to make streight for Cyprus, and there invade the Persians. Accordingly he forthwith Sail'd thither Cymon invades Cyprus. with a brave Fleet, well'd Man'd and Victual'd, and in all other things in every respect sufficiently provided. Artabasus was then Admiral of the Persian Fleet, and lay with Three Hundred Ships at Cyprus: And Megabyzus was General of the Ant. Ch. 448. Persian Land Forces, and incamp'd with an Army of Three Hundred Thousand Men in Cilicia. Cymon being Master at Sea, landed his Men at Cyprus, and forc'd Citium and Ma∣lus, but used his Victory with great Moderation and Humanity; having receiv'd A Sea Fight at Cyprus. Intelligence that Fleets were come from Phenicia and Celicia to the assistance of the Islanders, he hois'd up Sail, Fought with them, sunk many of their Vessels, and took an Hundred, together with their Men, and pursued the rest even to Phenicia. The Persians with the remnant of the Fleet that was left fled to Megabyzus, where he lay incamp'd. But the Athenians without delay pursued them, and lan∣ded Ante Chr. 448. A Battle at land in Cilicia with the Per∣sians. their Men and set upon the Enemy, but lost in this Fight Anaxicrates, Vice Admiral of the Athenian Fleet, who Fought with much Gallantry, and there fell with Honour. However the Athenians got the Day, and after they had made a great Slaughter of their Enemies, return'd to their Ships, and Sail'd back to Cyprus. These were the things done in the first Year of the Cyprian War. After this, when Pedieus was Archon of Athens, the Romans bestow'd the Con∣sular Dignity upon Marcus Valerius Lactuca and Sporius Virginius Tricostus. In the Olymp. 82. 4. Ant. Ch. 447. An. Mu. 3521. time of their Government Cymon continuing Master at Sea, brought most of the Cities of Cyprus under the power of the Athenians: But Salamis the Metropolis was a very strong Persian Garrison, well stor'd with Arms, Ammunition and Provision of all sorts; therefore he judg'd it of mighty consequence and Ad∣vantage if he could gain this Place; for he conceiv'd if this were done that the whole Island would easily fall into his Hands, and the Persians would be alto∣gether discourag'd, and not being able to relieve Salamis (the Athenians being Ma∣sters Salamis in Cy∣prus besieg'd by Cymon. at Sea) would be deserted and despised by all their Confederats. Lastly, he con∣cluded,
that if the whole Island of Cyprus were by force of Arms subdu'd, the chief ends of the War were obtain'd; and so it happend: For the Athenians P. 293. Ant. Ch. 447. laying close Siege to the City, Assaulted and Batter'd it every day. But the Garrison being well furnish'd with Arms and all other necessaries, easily de∣fended themselves from the Walls against all the strength of their Enemies. In the mean time Artaxerxes the King of Persia, hearing of the defeating of his Armies in Cyprus, call'd together a Council of War, where it was determin'd that it was most for the Public Good to make Peace with the Grecians: Whereupon Ex∣presses were sent to the Generals and Officers of the Persians to make Peace with them upon any Terms. Artabasus and Megabyzus forthwith dispatch'd Embassadors to Athens, to treat of Peace, whose Conditions being accepted by the Athenians, they sent likewise Plenipotentiaries, the chief of whom was Callias the Son of Hipponicus. And these were the Articles of Peace between the Persians and the A∣thenians Peace conclu∣ded between the Persians and Athenlans. and their Confederats, to wit, that all the Greek Cities in Asia should be free and govern'd by their own Laws. That none of the Persian Com∣manders with any Force should come within three Days Journey of the Sea. That they should not Sail in any Man of War between A City in Pamphilia. Phaselis and A City in Lycia. Cyane. When these were confirm'd by the King and the Officers of his Army, the Athenians on the other side agreed and engaged not to invade any of the Provinces of Artaxes. Peace thus concluded, the Athenians withdrew their Forces from Cy∣prus Triumphing in the glory of their Victories, and in the advantages of the Peace. But whilst the Army stay'd in Cyprus, Cymon fell Sick and there Dyed. Cymon dies. Olymp. 83. Ant. Ch. 446. Afterwards, Philiscus being chief Ruler at Athens, the Romans chusing Titus Romilius Vaticanus and Caius Veturius Cicurinus Consuls, was Celebrated the Eighty Third Olympiad, in which Crison of Himera carried the Victory. At this time the Megarians revolted from the Athenians, and by their Embassadors sent to Sparta, The Megarians revolt from Athenians made a League with them; with which Treachery the Athenians inrag'd sent their Forces into their Country, who rob'd and spoil'd every where, and so loaden with Plunder return'd home. The Citizens indeed issued out of the Town for the Defence of the Country, and ingag'd, but were beaten and driven within their Walls. CHAP. II. The Megarians revolt from the Athenians, and are beaten. The Athe∣nians routed at Cheronea by the Beotians. Many Cities revolt. A Peace is Concluded. AFter these things, when Tymarchides was chief Governor of Athens, Sporius Tarpeius and Aulus Asterius Fontinus being created Roman Consuls, the Olymp. 83. 2 An. M. 3525. Ant. Ch. 445. Lacedemonians made an Irruption into Attica, and wasted and destroy'd the Country far and near; and after they had taken several Forts and Castles return'd into Peloponesus. However Tolmedes the Athenian General took Cheronea; but the Beotians joyning together supriz'd him, upon which a Bloody Battel was Fought at Cheronea, in which Tolmedes was kill'd, though Fighting with great Resolution, and the rest of the Athenians were all kill'd or taken. By this re∣markable Slaughter the Athenians were compell'd for the redeeming of the Captives, to restore all the Cities of Beotia under their dominion unto their ancient Liber∣ties. Afterwards, at the time when Calimachus was Archon of Athens and Sex∣tus Olymp. 83. 3 Quintilius Tergeminus Roman Consuls; In Greece many Cities revolted from the Athenians, who were grown very low by reason of the late defeat at Che∣ronea, Ant. Ch. 445. especially the Inhabitants of Eubea were plotting and contriving some dangerous Designs. Pericles, therefore being made General, makes for Eubea with a great Army, and assaulted and took the City of the Call'd He∣stiea. Hestieans, and all the Citizens Captives, and transplanted them, and by this so terrified the rest that
they all submitted unto the Athenian Government. And a Peace was concluded for Peace Conclu∣ded by the Ci∣ties with A∣thens for 30 Years. Thirty Years, and the Articles were Sign'd and Seal'd by Callias and Chares. CHAP. III. The War between the Agrigentines and Syracusians in Sicily. The War between them of Crotona and the Siberites. Sibaris raz'd. The Buil∣ding of Thurium. Charondas his good Laws in Thurium. His remark∣able Death. The Laws of Zaleucus of Locris. IN Sicily Wars arose between them of Syracuse and of Agrigentum for these P. 294. Reasons. After the Syracusians had broken the Power of Ducetius Prince of the Siculi, upon his submission to the People for Mercy, they pardon'd him, but commanded him to lead a private Life at Corinth: But he continued not long there before he broke all his Engagements and Agreements, and pretending that he was commanded by the Oracle to People the . pleasant Sea Coast in Sicily, he arriv'd in the Island with a great Number of Men, as Colonies to Plant there. Some of the Siculi join'd him, and amongst them one Archonides, Prince of Now St. Ni∣cholas. Erbita: While he was intent upon his Colony, the Agrigentines partly out of envy to the Syracusians, and likewise because they had spar'd Deucetius their com∣mon Enemy, without their Consent, make War upon the Syracusians. Upon this the Cities of the Siculi then divided; some joyn'd with the Agrigentines, others with the Syracusians, and great Armies are rais'd on both sides, and the Cities are pressed to the War with great Importunity. At length emcamping one over against the other, at the River Himera, they came to a Battle, and the Syracusians got the day, and kill'd a Thousand of the Agrigentines upon the Place. But presently after the Fight, the Agrigentines sent Embassadors to Sy∣racuse to make Peace, which was agreed unto upon Conditions. Whilst things were thus acting in Sicily the City Thurium was Built in Italy: And this was the Thurium Built in Italy. occasion; The Grecians sometime before having Built Sybaris, in a short time the City grew very Rich by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil. For being Situated between two Rivers, Crathis and Sybaris (from whence it took it's Name) and the Inhabitants having a large and rich Country to Till, they grew Rich on a The City Sy∣baris very rich. suddain, and taking in many into the Freedom of the City, flourish'd to such a degree as that they seem'd to exceed all the Inhabitants of Italy. For they were so populous that this one City had in it three hundred thousand Inhabitants. There was at that time in the City one call'd Telys, who had great Influence over the People. This Man by raising Scandals amongst the the Citizens a∣gainst those who were the Richest, so far at length prevail'd with the Sybarites, that they Banish'd Five Hundred of the most wealthy Citizens, and confiscated The Wealthy Citizens Ba∣nish'd by the instigation of Telys. their Estates to the public Use. These Banish'd Men went to Crotona, and there (after the manner of suppli∣ants) fled to the Altars erected in the Forum. Hereupon Telys sent Embassadors to the Crotonians, either to deliver up the banish'd Men, or expect War. A Council was call'd, and put to the question, whether they should deliver up the . Italiotes, so strangers were call'd that liv'd in Italy. Pythagoras. Ant. Ch. 445. The War be∣tween the Sy∣barites and them of Cro∣tona. Suppliants to the Sybarites or ingage in a War with an Enemy more powerful than themselves. The Senate and People made some doubt, and the People first inclin'd to deliver them up rather than endure the War. But afterwards Pythagoras advising them to protect the Suppliants they chang'd their Opinion, and determin'd to Fight in their Defence. Hereupon the Sybarites took the Field with an Army of three hundred Thou∣sand Men. The Crotonians had but an hundred Thousand, which were com∣manded by Milo the Wrestler, who at the first Onset put to flight that Wing of the Army which was opposite to him; for he was of invincible Strength, and had Courage answerable to his Strength, and had been six times Victor at the Olympick Games; when he began his Fight he was Crown'd with Olmpick
Wealths, wearing (like Hercules) a Lion's Skin and a Club; at last he gain'd an absolute Victory, and thereupon was much admir'd by his Country-Men. Upon the rout the Crotonians gave no Quarter, but Kill'd all they took, so that most of the Army was destroyed, the City was sackt and miser∣ably laid wast and desolate. But within fifty eight Years Sybaris ras'd. after the Thessalians arriv'd in order to Plant there, and P. 295. Rebuilt 58 Years after. within less than five Years after they had rebuilt the City, they were likewise ejected by the Crotonians. For when Calimachus was Archon of Athens, this City began to be In∣habited: But shortly after it had chang'd both it's Name and Sybaris remov'd chang'd it's Name and call'd Thurium. Place, being Built elsewhere by Lampo and Xenocrates, which was upon this occasion. The Sybarites driven out of their Country a second time, sent Embassadors into Greece, and desir'd aid from the Lacedemonians and Athenians to assist them in restoring them to their Country, and likewise desiring that they would send a Colony to partake with them. The Lacedemonians rejected their Address; but the Athenians resolved to assist them, and sent ten Ships with Soldiers to the Sybarites, of which Lampo and Xenocrates Ant. Ch. 445. were Generals: And Proclamation was made through all the Cities of Pelopo∣nesus by the Athenian Heralds, that it should be lawful for any that would, to Plant with them in their intended new Colony. Many comply'd, especially be∣ing mov'd thereunto by the Oracle of Apollo, who advis'd them to Build a City there where there was little Water, and yet Bread without Mea∣sure. Setting Sail therefore for Italy, they at length arriv'd at Sybaris; and there made diligent search for the Place commended to them by the Deity. And finding a Fountain or Spring (not far from Sybaris) which was call'd Thuria, issuing it's Waters through a brazen Pipe, call'd Medymnum, which signifies a Bushel (judging this to be the Place foretold by the Oracle) they compass'd it in with a Wall, and there Built the City, calling it from the Name of the Spring Thurium. The City in length contain'd four Streets: The first they call'd Heraclea, the second Aphrodisiade, the third Olympiad, the fourth Dionysiad. The bredth was divided into three Streets; the first call'd Heroa, the other Thuria, and the last Thurina. When all these Streets were fill'd with Houses, the City appear'd very compact and beautiful. But the Thurians continued not long at Peace amongst Sedition at Thurium. themselves, for a grievous Sedition (and not without some cause) began to di∣sturb their Common-wealth. For the Sybarites, the ancient Inhabitants, shar'd all the chief Places of the Magistracy amongst themselves, and left only the in∣ferior Ant. Ch. 445. Offices to the new Colonies. And the Wives of the antient Citizens were first admitted to Sacrifice before those that were lately brought into the Freedom of the City. And besides, they ingross'd all the Land next to the City, and divided it among themselves, and left that which was far off to the new Comers. This Fire of Dissention broke out into a devouring Flame, insomuch that the new Colony (then more powerful than the other) destroy'd almost all the ancient Inhabitants, and brought the whole City into their own Power. But the Country being very Rich, and more than was sufficient for them that remain'd, they sent for many out of Greece to till and improve the Land, amongst whom they divided both the Houses in the City that were destitute of Inha∣bitants, and the Land in the Country. The Inhabitants grew very Rich in a short time, and entring into League with the Crotonians, govern'd their Com∣mon-wealth from thenceforth with great Commendation; and having setled a Democracy, divided the Citizens into ten Tribes, and gave them Names ac∣cording to their several Countries: Three that came out of Peloponesus they call'd the Arcadian, Achaian and Elean. The same Number of them that came from other more remote Parts of Greece, they nam'd the Beotian, Amphyctonidae, and Doridae, according to their several Tribes. The four residue from other Countries of Greece they call'd the Jadans, Athenaidae, Enboedae and Islanders. Out of the most learned and best accomplish'd Citizens they chose for their Legislator Charonidas, who examin'd the Laws of every Country, and pickt out of every one what he judged to be the best, and digested them all into one Body or Systeme: But Charonidas his Laws. Ant. Ch. 445. he added many himself of his own Contrivance: To rehearse some of which it will not be unprofitable to the Reader. And first he institued, That whoever
Married a second Wife, and brought a Stepmother amongst his Children, should 1 Concerning second Mar∣age. P. 296. be remov'd from the Senate and Common Assemblies, for he judg'd that Man could never advise his Country well who was so imprudent in his own Family: For they that were once well Marry'd ought to rest satisfied with such a Hap∣piness; and such as are unfortunate in their first Match, and yet against their own experience commit a second Fault in the same kind, justly deserve to be noted for Fools. To False Accusers he appointed this Punishment, That they should be led through the City Crown'd with the Shrub-Tamarisk, that it might 2 False accu∣sers. appear to all, that the Offender was guilty of the highest Wickedness. And it is reported that some Convicted of this Offence, to avoid the disgrace have kill'd themselves. By the severity of this Law false Informers (the Plague of the Common-wealth) were driven out of the City, and the Citizens lived in great prosperity. Charonidas made likewise a new Law (never before instituted by any former Legislator) concerning keeping bad Company. For he found by Experience, That both the Manners and Judgments of good and honest 3 Bad Compa∣ny. Men were often depraved by the society and familiarity of wicked Men, and drawn aside from the Paths of Virtue to the filthiness of Vice; and that such Company like an infectious Disease seised the Minds of the very best with it's Contagion and Corruption: For the way to Vice is down the Hill with a very easy descent; by reason whereof many of more than ordinary Integrity, (in∣snar'd with the inticing Charms of Pleasure) have fallen into the highest de∣gree of Wickedness; desiring therefore to prevent this mischief he severly for∣bad the keeping company and familiarity with lewd Men: And fram'd a Pro∣cess against ill Society, and impos'd a severe Fine upon such as should be found Guilty. And he made moreover another Law more excellent than this, past Ant. Chr. 445. by, by all the ancient Lawmakers: That is, That all the Children of the Citi∣zens should learn to . 4 Teaching to Write. Write, and the City should pay the Master Wages. For he knew that they who were poor were not able to be at the Charge, and by consequence must lose the advantage of Instruction for their Children: For he prefer'd (and not without Cause) the . The praise of the Art of Writing. knowledge of Writing to be learnt in the first place before all other Arts; For by the help of this many things conducing to the publice Good are preserv'd to Posterity; as Suffrages, Decrees, Epistles, Wills Laws and other things necessary for Instruction. Who can sufficiently set forth the praises this Art? By this the Memory of the Dead is preserv'd a∣mongst the living; by these Messengers, they that are at the greatest distance, far absent, may be Convers'd with as present. These preserve the Opinions of the wisest Men, the Answers of the Gods, the Learning of Philosophers, all the Sciences of the World, and hand them down to Posterity for ever. Life is due to Nature, but how to live well we ow to the Books of the Learned, so that by this good Law (at the public Care and Charge) those who were illiterate before (wholly depriv'd of those great Blessings) were now improv'd by more happy Education; so that (we may say) he far exceeded those former Lawmakers who appointed Phisicians for the curing of private Mens Distempers at the charge of the Public; for they provided cures for Mens Bodies; but he for Ig∣norance and disease of Mens Souls. And we never desire to have need of a P. 297. Phisician, but are always unwilling to part with a learned Man: Many Poets have Celebrated these Laws concerning evil Company; among others are these.— If one Herd with bad Company I ask not what he is, but, see, Such as his Friends are such is he. Ant. Chr. 457. Of his Law concerning Stepmothers mention is made thus, The lawgiver (say they) Charonidas, amongst others made this Law.— Let him have no repute but of a Fool That sets a Stepdame o're his House to Rule: Nor let him for a civil Office sue, Who to an old Plague dares to add a new:
If good luck in a Wife thou hast had, then Stick at a good hand; if bad, as most Men, Th'art Mad if thou seekst to be curs'd again. In truth he who miscarries twice in one and the same thing may justly be ac∣counted a Fool. For what Philemon the Comick Poet says of them that have often escap'd Shipwrack, some have apply'd to this Case. I wonder not that one the Sea should enter And Sail, but that he made the second venture. It's no wonder to see a Man Marry; but to see him twice Marry. For it's safer and more advisable for a Man to expose himself twice to the dangers of the Sea, than to the hazards of a second Wife. For most sad and cruel discords often arise in Families between Parents and Children by the tricks and devices of Stepmothers. Hence we have the frequent and horrid pieces of Villany of this kind represented upon the Stage by the Tragedians. Charonidas fram'd another very good Law concerning the Guardianship of Or∣phans. 5 About Or∣phans. Upon the first view there seems to be little in it worthy taking notice of; but Examining it more closely, we may discern much in it Wisdom and excellent Con∣trivance. Their Estates he commited to the care and Guardianship of next of Kin on their Fathers side, but their Education and the custody of their Persons Ante Chr. 445. to them of the Mothers. At first here seems nothing of any great weight in this Law, but upon more serious Consideration, it will evidently appear to be a most excellent Constitution: For if the Cause be seriously pry'd into why he order'd the care of the Estate to one, and the Education of the Person to another, the Wisdom and Prudence of the Lawmaker will be very evident: For they on the Mother's side would never contrive any thing of prejudice to the Person whose Estate could never come and descend to them; and the mischief was prevented as to the Kindred of the Father's side, because the Person was not committed to their Custody. On the other hand, in regard the Estate of the Orphan was to fall to the Father's Kindred in case of his Death, it was to be presum'd they would take care to preserve and improve it, upon the prospect of the possibility of it's coming unto themselves. Another Law he made against those that ran 6 Against such as ran from their Colours. away from their Colours or refus'd to take up Arms for the Defence of their Country: For whereas former Lawgivers made it Death, his Edict was, That such Men should sit three days in the Forum cloth'd in Womans Apparel; which Constitution as it was more moderate than those in other places, so the great∣ness of the disgrace did work more upon ingenious Spirits to deterr them from softness and effeminatness; judging it far better to dye than to undergo so much disgrace in their own Country. By this way he destroy'd not those that were Guilty, but reserv'd them for the future Service of the City as occasion should be; who in all likelyhood after such disgrace would carry themselves better, and endeavour to wipe off the stain of their former reproach by doing something more than ordinary for the time to come. The Severity and Strictness likewise The severity of his Laws as to the repea∣ting of them. of his Laws gave a perpetual vigor to them; For it was absolutly forbidden to depart in the least from the Letter of the Law tho' it were never so severe or inconvenient. But if any were fit to be repealed or amended, he gave power for that purpose. For he judg'd it fit and just for every Man to Stoop to the Ant. Chr. 445. Authority of the Lawgiver, but to suffer the Cavils and Exceptions of every private Man to prevail (nay though they seem'd to tend to the Public good) was most absurd. And by this means he restrain'd those that would in giving of of Judgment for criminal Matters bring in their own Glosses and Expositions a∣gainst the express Words of the Law, lest by their Cavils the Authority of the Laws should come to nothing. And hereupon it is reported that some Prosecu∣tors P. 298. against Criminals said to the Judges, that either the Law or the Malefactor must of necessity be preserv'd, Charonidas therefore appointed something more than usual concerning the amendment of the Laws. For whereas he saw that there were many in diverse Cities who rashly, and hand over head going about to correct and amend the Laws, did nothing else but (by corrupting them) in∣volve the common People in Seditions; he publish'd this most excellent Law (differing from all that were before) That any Person who would have any Law to be
altered or amended, a Council should be call'd, and he who would have an al∣teration, 8. Concerning amendment of the Laws. should have a Rope put about his Neck, and so continue while the Votes of the People-concerning the change of the Law were in taking; and if the Assembly did approve of the new Law, then the Author should be dis∣charg'd; A notable Law to pre∣vent Innova∣tion. but if it were rejected, then he should be forthwith hang'd. By this so severe a Caution to prevent Innovation, new Law-makers disappear'd, and none durst so much as whisper any thing concerning the amendment or altera∣tion of the Laws. From that time forward, there were at Thurium only Three (forc'd by ur∣gent Provocations) that appear'd and stood up to persuade the People to Abro∣gation of some Laws. For there was a Law, that he who struck out the Eye Ant. Chr. 445. of another, should have his own Eye pluckt out. It happened that one who had only one Eye (by the injury of another) lost that also, so that he was alto∣gether Eye for Eye. The Story of him that had but one Eye. blind. In this case although the Offender was to lose his Eye for the in∣jury done to the other, yet the punishment was not thought equivalent to the nature of the Offence; for he who made his Fellow Citizen wholly blind, al∣though by losing one of his Eyes, he satisfied the letter of the Law, yet the loss and prejudice was not equal; and therefore it was conceiv'd to be most e∣quitable and just, that he who depriv'd another of his sight wholly, should lose both his Eyes, if the punishment were proportion'd to the Offence. This blind Man therefore (mov'd and heated with the pain and indignity of the thing) complain'd to the People of his sad Condition, and made his Address to them One mov'd to have some Laws amend∣ed. for amendment of the Law. At length having the Rope about his Neck, he prevail'd, and the Law was abolish'd, and another made more effectual in its place, and so he escap'd hanging. Another Law likewise was moderated, where∣by power was given to the Wife in some cases, to leave her Husband, and mar∣ry whom else she thought fit. For one grown old (being forsaken by his young Wife) proposed to the People for an amendment of the Law to have this fur∣ther Addition, That it might be lawful for any Wife that had a desire to leave Law about Marriage. her Husband, to marry any other Man, provided he were no younger than her for∣mer Husband; and that he who cast off his Wife, should marry none younger than the Wife he rejected. And he succeeded so well in his Proposal, that by having the Law amended, he not only escap'd the Rope, but by this means, his Wife that had a Mind to a young Fellow, was forc'd to return to him again. Ant. Chr. 445. The Third Law (which Solon likewise had made) which was amended, was that concerning Virgins and Orphans. The Law was, that where there was an Heiress left, the next of Kin might demand her in Marriage; and so on the other hand, a young Woman an Orphan, might demand him that was of her next Kindred in Marriage, and he should be forc'd to marry her; or if she were poor, give her Five Hundred Drachma was of the Value of 7 d. in our Money. Drachma's for her Portion. There was an Or∣phan of this kind left of a good Family, but yet extream Poor; she by reason of her Poverty in no likelihood to get a Husband, made her application to the People, and with many Tears bemoaned her desolate condition, and despicable state of Life, and desir'd an amendment of the Law to this purpose, That in lieu of the Five Hundred Drachma's, the next of Kin whom by the Law the Orphan might demand in Marriage, should be forc'd to marry her. The People commiserating her Condition, chang'd the Law, and so she was delivered from P. 299. the Rope, and the rich Kinsman was forc'd to marry the poor Maid without any Dowry. Now it remains we should speak of the Death of Charonidas, concerning which, The remark∣able Death of Charonidas. there happened something remarkable and wonderful; for when he was gone forth against some Robbers that made inroads into the Country, before he re∣turn'd, there happened a Tumult to be rais'd by the People in one of their Common Assemblies. Determining therefore to make diligent Enquiry into the Cause and Authors of the Sedition, he came hastily in amongst them, with his Sword girt at his side; and a Law he had made, that none should come arm'd into the Senate-house; but had forgotten his Sword then at his Side, and so rushed into the Assembly, and thereby gave an occasion to them that maligned him, to accuse him: Upon which, one cries out, You break the Law which you your self made. No, says he, but I will confirm it; and forthwith ran himself through. Vid. lib. 13. f. 53. Some Writers ascribe this Fact to Diocles the Law-maker of Syra∣cuse.
But having spoken enough of Charonidas, we shall now relate something in short of Zaleuchus the Law-maker, because they were much alike in their Con∣sultations, The Law-maker Zaleu∣chus. and bent their Minds and Thoughts to the same things, and flourished in Cities near adjoyning one to another. Zaleuchus was an Italian born at Lo∣cris, of a noble Family, of great Learning, and Scholar to Pythagoras. He was of great esteem and account in his Country, and chosen by the People to be their Law-maker. He began his Laws first with the Worship of the Gods. In the Preface he requires the Inhabitants, That in the First place, and above all, they should be fully perswaded, and Law about Religion. Excellent Notions and Rules of Natural Religion relating to Divine Worship, and this by a Heathen. undoubtedly believe that there were Gods; and that de∣voutly looking up to Heaven, and viewing the Beauty and admirable Harmony and Order thereof, they should judge and certainly conclude, that that great Work was not of Men, or came there by chance: And therefore he ordain'd, they should adore and worship the Gods, from whom all that is good descends upon Men. And to that end, that they ought to have their Minds pure and unspotted, inasmuch as the Gods are better pleas'd with the just and honest Actions of Righteous Men, than with all their costly Sacrifices. Having made this Preface or In∣troduction, he then subjoyns his Precepts. First, That none should be impla∣cable Ant. Chr. 445. 1. Against Im∣placableness. one against another, but that all should so manage their Animosities; as to keep a reserve in a short time to be reconcil'd, and in full Friendship with their Adversaries; and if any did otherwise, such a Man should be reputed of a fierce and inhumane Disposition. Secondly, He commanded the Magistrates 2. About Ma∣gistrates. that they should not be Proud and Domineering; that they should not give Judgment in any matter, either for Love or Hatred. And in other particu∣lars, he devised many things with great Wisdom, Prudence and Ingenuity. 3. Whereas in all other Countries, by the excess and extravagance of Women 3. Against the Expence of Women. much Silver was spent and wasted, by a witty and ingenious kind of Punish∣ment, he restrain'd their Excess, for he ordered, That no Woman that was Free of the City should be attended Abroad with any more than one Servant, unless she were Drunk. That none should walk abroad in the Night, except it were with an intent to play the Whoe, nor wear golden Ornaments or Garments embroider'd with Gold, unless with the same intent: Nor that any 4. Expences of Men. Man should wear a Gold Ring, of a Milesian Garment, unless he were guilty of Fornication or Adultery. By these dishonourable Exceptions and Conditions of Indempnity (which were Punishments in themselves) he easily restrain'd the Citizens from Luxury and Excess, for none were willing to expose themselves as laughing-stocks to their Fellow Citizens, by owning themselves guilty of such foul Offences. Many other Laws concerning Contracts and other Differences which might arise, were with great Judgment made by him, which would be too tedious particularly to relate, and beside the scope and intent of our Hi∣story: We shall therefore return whence we made a digression. P. 300. Olymp. 83. 4. Ant. Ch. 443. Lysimachides was chief Ruler of Athens, when the Romans conferr'd the Con∣sular dignity upon Titus Menenius, and Poplius Sestius Capitolinus. In their time the Sybarites that had escap'd in the late Sedition, seated themselves at the Ri∣ver Tarentum, where they continu'd for some time, but at length were rooted out, and utterly destroy'd by the Brutii. In Greece in the mean time, the Athe∣nians having recovered Eubea, drave the Hestians out of the City; and sending thither a Colony of a Thousand Citizens of their own, they divided the City and Land adjacent amongst them by Lot.
CHAP. IV. Of the Decemviri in Rome, chosen to make Laws. The War between the Thurians and Tarentines. The sad Story of the Daughter of one Lucius Virginius in Rome, which caus'd a disturbance and great Sedition. The Law of the Twelve Tables. Peace all over the World. WHen Praxitiles was Governor of Athens, the Eighty Fourth Olympiad was Olymp. 84. 1. Ant. Ch. 442. celebrated (in which Crison of Himera was Victor) and at Rome, Ten Persons (call'd the Decem-viri) were chosen to compose new Laws. Appius. Publius Claudius Regillanus, Titus Crenucius. Minutius, Sporius Viturius, Caius Julius, Servius. Caius Sulpi∣tius, Publius Sestius, T. Romilius. Romilius, Sporius Posthumius, A. Manlius. Culbinius and Publius Horatius. By these Persons were Laws made. In their time a War broke out between the Thurians and them of Tarentum; in which War the Countries were wasted on both sides by Inroads by Land, and Invasions from Sea; many small Battels and Skirmishes were fought, but nothing done of any moment. Lysanias being chief Ruler at Athens, the Romans again chose Ten Men for Olymp. 84. 2. Ante Chr. 441. The Story of the Daughter of Virginius. making of Laws. Appius Claudius, Marcus Cornelius, Lucius Minutius, Caius Ser∣gius, Quintus Pitilius, Marcus Rabuleius, T. Antonius Meranda, Q. Fabius Vibulanus, C. Duilius, and Sp. Oppius. But these could not perfect the Business wherein they were imploy'd; for Appius. one of them fell in Love with a beautiful Virgin, but of small Fortune, whom he endeavour'd to debauch by Money. But when he saw he could not gain his Design by those means, he subborn'd a One Marcus Claudius. Fellow fit for his purpose to claim her for his Bondslave, and to bring her before the Decem-viri, and demand Judgment against her as his Slave; which was easily obtain'd from a corrupt Judge, the Author of the Villany. She being delivered to him, the Sycophant Knave carry'd her away as his Bond-maid. In the mean time, the One Lucius Virginius. Father of the Young Woman, mov'd with Grief and Rage at the indignity offer'd, hasten'd to the Court, where seeing no hopes of redress, he follow'd his Daughter close behind her, and spying a Knife in a Butcher's Shop, as he pass'd by, he snatcht it up, and forthwith stabb'd his Daughter to Death, to a∣void the indignity and disgrace of such a condition, and forthwith without de∣lay, hastening out of the City, made to the Army that was then encamp'd at Algidum, and with many Tears declar'd his miserable Condition, and implor'd their Assistance; which on the suddain affected them all with Commiseration, and great sorrow at his Calamity; upon which (being all stirr'd up with a re∣solution to relieve the distressed Father) in the Night they rush into Rome, and possess themselves of the Aventine Mount. As soon as the Day brake, the Decem-viri, being inform'd of the Rage of the Soldiers against the wickedness of the Fact (by force of Arms resolving to defend their Collegue) got toge∣ther a multitude of Young Men to dispute the matter with their Adversa∣ries by the Sword. And now a great and bloody Fight seem'd to be at hand, when some of the Citizens of the best Quality, foreseeing the danger, inter∣pos'd by Messengers to both Parties, in order to compose the Difference; in∣treating and earnestly beseeching them, that they would forbear, and not in∣volve their Country in Blood and Destruction. At length the matter was agreed upon these Conditions, That there Tribunes of the People chosen at Rome. should be Ten call'd , Tribunes of the People. Tribunes of the People chosen, who should have Sovereign Power and Authority over all the rest of the Magistrates of the City, and who might protect the common Liberty of the People: And that one of the Consuls every Year should be chosen out of the Senators, and the other out of the Common People. Yea, further, that they should have Power to chuse both Consuls out from among themselves if they thought fit. And this Law was then made to be a Check to the exorbitant power of the Patricians; for they Ant. Chr. 441. P. 301. under colour of their great and high Birth, and the glory of their Families, with insufferable Pride engross'd to themselves all the power and authority of
the City. Amongst the Conditions it was further added, That the Tribunes of the People, at the end of every Year, should appoint as many new ones in their room to succeed, and if they did neglect it, they should be burnt alive. And though the Tribunes could not agree in their Choice, yet they should continue still in their Offices in the mean time. And this was the end of the great Com∣motion at Rome. Diphilus being Archon of Athens, the Romans created Marcüs Horatius, and Olymp. 84. 3. Ant. Ch. 440. The Twelve Tables at Rome. Lucius Valerius Potitus Consuls, who perfected the Laws which suffered an ir∣ruption by the Sedition. For there were then Ten of the Twelve Tables (as they were call'd) only finished, the other Two were added by these Consuls. The Roman Laws thus perfected, the Consuls ordered them to be engraven upon Twelve Tables of Brass, and fix'd them to the Pleaders Desk in the face of the Court. And these Laws thus written briefly and plainly without any flou∣rish of Words remain unto this Day. About the time these things were done, most Nations through the World were at Peace; for the Persians made a double League with the Grecians, and with the Athenians and their Confederates, Most Nations of the World at Peace. whereby Liberty was restor'd to all the Greek Cities of Asia. The other afterwards was with the Lacedemonians, by which This may be the time mention'd in Zachary, Zach. 1. 11. which conti∣nued to the time of Darius Nothus, Ant. Chr. 440. it was agreed quite contrary, that the Greek Cities in Asia, should remain under the power of the Persians. In like man∣ner, the Grecians were at Peace among themselves, the A∣thenians and Spartans having entred into a League for Thirty Years. And all was likewise quiet in Sicily, the Carthaginians having made Peace with Gelon, and all the Grecian Cities submitted to them of Syracuse. And the Agrigentines after the Slaughter at Himera, accepted of Terms of Peace. And all the People of Italy, France, Spain, and most Parts of the World, were at perfect Concord one with another. Therefore we have no account in History of any thing memorable done in War during this time; but all were every where at rest, solacing themselves with Sports and Sacred Festivals, and other Jollities, the common Attendants of a prosperous State and Condition. CHAP. V. The War between the Samians and the Melesians. A Sedition in Samos, which revolts from the Athenians. The War in Sicily by the Syracusians against the Trinacrians. TImocles was now chief Governour of Athens, and Larius Herminius, and Ti∣tus Virginius Tricostus, Roman Consuls. In their time the Samians break forth into War against the Milesians concern∣ing Olymp. 84. 4. Ant. Chr. 439.  pro Priene, Thucyd. Priene, a Town in Ionia, under the Mountain Micale. Pericles sent against the Samians. Priene; and discerning the Athenians more to favour the Milesians, they revolted from them. Hereupon the A∣thenians sent Pericles (made Admiral some time before) with Forty Sail against the Samians, who approached their City, easily reduced it, and there established a Democracy. And having impos'd a Mulct of Eighty Talents upon them, and receiv'd as many Youths for Hostages, he committed them to the care and custody of the Lem∣nians; and so having in a short time finish'd with good success all for which he was sent, he return'd to Athens. After this, a grievous Sedition happen'd in Samos, some being for the Demo∣cracy, Seditions in Samos. others endeavouring to set up an Aristocracy, whereby the City was in a mighty popular Tumult. They who were against the Democracy went over to Sardis in Asia to Pissuthines the Persian Governor to desire aid, who lends them Seven Hundred Soldiers, hoping by this means to bring Samos under his power. P. 302. The Samians with this aid, loosing from Asia in the Night, stole secretly upon
the City, and by the help of their Accomplices, enter'd and surpriz'd it; and being thus easily possess'd, forthwith eject all of the contrary Faction. Then ha∣ving stollen and carry'd away the Hostages out of Lemnos, and strengthen'd Samos with Garrisons, they declare themselves open Enemies against the Athe∣nians; who again send against them Pericles with Sixty Sail; who overcame them in a Sea Fight though they had Seventy Sail. Upon this (with the help of Twen∣ty Five Ships, which join'd him from Chios and Mitylene) he besieg'd Samos; and some few Days after, leaving part of his Forces to maintain the Siege, with the rest he made against the Phenician Fleet, which the Persians sent to the aid of the Samians. The Samians taking advantage of the opportunity of his depar∣ture, suddenly set upon the rest of his Fleet and routed them; with which success they grew very proud and haughty. But Pericles hearing of the ruin of his Fleet left behind, return'd without delay, and got together a strong and numerous Navy, fully resolving utterly to ruin the Enemy's Fleet; And being speedily supplied by the Athenians with Threescore Ships, and with Thirty from Chios and Mitylene, he renew'd the Siege both by Sea and Land, wearying the City with continual Assaults. He was the first that made use of those warlike Engines call'd Battering Rams, and Scorpions, by the assistance and ingenuity Battering-Rams and Scorpions. Ant. Chr. 439. of Artemon the Lacedemonian. And by his fierce and violent Assaults, battering down the Walls with his Engines, the City fell into his Hands. And after he had put to Death the Authors of the defection, he caus'd the Samians to pay Two Hundred Talents in Compensation for the charge of the War. He carry'd away likewise all their Ships, and demolish'd the Walls; and when he had re∣stored the Democracy, return'd into his own Country. To this time the Thirty Years Truce between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians continued unviolated. And with these things was this Year remarkable. When Myrichides govern'd the state of Athens, Lucius Julius, and Marcus Ge∣ganius Olym. 85. 1. An. Mu. 3531. Ant. Chr. 438. were Roman Consuls. The Eleans then celebrated the Eighty Fifth Olym∣piad, in which Crisus of Himera was the Second Victor. In these times in Si∣cily, Ducetius formerly Prince of the Siculi, planted the Country of the Callatines, and having setled there many Colonies, began at length to take upon him the Sovereign power over the Siculi: But falling sick, both his Life and his Designs Ducetius dies. vanish'd together. The Syracusians now being Lords of all the Cities of Sicily (except Trinacria) War between the Syracusians and Trinacri∣ans. resolv'd to gain that likewise by force of Arms; for they were exceedingly jealous of the Trinacrians, because they were very rich, lest they should at any time after gain the Sovereignty of the Sicilians. Siculi, to whom they were related as Kindred. This City both then and ever, had many valiant Men amongst them, and upon that account was ever esteem'd the principal City of the Siculi, for it was full of good Commanders, Men of brave and daring Spirits. The Syracu∣sians therefore gathered together all their Forces both from Syracuse, and from among their Confederates, and march'd against the Trinacrians; who being de∣stitute of all assistance, by reason the rest of the Cities were subject to Syracuse, were in a bloody Battel hard put to it; and after a resolute and valiant oppo∣sition, all gallantly dy'd upon the spot. For those that were wounded, rather than to undergo the disgrace of being Captives, dispatched themselves. They of Syracuse having obtain'd this Victory over a People never before subdu'd, P. 303. made all the Inhabitants Captives, and raz'd the City to the Ground. The richest of the Spoils they sent to Delphos as a grateful Offering to the Gods.
CHAP. VI. The Corinthian War against Corcyra. Potidea revolts from the Athenians. Quarrels in Thurium. Meton's Year. Heraclea in Italy built. Potidea besieg'd by Phormio. GLaucides the Chief Magistrate of Athens, Titus Quintus, and Agrippa Furius, Olym. 85. 2. An. M. 3533. Ant. Ch. 437. Consuls of Rome: The Syracusians (being Victorious as is before related) fell a building of Ships of Three Oars upon a Bank, and doubling the number of their Horse, busi'd themselves in raising a Land-Army. And that they might. raise, and get together a great Treasure and Fond of Money, they exacted larger Contributions from their Subjects; and this they did with a Design to subject all Sicily by degrees to their Dominion. Whilst these things were in doing, the Corinthian War (as it's call'd) broke The Corin∣thian War. forth upon the following occasion. The Epidamnians, the Inhabitants of the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea, being Colonies brought from Corcyra and Corinth, were greatly distress'd with Tumults and Seditions amongst themselves, where the stronger Party cast many of the contrary Faction out of the City; where∣upon the Exiles join'd together, and calling the Illyrians to their Assistance and Confederacy, they made against Epidamnum with a great Fleet: And being the Barbarians were very strong, they easily possess'd themselves of the Country, and besieged the City. They of Epidamnum not able to resist so great a Force, Ant. Chr. 437. sent to Corcyra for aid, who were of the same Stock and Kindred; but being disregarded by them, they made their Application to the Corinthians, owning that City to be their only Metropolis, and desired a Supply of more Citizens in the room of those that were ejected. The Corinthians partly out of pity to them of Epidamnum, and partly out of an old grudge they bore them of Cor∣cyra (for that they only of all the Colonies, brought from them thither, neg∣lected to send to them as their Metropolis, the usual Offerings) decreed Aid to be sent to them of Epidamnum. And accordingly they sent both a new Sup∣ply of Citizens, and a Guard of Souldiers sufficient for the defence of the City. The Corcyreans much inrag'd at this, fitted out a Fleet of Fifty Sail against them. The Admiral of which Fleet after his arrival commanded them of E∣pidamnum, to receive the Exiles: And then by Ambassadors propos'd to the Co∣rinthian Garrison, That the matter relating to the Colony, might rather be end∣ed in an orderly Course of Justice, than by force of Arms. But the Corin∣thians refusing, it came at length to a War; and Fleets were prepared, and As∣sociations and Confederacies made on both sides: And these were the Causes of that Corinthian War. In the mean time, the Romans made War against the Volsci. At first they began with light and small Skirmishes; but at length in a formal Battel the Romans became Victorious, and slew most of their Enemies upon the Field. When Theodorus govern'd Athens, and the Romans constituted Marcus Genu∣sius, Olymp. 85. 3. Ant. Ch. 436. and Agrippa Curtius Chelon, Consuls; in Italy the Nation of the Campanians began to flourish; so call'd from the Fruitfulness of the Country round about them. In Asia the Archaeanactidae had now held the Kingdom of the Cimmerian Bosphorus for the space of Two and Forty Years; to whom then succeeded Spar∣tacus, who reign'd Seven Years. In Greece the Corinthians and Corcyreans were preparing on both sides Navies for Fights at Sea: And presently the Corinthians Sea-Fight be∣tween the Co∣rinthians and Corcyreans. made towards the Enemy with Seventy Gallies bravely sitted out; and the Cor∣cyreans met them with Fourscore, routed them, and took Epidamnum by Storm, and made all the Corinthians their Prisoners, but put all the rest to the Sword. The Corinthians by this overthrow, wholly discouraged, return'd into Peloponesus. P. 304. The Corcyreans now become Masters of this part of the Sea, invaded the Con∣federates of the Corinthians, and wasted their Country.
This Year ended, Euthymenis entred upon the Government of Athens, and at Olymp. 85. 4. An. Mu. 3535. Rome Three Military Tribunes were appointed Magistrates with Consular dig∣nity, Aulus Sempronius, Lucius Atilius, and Titus Celius. At that time the Co∣rinthians, not long before overcome at Sea, determined to put forth another Na∣vy more glorious than the former. And to that end getting together Materials from all Parts, and hiring Ship-Carpenters out of the Cities, they built Ships with all care and earnestness, and prepared all manner of Arms and Weapons, and every thing necessary for War; some Ships they built new, others they re∣paired, and some they borrow'd of their Confederates. Nor were they of Cor∣cyra idle, for they were nothing inferior to their Enemies in care and diligence; whence it was apparent how dreadful a War was like to ensue. In the mean time, the Athenians sent a Colony to Amphipolis, chosen partly out of their own City, and partly out of the neighbouring Forts and Castles. Nausimachus being chief Ruler of Athens, Titus Quintus, and Marcus Geganius Macerinus were chosen Roman Consuls. At that time, the Eleans celebrated the Olymp. 86. 1. An. Mu. 3536. Ant. Chr. 435. Eighty Sixth Olympiad, in which Theopompus of Thessaly carry'd away the Prize. The Corcyreans hearing of the great Preparations that were making against them, sent Ambassadors to Athens, to desire their Assistance, which was done likewise by the Corinthians. The Assemblies being called, and audience given to the Embassadors on both sides, it was determin'd to joyn with them of Corcy∣ra. The Athenians joyn with the Corcyreans. And without delay, they sent them Ten Ships of Three Oars in a Seat, well Man'd and provided, promising to send them more, as there should be oc∣casion. The Corinthians (now abandoned by the Athenians) having Ninety Ships of their own, borrow'd Sixty more of their Confederates, and so made up a Fleet of an Hundred and Fifty Sail, and furnished it with choice Commanders, and forthwith made out against the Corcyreans, to fight them upon the first op∣portunity. As soon as the Corcyreans heard that their Enemies Fleet was near at Hand, they made forth against them with a Navy of an Hundred and Twen∣ty Sail, accounting those of Athens. The Fleets engaged, and fought with great Resolution; the Corinthians at the Another Fight at Sea. Ant. Chr. 435. first had the Advantage, but a Fleet of Twenty Sail from Athens just then ap∣pearing (sent in pursuance of a second Address made to them) the Corcyreans got the Day. The next Day the Corcyreans appear'd with their whole Strength in a Line of Battel, daring the Corinthians to Fight; but they kept within their Harbours, and so avoided further Fighting. Antilochides now Archon of Athens, at Rome Marcus Fabius, and Posthumius Ae∣butius Olymp. 86. 2. An. Mu. 3537. Elbas. Ant. Chr. 434. Aulicus were made Consuls: In their times the Corinthians greatly resented the Confederacy of the Athenians with them of Corcyra, especially for that the Victory obtain'd, was chiefly by their means. And therefore being inrag'd, and seeking by all the means they could to be reveng'd, they stirr'd up their Colony at Potidea to revolt. In like manner Perdicas the King of Macedonia, not long Potidea re∣volts from the Athenians. before incens'd against the Athenians, prevail'd with them of Chalcidica a Region in Macedonia. Chalcidica to revolt, and leave the Cities upon the Sea Coast, and withdraw only into one cal∣led Olynthus. The Athenians hearing of the defection of Potidea, sent forth a Fleet of Thir∣ty Sail, with Command both to destroy the Country of the Rebels, and storm the City. They according to order, bent their Course for Macedonia, and like∣wise besieg'd the City. The Corinthians sent Two Thousand Men to assist the Besieged, and the Athenians sent as many to strengthen it. Hereupon a great P. 305. Potidea Be∣sieg'd. Ant. Chr. 435. Battel was fought in the Isthmus near Pallene, where the Athenians were Victors, and kill'd above Three Hundred of the Enemy. And then straiter Siege was laid to Potidea. In the mean time, the Athenians built a new City in Propontis, which they call'd Letoanum. In Italy the Romans sent new Colonies into Ardea, and divided the Country a∣mongst them by Lot. Now Charetes executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans made Olymp. 86. 3. An. Mu. 3538. Ant. Chr. 434. Quintus Furius Fusus, and Manius Papyrius Crassus Consuls. In Italy the Inhabitants of Thurium (being composed of People gathered from several Places) began to quarrel and disagree concerning what City chiefly Thurium, should be re∣puted Quarrels at Thurium. a Colony of, and who should be acknowledg'd the Founder. For first they
of Athens challeng'd it, affirming most of the Inhabitants came from thence. Next they of Peloponesus (because many Cities sent Colonies from thence) claim'd the right of being accounted Founders of the City. In this manner (there being many Persons of Quality Members of the Colony, who had done much towards its Advancement,) there arose great Dissentions, every one challenging the dignity and honour as due to himself. At length they of Thurium sent to Del∣phos to consult there who should be esteemed and taken to be their Founder. The Oracle answered, That he himself should be so taken. And thus the great doubt being resolv'd, the Thurians declar'd Apollo their Founder: And so this Difference being remov'd, the People lived in Peace as formerly. In Greece, Ar∣chidamus King of Lacedemon died, having reign'd Forty Two Years, and Agis Archidamus dies. succeeded, who reign'd Seven and Forty Years. At the time when Apseudes was chief Governor of Athens, and Titus Mine∣nius, Olymp. 86. 4. An. Mu. 3539. Ant. Chr. 453. and Proculus Geganius Macerinus, Roman Consuls, Spartacus King of Bos∣phorus died, after he had Reigned Seventeen Years; whom Seleucus succeeding, Reign'd only Four Years. At Athens flourished that famous Astrologer Me∣ton the Son of Pausanias, who then published his Table of the Cycle of the Moon called Enneadeceterides, beginning from the Thirteenth of the Attick Month Answering to the Roman Months June and July. See Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 10. c. 7. Scirrophorion: For in the space of Nineteen Years the Stars return to the same State and Place, and compleat as it were a great Year. And therefore by some it is called Meton's Year. Meton's Year. This Man in this Discovery, seems to be exactly true to a wonder, for the Motions and Aspects of the Stars, fully agree with this De∣scription. And therefore most of the Grecians following the Rule of this Table, have never err'd to this Day. In Italy they of Tarentum, drave out the Inhabitants of Siris, and bringing a new Colony thither, built a City call'd Hera∣clea. When Pythodorus govern'd Athens, and Titus Quintius, and Titus Menenius A∣grippa, were Roman Consuls, the Eleans celebrated the Eighty Seventh Olympiad, in which was Victor Sophron of Olymp. 87. 1. An. Mund. 3540. Ant. Chr. 432. of Amphracion. At this time Spurius Milius kill'd by Servilius Hala, Master of the Horse. Manius affecting So∣vereignty at Rome, was kill'd. In the mean time, the Athe∣nians in a Signal Battel at Potidea (wherein they were Con∣querors) lost their General Callias. Phormio was advanced to his Place, who as soon as he came to the Army, renew'd the Siege, and press'd hard upon it with continual Assaults: But by reason of the Valour and P. 306. Obstinacy of the Defendants, the Siege continued long. Here Thucydides the Athenian begins his History, and then proceeds to relate Thucydides be∣gins his Histo∣ry. the War between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, call'd the Peloponesian War. It continued Seven and Twenty Years, but Thucydides writes only of the first Two and Twenty Years, in Eight Books, others say Nine.
CHAP. VII. The Peloponesian War. Potidea Revolts; Besieg'd by the Athenians, and is surrendred upon Articles. Nicias made the Athenian Admiral. Gor∣gias an excellent Orator sent from Leontine in Sicily to Athens. A Peace concluded after the War had continu'd Ten Years. WHen Euthydemus govern'd at Athens, the Romans created Three Military Olymp. 87. 2. An. M. 3541. Ant. Ch. 431. Tribunes, invested with Consular Power; Manius Emilius Mamercus, Caius Julius, and Lucius Quintius. At this time broke forth that War between the Athenians and the Lacedemonians, call'd the Peloponesian War, of longest con∣tinuance of any we read of in History. According to the Design of our History, it is convenient in the first Place, to The Pelopone∣sian War. declare the Causes of this War. The Athenians now endeavouring to have the Dominion of the Sea, brought over to Athens all the Money they had laid-up at Delos, which they had gathered together from the Cities of Greece, almost to the value of Eight Thousand Every Ta∣lent is 187 l. 10 s. Talents, and made Pericles Treasurer. He was of a very noble Family, and in Eloquence far exceeded others of his Fellow Citizens: But not long after, having spent a great part of the Money (intrusted with him) upon his private occasions, and being call'd by the People to give an account, through grief of his incapacity to discharge himself, he fell Sick: And being thus disturb'd in his Mind, in regard he was not able to make sa∣tisfaction, Alcibiades his Nephew (who was then under Age, and under his Care and Guardianship) directed him into a way how to extricate himself out of the present trouble. For seeing his Uncle so disturb'd, he ask'd the Reason; who answered, I am studying how I shall give an Account to the People for the Moneys committed to my Care and Custody. He replied, That it were better for him to con∣sider and advise how he might give no account at all. Pericles hereupon following the Advice of the Young Man, contriv'd by all the ways imaginable how he might involve the Athenians in some great War. For by this means he foresaw Ant. Ch. 431. he should avoid the Account, inasmuch as the City would be so distracted with Cares and Fears in such a conjuncture. To forward this Design, an Accident fell out very opportunely upon the following occasion. Phidias had made the Statue of Minerva, and Pericles the Son of Xantippe, was imploy'd to see the Work done: But some of Phidias's Workmen and Servants fell out, and stir'd up by the Enemies of Pericles, they fled to the Altars of the Gods. And be∣ing commanded to declare the Reason of a thing so unusual, they said, that they could make it out, that Phidias, with the connivance and help of Pericles, had imbezilled a great Sum of Money belonging to the Goddess. Whereupon an Assembly was call'd, at which the Enemies of Pericles mov'd the People to apprehend Phidias, and charge Pericles with the Sacrilege. They accus'd likewise A Famous Philosopher, who held the Sun was a burning Plate or Stone. He was tried in Athens, for this and his Impieties: He held God was an Infinite Moving of him∣self. See Laertius. Lact. lib. 1. c. 5. Anaxagoras the Sophist, the Master of Pericles, for his impious Opinions concerning the Gods; with the same Calumnies they loaded likewise Pericles, chief∣ly designing to stain the glory, and weaken the interest of so brave a Man. But Pericles being well acquainted with the Disposition of the People, as knowing that they highly va∣lued Men of worth, in times when they were threatned with War, (the pre∣sent Circumstances of Affairs making it at such times of absolute necessity:) And on the contrary, that in times of Peace (when they had nothing to do but giving the Reins to Envy and Malice) blackned the same Men with all man∣ner of Calumny; therefore judg'd it advantagious for his Affairs, if he could engage the City in some considerable War, that thereby having occasion to make use of them, they should be deaf to all Acccusations against him, and should have no time or leisure to call him to an Account. To help on this his Design, Ant. Ch. 431. it was lately decreed at Athens, that they of Megara, should have no Traffick with the Athenians either by Sea or Land: The Megareans therefore made their Address for Relief to the Spartans, who agreed to their Requests, and by the
unanimous Assent of all the Assembly, they sent Ambassadors to the Athenians, with order to require them to rescind the Decree against them of Megara; And that if they refus'd, then that their Embassadors should denounce War a∣gainst P. 307. them in the name both of them and their Confederates. Upon hearing of the Embassadors, an Assembly was call'd to debate this matter; where Pericles, (that far surpass'd all the rest in Eloquence and strength of Reason) gave his Reasons against the abrogating of the Decree. He alledged it was a step to Bondage and Slavery, and against the common good to yield to the Demands of the Lacedemonians; but advis'd them rather that they should draw all their Goods and Concerns out of the Country into the City; and being now Masters at Sea, to enter into a War with the Lacedemonians. And hereupon making an accurate Discourse of the War, he told them what a Multitude of Confederats they had, what a brave and well man'd Fleet they were Masters of, what a vast Treasure they were possessed of, brought from Delos, gather'd from the common Con∣tribution of the Cities, amounting to Ten Thousand A Common Talent was about an Hundred Eighty Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings of our Money. Talents; and though Four Thousand of it were spent in the building of the The Propyle was a stately Gate or Porch belonging to the Acropolis or Citadel. Propyle, or Citadel, and in the Siege at Potidea, yet every Year Four Hundred and Sixty Talents were rais'd by Tribute from their Confederates. And besides all this, that the Adornments belonging to the Shows, and the Persian Spoils amouned to Five Hundred Talents more. And that in the Temples and other publick Works of the City, there were great Riches, so that the very Image of Minerva it self alone was worth Fifty Talents of Gold; whose Ornaments were so plac'd, that they might be taken off; and all of them when necessity requir'd might be borrow'd from the Ant. Ch. 431. Goddess, so that they be faithfully restor'd in time of Peace. And as to the Estate of the Citizens, he told them, through the Enjoyment of a long Peace the City was grown exceeding Rich; he added moreover, that they had Twelve Thousand Armed Men, besides their Confederates, and what were in their Garrisons. And those in their Garrisons, together with their Colonies, were more than Seven∣teen Thousand; and that they had ready a Fleet of Three Hundred Sail. On the contrary, the Spartans were Poor, and far inferior to the Athenians in Naval Forces. Having fired the Citizens with these Discourses, he vehemently pres∣sed the People not to give ear to the imperious Demands of the Lacedemonians: And by the earnestness of his Speech, he easily prevail'd; for which reason he was called Olympius. Aristophanes the Comick Poet, who flourished in the time of Pericles, mentions these things in the Verses following— Ye Poor and Country Swains, consider well, The Words I speak; if you would know, they'll tell Your Country how destroy'd; a Spark but small, Brought from Megara's Law, blown up with all By him, hath rais'd such Smoak of War, Blood, Fears, As draws from Eyes of Greece continual Tears. And likewise the Comick Poet Eupolis, in other Verses, says of Pericles, whom Ant. Ch. 431. they call Olympius. Thunder and Lightening he rais'd in Greece, Of Eloquence who was the Masterpiece; Only among the Orators, his Darts Were left fast fixed in the Hearers Hearts. And these were the causes of the Peloponesian War, as they are related by E∣phorus. The principal Grecian Cities thus provoked to War, the Lacedemonians (in a general Convention with them of Peloponesus) declar'd War against the Athe∣nians, and forthwith sent their Embassadors to the King of Persia, to enter into a League offensive with them. Embassadors were likewise sent, to desire Two Hundred Ships of their Confederates in Sicily and Italy.
And now being join'd with the Peloponesians, and having rais'd a Land-Army from several Parts, and prepared with all things necessary for War, they first begin. At that time in Beotia the City Platea was a free City, in league with the Athe∣nians: P. 308. But some of the Citizens designing to enslave the Place, in contrivance with the Beotians promis'd to bring the City under their Power if they would but send them a Guard of Souldiers. The Beotians therefore sent Three Hundred Souldiers in the Night to Platea, who being let into the Gates, the Traytors de∣liver'd up the City into their Hands. But the Plateans willing to approve their Platea entr'd in the Night by the Thebans. Faithfulness to the Athenians (at first thinking that the whole Army of the Thebans were entr'd) sent Embassadors to them to treat and make Terms: But when Day appear'd, and they of Platea understood how small a Number the Enemy was, they all as one Man came upon them, and Fought with great re∣solution for their Common Liberty. But because the Fight was in the Streets, the Thebans being better Souldiers at the first destroy'd many of the Plateans: But afterwards they in the Houses, even the very Boys and Children by throwing down Tyles from the Roofs so sorely gall'd the Thebans that they were forc'd to fly; that part of them who got out of the City clearly escap'd, but another part that fled for shelter to a little House, at length were compell'd to give The Thebans driven out of Platea. up themselves to the will of the Enemy. The Thebans being inform'd by them that had escap'd, of this misfortune, with all their force hasten'd to the City: By reason of which suddain incursion many of them who liv'd in the Country, and those abroad being taken at una∣wares, were kill'd and many Prisoners taken; the whole Country being fill'd with Fears Devastations and Robberies. In the mean time the Plateans sent to the Thebans to intreat them to depart out of their Coasts, promising they would release the Prisoners. Upon which conditions the Matter was Com∣pos'd; and the Thebans receiv'd the Captives and restor'd the Plunder to them of Platea, and so return'd home. The Plateans had sometime before sent to Athens for Aid, and had brought much of their Goods out of the Country into the City: The Athenians hearing of their Distress hastned away to them a competent Number of Souldiers, who tho' they March'd with all expedition, yet they Ant. Ch. 431. could not prevent the Thebans: But what was left in the Country they brought into the Town: The Women and Children and those that were infirm, they got together in a Body, and convey'd them to Athens. Hereupon the Lacedemonians judging the Athenians had broke the League, gather'd Forces together from all parts both from Sparta and from the rest of the Peloponesians. The Confederats of the Lacedemonians were the Peloponesians wholly, except the Argives, for they then stood Neuters. Those out of Pe∣loponesus were the Megareans, Ambraciots, Leucadians, Phocians, Beotians, many of the Locrians over against Eubea, and the rest those of Amphissa. Those that sided with the Athenians were the Inhabitants of the Sea-Coasts of Asia, the Carians, Dorians, Ionians, them of the Hellespont, and all the Islanders, ex∣cept the Inhabitants of Melus and Thera. The Thracians likewise were their Confederats, except those of Calcidica and Potidea. Besides these there join'd with the Athenians the Messenians in Naupactus, and the Corcyreans. Here seems to be something wanting and lost, i. e. who they were that sent Shipping. All the rest sent Land-Forces. These Confederats stood firm on both sides. The Lacedemonians having at length rais'd a great Army, made Archidamus their King, General, who made an Irruption into Attica, besieg'd their Castles, The Spartans wast Attica. and wasted a great part of the Country. The Athenians inflamed with desire of Revenge for this Destruction of their Country, were eager to be out to Fight their Enemies; but Pericles the General advis'd the hot Youths to forbear a while, telling them that he would drive the Spartans out without Fighting. To this Ant. Ch. 431. P. 309. end he fitted out an hundred Gallies well Man'd, and gave the command of the Fleet to Carcinus and some other Officers, with order to make a descent into Peloponesus. Accordingly they laid wast a great part of the Sea-Coasts, took se∣veral Castles, and struck the Lacedemonians with great Consternation. So that without delay they withdrew their Forces out of Attica, and made it their chief care now to defend Peloponesus. The Athenians now freed by this ingenious Contrivance from their Enemies, highly Honour'd Pericles as a wise Com∣mander and one able to carry on the War against the Lacedemonians.
Apolodorus now Archon at Athens, the Romans chose Marcus Geganius. Genarius and Olymp. 87. 3: An. Mu. 3542. Ante Chr. 430. Lucius Sergius Consuls. In the mean time the Athenian General ceas'd not to wast and plunder the Sea-Coast of Peloponesus, and destroy their Castles. And being join'd with Fifty Gallies of Three Tire of Oars from Corsyra, he made a more dreadful incursion into Peloponesus, and especially on the Acte. Pericles har∣rases Pelopo∣nesus. Ant. Ch. 430. Brasidas his Valour. Sea-Coast, and up further into the Land, burning all the Towns before him. Then he made for Methone, a City of Laconia, wasting and plundering the Country in his way, and attempted the taking of the City it self. There Brasidas a Spartan (a young Man, but of great Strength and Valour) seeing Methone likely to be lost, with some other Spartans joining with him, made his way through the midst of the Enemy, who were dispers'd here and there in their several Posts, and with the slaughter of many of them got safe into the Castle. After the Athenians had made several Assaults (in which Brasidas behav'd himself with great bravery in the midst of dangers) and saw no hopes of gaining the Place, they return'd to their Ships. But Brasidas who had preserv'd Methone by his valour and resolute De∣fence, was highly honour'd amongst the Spartans. And being incourag'd by this Success in several Encounters, afterwards he behav'd himself with that Valour that he gain'd a great Name and Reputation. The Athenians roul'd about to Elis, wasted the Country, and besieg'd Pheras, Pheras taken by Storm by the Athenians. a Castle of the Eleans; to which they sent relief, but were beaten by the Athe∣nians, who took Pheras by Storm. Yet within a while after the Eleans coming upon them with all their Strength, they were forc'd to their Ships, and Sail'd back to Cephalenia; where they made a league with the Inhabitants, and then re∣turn'd to Athens. Afterwards Cleopompus, made by the Athenians Admiral of a Fleet of thirty The Acts of Cleopompus. Sail, was commanded into Eubea, both to defend the Island, and to make War upon the Locrians. He invaded and spoil'd all the Sea-tract of Locris, and took the City Thronium, and afterwards routed the Locrians in a Land-Fight at Aelopes. He then Fortisied the Island Atalante, near Locris, that it might be both a De∣fence against the Locrians, and that from thence he might with more ease make incursions upon them. About the same time the Athenians cast all the Inhabitants out of Aegina, for favouring the Lacedemonians (as they were accused) and brought new Colonies Ant. Chr. 430. thither, and divided the City and Country amongst them by Lot. The Lace∣demonians appointed A Town be∣longing to the Messenians. Thyre to the ejected Aeginites for their habitation; and on the other side, the Athenians forthwith alloted Naupactus for a receptacle for the Messenians, formerly ejected by the Lacedemonians. At the same time the Athenians sent Pericles with an Army against them of Megara, who after he had harras'd the Country and taken much Spoil and Plunder, return'd to Athens. Shortly after the Lacedemonians with their Confederats broke a second time into Attica, and cut down the Trees, burnt the Towns and most miserably de∣stroy'd P. 310. almost the whole Country, except Tetrapolis, which they spar'd by rea∣son of their former kindness in receiving of their Ancestors and subduing (by Arms from thence) Euristheus. For they conceiv'd it just and equal to shew kindness to them who had deserv'd so well from their Predecessors. The Athe∣nians during this incursion durst not come into the Field, but kept close withim A Plague in Athens. the Walls of their City, by reason whereof a great Plague raged amongst them. For a Multitude of all sorts of People being throng'd together, it may be rea∣sonably concluded that through the straitness of the Place the Air was corrupted, and caused the Infection. By this means they were so weakn'd that they were not able to drive the Enemy out of the Country, but sent out Pericles again with a Fleet into Peloponesus; who wasting the Sea-Coasts, and taking some Cities, caus'd the Lacedemonians at length to leave Attica. The Athenians by reason of the wast and spoil made in the Country, and the great destruction of the People by the Plague in the City, fell into great discontent and vexation, and were enrag'd, at Pericles, whom they look'd upon as the great Incendiary and occasion of the War, and therefore depriv'd him of the Magi∣stracy, and upon slight and frivolous Surmizes laid a Mulct upon him of Thirty Talents. Then they sent Embassadors A Talent was Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, the greater; but the lesser an Hundred Eighty Seven Pounds Ten Shillings. to Sparta to treat of Peace; but being slighted by the Lace∣demonians (who would admit of no reasonable Terms,) they were reduced to a necessity to chuse Pericles General again. And these were the Actions of this Year.
Epaminondas this Year was chief Ruler of Athens, and Lucius Papyrius Crassus and Olymp. 87. 4. Ant. Chr. 429. Marcus Comelius Maluginensis. Pericles dies. Macerinus Roman Consuls: At which time Pericles the General Died at Athens. A Man in Nobility of Birth, greatness of Estate, in Eloquence, Arts and Stratagems of War far beyond all the rest of the Citizens. About the same time the Athenians were very hot and earnest to recover Potidea by force, and to that end sent Hagno thither with the Army formerly commanded by Pe∣ricles. Hagno thereupon Sail'd thither with the whole Fleet, and made all the preparation for the Siege imaginable, viz. Engines of all Sorts for an Assault, Potidea Be∣sieg'd. Arms and Darts, and sufficient Provision for the whole Army. However though he continually batter'd the Walls of the City in many places, yet he spent much time to no purpose. For the fear of being taken by Storm added courage to the De∣fendants, and the hight of the Walls commanding the Port, made them very re∣solute: Besides, a Disease hapn'd among the Besiegers which destroy'd many of them, so that they were greatly discourag'd. Notwithstanding Hagno knowing that the Athenians had been at the charge of a Thousand Talents to carry on the Siege, and that they were highly incens'd against them of Potidea (because they Ant. Chr. 429. were the first that made a Defection) durst not leave the Siege: But with all his might persisted, and stir'd up the Souldiers even above their Strength to force the City. But at length considering that many of the Citizens were lost both in the Assaults and by the infection of the Disease, leaving a part of the Army to maintain the Siege, he return'd with the rest to Athens, having lost above a Thousand Men. After he was gone, they of Potidea (being brought to the utmost extremity for want of Provision) sent to the Besiegers to treat with them upon Terms of Peace; which was readily accepted and imbrac'd with both Arms (as they say) by the Athenians, and Peace was made upon the Terms following, to wit, That Potidea sur∣rendred. all the Inhabitants should draw out of the City, and take nothing away with them but every Man one Suit of Apparel, and every Woman two. Matters being thus compos'd, the Potideans with their Wives and Children (according to the Articles) left the City and setled themselves among the Cal∣cideans in Thrace; after which the Athenians sent a Colony of a Thousand Per∣sons, P. 311. and divided both the City and Country adjacent amongst them by Lot. Phormio being now made Admiral at Athens, with Twenty Ships sail'd round Peloponesus and arriv'd at Naupactum, where possessing himself of the Greek Criseus, he stopt the Passages against the Lacedemonians so as that their Ships could not come forth. But their King Archidamus with a great Army began a new expe∣dition, Ant. Chr. 429. and march'd into Beotia, and when he came to Platea (ready and pre∣par'd to wast and destroy the Country) he first solicited that City to revolt: Platea besieg'd by the Lacede∣monians. But not being able to prevail, he fell a robbing and spoiling the Country all along as he went. Afterwards he Besieg'd the City, in hopes to weary them out for want of Provision: He incessantly likewise Batter'd the Walls with his Engines, and made frequent Assaults. But with all his Attempts not being able to gain the Place, he left a part of the Army to carry on the Siege, and with the rest march'd back into Peloponesus. About this time the Athenians made Xenophon and Phanomachus Generals, and com∣manded them with a Thousand Men to go into Thrace. When they came as far as Pactolus in Beotia, they burnt spoil'd and rob'd the Country all before them, and destroy'd the very standing Corn. But they of Olynthus join'd with the Be∣otians, fell upon the Athenians and slew most of them, together with their Ge∣nerals. The Athenian Generalskill'd in Beotia. In the mean time the Lacedemonians by the advice of the Ambraciots with a Thousand Men and a few Ships under Cnemus their Captain, made for Acarnania and being inforc'd by a considerable Number of their Confederates, Cnemus arriv'd there and incamp'd near the City Stratos. But the Acarnanians in a Body came suddainly upon him, surpriz'd him with the loss of many of his Men and drove him into the Country of Oeniades. About the same time Phormio the Athenian Com∣mander with his twenty Ships met with the Lacedemonian Fleet of Forty Seven Ante Chr. 429. The Lacede∣monians rou∣ted at Sea, at Rhium. Sail, and Fought them, sunk the Admiral and disabl'd many others, took Twelve with the Men in them, and pursu'd the rest to the Continent. The Lacede∣monians thus unexpectedly beaten, with the remaining part of their Fleet got into Patrae in Achaia. This Battel was at a Place call'd Rhium. Hereupon the Athenians erected a Trophy, and Dedicated a Ship in the Isthmos to Neptune, and
so return'd to their Confederat City Naupactus. But the Lacedemonians sent o∣ther Ships to join the remainder of their Fleet that were at Patra. And all of them rendezvouz'd at A Promon∣tory neer the Isthmos of Co∣rinth. Rhium, whither likewise the Lacedemonians Land-Army March'd, and there encamp'd near to their Fleet. Phormio encourag'd by the late Victory, set upon the Enemy though they far exceeded him Number, and destroy'd many of their Ships; but not without some loss of his own, so that he went off but half Conqueror; but being en∣forc'd with Twenty more Ships from Athens, tlie Lacedemonians made off for Corinth, and durst never attempt any more to Fight at Sea. And these are the things reported to be done this Year. Diotinus executing the place of chief Magistrate at Athens, the Romans created Olymp. 88. 1. Ante Chr. 428. Caius Julius. Junius and Proculus Virginius Tricostus Consuls: And they of Elis celebra∣ted the eighty eighth Olympiad, in which Simmachus of Messina in Sicily carry'd a∣way the Prize. About this time Cnemus the Lacedemonian Admiral while he lay at Corinth contriv'd how to surprize the Pyreum. For he understood by his P. 312. Spies that no Shipping lay there, nor any Guard was appointed to defend the Place; and that the Athenians were secure, and therefore Negligent, conceiving none durst be so bold as to come up thither to attempt any thing of that Nature. To this end having brought Forty Ships a little before to Megaris, with these well Man'd he set Sail from thence in the Night, and past over to Salamis, where he surpriz'd and took the Castle Budorium, and seiz'd their Ships and harras'd the rest of the Country. They of Salamis firing their Beacons, the Salamis inva∣ded by the La∣cedemonians. Athenians suspected that the Pyreum was taken, and ran all with great fear and confusion to their Arms for the defence of the Place: But being better in∣form'd made away for Salamis. The Lacedemonians thus frustrated in their Design, left Salamis and return'd home. After their departure the Athenians had a more watchful Eye upon Salamis, and plac'd there a strong Garrison; and fortifi'd the Pyreum with Walls, and sufficient Guards for it's Defence. About this time Sitalces King of Thrace, though he had but a Small Kingdom, yet by his Valour and Prudence greatly enlarg'd his Dominions; being a Man The Com∣mendation of Sitalces King of Thrace. both Just and Kind to his Subjects, and Valiant and Diligent in time of War. He made his chief care to preserve and increase his Stores, by which means he grew so very Rich that he gain'd larger Territories than ever any King of Thrace had done before him. For that part which lay by the Sea Coast ran along from the Borders of the Abderites to the River Ister. And that from the Sea, up into the main Land, was of as great extent as a swift Footman could Travel over in Thirteen Days. This Prince was possess'd of so large a Country, that his yearly Revenue a∣mounted to above a Thousand Talents. During his Reign a War broke forth, upon which occasion he rais'd out of Thrace more than an Hundred and Twen∣ty Thousand Foot, and Fifty Thousand Horse. But it's necessary that we Ant. Chr. 428. declare the Causes of this War, that so the following account may be better understood. Sitacles had entr'd into a League with the Athenians, and one of the Articles Sitalces his War with the Macedonians. was, That he should faithfully Assist them in the War wherein they were en∣gag'd in Thrace. To this end he rais'd a powerful Army, with a design to join with the Athenians to take Calcidea by Force: And likewise for the hatred he had to Perdiccas, King of Macedonia, he resolv'd to restore Amyntas the Son of Phi∣lip, to his Father's Kingdom. For these Causes he was necessitated to raise a very great Army. When all things were in readyness he Marc'hd all his Forces out of Thrace, and entr d Macedonia: But the Macedonians struck with terror at the multitude of their Enemies dar'd not to oppose them, but getting in all their Fruits and Goods they could within their Garrisons, they kept close within their Forts and Walls. The Thracians brought Amyntas along with them as King, and first treated the Cities by Messengers and fair Speeches; but when none would hearken to them, he Assaulted the first Castle in his way, and took it by Storm. Upon which many of the Cities and Garrisons (through fear) Ant. Ch. 428. surrender'd of their own accord. After they had run through all Macedonia, loaded with Rich Booty, they made against the Greek Cities of the Calci∣deans.
Whilst Sitalces was thus imploy'd, the Thessalians, Achaians, Magnesians, and all the other Grecians inhabiting within Macedon and Thermopyle, confederated and rais'd a mighty Army; for they were afraid lest the Thracians who were so P. 313. powerful, should make an inroad into their Country, and bring them under the Thracian Yoke: And the Calcideans did the like. Sitalces hereupon being inform'd of the great Armies rais'd against him by the Grecians, and knowing his Army was not able to indure the sharpness of the approaching Winter, struck up a Peace with Perdiccas, and in confirmation thereof, contracted a Marriage with him, and so march'd his Army back into Thrace. In the mean time, whilst these things were on foot, the Lacedemonians with Another in∣road into At∣tica. their Confederates made another irruption out of Peloponesus into Attica, under their King Archidamus, who had the Sovereign Command of the Army; and after they had destroy'd all the standing Corn when it was near ripe, and made havock and spoil all over the Country, they return'd to their respective Habi∣tations. The Athenians on the other hand, were not in heart to oppose them, but were under sore Calamities by Plague and Famine, and therefore altogether despair'd of any good issue and event of the War. And these were the things observable this Year. Euclides was Ruler of Athens, when the Romans chose Three Military Tri∣bunes Olymp. 88. 2. Ant. Chr. 427. War between the Syracusians and the Leon∣tines. in the room of Consuls, Marcus Manlius. Mannius, Quintus Su'pitius Pretextatus, and Servitius Cornelius Cossus. At this time in Sicily, the Syracusians made War upon them of Leontum, a Colony brought thither from the Calcideans, originally A∣thenians, who being overpress'd by the power of the Syracusians, and in great danger to lose their City, sent Embassadors to Athens for speedy and seasonable aid, to deliver them from their present Exigency. The chief among them that were sent, was Gorgias the Orator, the most Eloquent Man of his time. He Gorgias the Orator. was the first that taught the Rules of Rhetorick, and was so famous for his wise and learned Orations, that all his Scholars as a Gratuity, gave him an Hun∣dred A Mina in Silver, is a∣bout 3 l. 9 s. Mina's apiece. When he came to Athens, and had Audience, he made an Oration to the People concerning the League desired; and by his new and ingenious way of speaking, the Athenians were so taken (who were otherwise Men of great Wis∣dom and Eloquence) that they were struck with admiration. For he adorn'd his Speech with most excellent Figures, Paranomacisms, . Figures call'd Synoecei∣osms, Oxymorons, Paranomacisms, and the like. and artificial composures of Words and Sentences, as by Op∣posites, Paranomacisms, equal Periods like Terminations, and the like gingling strains of Rhetorical Wit, to allure and in∣tice his Auditors, which at that time for its novelty, was much admired. But now it's lookt upon to savour too much of affectation, and to be ridiculous, especially when by frequency and often re∣petition it becomes fulsome and tedious. Gorgias having perswaded the Athe∣nians to enter into a League with the Leontines, return'd to Leontinum with great Reputation for his Eloquence. Ant. Chr. 427. The Athenians for some time before, had an hankering Mind after Sicily, by reason of the richness of the Soyl, and therefore were now more willingly per∣swaded by Gorgias, and decreed to send Aid as was desir'd. The pretence was to assist them who were their own Countrymen, and were brought into great straits, but in truth their chief Design was to gain the Island; for not many Years before, when the War broke forth between the Corinthians and them of Corcyra, and both address'd themselves to the Athenians for Aid, to make them their Confederates, the People of Athens resolv'd to side with the Corcyreans, because Corcyra was so situated, that it was a very ready and convenient Pass over from thence into Sicily. In short, the Athenians being now Masters at Sea, and every where successful, had many Confederates, and were richly fur∣nished, both with Men and Money, had many Cities under their power, were possess'd of a mighty Treasure in ready Money brought from Delos, gathered from the Inhabitants of Greece to the value of above Ten Thousand Ten Thousand Talents amounts to 1875000 l. Sterling, the lesser Ta∣lent. The greater Talent is 250 l. The lesser is 187 l. 10 s. Talents. Moreover, they had likewise many excellent Officers, and expert Commanders; by these Advantages, the Athenians were grown very confident that they should both overcome the Spartans, (and having subdu'd all Greece) win also the P. 314.
whole Island of Sicily. These were the Reasons induced them to resolve to assist the Leontines, and to that end sent them Ant. Chr. 427. an Hundred Sail of Ships, under the command of Lachetes and Chabrias. With these they arriv'd at Rhegium, and from The Athenians assist the Leontines in Sicily by Chabrias. their Colonies there and at Calcidea, they had an Hundred Ships more, which join'd with the former; from thence they loos'd, and came first to the Lipare Islands, where they ravag'd the Country, because they were Confederates of the Syracusians. Then they made to In Italy up∣on the Sea-Coasts. Locris, and took Five Ships belonging to the Locrians, and besieg'd one of their Castles. The Siculi bordering upon the Mylae, a Ci∣ty in Sicily. Myleans coming to their aid, the Armies engag'd, and the Athenians were Conquerors, and kill'd above a Thousand of their Ene∣mies, and took no fewer than Six Hundred Prisoners: And presently after they took the Castle by Storm. In the mean time, Forty Ships more were sent to the Fleet by the Athenians, to carry on the War with more Vigour, under the command of Eurymedon and Sophocles. And when they were all join'd, they made up a Fleet of Two Hundred and Fifty Sail. But while the War was car∣rying on, the Leontines by their Embassadors, struck up a Peace with them of Syracuse: Upon which, the Athenian Fleet, return'd Home. But the Syracusians receiv'd all the Leontines into the City, and made them all free of Syracuse, and from that time appointed the City Leontium to be a Fort or Garrison of the Sy∣racusians. And this was the Condition of Sicily at this time. In Greece, they of the Island Lesbos revolted from the Athenians: And the Lesbos revolts from Athens. Reason was, because all the Inhabitants of the Cities throughout Lesbos, were by order and decree of the Athenians, remov'd and brought into The greatest City of Les∣bos. Mitylene. For this Reason also they entred into a League with the Lacedemonians, and advis'd them how they might become Masters at Sea. To accomplish which Design, they promis'd them a great number of Ships: The Spartans gave a very quick ear to this, and whilst they were preparing a Navy, the Athenians were before them, and commanded Clinippides with Forty Sail, forthwith to waft over an Army into Lesbos; who being joyn'd with other Confederates, made for Mity∣lene; Ant. Chr. 427. Mitylene be∣sieg'd by the Athenians. and in a Sea-Fight routed the Mityleans, and then besieged them. Hereupon the Lacedemonians resolved to assist them of Mitylene, and to that end prepared a brave Navy; but the Athenians enforc'd their Army with a Thousand Men more sent into Lesbos, before the Lacedemonians arriv'd. Paches, the Son of Epiderus, was General of this Expedition, who when he arriv'd at Mitylene (joining with the former Army) laid a more strait Siege to the Place; and contiually assaulted the City both by Sea and Land. The Lacedemonians in the mean time, sent Five and Forty Ships, under the Command of Alcidas, to assist the Mitylenes; and again invaded Attica, with the assistance of their Con∣federates; who fell upon those Places that were before untouch'd, and after they had most shamefully pillaged and wasted the Country, they return'd Home. But the Mitylenes, oppress'd with Famine, the Sword, and seditious Tumults, upon Conditions surrender the City. After which a Council was held at Athens what Mitylene sur∣rendred. they should do with them of Mitylene: There was one Cleon an Orator, a cruel and violent spirited Man, stir'd up the People to kill all the Mitylenes, that were Men grown up, and to sell all the Women and Children for Slaves. The Athe∣nians P. 315. voted it to be so as Cleon had perswaded them, and sent Messengers to Mitylene, to acquaint the Governor with the Decree. When Paches had read it, another to the contrary presently came to his Hand; upon which, Paches un∣derstanding the Athenians had chang'd their Minds, with great joy call'd the Mitylenes together, and both remitted their faults, and likewise freed them from their fears. But the Athenians demolished the Walls of Mitylene, and divided the whole Island of Lesbos by Lot, except the Lands belonging to Methymna. And this was the issue of the Lesbean defection from Athens. About the same time, the Lacedemonians (still carrying on the Siege at Platea) drew a Wall round the City, and fortify'd it with several Forts and strong Guards for its Defence. The Siege continuing long, and no Relief coming from Ant. Chr. 427. Athens, the Besieg'd were greatly press'd both with want of Provision, and the loss of many of the Citizens who were cut off in the frequent Assaults. All therefore being doubtful what the issue might be, a Council was call'd to advise what was fit to be done in order to their Preservation. Many thought it most advisable to capitulate; but there were others, to the number of Two Hundred,
that were for breaking through the Guards in the Night, and so fly to Athens. In pursuance whereof, observing the darkness of the Night, those that were for Capitulating, were prevail'd with to assault a remote part of the Enemy's Wall; by which means, they who intended to break through the Guards (whilst their Enemies were busied in assisting their Fellows that were assaulted) scaled ano∣ther part of the Wall (having got Ladders for that purpose) and kill'd the Guards, and so escap'd to Athens. The next Day, the Lacedemonians were in great vexation at the escape of them out of the City, and brought their Forces close to the Walls, and bent all their Minds and Strength with all expedition to force the Place: Upon which, the Plateans being terrify'd, gave up both themselves and their City to the mercy of their Enemies. Platea surren∣dred. But the Lacedemonian Commanders put this Question to every one that they sent for from among the Plateans, What good Offices or Services they had ever done to the Lacedemonians? And when one by one confessed they knew of none; they asked them again, Whether they had ever done the Spartans any harm? And when none deny'd that, they order'd them all to be slain; so that all that remain'd in the City, were put to the Sword, and the Town it self was raz'd to the Ground, and the Lands belonging to it let to farm. And thus the In∣habitants Platea raz'd. of Platea for their faithfulness to the Athenians, became involv'd in great Misery, and undeservedly perished. Whilst these things were in doing, a great Sedition and A Sedition at Corcyra. civil Discord a∣rose in Corcyra upon the following occasion: In the Battel at Epidamnum, many of the Corcyreans were taken Prisoners; and while they were in custody, they promis'd the Corinthians, that if they might be releas'd, they would undertake to deliver up Corcyra into their Hands. This was a very welcome and grateful Offer to the Corinthians. A considerable Number of Talents therefore being co∣lourably procur'd from their Friends for their Redemption, they were all dis∣charg'd. As soon as they return'd into their Country, minding the performance of their Contract, they First seised upon the chief of the Citizens, (and especially those who could most influence the People,) and afterwards cut their Throats, and so quite dissolved the Democracy. But the Corcyreans were presently assisted by the Athenians, and recoverd their Liberty, and were resolved to execute Justice upon Ant. Ch. 427. the Ringleaders of the Defection. But they (through fear of punishment) fled for refuge to the Altars of the Gods, and as Suppliants begg'd Pardon both of the Gods and the People. Euthydemus was Governor of Athens, when Three Military Tribunes invested P. 316. Olymp. 88. 3. Ant. Chr. 426. Plague breaks forth again at Athens. with Consular Power were again chosen at Rome, Marcus Fabius, Phalinius, and Lucius Sereulius. In their time the Plague broke out afresh, when they were freed from this Contagion but very lately before: It rag'd so exceedingly, that they lost Four Thousand Foot Soldiers, and Four Hundred Horse; and of others, Freemen and Servants, above Ten Thousand. And now because the Course of the History may require a Declaration of the Causes of this violent Distemper, it is necessary for us in this place to set them forth. Abundance of Rain had fallen in the Winter, by reason whereof, the Earth being over-wet in many Places (especially in low and hollow Grounds) the Water lay like standing Pools; and those being corrupted and putrify'd by the heat of the Summer, thence proceeded a Mist of gross and stinking Vapours, which corrupted the Air, as it often happens about filthy Marishes. And besides, the want of good Food, much advanc'd the progress of the Disease, for the Year before, the Fruits by too much Rain were crude and unwholsom. There was likewise a Third cause of this Distemper, which was this; the That is, Winds which come at stated and certain times every Year. Plin. lib. 2. c. 47. E∣tesian Winds this Summer blew not, by whose gentle Breezes, the violent heat of the Air was constantly allay'd before at other times; so that the Heat be∣ing now excessive, and the Air as it were inflam'd, Mens Bodies now wanting the usual Refreshment, contracted an evil Habit; from whence arose (through the vehement and immoderate heat) all sorts of burning Distempers. And hence it was, that many seiz'd with this Disease, to free themselves from the burning heat that was in their Bodies, cast themselves into Pits and Wells. But the Athenians judg'd that Ant. Chr. 426. so grievous a Distemper was from God, and therefore according to the charge gi∣ven them by the Oracle, they purg'd the Island Delos (which was formerly dedi∣cated
to Apollo) now polluted (as they conceiv'd) by burying many dead Bodies there. Therefore all the Graves of the Dead were dug up, and the Urns were transported into the next Island to Delos, call'd Rhene; and a Law was made, that it should not be lawful for any for the time to come, either to bury, or to bear any Child in Delos. They then likewise reviv'd the Panegyrick Festival in Delos, now for a long time disus'd. While the Athenians were thus religiously imploy'd, the Lacedemonians with their Confederates in Peloponesus, incamp'd in the Isthmos, and there consulted together concerning the invading of Attica a∣gain. But there then happening such terrible  An Earth∣quake. Earthquakes in several parts of Greece, that it so terrify'd and possess'd them with fear and awe of the Gods, that they all return'd to their respective Countries. For the horrible Concussions of the Earth were so great, that many Cities near the Sea were sunk and drown'd. And whereas that Tract of Land near Locris was before a Peninsula, by the violence of the Earthquake, a Channel was made through the Isthmos, and the Place turn'd into an Island now call'd Near Eubea, now call'd Negro∣pont. Atalante. While these things were doing, the Lacedemonians sent new Colonies into Trachin, and changed its Name into There are many of this Name, but this is near the Mountain Oeta, and the Straits of Thermopyle. Ant. Chr. 426. Heraclea. The Reason was, for that the Trachinians ha∣ving had Wars with the Oeteans many Years, had lost most of their Citizens. And therefore being almost depopulated, they addressed themselves to the Lacedemonians (whose Co∣lonies they were) to repeople their City. The Lacedemo∣nians in regard they were their Countrymen, and Hercules their Ancestor in times long past, had resided at Trachin, resolved to make it a large and beau∣tiful City: And to this end, they sent a Colony thither, out of their own City, and out of others in Peloponesus, to the number of Four Thousand; and out of the rest of Greece, as many as pleased, were receiv'd as Members of the Colo∣lony. The whole number was little less than Six Thousand. To conclude, Tra∣chin was at length so far inlarged, that it contain'd Ten Thousand Men; and when they had divided the Land adjoining by Lot, they call'd the City Hera∣clea. Stratocles being Archon of Athens, the Consular dignity was conferr'd upon the Three Military Tribunes at Rome, Lucius Furius Medullus. Me∣tellus, Mamercus. P. 317. The Acts of Demosthenes the A∣thenian General. Lucius Pinarius, and S. Posthumius Albus. In the time Olymp. 88. 4. An. Mu. 3547. of their Government, Demosthenes made Admiral of the Fleet by the Athenians, with Thirty Ships well man'd, join'd with Fifteen more from Corcyra, and other Aids from the Cepha∣leans, Acarnanians and Messenians inhabiting A City of Achaia, now call'd Le∣pantum by the Venetians. Ant. Chr. 426. Naupactus, and so set sail for Leucas, and when he had harrased and wasted the Country of Leucadia, he bent his Course for Aetolia, and there burnt and destroy'd many of their Villages; but the Aetolians making head against them, routed the Athenians, who fled to Naupactus. The Aetolians incouraged with this Victory, with the aid of Three Thousand Lacedemonians, march'd against Naupactus (which the Messeneans then inhabited) but were repulsed. From thence they made an Expe∣dition against A City of Aetolia. Molycria, and took the City. The Athenian General Demosthenes, fearing lest they should attack Naupactus, sent a Thousand Men out of Arcarnania to strengthen the Garrison. He himself continu'd in Acarnania, and fell upon a Thousand Ambraciots in their March, and cut them almost all off. Upon this the whole Strength of the Ambracia. City came out against him, and he destroy'd most of them likewise, so that the City was al∣most made desolate. Hereupon he entred into a Consultation of assaulting Ambra∣cia, hoping it might be easily won by reason there were few left to defend it: But the Acarnanians fearing that if the Athenians were Masters of the Town, they should have more troublesome Neighbours than the Ambraciots were, refused to follow Demosthenes: Upon this Mutiny the Acarnanians became Friends with the Ambraciots, and entred into a League of Peace and Amity for an Hundred Years. Demosthenes thus deserted by the Acarnanians, returns with Twenty Sail to A∣thens. Presently after the Ambraciots (having lately smarted so much, and in great fear of the Athenians) desir'd a Garrison from the Lacedemonians.
Demosthenes afterwards marching with an Army to A Town in the Western part of Peloponesus. Py∣lus in Peloponesus, determin'd to draw a Wall round the Place; which was naturally Fortify'd, and Four Hundred Stadia's from Messena: And being well furnished with Mul∣titudes † Eight Stadia's make a Mile; e∣very Stadium is 625 Foot. 400 Sla∣dia is 50 Miles. of Men, in Twenty Days space he finished the Work. But the Lacedemonians hearing of the Fortifying of Pylus, pre∣par'd great Forces, both by Land and Sea, and with a Ante Chr. 462. Fleet of Forty Five Sail well man'd and provided, and with Twelve Thousand Land Soldiers, made against Pylus. For it seem'd to them a thing dishonourable, to suffer them who durst not come into the Field to de∣fend Attica from Devastations, now to nestle themselves, and to make Fortifi∣cations in Peloponesus. They incamp'd therefore with their Army, under the command of Thrasymedes near to Pylus, and were resolv'd to undergo all hard∣ships Pylus besieg'd. and hazards, in order to subdue the Place. To this end they stood with their Fleet in the very Mouth of the Port, to block up all the Passage and En∣trance from the Enemy. And by their Forces at Land, they assaulted the Walls with one Body after another by turns, pressing on with wonderful Obstinacy and Resolution. They put likewise some of the choice of their Souldiers, both of the Lace∣demonians and their Confederates, into the Island Sphacteria, which was near at hand, and ran out at length over-against the Port, by which the Harbour was the safer and securer from Storms. And this they did to prevent the Athenians, it being a Place very commodious, and useful for the carrying on of the Siege. They likewise continu'd the Assaults every Day, without intermission, and re∣ceiv'd Wounds upon Wounds, from the Towers and Bulwarks upon the Walls, and yet remitted nothing of their Heat and Resolution; so that Multitudes were kill'd, and many wounded, in striving to storm a Place most strongly For∣tify'd. Ant. Chr. 426. P. 318. For the Athenians being possess'd of a Town of natural Strength, and abundantly furnish'd with Arms and all things necessary for a Defence, most vi∣gorously repell'd their Enemies. For they hop'd, that if they frustrated this Design, Peloponesus would be the Seat of the whole War; and that they should by degrees wast and destroy their Country. In the mean time, whilst these things were managed at the Siege with the greatest heat imaginable on both sides, and the Spartans exercis'd all their Force and Power, (amongst many others that purchas'd Honour by their Gallantry) Brasidas mounted to the highest step of Glory; for when the other Captains and Commanders in the Fleet durst not make up to the Shoar with the Ships, by reason of sharp Rocks, and the difficulty of the Place, he acting the part of an Admiral, with a loud Voice commanded, and incessantly urged the Pilot of his own Vessel, without any regard to the Ship, to force it ashore: For he said it was a base thing for the Spartans, if they resolving (as they pretended to be victorious) should be more sparing of their Ships than their Lives; and in the mean time suffer the Athenians to Lord it in Laconia. Hereupon the Pilot was forc'd to run the Ship ashore, and forthwith Brasidas (resolvedly fixing himself upon the Hatches or Ladder to get out of the Ship.  Hatches) encountered with a whole Troop of Athenians that made up in a Body upon him, and kill'd many of them that first assaulted him; but Darts flying thick about him, and receiving many Wounds, at length (through the loss of much Blood) he fell down as dead; and his Arm slipping off Board, and hanging out of the Ship, his Buckler catcht by the Waves, dropt out of his Left Hand into the Sea, and was seiz'd presently by the Enemy; and he himself lying half Dead amongst the Heaps of those he had kill'd, was taken Ant. Chr. 426. up and carry'd out of the Ship by his own Men; Thus far excelling others in Valour, that when others have been put to death because they basely threw away their Shields, he by the loss of his, gain'd the highest Honour and Repu∣tation. However the Lacedemonians obstinately persisted in the Siege at Pylus, with great loss of their Men. Here any one may justly admire at the wonderful and various turns and chan∣ges of Fortune at Pylus: For the Athenians drave the Spartans out of Laconia; and they who were usually Victors at Land (now forc'd from Land) over-power the Athenians at Sea; and they who were before Masters at Sea, now repel their Enemies at Land. But the Siege continuing very long, they who were in the Island were in great hazard to be famish'd, because the Athenian Fleet now com∣manding
at Sea, stop'd all Provision that way. The Lacedemonians therefore now fearing what would become of them that were block'd up in the Island, The Lacede∣monians blockt up in Sphacte∣ria. sent to Athens to treat upon Terms of Peace: But when nothing of Peace would be hearkened unto, they desired that they would accept of an Exchange, and receive as many Prisoners of their own Men, as they were that were in the Island. But when this was refus'd, the Lacedemonian Ambassadors very freely and sharply even in Athens it self, told them, that by their refusing to exchange one equal number for another, they own'd that the Lacedemonians were of more worth and value than the Athenians. Being reduc'd to these straits and necessi∣ties, they in the Island Sphacteria, were forc'd to submit, and the Athenians took them all Prisoners. The number of those that were Spartans (who then deli∣vered up themselves) were an Hundred and Twenty; of those that were their Confederates, an Hundred and Fourscore. Cleon the Admiral of the Fleet, brought Ant. Chr. 426. them all bound to Athens, where it was decreed by the People, that if the La∣cedemonians would make an end of the War, they should all be preserved; but if they persisted, they should all be put to Death. After this, the Athenians sent for the best Soldiers of the Messenians that inhabited Naupactus, and join'd some of their Confederates with them for the defence of Pylus, judging the Messenians, for the P. 319. inveterate hatred they had towards the Spartans, would be very eager to spoil Laconia by Sallies from so strong a Fortification: And in this condition were things at Pylus. In the mean time Artaxerxes, King of Persia died, having reign'd Forty Years: Artaxerxes dies. Xerxes succeeded him, and reign'd only one Year. In Italy the Aequi rebell'd against the Romanś; to suppress whom, the Romans created Aulus Posthumius Dictator, and Lucius Julius, Master of the Horse; who made an inrode with a brave Army into their Country: Upon which the Aequi presently Fought them, and were routed. A great Slaughter was made, and many taken Prisoners, and the Romans carry'd away great Spoil. After this Slaughter, the Aequi sub∣mitted to the mercy of the Romans. Posthumius having thus bravely manag'd the War (according to Custom) triumph'd. A thing something incredible is reported to be done by this Posthumius; to wit, that he put his own Son to Posthumius put his own Son to death. Death, for that in the Battel, out of a spritely heat of Youth, pressing on upon the Enemy, he left his Post assign'd him by his Father. This Year ended, Or rather Iparchus. Olymp. 89. 1. An. Mu. 3548. Ant. Chr. 425. Nicias invades Melus. Isarchus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and at Rome, Titus Quintius, and Caius Julius were Consuls; at which time, the Eighty Ninth Olympiad was celebrated at Elis; in which Symmachus was again Victor. At this time the Athenians made Nicias Admiral of their Fleet, who with Threescore Sail, and Three Thousand Men at Arms, under his Command, was ordered to invade the Lacedemonian Confederates. Whereupon he forthwith made up to the Island Melus, spoil'd the Country, and besieged the City many days. For this only of all the Islands of the Cyclades stood firm and constant to the Lacedemo∣nians, because they were a Colony from Sparta. Nicias knowing he was not in a condition able to storm the Place (which made a resolute Defence) pass'd to Oropus in Beotia, and leaving his Fleet there, march'd with his Forces into Ta∣nagria, where he was join'd with new Supplies from Athens, under the Com∣mand Spoils Tana∣gria. of Hipponicus the Son of Callias: Both these together proceeded in wasting and spoiling the Country. Hereupon the Thebans came out against them, and fought them; but the Athenians routed them with a great Slaughter. When all was over, Hipponicus with his Forces return'd to Athens, and Nicias to the Fleet; who sailing along the Coasts of Locris, wasts and destroys many Places upon the Sea-shoar. Here Forty Ships came up to him from the Confederates, which (with those he had before) made up a Navy of an Hundred Sail; he had likewise a brave Army of Land Soldiers, with which he made for Corinth, and landing his Men, engaged with the Army of the Corinthians, beat them twice, and after Nicias routs the Corinthi∣ans, and in∣vades Cythera. the Slaughter of many of his Enemies, erected a Trophy. In this Fight there were kill'd only Eight of the Athenians, but Three Hundred of the Corinthians. Thence he sail'd toward A Town near Corinth. Cremmion, spoil'd the Country, and took the Castle by Assault. Presently after, he marches back, Fortifying the Castle in In Laconia. Ant. Chr. 425. Me∣thone by the way, and having put in a strong Garrison, wasted the Country ad∣joining, and at length (spoiling and harrasing all along upon the Sea-Coast) return'd to Athens. Not long after, the Athenians sent forth Threescore Sail,
and Two Thousand Men at Arms against An Island on the South-East side of Laconia. Cythera, under the command of Nicias and some others. When he had land∣ed his Men in the Island, the City after a short Siege sur∣rendred, and leaving there a good Garrison for the defence P. 320. of the Island, he passed over to Pelōponesus, and spoil'd the Country upon the Sea-Coasts, and took In Peloponesus, now call'd Ceri∣go, belonging to the Venetians. Thyre (situated be∣tween the Consines of Laconia and Argos) by Assault, and demolish'd the Walls, and made all the Inhabitants Cap∣tives. But the Aeginetes who inhabited there, and Tantalus the Governor of the Castle, he sent Prisoners to Athens, where they were detain'd with other Priso∣ners. Whilst these things were acting, the Megareans now tir'd out with the War they had both with the Athenians and their Exiles (after many Messages backwards and forwards between the two Cities,) some of the Citizens of Megara (incens'd a∣gainst the Exiles) promis'd the Athenian Commanders to betray the City. To that end, Hippocrates and Demosthenes the Athenian Generals (by Compact with them of Megara) sent in the Night Six Hundred Souldiers to the City, whom the Traitors let in within the Walls: But the Treachery being discover'd, the Ant. Chr. 425. Magara be∣tray'd to the Athenians. People were divided into Two Factions, one sided with the Athenians, and the other with the Lacedemonians. In the mean time, one of his own accord made Proclamation, that whosoever would, might join with the Megareans and Athe∣thenians. The Lacedemonians thus deserted by them of Megara, the Watch which was all along upon the Walls, left their station, and fled into the Arsinal call'd Nicea, where the Megareans kept all their Naval Stores and Provisions. But the Athenians intrench'd round and besieg'd the Castle; and a little time after, send∣ing for Workmen from Athens, compass'd in Nicea with a Wall. Upon this, the Peloponesians fearing they should all be put to the Sword, if the Place were taken by Storm, delivered up Nicea upon Conditions to the Athenians. Thus stood the Affairs of Megara at this time. But Brasidas with a great Army rais'd in Sparta and other Parts of Peloponesus, marcht to Megara, and drave the Athenians (surprized with this suddain and un∣expected approach) out of Nicea, and reduc'd the City to its former obedience Recover'd by Brasidas. The Acts of Brasidas. to the Lacedemonians. Then he marched through Thessaly, and came to Dion in Macedonia. Thence going on to Acanthus, he assisted the Chalcedeans, and partly by Threats, and partly by fair and plausible Arguments, wrought upon the chief City of the Acanthians to desert the Athenians. Afterwards he brought o∣ver many other of the Thracians to join as Confederates with the Lacedemonians; and henceforward desiring to carry on the War with more Vigour, sent for Sol∣diers out of Lacedemon to strengthen his Army. The Spartans hereupon sent to him a Thousand of the best Souldiers amongst the The Descen∣dents of Slaves. Ant. Chr. 425. Helots, whom they had long before design'd to root out, hoping most of them would be cut off in the War: And there was another vile act of cruelty committed by them, by which they determin'd utterly to destroy all the Helots. For they made a Proclamation that whosoever of the Helots had done any service for Sparta, should be made Free, and to that end they should send in their Names: When Two Thousand had writ their Names, they order'd the most powerful and chief of the Citizens to cut all the Helots Throats in their several Houses: For they were in great dread of them, lest when they saw an opportunity they should join with their Enemies and so be instrumental to the ruin of Sparta. However, when these Helots, with some other supplies from their Confederates join'd with Brasidas, his Army was very Strong. And thus strengthen'd he March'd P. 321. his Forces to Amphipolis. Aristogoras the Milesian, was the first that brought Colo∣nies into the City; when he fled from Darius the King of Persia. But after A∣ristogoras his Death, the Inhabitants were ejected by the Thracians call'd Edones. Two and Thirty Years after the Athenians sent thither a Colony of Ten Thou∣sand Men. But these being destroy'd by the Thracians at Drabiscum two Years after, the Thracians recover'd the City under Apion, their General. This City subject to so frequent changes of War, Brasidas made it his business to subdue. To this end marching thither with a great Army, he encamp'd at the Bridge near to the City, and presently possess'd himself of the Suburbs. The next day they of Ant. Chr. 425. Amphipolis being greatly terrify'd, surrendred the Place, upon conditions that all
that would, might leave the City, and take their effects with them. And soon after he took in many other neighbouring Cities, amongst which, the chief were Sime and Galepsus, both Colonies of the Thracians, and Myrcinus a Town of the Edones. He likewise fell a building new Ships at the River Strymon, and sent for fresh Supplies from Lacedemonia and other Confederates. He also caus'd great store of Arms to be made, by which he arm'd the new rais'd Men, and furnish'd himself with Darts, Weapons and all other Provisions. And being thus com∣pleatly provided, he march'd from Amphipolis, and encamp'd at a Place call'd The Sea Shoar. Acte. Here were Five of the Towns partly inhabited by Grecians of Andros, and partly by a mixt multitude of Barbarians, descended from the Iberians, a People of Macedonia, near the River Stremon: Said to be , of Two Tongues. Bissalte, People of a double Tongue. Having brought these under his Power, he fell upon Toron, built by the Chalcideans, but then in the power of the Athenians. Here by the Treachery of some of the Inhabitants, in the Night he was let into the Town, and so won Toron. And thus far the Expedition of Brasidas prosper'd this Year. In the mean time there was a Battel fought by the Athe∣nians A Battel by the Athenians with the Beotians at Delium. at Delium in Beotia, with the Beotians upon the accounts following: The then present Government in Beotia was dis∣pleasing to some, who desir'd to set up a Democracy in the Cities. These Male∣contents Ant. Ch. 425. discovered their Designs to the Athenian Generals, Hippocrates and De∣mosthenes, and engaged to deliver up the Cities in Beotia. This was a very wel∣come Overture to the Commanders: And that the Business might the better be effected, they divided the Army, and Demosthenes with the greater part made an incursion into Beotia: But the Beotians being well prepared, having had no∣tice of the Treachery, he marcht back without doing any thing. Hippocrates in the mean time invaded Delium, possessed himself of the Place; and to pre∣vent the March of the Beotians that way, fortify'd Delium with a Wall; which lies near to Oropia, and the Borders of Beotia lying towards the Mountains. But Pantoedas the Beotian General, gathered out of all the Cities of Beotia, the best and choicest Souldiers, and with a great Army and a swift March made for De∣lium; for he had with him little less than Twenty Thousand Foot, and a Thou∣sand Horse. The Athenians on the other side were more in number, but not so well arm'd; for coming hastily and suddenly out of the City, many were ill furnished, both as to Arms and other Necessaries. This was the condition of The manner of the Fight at Delium. P. 322. Ant. Chr. 425. both Armies, yet very hot and eager on both sides to fight. In the Army of the Beo∣tians, the Thebans were in the Right Wing, the Orchomeans in the Left, and the Beotians in the main Body. Those that were call'd Heniochans and Paraebates, that is, the Charioteers, or those that fought in Chariots, were plac'd in the Front; these were the best Souldiers, in number Three Hundred. The Athe∣nians were forc'd to join Battel, before they were perfectly drawn up in Bat∣talia; but it was fought with great Courage and Resolution on both sides. The Athenian Horse charg'd with that Bravery, that in the beginning they put the Enemies Horse to flight. Then the Foot engaged, and that part of the Athe∣nian Army that opposed the Thebans, by the violence of the Enemy's Charge were quite broken in pieces and routed. But the rest of the Athenians chas'd all the other Beotians, and pursu'd them a long way, with a great Slaughter. On the other side, the Thebans (being strong Bodied Men) left the chase of their Enemies, and fell upon the other Pursuers, hew'd them down, dispers'd and utterly routed them; and thus the Thebans highly advanc'd their Reputation by this signal Victory. As for the Athenians, some of them fled to Oropus, others to Delium; some made to their Ships, and the rest fled every way, as their Lot and Fortune led them, till Night put an end to the Pursuit. There were not Ant. Chr. 425. above Five Hundred of the Beotians kill'd, but many more of the Athenians, and if Night had not come on, most of them had been cut off; but that sav'd them, and gave a check to the fury of the Conquerors. Yet the number of the Slain was so great, that with the Price of the Spoils the Thebans built a great Walk or Gallery in the Forum, and adorn'd it with many . Statues of Brass; and even cover'd over the Temples with Brass, and the publick Buildings in the Market Place, with the Arms and Shields of their Enemies. And with the Riches got in this Fight, they set up Sports and Shews at Delium.
After this Victory, the Beotians assaulted Delium with that fury, that the greater part of the Garrison were kill'd in defending the Place. Two Hun∣dred only were taken, the rest escaped to their Ships, and with other Inhabi∣tants came to Athens. Into this Disaster fell the Athenians by their crafty De∣signs against the Beotians. In Asia, Xerxes the Persian King died, after he had reigned one Year, some say only Two Months. To him succeeded Sogdianus for the space only of Seven Months; who being kill'd, Darius injoy'd the Kingdom Nineteen Years. With Darius No∣thus begins to Reign. this Year Antiochus of Syracuse, the noble Writer of the Affairs of Sicily ends his History, beginning at King Cocalus, and consisting of Nine Books. When Amyntas was chief Magistrate of Athens, Caius Papirius, and Lucius Olymp. 89. 2. Scione a City in Thrace. Ant. Ch. 424. Julius were Roman Consuls. In their time the Scioneans now slighting the Athe∣nians, by reason of the late Defeat given them, made a defection to the Lacede∣monians, and gave up their City into the protection of Brasidas, then General of the Army in Thrace. And those who escap'd out of Lesbos, after the ta∣king of Mitylene by the Athenians (who were no small Number) (some time be∣fore contriving how to return into their Country) join'd together, and possess'd themselves of Antandrus; from whence taking their opportunity, they issued forth and set upon the Garrison at Mitylene: At which the Athenians being in∣cens'd, command was given to Aristides and Symmachus, to lead the Army a∣gainst Aristides and Symmachus sent into Lesbos a∣gainst the Exiles of Mi∣tylene. them; who having passed over the Forces into Lesbos, after some few As∣saults, took Antandrus, and put part of the Exiles to the Sword, and expelled the rest out of the City: And after they had strenghned the Place with a Garri∣son, they departed from Lesbos. After this Lamachus, with Ten Ships under his Command, Sail'd for Pontus, and lay with his Fleet at Heraclea, and near the River Cacheta, lost all his Ships. For abundance of Rain falling, the Rain by the violence of the Stream, dash'd in Pieces all the Vessels against the Rocks lying upon the Shoar. Hereupon the Athenians made a Truce with the Lacedemonians P. 323. A Truce pro∣pounded, and made for a Year. for a Year, upon these Conditions, that all that was then under the Power and Government of each other, should so remain on both sides. And after several Debates and Consultations, it was Judged to be the wisest course to put an end to the War, and those destructive Contentions between themselves for ever af∣ter. That which chiefly mov'd the Lacedemonians was the earnest desire they had to release those who were taken in the Island Sphacteria. Thus far the Truce went on; but they could not agree concerning Scione, though all other things were consented to on both sides. The Contention was so hot, that all Ant. Chr. 424. War conti∣nu'd. further overtures of Peace were at an end, and the War was still carry'd on upon the Account of Scione. About this time the City Menda fell off to the Lacedemonians, which caused Menda revolts to the Lacede∣monians. a greater heat and resolution for the keeping of Scione. To this end Brasidas remov'd all the Women and Children, and their best Goods out of Scione and Menda, and put strong Garrisons into them. The Athenians were so enraged at this, that they made a Decree to put all the Sciones to the Sword, when ever they took the City. To that end they sent Nicias and Nicostrates with Fifty Sail against them: Menda re∣taken. They first set upon Menda, which they took by the Treachery of some within. Then they Besieg'd Scione, compassing it round with a Wall, and press'd upon Scione be∣sieg'd by the Athenians. it with continual Assaults. But the Garrison in Scione being very strong, and well provided with all things necessary, easily defended themselves, and from the top of the Walls greatly gall'd the Besiegers. And these were the things done this Year. The Year following, Alceus governing at Athens, and Opicter Lucretius, and Olymp. 89. 3. Ant. Ch. 423. Lucius Sergius Fidenas. Fideniates, Roman Consuls, the Athenians cast the Delians out of the Island, and took the City into their own Hands, because they kept secret correspondence (as they alledg'd) with the Lacedemonians. Being thus expuls'd, Pharnaces the Persian Lord Lieutenant gave them the City Or Adra∣metum, a City in Mysia, in the Lesser Asia. Adramyttium to in∣habit. The Athenians at the same time, sent forth Cleon, with a great Body of Foot unto the Coasts of Thrace; who arriving at Scione, shipt part of them that lay before the Town, and sail'd with them to Torona. For he had intelligence that Brasidas was gone from those Parts, and had left but few Soldiers at To∣rona. To which Place, he approached as close as he could, and besieged it both by Sea and Land; at length he took it by Storm, and made the Women
and Children Captives; the Souldiers he bound in Chains, and sent them to A∣thens; having left at Torona a small Garrison, he march'd with the rest of his Forces to the River Strymon in Thrace, and thence to the City Scione (which is distant Thirty Stages from the City Amphipolis) which he fiercely assaulted. But here having intelligence that Brasidas incamp'd with his Army at Amphipolis, he makes against him with a swift March; who being inform'd of the approach of the Enemy, sets forth in Battalia to meet the Athenians; whereupon they pre∣sently join'd Battel, the Victory continuing very doubtful for some time where it would fall, both sides bravely behaving themselves: In the mean time the Ge∣nerals The Battel of Amphipolis, where the Generals on both sides were kill'd. P. 324. fought with that Resolution, as if each would gain the Victory with his own Hands; and the Officers themselves, with undaunted Courage rush'd into the heat of the Battel, insomuch as many brave Men on both sides breathed out their last. At length Brasidas fell in the Bed of Honour, amongst Heaps of his Enemies slain by his own Hand. Cleon likewise was slain in the thickest of the Combatants: And now both Armies were at a stand, and in a Consterna∣tion at the loss of their Generals; but at length the Lacedemonians got the day, and set up a Trophy. And the Athenians upon a Truce made, bury'd their Dead, and sail'd back to Athens. When some who return'd to Lacedemon gave an account of the Victory and Death of Brasidas, it is reported that his Mo∣ther Ant. Chr. 423. asked how he behaved himself in the Battel. To whom Answer was made, That he went beyond all the Lacedemonians. Upon which, she replied, Her Son Brasidas was an Honest and Good Man, but much inferiour to many other Spartans in Valour. What she said being nois'd through the City, the Ephori decreed her publick Honours, because she prefer'd the Glory of her Country, before the par∣ticular praise of her Son. After this Battel, the Athenians determin'd to make Peace con∣cluded. Peace with the Lacedemonians for Fifty Years, and did so upon these Conditions, that the Prisoners on both sides should be discharg'd, and that the Cities taken in the War should be restored. And so the Peloponesian War that had now con∣tinu'd Ten Years of the Pelopone∣sian War. Ten Years, was in this manner ended at this time. CHAP. VIII. The continuance of the Peloponesian War. The War by the Romans against the Fidinates for putting their Ambassadors to death. The Quarrels be∣tween the Aegistines and the Seluntines in Sicily. The Expedition of the Athenians against Sicily under Nicias, being the Sixteenth Year of the Peloponesian War. ARiston was Archon at Athens, when the Romans committed the Consulship Olymp. 89. 4. Ant. Chr. 422. New Com∣motions. to Titus Quintius, and Aulus Cornelius Cossus. The Peloponesian War was scarcely ended, when new Commotions and Dissentions broke out afresh, occa∣sion'd as follows. The Athenians and Spartans, with the common Consent of all their Confederates, had enter'd into Terms of Truce and Peace. But in the mean time they privately confederated in a League Offensive and Defensive, without taking in the Cities that had sided with either Party; which rais'd a suspicion as if there was a Design laid by this secret Association to inslave all The Cities confederate both against Athens and Sparta. Ant. Chr. 422. Greece: And therefore the chiefest Cities in Greece sent one to another, and enter'd into mutual Leagues to join together against the Lacedemonians and A∣thenians. The most potent Grecian Cities in this Confederacy were Four, Argos, Thebes, Corinth and Elis. And indeed there was some reason to suspect these Two Cities had some Design against Greece; for that in the Articles of the League, there was a Clause superjoyn'd, that it should be lawful for the Athe∣nians and Lacedemonians at any time when they thought fit, either to add to, or take any thing from that which was before solemnly agreed to. Besides, the Athenians had created Ten Magistrates, who were invested with full power to manage all Affairs relating to the City. And whereas the Lacedemonians did
the same thing, it was very evident at what the insatiable Ambition of the Two Cities pointed. Many therefore of the Cities now resolv'd to defend the com∣mon Liberty, and to that end considering the power of Athens to be low, by their late overthrow at Delium, and the honour and glory of Sparta, much di∣minished upon the account of so many Captives of the noblest of their Citizens taken in the Island Sphacteria, they conspir'd against them, and committed the Sovereign power and management of the War to the City Argos. For the ancient noble Actions done by that City, challeng'd above all others that preeminence and prerogative; for long before, and to the very time of the * migration of the Heraclidae into Peloponesus, the greatest Kings of Greece came out of Argos; An. Mu. 2847. Eighty Years after the ta∣king of Troy, in the time of Saul and Sa∣muel. and besides, by the advantage of a long Peace, it was grown very rich and po∣pulous. Argos now concluding that the chief Command was lodg'd in themselves, pickt out a Thousand of the strongest young Men, and best ability for Estates, whom they freed from all publick Affairs, and maintain'd at the common Charge. These were continually by daily Exercise, to inure themselves to Martial Dis∣cipline: Ante Chr. 422. And by the help of a plentiful allowance, and constant care and dili∣gence, in a short time they became most expert Souldiers. But when the La∣cedemonians perceiv'd all Peloponesus had conspir'd against them, and foreseeing the greatness and danger of the War, they made preparation for defence of the Government, as far as was possible. To that end, in the first place, they P. 325. manumitted a Thousand of the Helots that were with Brasidas: And afterwards they restored the Citizens to their former Priviledges that had been taken Pri∣soners in Sphacteria, whom they had before degraded by reason of the disgrace they had brought upon their Country. Moreover they brought in many who had formerly done great Service in the Wars, by crying them up, and feeding them by Rewards, to incourage them to shew the like instances of their Va∣lour in the hazards of the approaching War. They carried themselves like∣wise with more kindness towards their Confederates, and strove to gain and win by courtesie and civility, those they had disoblig'd and alienated from them. But the Athenians went a quite contrary way; for conceiving that those whom Ant. Chr. 422. they suspected to be false, were to be discourag'd by fear of Punishment, they put them in mind of that severe Revenge taken in the business of Scione is an Island in the Ae∣gean Sea. There's another Scione in Thrace. See before. Scione; for there when the City was taken, they put all the Men to the Sword, and carry'd away all the Women and Children as Captives, and planted the Island with the Plateans, who were banish'd their Country for their faithfulness to the Athenians. About the same time, the Campanians in Italy march'd against Cuma with a great Army, and routed and destroy'd most of the Cumeans. Then they be∣sieg'd the City, and after several Assaults, at length took it by force, and ha∣ving The Campa∣nians take Cu∣ma. plunder'd it, and carry'd away all the Inhabitants that were left as Slaves, they repeopled it with Colonies sent out of their own City. The chief of the Senate at Athens, was Aristophilus, Lucius Quintius, and Olymp. 90. 1. An. Mu. 3552. Ant. Chr. 421. Aulus Sempronius, Roman Consuls, when they of Elis celebrated the Ninetieth O∣lympiad, in which Hiperbius the Syracusian was crown'd with Victory. And at that time, the Athenians by command of the Oracle, restor'd the Island Delos to the Deleans; and they that inhabited Attramitium in Delium, return'd to their own Country. And now because Pylus was not given up, and restor'd to the La∣cedemonians, the War began to break out afresh between the Two Cities, which being understood by them of Argos, they enter'd into League with the Athe∣nians. And the breach growing wider and wider, the Lacedemonians perswaded the Corinthians, that leaving their Association with the Confederate Cities, they would join with them. In this condition and confusion of Affairs stood Pelopo∣nesus. As to other Places out of the Bounds of Peloponesus, the Aenians, Dolopeans and Melcans, confederated together, and set upon A City in Macedonia. Heraclea in Trachinia. The Heracleans march'd against them with great Forces, wherewith they bravely fought the Enemy, but were totally routed, with the loss of a great part of their Army; the rest by Flight got within their Walls. Then they sent to the Beotians for aid, who sent them a Thousand of heavy arm'd Men from Thebes; by which assistance they repell'd their Enemies. In the mean time, the Olyn∣theans.
made an Expedition against the City A City in the Hellespont. Micyberna, then a Garrison of the Athenians, and having forc'd out the Guards there, possess'd themselves of the Place. Archias was Archon of Athens, and Lucius Papyrius Mugillanus, and Caius Ser∣vilius Olymp. 90. 2. An. Mu. 3553. Ant. Chr. 420. Structus, were Consuls at Rome, when the Argives proclaim'd War against the Lacedemonians, because they neglected to offer the usual Frankincense to Apollo Pythius. At the same time Alcibiades the Athenian General came with his Army into the Country of Argos, by whom the Argives being Forc'd, invaded Troezena, The Argives invade Troeze∣za near Argos. which was Confederated with Sparta, and after they had wasted and spoil'd the Country, and burnt many of their Towns, at length they return'd. The Lacede∣monians being greatly inrag'd at the Injuries done against all Law and Justice to them of Troezena, denounce War against Argos; in prosecution whereof, they rais'd an Army, and thereof made Agis their King, General, who march'd with all P. 326. speed against the Argives, and after he had made spoil and havock in the Country, made up close to the City, and offer'd them Battel. Hereupon the Argives being join'd with Three Thousand of the Eleans, and as many of the Mantineans, march'd out of the City; and just when they were ready to joyn Battel, the Generals on both sides by their Ambassadors, made a Truce for Four Months; so both Armies return'd, without doing any thing: But both the Cities were in∣cens'd at the Authors of the Truce, insomuch as they of Argos cast Stones at the Officers of the Army, and had order'd them all to be put to death; which had been executed if by great intercession their Lives had not been spared; but their Goods were confiscated, and their Houses pull'd down. The Lucedemonians also intended to have put Agis to Death; but upon his Agis threat∣ned to be put to Death. promise to wipe off the stain of the late miscarriage by his future Services, with much adoe he was spar'd. However for the future, they join'd with him Ten Persons, approv'd for their Wisdom and Prudence, without whose Advice he was strictly charg'd not to do any thing for the time to come. After this, when the Athenians had sent forth a Thousand well-arm'd Men, and Two Hundred Horse by Sea to them of Argos, under the command of Ni∣chetes Ante Chr. 420. and Nichostratus (to whom Alcibiades join'd himself (though then in no command) for the great love and kindness he bore towards the Mantineans and Eleans,) the Argives in a common Assembly decreed, that notwithstanding the former Agreement, they should make it their business to carry on the War with all their Power. To that end all the Officers incouraged every one their own Souldiers; who readily and heartily follow'd their Leaders, and encamp'd out of the Walls of the City. There it was concluded to be most advisable to begin first with an Expedition against Orchomenia in Arcadia. To that purpose, having advanced into Arcadia, they besieg'd the City, and wearled it out with Orcomenia ta∣ken by the Argives. daily Assaults; and having taken the Town, they march'd to Tegea, determining to force that likewise. The Tegeans desiring speedy aid from the Lacedemonians, they with the strength of their whole City, and of their Confederates, made for Mantinea, conceiving that by Besieging of that, a stop would be easily put to the Siege of Tegea. But the Mantineans (being inforc'd by the Assistance of their Confederates) march'd out with the Youth of their City, and had an Army in the Field ready to oppose the Lacedemonians. Presently hereupon Battel was joyn'd, and a select Band of the Argives (consisting of a Thousand well disci∣plin'd and expert Souldiers) were the first that put the Enemy to flight, and made a great Slaughter in the Pursuit. But the Lacedemonians returning from Ant. Chr. 420. A Battel be∣tween the La∣cedemonians and the Man∣tineans. the Pursuit and Slaughter of those they had routed in another part of the Ar∣my, fell upon the Conquering Argives, and surrounding them, made no question but to cut them off every Man: And whereas these brave Men, although far inferior in number, prevail'd in a great measure against their Enemies, the Lacedemonian King (being earnest to perform his Promise to the Citizens, and to wipe off the stain of his former disgrace by some great and remarkable Action) in the Head of his Army, ran through all sorts of Difficulties in the Fight, and had kill'd them all upon the spot, if he had not been prevented; for Pharax (one of the Ten, join'd with the King as his Council, a Man of great authority in Lacedemon) commanded the Souldiers to open a way for the Arcadians, lest fight∣ing with Men in a desperate condition, they came to experience what Valour can do when it's driven to a necessity. The King restrain'd by his Command, a Passage was made for the Enemy to break through, as Pharax had ordered.
And in this manner; these Thousand Men got off, and the Lacedemonians having gain'd an eminent Victory, set up a Trophy, and return'd Home. The former Year ended, Antopha was chief Governour at Athens, and Four Military Tribunes, Caius Furius, Titus Quinctius. Quin∣tilius, Olymp. 90. 3. An. Mund. 3554. Ante Chr. 419. Marcus Posthumus, and Aulus Cornelius, bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. At that time the Argives and Lacede∣monians had several Meetings and Messages to and fro, about entring into a League one with another, which was effected P. 327. accordingly. Upon this, the Mantineans (now deserted by A League between the Lacedemo∣nians and the Argives. the Garrison put in there by the Argives) were forc'd to come under the power of the Lacedemonians. About the same time, the Thousand choice Men before spoken of, in the City of Argos, conspir'd to overthrow the Democracy, and set up an Aristocracy from among A Sedition in Argos. themselves: And having many Associates and Abettors in this Affair, of the wealthiest and most couragious Men of the City, they forthwith seiz'd upon the Tribunes of the People, and the Heads and chief of those that were for Popular Government, and cut their Throats. The rest being terrified, repealed all the ancient Laws, and began to order all Affairs in the Commonwealth, according to the Will and Pleasure of these Men. And after they had thus govern'd for the space of Eight Months, they were by an insurrection of the People depos'd, and the Democracy restor'd. Another Disturbance likewise arose in Greece; for upon a Difference happen∣ing between the Phoceans and the Locrians, the matter came to a decision by the Sword. The Phoceans were Conquerors, Quarrels and a Fight beween the Phoceans and Locrians. and kill'd above a Thousand of the Locrians. In the mean time, the Athenians under the Command of Niceas, took Two Ant. Ch. 419. Cities, Cithera in Peloponesus. Cithera and Nicea a Port Town in Megara. Nicea, and in Melus in Thessaly. Melus, (which was taken by Storm) they put all (but Women and Children) to the Sword, and them they made Captives. In Italy the Fidenates put the Roman Ambassadors to Death upon a light occasion. At which base act of Injustice, the People of Rome were highly incens'd, and decreed to revenge it by a War. To this end they made Manius Aemilius Dictator, and according to the Custom, join'd with him Aulus Cornelius, the Master of the Horse. When all things were in readiness, he marcht against the Fidenates with all expedition, who drew out, and met him; upon which there was a sharp Ingagement, and so continu'd for a long time; and after many were cut off on both sides, they parted at length upon equal Terms. At this time Euphemus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and the Military Tri∣bunes Olymp. 90. 4. An. Mu. 3555. Ant. Chr. 418. Lucius Furius, Lucius Quinctius, and Aulus Sempronius again executed the Con∣sular Dignity at Rome. At this time the Lacedemonians inforc'd by the Aid of their Confederates, made an incursion into Argaia, and took the small Town of of Argias, kill'd the Inhabitants, and raz'd the Castle. Then hearing that they of Argos had enlarged their Walls out as far as to the Sea, they marched thither, and pull'd them down, and return'd Home. The Athenians made Alcibiades Ge∣neral, who with Twenty Ships under his Command, was order'd to do the ut∣most he could to restore the Argives to their former Government; for there was such Confusion and Disorder there, that great Multitudes of them were for the advancing of the Aristocracy. Alcibiades therefore as soon as he came Alcibiades sent to compose matters in Ar∣gos. to Argos, call'd an Assembly of those that were for the Popular Government, and caus'd those who seem'd to side with the Lacedemonians to be banished out of the City, and having setled the Democracy, return'd to Athens. At the end of the Year, the Lacedemonians invaded Argaia with a great Army, and making The Lacede∣monians in∣vade Argaia. waste and spoil in many Places of the Country, plac'd the Exiles of Argos in Orneas, and Fortified and walled the Place round, in regard it lay in Argaia; and having put in there a strong Garrison, they order'd them to waste the Country of Argos with continual Excursions. When the Lacedemonians were march'd back, the Athenians sent Forty Ships, and Twelve Hundred Souldiers Ant. Chr. 418. The 15th Year of the Peloponesian War. P. 328. to the Assistance of the Argives. With this Aid they march'd against Orneas, and took it by Storm, and putting part of the Garrison and the Exiles to the Sword, they expelled the rest out of the City. And these were the things done in the Fifteenth Year of the Peloponesian War.
In the Sixteenth Year, when Aristomnestes was Archon at Athens, and Titus Clau∣dius Olym. 91. 1. Ant. Chr. 417. Spurius, Nautius Lucius Sergius, and Sextus Julius, Military Tribunes, execu∣ted the Office of Consuls at Rome, the Ninety First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, wherein Exaneus of Acragentum was Victor. At that time the Bysantines and Chalcedeans joining with the Thracians, pass'd over with a great Army in∣to Bithynia, and wasted and spoil'd the Country; and after they had taken se∣veral small Towns by force, they executed most horrid cruelty. For after they had gathered together a great multitude of Prisoners, of Men, Women and Chil∣dren, The cruelty of the Thra∣cians. Quarrels be∣tween the Agistines and the Se∣luntines in Si∣cily. they cut all their Throats. About the same time, the Aegistines and Seluntines in Sicily went to Blows, upon the Differences between them concerning the Bounds of their Country. For though the River divided the Territories of the several Cities that were at va∣riance, yet the Seluntines pass'd over to the other side, and seiz'd upon the Lands lying next to the River; and incroaching still by little and little, they gain'd the next to them, and laugh'd and jeer'd at those they thus abus'd. Provoked with these Indignities, the Aegistines at first thought to win them by fair Words, and dissuaded them all they could from seizing of other Mens E∣states. But when they saw they turn'd a deaf Ear, the Proprietors rose up in Ant. Chr. 417. Arms, and drove them out of the Country, and so recontinued their ancient Possessions. Upon this, a great Fire of Strife and Contention was kindled, and Armies were rais'd on both sides, to decide the Controversie by the Sword. Both Armies being drawn into the Field, a sharp Battel was fought, in which the Seluntines got the Day, and kill'd a great number of the Aegi∣stines. The power of the Aegistines being very much weakened by this Slaughter, and so unable of themselves to oppose their Enemy, they First sought Aid and Assistance from them of Acragentum and Syracuse: But these failing them, they sent Am∣bassadors to Carthage for relief; and they likewise refus'd. Upon which they sought to get Confederates beyond the Seas: And this prov'd successful; for whereas the Leontines had been driven both out of their City and Country by the Syracusians, those that were remaining of these Exiles consulted together and de∣termin'd to enter into a League with the Athenians, from whom they were de∣scended. The matter was debated and decreed in a Common Assembly of all their Allies, that Embassadors should be sent to Athens, to desire their Assi∣stance for the Relief of the oppressed Cities, and withal to promise that they would do their utmost endeavour to serve the Athenians in all their Concerns in Sicily. When the Ambassadors came to Athens, the Leontines pleaded their Kindred and Ant. Chr. 417. ancient Allyances; but the Aegistines promis'd a great Sum of Money for the carry∣ing on the War, and with all their power to oppose the Syracusians. Upon this the Athenians thought fit First to send some prudent Citizens to Sicily, better to un∣derstand the State and Condition both of the Island and of the Aegistines. When they came to Aegista, the Aegistines with great Ostentation and Vanity, shew'd them a great mass of Treasure, in part their own, and part borrow'd. When Debates at A∣thens about af∣sisting the Ae∣gistines in Si∣cily. the Ambassadors were return'd, and the great Riches of the Aegistines was nois'd Abroad, an Assembly of the People was call'd, where the War to be made in Sicily was propos'd, and where Niceas the Son of Niceratus, a Man of great ac∣count amongst the People, argued with great prudence against the War, alledg∣ing it impossible both to contend with the Lacedemonians, and likewise to send so great a Force as they must needs do, into parts beyond the Seas. And alledg'd, that when they were not able hitherto to subdue Greece, it was in vain to think to bring the greatest Island of the World under their power. He added more∣over, when Carthage, that was of so large an Empire, and had often attempted Sicily, was not able to conquer it, could they suppose that the Athenians, who were far inferior in Strength and Power, could subdue an Island the most potent in Arms of all others in the World? After he had spoken this and much more, suit∣able P. 329. to the present Occasion, Alcibiades one of the chief of the Nobility of Ant. Chr. 417. Athens, persuaded the People to prosecute the War. This Man was the most Eloquent Speaker of all amongst the Citizens, and for the Nobleness of his Birth, and greatness of his Estate, and Skill in Martial Affairs, far exceeded the rest. The People upon his persuasion, without delay rigg'd out a Fleet of
Thirty Sail from their Confederates, and an Hundred of their own. In these compleatly furnish'd with all Provisions and Necessaries, they put Five Thou∣sand Men well Arm'd, and appointed Three Generals, Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus for this Expedition; and thus were the Athenians then imploy'd. And now being come to the War between the Athenians and Syracusians, according to our design'd Method at the beginning, we shall pursue the things that follow'd in the next Book.
The MAPP of Antient Greece Expressing especially the Places mentioned in THVCYDIDES. by THO: HOBBES
THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XIII. The PREFACE. IF we should imitate others in the compiling of their Histories, we should P. 331. first in the Preface of every Book, observe some things pertinent to the Occasion and Subject in Hand, and then descend to the continuation of our Discourse, upon the Actions and Affairs that follow next in order: For by some small intermission from writing, we gain a breathing fit; the fruit and advantage by Prefaces. But in as much as we have promis'd to endeavour in a few Books, not only to relate things that have been done, but likewise to comprehend in that Relation, the time of above Eleven Hundred Years, it's necessary to avoid Prefaces, and come presently to the matters in Hand. Only promising this to inform the Reader, that in the Six former Books, are contain'd the things done in all Parts of the World, from the Trojan War, to the time the Athenians decreed the War against the Syracusians, to which from the Destruction of Troy, is Seven Hundred and Threescore Years: And that we shall begin this Book with that Expedition against the Syracusians, and end it at the beginning of the Second Carthaginian War against Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse.
CHAP. I. The Athenian Fleet rigg'd out for Sicily. Alcibiades accus'd; Flies; Is Con∣demned; Goes to Sparta out of Italy. The Syracusians send for Aid to Lacedemon. Gylippus is sent to them. The Battel at Syracuse. WHen Cabrias bore the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans invested Olymp. 91. 2. An. Mu. 3531. Ant. Chr. 412. Lucius Sergius, Marcus Servilius, and Marcus Papyrius, Three Military Tri∣bunes, with Consular dignity, the Athenians having decreed War against the Sy∣racusians, rigg'd out a Fleet, rais'd Money, and prepar'd with great diligence all other things necessary for the Expedition. To this end they commission'd Three Generals, Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus, to whom they committed the ma∣nagement of the whole War. The richer sort to ingratiate themselves with the People, some of them supply'd the Fleet with Arms, others promis'd to ad∣vance Money towards the Victualling the Navy, and providing Pay for the Souldiers. Many likewise of the People, both Citizens and Strangers, freely of∣fer'd Preparations against Sicily. themselves to the Generals, to be listed and inroll'd: And all were so con∣fident, that they were ready to divide the Country of Sicily amongst themselves by Lot. And now the Navy was ready to set sail; when on the sudden in one Night, All the Images in Athens had their Heads struck off in one Night. Ant. Chr. 412. all the Statues of the Goddess Minerva through the City (which were very ma∣ny) had their Heads struck off. The Populacy conceiv'd this not to be done by any of the meaner sort, but by some in authority, with a design to destory the De∣mocracy, and therefore they were highly incens'd at the wickedness of the fact, and promis'd great Rewards to find out the Authors. In the mean time, one of the Citizens came to the Senate, and told them, that in the new Moon about Midnight, he saw several Persons go into the House of a Foreigner, amongst whom Alcibiades was one. And when the Senate askt him how he could know him at such a time of the Night? He answered, he discerned him by the light of the Moon: By which Contradiction he detected his own Falshood, and never after could the least Discovery be made of that Fact by any Person whatso∣ever. However notwithstanding this Accident, an Hundred and Forty Gallies were rigg'd out, besides Ships of Burden and other Ships, for transporting of Horses, P. 332. Provisions and other Necessaries, whereof there was a very great number. In this Expedition there went forth with them above Seven Thousand Men at Arms, and Slingers, and Horsemen sent from their Confederates, besides those belong∣ing to their Fleet. During this time, the Officers had a private Consult with the Senate, concer∣ning the Administration of Affairs in Sicily, in case they should conquer the Ant. Chr. 412. Island. Where at length it was determined, that they of Selinuntium and Syra∣cuse should be carry'd away as Captives and Slaves, and that the rest should have only a Yearly Tribute impos'd upon them. The next day the Officers with the Army, march'd down into the The Port of Athens, Five Miles from Athens, join'd to it with a long Wall. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 2. c. 85. Piraeum, and were follow'd with a great Multitude, both of Citizens and Strangers throughout the whole City; every one making it his business to take leave of his Friend or Relation. The Ships lay on every side of the Harbour with their Fore-decks adorn'd with Flags and Streamers erect, and shining with the splendor of the Arms. The Shoar round the Harbour was fill'd with  Altars of Incense, and Silver Bowls, out of which were poured out into Golden Cups, Drink-Offerings to the Gods, by them who worshipped the Deity, and earnestly pray'd for the happy Success of the Expedition. At length they set sail from the Pyraeum, and sailing round the Coasts of Pe∣loponesus, arriv'd at Now Corfu. Corcyra: For here they were commanded to stay, till they were join'd by some others of their Neighbour Confederates. Being all come up to them, passing through the Ionian Sea, they came to the Promontory A Promon∣tory of Italy. of Japygia; hence sailing along the Coasts of Italy, they were refused by the Tarrentines;
and passing by the likewise of Metapontum and Heraclea, they came to the Thu∣rians, by whom they were courteously received: Loosing from thence, they made for Crotona, and there bought some Provisions: And sailing by the Temple of Juno Lacinia, pass'd under the Promontory call'd Dioscurias. After this, leaving Tesasletius (as it is call'd) and Locris behind them, they anchor'd near Rhegium and invited the Rhegians to join with them; who answered, that they must first advise with the other Italians. As soon as the Syracusians heard that the Athenians were within their . In the Streights. Seas, they made Three Generals, invested with Absoute Power, Hermocrates, Sicanus and He∣raclides, who rais'd Souldiers and sent Messengers through all the Cities of Sicily, to press them with all earnestness to join with them in Arms for the common safety of their Country; For that the Athenians (under Colour of a War against the Syracusians) had no other Design but to subdue the whole Island. To which the Acragentines and Naxians, answered, that they were resolv'd to abide firm in their League with the Athenians. The Camarians and Messenians, declared they were for Peace, and refused to return any Answer to what was propos'd. The Hime∣reans and Seluntians, with them of Gela and Catanea, pro∣mis'd their Assistance. The Cities of the The Siculi are they that came out of Italy, and call'd it Sicily, which was before Sicania. Sicilians is a ge∣neral Name for all the Inhabitants. Siculi (though they favoured the Syracusians) yet desired to be at ease, and not knowing what to resolve, judg'd it most advisable to consi∣der a while of the business, that they might be better able to discern what was like to be the issue of so great a War. The Aegistines plainly declaring they could not contribute to the Athenians Ant. Ch. 412. above Thirty Talents, the Athenian Generals accused them of Treachery; and setting Sail from Rhegium with their whole Fleet, arriv'd at Naxus in Sicily, where they were friendly and courteously received by the Citizens; and from thence they made to Catana. But they of Catana refus'd entrance to the Soul∣diers, yet admitted the Generals, and call'd a common Assembly; where the A∣thenian Generals treated with them concerning the entring into a mutual League offensive and defensive; but whilst Alcibiades was making an Harangue to court . the People, the Souldiers broke through a little Gate into the City, by which means the Cataneans were forc'd to join with the Athenians in the War against the Syracusians. Whilst these things were acting Abroad, they who were Enemies to Alcibiades, Alcibiades ac∣cused at A∣thens. (through private Peaks and Grudges) at Athens took Occasion, from the maiming and spoiling of the Images, and accused him in the Common Assemblies of a Conspiracy against the Democracy; which Accusation was much supported and further'd by what had then lately happen'd at Argos: For some of the chief of the City, conspiring with others of their Dependents, to overturn the Democracy in Argos, were all destroy'd by the Citizens. This Attempt of innovation there, P. 333. caus'd the Accusation at Athens to be more readily believed, and therefore the People being with all earnestness stir'd up by the Orators, sent a Ship from Salamis to Sicily, to recall Alcibiades, in order to abide his Trial. As soon as it arriv'd at Catana, Alcibiades was made acquainted by the Messen∣gers, Ant. Ch. 412 what Order they had from the People; upon which, he (with those who were accused with him) went on Ship-board into his own Gally, and together with that from Salamis set Sail from Catana. As soon as he arriv'd at Thurium, ei∣ther through Consciousness of the Guilt of his Impiety, or through the fear of the greatness of the Danger, he and all those accused with him made their Escape. Alcibiades withdraws himself. Those who were on Board the Salamian Vessel, made great inquiry after Alci∣biades; but when he could not be found, they Sail'd back to Athens, and there gave an Account what had happen'd. Upon which, the Athenians gave Judgment of Death upon Alcibiades, and all Alcibiades Condemn'd. his Fellow Fugitives, (their Names being only put up to the Court) without be∣ing further heard. But Alcibiades fled out of Italy to Sparta, and there perswaded the Lacedemo∣nians to invade the Athenians: But the Generals that remain'd in Sicily, sail'd with their Forces to Aegista, and took Hyccara, a small Town of the Siculi; out of whose Spoils they rais'd an Hundred Talents. And having receiv'd Thirty Talents more from the Aegistines, they sail'd back to Catana; where having consulted how to posses themselves of a Place near to the chief Port of Syracuse, with-little or no hazard, they sent thither a Trusty Fellow of Catana, not
suspected by the Syracusian Officers, with Orders to acquaint them that some of the Cataneans had plotted upon a sudden to set upon the Athenian Souldiers in the Night, when they had laid aside their Arms, and to burn all their Ship∣ping in their Harbour: And that this might be the better effected, they desir'd the Commanders to appear with their Army, that the Design might not be de∣feated. As soon as the Catanean came to Syracuse, he delivered his Message. The Generals believing what he said, appointed a Night when they would march out with their Forces, and sent back the Man to Catana. At the Night appointed, the Syracusians led forth their Men towards Catana; and the Athenians (with great Silence) made out with their Fleet to the great Port of Syracuse; and seizing upon Olympius; and all the Places bordering round about, they there fortify'd their Camp. But the Syracusians understanding the Treachery, return'd with a swift March, and set upon their Enemies Camp. They on the other side issued forth, and Battel was join'd, in which the Athenians kill'd Four Hundred of their Enemies, and put the rest to flight: But the Athenian Generals discerning that the Enemy exceeded them in the number of their Horse (that they might be the better provided for the Siege,) sail'd back to Catana. Messengers likewise were sent to Athens, with Letters to the Democracy to Ant. Chr. 412. desire more Horse and Moneys, because the Siege they were about to begin, would be long and tedious. Upon which, it was decreed, that Three Hundred Talents and some Troops of Horse should be sent into Sicily. During these things, Diagoras surnamed the . This Diagoras was a Milean; he questioned in his Wri∣tings, whether there were any Gods; for which he was prosecuted. Vid. Lact. lib. 1. p. 7. Atheist, ac∣cused for his Impiety, for fear of the People, fled out of At∣tica; and a Talent of Silver was promis'd as a Reward by the Voice of the common Cryer, to any that should kill him. In Italy the Romans had War with the Aequi, and took La∣vinium by Assault: And these were the Actions produc'd this Year. Pisander now executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans created P. 334. Olymp. 91. 3. Ant. Ch. 411. The Syracu∣sians crave aid of the Lacede∣monians. Four Military Tribunes as Consuls, Publius Lucretius, Caius Servilius, Agrippa Me∣menius, and Spurius Veturius. At this time the Syracusians sent Embassadors to Corinth and Lacedemon, to desire Aid, and earnestly intreated that they would not suffer them to be reduc'd to the utmost extremity. The Lacedemonians stirr'd up by Alcibiades, determin'd to assist the Syracusians, and made Gylippus General. The Corinthians sent only Two Gallies under Pythes to go along with Gylippus into Sicily for the present, while they were preparing a greater Fleet to be sent after them. Nicias and Lamachus the Athenian Generals at Catana, Ant. Chr. 411. having receiv'd Three Hundred Talents, and re-inforc'd with Two Hundred and Fifty Horse from Athens, set Sail for Syracuse, and arriving there in the Night unsuspected by them of Syracuse, possess themselves of An high piece of Land near the City over-topping it. Epipole; which they of Syracuse perceiving, made a Sally with all speed to drive them thence, but were forc'd back within their Walls, with the loss of Three Hundred Men. After this, there came to the Athenians Three Hundred Horse from Aegina, and Two Hundred and Fifty from the Sicilians, which made up a Body of a∣bove Eight Hundred Horse: Being inforc'd, they drew a Trench round Labda∣lus, and blockt up the City Syracuse on every side with a Wall. At which the Syracusians were greatly terrify'd, and to prevent the building of the Wall, they sally'd out; but after a Skirmish with Horse on both sides, the Syracu∣sians were beaten back with great loss. Then the Athenians with a part of their Army possess'd themselves of a Place call'd Polichna, commanding the Port, and drew a Wall about it, wherein they included the Temple of Jupiter: So that now Syracuse was Besieg'd on both sides. With these many Misfortunes, the Syracusians were greatly discouraged; but when they heard that Gylippus was ar∣riv'd at Himera, and raising Men, they began to take Heart. For Gylippus as Gylippus ar∣rives at Hi∣mera. soon as he came to Himera, with Four Gallies only, after he had secur'd his Ships, brought in them of Himera to join with the Syracusians; and from them and the Geleans, Selinuntians and Sicanians, he rais'd and listed Men, who when they were all mustered, made up a Body of Three Thousand Foot, and Two Hun∣dred Horse; with which he march'd through the midst of the Country, and entred into Syracuse: And after a few Days, led forth his Forces, with those
of the Syracusians, against the Enemy. Whereupon a sharp Battel was fought, A Baatel fought near Syracuse. wherein Lamachus the Athenian General was kill'd. But at length (after many kill'd on both sides) the Athenians got the Day. After this Fight, came in Thirteen Gallies from Corinth, whereupon Gylip∣pus having drawn the Souldiers out of these Ships, with them, and the Syracu∣sians set upon the Enemies Camp, and assaulted the Epipole: And though the Athenians made a Sally, yet after a sharp Dispute, and many of them kill'd, they were routed by the Syracusians; who presently demolish'd the Walls and Fortifications through all the Epipole. The Athenians having lost this Place, led away their Army to another Post. These things thus perform'd, the Syracusians sent Embassadors a Second time to Corinth and Lacedemon for further Supplies. To whom were sent a Thou∣sand Men from Corinth, Beotia and Sicyon; and from Sparta Six Hundred. In the mean time, Gylippus traversing the Country about from Town to Town in several Parts of Sicily, brought in many to join with him in the War; and being reinforc'd with Three Thousand Men from the Himereans and Sicanians, Ant. Chr. 411. P. 335. he march'd his Army through the Heart of the Country: But the Athenians having intelligence of their coming, cut off one half of them by an Ambush; the rest came safe to Syracuse. And now they of Syracuse being incouraged with fresh Supplies, determin'd to try their Fortune in a Sea-Fight: What Shipping they had left, they set forth, and built others, which they made use and ,   trial of in the little Har∣bour. Nicias the Athenian General, acquainted the People of Athens by Letters, that the Syracusians were much inforc'd, and that they were putting forth a great Fleet, with an intent to come to a Sea-Fight; and therefore desir'd more Shipping and Moneys to be sent him, and a Collegue to bear part of the Bur∣den and Care of the War. For Alcibiades being fled, and Lamachus kill'd, he only remain'd, and that very infirm and unhealthful. Upon this the Athenians sent into Sicily about the Summer Solstice, Ten Gallies, under the Command of Eurymedon, with an Hundred and Forty Talents of Silver: But withal pre∣paring and designing to send a greater Fleet at the Spring. And to that end, Ant. Chr. 410. they rais'd Men and Money in every Place from among their Confederates. In Peloponesus the Lacedemonians by the instigation of Alcibiades, broke the League they had made with the Athenians, and the heat of this War continu'd for the space of Twelve Years. CHAP. II. The Lacedemonians invade Attica. The Fight at Sea between the Syra∣cusians and Athenians. Eurymedon and Demosthenes arrive in Sicily. A Plague in the Athenian Camp. Another Fight between the Syracu∣sians and Athenians. The latter routed at Sea. The Athenians ruin'd in Sicily. Nicholaus's long Oration. Gylippus his Answer. THis Year ended, Cleocritus governed in chief at Athens, and at Rome Four Olymp. 91. 4. An. M. 3559. Ant. Ch. 410. Military Tribunes executed the Authority of Consuls; that is to say, Aulus Sempronius, Marcus Papyrius, Quintus Fabius, and Spurius Nautius. At this time the Lacedemonians invaded Attica under Agis their General, and Alcibiades the Athenian. They seize upon Decelia, a Place very strong and fit for a Garrison, and there they built a Fort; from whence this War was call'd the Decelian War. On the other side, the Athenians sent Charides with Thirty Sail into La∣conia, and decreed Fourscore Gallies, and Five Thousand Souldiers to be sent into Sicily.
In the mean time the Syracusians in order to a Sea-Fight before determin'd, made out with a Fleet of Fourscore Sail well Mann'd, against the Enemy; whom the Athenians met with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, whereupon began a fierce Fight: A Sea-Fight between the Athenians and Syracusians. And now the Athenians came running to the Sea-side from every Quarter, from their Posts and Forts, some out of Curiosity to see the Engagement, o∣thers to be assistant to their Countrymen in their Flight, in case they should be worsted. The Syracusian Officers foreseeing the Athenians were likely to do, as now they did, had before given secret Orders to those that were left as a Guard for the City, to Assault the Forts of the Athenians which were full of Money, Naval Preparations, and other Provisions. The Syracusians therefore easily possess'd themselves of the Forts, which were slightly guarded, and made a great Slaughter of them that came from the Sea-shoar in aid of their Fel∣lows. Ant. Ch. 410. Hereupon a great Noise and Clamour being made about the Forts, and in the Camp, the Athenians Souldiers now engag'd at Sea, were struck with great Terrour, and gave back, and at length betook themselves to the defence of the Forts and Fortresses that were left; whom the Syracusians pur∣su'd, without observing any order. Whereupon the Athenians discerning there was no hope nor way left of escaping at Land, (for that the Syracusians had possess'd themselves of Two of their Forts) tackt about, and were forc'd to renew the Fight: Upon which, with their whole Fleet, in a Line of Bat∣tel, they fell upon the Syracusians (who were separated one from ano∣ther, and had their Line broken and disordered by the Pursuit) and sunk Ele∣ven of their Ships, pursuing the rest to the Island. After the Fight, both sides set up a Trophy, the Athenians for their Victory at Sea, and the Syra∣cusians for their Success at Land. The Fight at Sea having this Issue, and the Victory so hardly obtain'd, the Athenians (understanding that Demosthe∣nes within a few Days would be with them with a Fleet, were resolved not to attempt any thing further, till those Forces arriv'd. The Syracusians on the contrary resolv'd to lay all at stake, and try the utmost by force of Arms, before the Army of Demosthenes came up. And to that end, they fac'd the P. 336. Ant. Chr. 410. Athenian Fleet, and did all they could every Day to provoke them to a Bat∣tel. About that time Aristo a Corinthian Commander of a Vessel, advis'd the Sy∣racusians to make the Fore-Castles of their Ships shorter and lower, which was of great advantage to them in Fights at Sea afterwards: For the Fore-Castles of the Athenian Gallies were both very slender and high built, by reason where∣of their Beaks made no impression, but where they met with those equal in height; and therefore the Enemy receiv'd no great Prejudice by them. But the Vessels of the Syracusians (having their Fore-Decks low and strong built,) often at the first Stroke sunk the Athenian Gallies. The Syracusians (as is before related) many Days dar'd the Athenians to Fight both by Sea and Land, but all to no purpose; for they kept close, and would not be drawn forth by any means. But afterwards (some of the Officers of the Fleet not being able longer to indure the Insolencies of the Syracusians) part of the Navy set upon them in the great Haven, which at length engag'd the whole Fleet. The Athenians indeed excell'd the other in Another Sea Fight. the swiftness of their Gallies, and in the expertness and diligence of the Sea-men: But because the fight was in a strait and narrow Place, this advantage was of no use to them. The Syracusians therefore being confusedly mixt with their Enemies, and gi∣ving them no respite or time to withdraw, they drove them from off their Decks and their Fore-Castles, with Stones and Spears. And when they had Ant. Chr. 410. with the Beaks of their Ships pierc'd through many of the Enemy's Gallies, they boarded them, and the Fight seem'd within the Ships, just like a Battel at Land. All things thus going to rack on the Athenians side, they fled outright with great precipitation; whom the Syracusians pursu'd close, and sunk Seven of their Gallies, and disabled many more. The Syracusians being now grown confident, by their late Victories both at Sea and Land, presently arrives Eurimedon and Demosthenes, with a Demosthenes and Eurime∣don arrive at Sicily. great Army from Athens, and with many Auxiliaries from Thurium and
Messapia an Island neer Si∣cily call'd Ca∣labria. Ant. Chr. 410. Messapia which join'd them in their Passage. These Generals brought with them more than Three Hundred and Ten Gallies, and Five Thousand Men, be∣sides Seamen: But Arms, Moneys, Engines for a Siege and other Provisions were on board other Transport Ships. Upon this the Syracusians were again discourag'd, judging they were never able for the future to cope with so potent an Enemy. Demosthenes having now persuaded his Collegues to seise upon the Epipole, (for otherwise he could never straiten the City on every side) set upon the Syracusians in the night with Ten Thousand heavy Arm'd Men, and as many light Arm'd; Ant. Chr. 410 and the Assault being unexpected they took some Forts, and entring within the Fortifications, demolish'd part of the Wall. But the Syracusians running to∣gether from all parts to the Place assaulted, and Hermocrates with a choice Band of lusty Young Men hasting in with aid and assistance; the Athenians were driven out, and through the darkness of the Night and ignorance of the Pas∣sages were dispers'd and scatter'd far from one another, so that the Syracusians with their Auxiliaries with a close persuit kill'd Two Thousand Five Hundred of Ant. Chr. 410. The Athenians worsted. them, and wounded many that got off, and possess'd themselves of a great Number of Arms. After this encounter, the Syracusians sent Sicanus one of the Officers with twelve Gallies to the rest of the Cities both to inform them of the Victory and likewise to desire further Aid. The Athenians (their affairs now declining so much to the worse, and the P. 337. A Plague in the Athenian Comp. Plague breaking forth in the Army by reason of a stinking marsh Ground near adjoyning) consulted what was sit to be done in the present exigency. Demosthenes was of Opinion without delay to return to Athens, saying it was far more com∣mendable to venture their Lives for their Country against the Lacedemonians than to lie still in Sicily doing nothing. But Nicias said it was base and dishonourable Ant. Chr. 410. to leave the Siege when they were so plentifully supply'd, both with Shipping Men and Money. And moreover, that they should be involv'd in great Dan∣ger by those whose common practice it was, to asperse the Generals, if they should make Peace with the Syracusians, and return to their Country without the order and command of the People. Among those that were then present at the Consult some approv'd of the Advice of Demosthenes for returning; others agreed with Nicias. But nothing being determin'd, they lay idle without any Action. In the mean time, great Aids and Supplies came to them of Syracuse from the Siculi, Selenuntians, Geleans, Himereans and Camarineans, which encourag'd them as much as it discourag'd the Athenians. And besides the Plague so rag'd and increas'd that a great part of the Army Perish'd, which caus'd them all now to repent that they had not return'd before. The Athenian Army therefore being in a tumult, and hasting to their Shipping, Nicias himself was forc'd to a Com∣pliance. And now both the Generals agreeing in Opinion, the Souldiers Shipt their Baggage and Lumber, and having all Aboard their Ships, hoist up Sail. And the Generals caus'd it to be Proclaim'd that upon a Sign given all should be ready, and if any loytred they should be left behind. But the Night before they intended to set Sail, the Moon was Ecclips'd, which occasion'd Nicias (who was Ant. Ch. 410. naturally Superstitious, and then in great uneasiness by reason of the Plague) to advise with the Sooth-sayers. By whom Answer was given, that they must not by any means Sail of three Days: Into which Opinion Demosthenes and those of his party likewise were led through their Superstition. The Syracusians understand∣ing Another Sea Fight. by Deserters the cause of the stay, Man'd all their Gallies, to the Number of Seventy Four. And drawing out their Land-Forces, set upon the Athenians both by Sea and Land. On the other side the Athenians Man'd Fourscore and Six Gal∣lies and gave the Command of the Right Wing to Eurymedon, against whom was oppos'd Agatharcus the Syracusian General. In the left Wing they plac'd Euthyde∣mus, in opposition to Sicanus, who Commanded for the Syracusians. Menander Commanded the middle Battle on the Athenians side, and Pithes the Corinthian for the Syracusians. And altho' the Athenians Line of Battel stretch'd out further in length than the Syracusians because their Ships were more; yet that which seem'd to be their advantage prov'd to be their ruin in the Issue.
For Eurymedon striving to surround the Wing opposite to him (by that means being sever'd from the rest of the Fleet) was driven by the Syracusians (who bore down upon him) into the Creek Dascones, before possess'd by other Syracusians; where being hemm'd in within the Straits, and forc'd upon the Shoar, (upon a mortal Wound given) he fell down Dead, and there seven of his Ships were destroy'd. In the heat of the Fight, the report spread abroad that the General was kill'd, and many of his Ships lost; upon which the chiefest of the Gallies Ant. Ch. 410. which were next in place and order to the Vessels lost, began to give back, and thereupon the Syracusians press'd forward and (heated by their late success) fell P. 338. with great fury upon the Athenians and forc'd them to an absolute Flight, and driving them into the Shallows of the Haven, many of the Vessels were stranded among the Shelvs and Sands. Upon which Sicanus the Syracusian Ad∣miral fill'd A Fire-Ship. a Ship with Fagots, Fire-brands and Pitch, and set it on Fire among the Ships floating upon the Shallows. On the other hand the Athenians with all expedition extinguish'd the Flames, and when they saw there was no other way left to escape, they valiantly grappled with their Enemies, and threw them overboard. In the mean time the Land-forces of the Athenians were ready up∣on the Shoar to Aid them that fled that way, and bestirring themselves with extraordinary Valour and contempt of all Dangers routed the Syracusians at Land. But they being Victors at Sea return'd into the City, having not lost many Men in the Sea-Fight. But the Athenians lost no less than Two Thousand Men and Eighty Gallies. The Syracusians now conceiving that their City was safe, and that their business remaining was to break into the Enemies Camp and ruin their Army, block'd up the Mouth of their Haven with Ships join'd, and fastned together, to hinder the Ant. Ch. 410. Flight of the Athenians by Sea. To which end they made a Bridge with Boats, Gallies, and other Sihps fixt with Anchors, compacted and fastned together with Iron Chains. The Athenians perceiving that they were penn'd up on every side, and no way of escape remaining, consulted and resolv'd to sill what Ships they had remaing with the best of their Souldiers, that with the multitude of their Ship∣ping, and resoulteness of their Souldiers (now ready to Fight as Men in a de∣sperate condition) they might strike a Terror into the Syracusians. Hereupon the chiefest of the Officers and best and most expert Souldiers Imbark'd and Man'd an Hundred and Fifteen Gallies. The rest of the Army they plac'd in order upon the Shoar. On the other side the Syracusians (being furnish'd with Land-Souldiers for the Defence of their Walls) fitted out Seventy Four Gallies, attended by many of the young Boys of the City, (not yet of full Age) in other Ships as Auxiliaries to be ready to aid and assist their Parents. The Walls of the Harbour and every high Place within the City were fill'd with Multitudes of Spectators. For both Women and Children and all others unfit to bear Arms (with great concern and trembling of Heart) stood to view the Fight in . in order to judge how things were like to go with them. At the same time Nicias, the Athenian General, viewing the Fleet, and seriously considering the greatness of the danger, left his Post upon the Shoar, and went on board a Vessel, and sail'd round the Athenian Fleet, and call'd to the Commanders A great Sea-Fight in the Harbor at Sy∣racuse. and Captains of every Gally, earnestly intreating them with his Hands lift up to Heaven, that every one would strive to out-do another, and improve to the ut∣most the present opportunity, being the last ground of hope they were ever like to injoy, for in their valour in the Sea-Fight now approach∣ing, lay the safety and preservation both of them and of their Ante Chr. 410. Nicias stirs up the Souldiers to Fight like Men of Valour. Country. Those that were Fathers he put in mind of their Children: Those that were nobly born he earnestly press'd and exhorted that they would be careful to avoid what ever would stain the Honor and Glory of their Families: Those that had been ad∣vanc'd by the People for their former good Services, he advis'd now to approve themselves worthy of those marks of Honor they then bore. Lastly, he put them in mind of the Trophies at Salamis, earnestly adjuring them that they would not prostitute the Glory of their Country, and become Slaves to the Syracusians. After this Speech, Nicias return'd to the Army at Land. When they in the Fleet had Sung the A Song be∣fore Battle. P. 339. Paean, they made out with a Design to break the Blockade at the Mouth of the Harbour. But the Syracusians sail'd up in order of Battle against them, with that speed that they drove them off the
Bomb and forc'd them to Fight. In this confusion some Sail'd towards the Shoar, others made into the middle of the Harbour, and others towards the Fortifications; and thus their Lines being broke, the Fleet was presently se∣parated and dispers'd, by which means the Athenians, in this manner disappoin∣ted, were forc'd to Fight here and there, up and down in the Harbour it little Ant. Chr. 41 Squadrons and small Parties: However the Fight was obstinate on both sides. The Athenians exceeding in Number of Ships, seeing no other hopes of safety, undauntedly despis'd all Dangers, and resolv'd to die Valiantly. On the other hand, the Syracusians knowing their Parents and Children were observing them, put themselves forth to the utmost, every one striving to improve his Valour, to gain the Victory for his Country. Many there were, that when their Ships were pierced through by the violent Assault of the Enemy, leapt into the Ships that pierc'd them, and fought bravely upon their Fore-castles in the midst of their Enemies. Others with grappling Irons, so join'd the Ships together, that they forc'd their Enemy to fight on Board, as if they had been at Land. And there were not a few that when their own Ships were disabled, boarded their Adversaries, and kill'd and threw them overboard, and so possess'd themselves of their Vessels. And now the crashing of Ships one against another, and the Cries and Shouts of the Combatants and Dying Men, was heard in every Place throughout the whole Harbour: For sometimes one single Vessel was sur∣rounded, and struck through with the Beaks of many, and so the Water for∣cing in at the Breaches, the Ship with all the Men in it, sunk together. And many (after their Ships were sunk) endeavour'd to save themselves by Swim∣ming, but were struck through with Darts, and wounded with Spears, and so miserably perish'd. In the mean time, the Masters of the Ships were a∣mazed, Ant. Ch. 410. to see the Confusion and Disorder of the Fight, seeing nothing but tumult and horror about them, one Ship often set upon by many, and what was commanded, not regarded, and the Advice to one, disagreeable to the Circum∣stances of another; and after all, none attending to what was said. For what by Storms of Darts, crashing of Ships, brushing off of Oars, increase of Noise and Clamour of them that were engag'd, and loud Shouts of the Army upon the Shoar, incouraging them upon the Sea, none heard what Orders were given: For the Shoar was full of Souldiers, the Syracusians in one part, and the Athe∣nians in another. By which means, they that were driven in the Fight near to the Land, were sometimes succour'd by them upon the Shoar. The Spectators upon the Walls, gave great Shouts when they discerned any advantage gain'd by their Friends; but when they were in danger to be overcome, they fill'd the Air with doleful Groans and Lamentations, calling upon their Gods for de∣liverance. Sometimes some of the Gallies of the Syracusians were destroy'd un∣der the very Walls, and their Kindred and Relations Butcher'd before their Faces; so that Parents were the Eye-Witnesses of the Death of their Chil∣dren, Wives of the miserable end of their Husbands, and Brothers of their Brothers. And after the Fight had lasted long (with much Slaughter on both sides) yet the Battel was still carry'd on, for none (never so greatly press'd) durst fly to Land. For the Athenians ask'd them which made towards the Shoar, whether they intended to Sail to Athens by Land? So the Syracusians on the Shoar, demanded of them that fled towards them, Why they were now ready Ant. Chr. 410. to betray their Country, who would not suffer them that staid on Shoar to imbarque with them? Did they shut up the Mouth of the Harbour, as if they P. 340. would prevent the Escape of the Enemy, to the end that they themselves might have the better Excuse to fly to the Shoar? And being that every Man must of necessity die, what more honourable Death could they desire, than that for their Country, which is now a witness of the Engagement, and whom they basely and sordidly desert? With these and the like Reproaches did they who fled to Land, meet with from the Souldiers plac'd on the Shoar: Whereupon they return'd to the Battel, though greatly disabled in their Shipping, and their Bo∣dies so wounded, that they were scarce able to defend themselves. At length the Athenians nearest to the City were forc'd to fly. Presently after, they that The Athenians routed in the Sea-Fight. were next gave back, till at length the whole Fleet made away. Whereupon the Syracusians pursu'd with a great Shout. Those of the Athenians that escap'd (being driven upon the Shelves and Sands) leap'd out of their broken and shat∣ter'd
Vessels, and fled to the Land Army. The Harbour was now full of Arms and Wrecks of Ships every where. Threescore of the Athenian Ships were absolutely destroy'd, of the Syracusians Eight were lost, and Eleven disa∣bled. The Syracusians tow'd as many of their Gallies to the Shoar as they could, and took out the Dead Bodies of their Citizens and Confederates, and gave them an Honourable Burial. The Athenians throng'd together to the Generals Tents, desiring them not so much to regard the Ships, as the preservation both of Ant. Chr. 410. themselves and the Souldiers. Thereupon Demostbenes declar'd that more Ships were forthwith to be man'd, in order to force the Blockade, which if done pre∣sently, they might all easily escape. Nicias was of a contrary Opinion, and advis'd the leaving the Ships, and to march up into the heart of the Country to the Cities of their Confederates; whose Opinion all embrac'd: And having burnt some of their Ships, they forth∣with made it their business to march away. Their Design of Decamping in the Night being known to the Enemy, Hermocrates advis'd the Syracusians to draw out all their Forces in the Night, and stop all the Passes on the High-Ways. But the Officers not approving of this, because many of the Souldiers were wounded, and all wearied and tir'd out by the late Engagement, sent some Horsemen to the Athenians Camp, to inform them that the Syracusians had laid all the Ways with Souldiers to intrap them in their March. The Horse coming in late in the Night, (the Athenians believing they were sent out of kindness to them from the Leontines) were in a great perplexity, and thereupon stay'd at pre∣sent where they were; though they might have pass'd with great safety, if they had not been thus deluded. The Syracusians therefore as soon as it was light, sent out Souldiers, and secur'd all the narrow Passes on the Road. The Athe∣nians divided the Army into Two Parts, their Sick Men and  Carriages they plac'd in the middle; those that were strong and able to fight, were in the Front and Rear: Demosthenes led these, and Nicias the other, and so they march'd towards Catana. In the mean time, the Syracusians drew Fifty Gallies left behind, with Ropes into the City, and ordered all their Sea-men and Soul∣diers out of the Gallies, and arm'd them, and so pursu'd after the Athenians Ant. Chr. 410. with all their Forces, and continually vexed, galled, and even tir'd out the The miserable Condition of the Athenians in Sicily. Rear. Pressing thus upon their Backs for Three Days together, and possessing all the Passes before them, the Way to Catana was quite blockt up. At length being chas'd through the Helorine Way, to the River Assinarus, where there was no going forward, they were absolutely coup'd up, and there the Syracusians kill'd Eighteen Thousand of them, and took Seven Thousand Prisoners, among whom were Demosthenes and Nicias the Generals. The rest were given as a Prey to the Souldiers; for the Athenians (no Way being left to escape) were P. 341. forc'd to deliver up, not only their Arms but themselves, as Captives to their Enemy's Mercy. Upon this happy Success, the Syracusians erected Two Trophies, and fixt to them the Arms of the Generals, and then return'd to the City. Hereupon the whole City gave publick Thanks unto the Gods. The next Day an Assembly was call'd, to consider what was to be done with the Prisoners. There Diocles, one of the highest Esteem among the People, deliver'd his Opinion, That the A∣thenian Generals should be first Scourg'd, and then put Death, and that the rest of the Prisoners should be sent to the Quarries. And that they that had any ways assisted the Athenians, should be sold under the Spear; and that no more than Two About half a Pint. Cotyles of Corn a Day, should be allow'd to every Prisoner. When the De∣cree was read, Hermocrates then in the Assembly began to speak, and say, That it was more commendable to use a Victory with Moderation and Humanity, than to o∣vercome. The People murmuring and grumbling at this, as not pleasing to them, one Nicholaus, who had lost Two Sons in this War, ascends the Desk, supported by his Servants, by reason of his Age. At which the People ceas'd their Murmu∣ing, supposing he would be sharp against the Prisoners. Silence being made, the Old Man began thus, Ye Inhabitants of Syracuse, I my self have born no small Nicholaus's Speech. part of the Calamities of this War; for being the Father of Two Sons, I rea∣dily sent them forth to venture their Lives for the defence of their Country;
and for them were sent a Messenger, who inform'd e of the Death of them both; and though I am every Day desiring they were alive, yet considering the manner of their Deaths, I cannot but judge them happy, and bewail my own Life, and count my self most miserable: For they by losing of their Lives, (which as a Debt to Nature, they must of necessity some time or other have parted with) for the safety of their Country, have left an immortal Honour behind them. But I now in the end of my Days, being depriv'd of the helps of my old Age, am doubly afflicted, whilst I have both lost my Chil∣dren, and likewise all hopes of Posterity. For the more glorious their ends Ant. Chr. 410. were, the more grateful and desirable is their Memory; therefore the very Name of the Athenians is most deservedly hateful to me, whom you see led and supported by the Hands of my Servants, and not of my Children. Ye Syracusians, if I had discerned that this present Assembly had been appointed to consult and advise something in favour of the Athenians, I should (as Just∣ly I might) for the many Slaughters and Calamities brought by them upon the Country, and for my own particular Miseries, most bitterly inveigh a∣gainst them. But seeing we are here debating about shewing Compassion to the Afflicted, and how to spread Abroad through all the World, the Honour and Glory of the People of Syracuse, I now desire with all  Sine Cornu, without a Horn. Lenity and Gentleness, to propose what I conceive may be every way for the advan∣tage of the Commonweath. The Athenians indeed have justly deserved to un∣dergo all manner of Punishments for their Madness and Folly: In the first place for their Impiety towards the Gods, and next for their great injury done to us. God is certainly good in this, in bringing those into Misery and Di∣stress, who not contented with their own abundance, fall by an unjust War upon others. Who would ever have thought that the Athenians, who had brought over Ten Thousand Talents from Delos, and invaded Sicily with a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail, and with an Army of Forty Thousand Men, should have Ant. Chr. 410. been brought so low, into such Calamities as now they are? For after so so great a Preparation, neither Ship nor Man return'd to bring the News of their destruction. And now, O ye Syracusians, since ye see by experience, that the Proud and Ambitious are hateful both to God and Man, (adoring the Deity) take heed of doing any thing cruel and inhumane. For what Ho∣nour is it, to destroy him that lies prostrate at our Feet? What glory to be sierce and cruel in taking Revenge? For he that is Implacable towards Men P. 342. in Distress, is injurious to the common frailty and weakness of Mankind. No Man is so subtil as to be able to baffle Fate; who as it were sporting her self in Mens Miseries, oftentimes on a sudden draws a black Cloud over their Prosperity. And here perhaps some may say, The Athenians have most un∣justly committed many Slaughters among us, and now we have power to take full revenge. Have not the Athenians suffered already above the degree and measure of their Offence? Have ye not sufficiently punished the Prisoners? Con∣sider when they deliver'd up themselves with their Arms into your Hands, they did it relying upon the mercy of the Conquerors. Therefore it would be a base thing, to deceive them in the good Opinion and Hope they had of your Humanity. Certainly they that are implacable and obstinate in their Hatred, will sight it out to the last; but these instead of Enemies, gave up themselves to you as Suppliants. For they that render their Bodies to the E∣nemy Ant. Chr. 410. in time of the Battel, undoubtedly do it in hopes of Preservation; but if they are hurried to Execution (though they were perswaded to the con∣trary) they indeed fall into an unexpected Calamity; but they who act so Cruelly, may justly be termed  raging Fools: But it becomes those who would rule others, to recommend themselves rather by Mercy and Clemency, than to seek to establish their Grandeur by Force and Power. For they who are driven to Obedience through Fear, are ready to execute their Hatred, when they see their opportunity to Rebel. But they love those that rule them with gentleness and moderation, and do all they can to advance and strengthen their interest. What overthrew the Empire of the Medes, but then cruelty to their Subjects? For as soon as the Persians made a defection, most of the Nations together with them rebell'd. How did Cyrus who was but a Private Man, gain the Sovereignty of all Asia, but by his Courtesie and Kindness to those he had subdu'd? He did not only forbear to execute cruelty upon King
Cresus, but heap'd many Favours upon him. And such was his Practice to∣wards other Kings and People: His Mercy and Lenity being thereupon pub∣lished in every Place, all the Inhabitants of Asia flock'd together to him, and strove to be his Confederates. But why do I speak of Times and Places so far remote, when in this very City of ours, Gelon from an ordinary Man, be∣came Prince of all Sicily; all the Cities giving up themselves freely to his Government? The Courtesie and winning Behaviour of the Man, gain'd upon Ant. Chr. 410. every Person, especially his tenderness towards them that were in Distress. Therefore guided by this Example (at a time when this our City rul'd over all Sicily) let us not slight that which was so commendable in our Ancestors, nor behave our selves like Beasts, fierce and inexorable towards Men in Mi∣sery. It will ill become us to give occasion to those that envy us, to say  that we us'd our Success and Prosperity unworthily. How desirable a thing is it when we are in Affliction, to have some to sympathize with us, and when we are in Prosperity, to have others to rejoyce with us! Victory is many times gain'd by Fortune and Chance, but Humanity and Mercy in a time of Success, are clear instances of the Virtue of the Conqueror. Wherefore envy not your Country this Honour, whereby they will be Famous all the World over, when it shall be said that it did not only overcome the Athenians by Arms, but by Mercy and Humanity. And hence it will appear that they who ingross to themselves all the praise and commendation due to Mercy and Generosity, are far out-done by your Lenity and Compassion. And that they who first dedicated an Altar to Mercy, may find the very same in the City of Syracuse. And it will be a convincing Argument to all Mankind, that they were most justly cut off, and we most deservedly crown'd with Success; because they so unjustly fell upon those who afterwards shew'd Mercy to such implacable E∣nemies; Ant. Chr. 410. and that we overcame such a sort of Men as most unjustly made War upon them who learnt to shew Mercy even by the Cruelty and Injustice of their Enemies. And hence will follow that the Athenians shall not only undergo the Censures of others, but will likewise condemn themselves, that they should en∣deavour by an unjust War to destroy such Men. It is certainly a most comen∣able thing, to lay the first Foundation of Friendship, and extinguish Dissentions, P. 343. by shewing of Mercy. A good understanding amongst Friends, is to be ever∣lasting, but Enmity with Adversaries ought to be but temporary. By this means the number of Friends would increase, and Enemies would be the fewer. But to continue Hatred and Discord for ever, and intail them to Posterity, is neither just nor safe. For sometimes it falls out that they who now seem to be more po∣tent than the other, in a moment are brought lower than those they formerly overcame; which is clearly evinced to us by the event of the present War. They who even now besieg'd our City, and to that purpose hemm'd us in with a Wall, by a turn of Fortune are now become our Prisoners, as you all see: It's there∣fore our great Prudence in the Miseries of others, to shew Compassion, if we Ant. Ch. 410. expect to find the same our selves in their Condition. This present Life is full of Paradoxes and Mutations, as Seditions, Robberies, Wars, among which Hu∣mane Nature can scarce avoid loss and prejudice: Therefore if we shut up all Bowels of Mercy towards the Distressed and Vanquished, we establish a bloody Law for ever against our selves. For it's impossible that they who are cruel towards others, should find Mercy afterwards themselves; and that they that act barbarously should be gently used; or that those who de∣stroy so many Men against the common custom of the Greeks, when a change of Fortune comes, should obtain the common Rights and Privileges of all o∣ther Men. For which of the Grecians ever put to Death those that submit∣ted and delivered up themselves upon hopes and belief of Mercy from the Conquerors? Or who ever prefer'd Cruelty before Mercy? or Precipitation and Rashness before Prudence? All Mankind indeed agree in this, to destroy an Enemy in Fight by all ways imaginable; but yet to spare those who submit and yield up themselves. For in the one case Obstinacy is corrected, and in the other Mercy is exercised. For our Rage is naturally cool'd, when we see him that was an Enemy, upon change of his Fortune, now lye at our Foot, submitting himself to the will and pleasure of the Conqueror: Espe∣cially Men of mild and good Tempers are toucht with a Sense of Compassi∣on, through Affection to the same Common Nature with themselves. Even
the Athenians in the Peloponesian War, when they took many of the Lacede∣monians in the Illand Sphacteria, yet restor'd them to the Spartans upon Ran∣som. The Lacedemonians likewise when many of the Athenians and their Con∣federates fell into their Hands, used the like Clemency; and it was Honourably done of them both: For Grecians should lay aside their Enmity after Con∣quest, and forbear Punishment after the Enemy is subdu'd. He that revenges himself upon the Conquered, after he hath submitted to Mercy, punishes not an Enemy, but rather wickedly insults over the weakness of Mankind. Con∣cerning this severity one made use of these Savings of the ancient Philosophers, O man! be not overwise. Know thy self. Consider Fortune commands all things. What I beseech you was the Reason that all the Grecians in former Ages, af∣ter their Victories, did not make their Trophies of Stone, but of ordinary Wood? Was it not that as they continu'd but a short time, so the Memory of former Feuds and Differences should in a little time vanish? If you are resolv'd to perpetuate your Hatred and Animosities, then learn first to slight the inconstancy of Humane Affairs. Many times a small occasion, and a little turn of Fortune, has given a check to the Insolencies of the Proudest of Men. And if you purpose at any time to put an end to the War (which is probable) how can you have a better opportunity than this, in which by your Mercy and Clemency towards the Conquered, you lay the Foundations of Peace and Ant. Chr. 410. Amity? Do you think the Athenians by this loss in Sicily, have no more Forces left, who are Lords almost of all the Islands of Greece, and of the Sea-Coasts of Europe and Asia? For not long ago, though they lost Three Hundred Gallies in Egypt, yet they compell'd the King (who seem'd to be the Conqueror) to make Peace with them upon Terms on his Part dishonourable. And heretofore P. 344. though Xerxes had destroy'd their City, yet not long after they overcame him, and became Masters of all Greece. This noble City thrives in the midst of the greatest Calamities, and nothing small and mean is the subject of any of its Consultations. And therefore it is both honourable and profitable, that we should rather (by sparing the Captives) enter into a League of Friendship with them, than to widen the breach by destroying of them. For if we put them to Death, we only gratify our Rage with a little unprofitable Pleasure for the present; but if we preserve them, they (whom we use so well) will be for Ant. Chr. 410. ever grateful, and from all Mankind, we shall reap eternal Praise and Honour.  Yea, but may some say, some of the Grecians have kill'd their Prisoners. What then? if they have been prais'd and honour'd for this Cruelty, let us then imi∣tate them who have been so careful to preserve their Honour; but if the best and chiefest among us justly condemn them, let not us do the same things with them, who did apparently so wickedly. As long as these Men who have yielded up themselves to our Mercy, suffer nothing sad and doleful from us, all the Nations will blame the Athenians: But when they hear that you have destroy'd the Prisoners against the Law of Nations, all the Shame and Dis∣grace will fall upon your selves. And if there be any regard to desert, we may consider that the glory of the City of Athens is such, that all acknow∣ledge themselves bound to be grateful for the Benesits and Advantages reapt from thence. These are they who first enobled Greece with  civil Education; for when by the special bounty of the Gods, it was only among them, they freely imparted it to all others. These fram'd Laws, by means whereof, Men that before lived like Beasts, were brought into orderly Society to live toge∣ther according to the Rules of Justice: These were they who first of all pro∣tected those in Distress that fled to them, and caused the Laws for the re∣ceiving and defending of Suppliants in such case, to be inviolably observ'd a∣mongst all other Nations; and it were a most unworthy thing now to deny the benefit of those Laws to them who were the Authors of them. And thus Ant. Chr. 410. much in general to all. And now I shall hint something particularly to some of you, concerning the Duties incumbent upon such as should have regard to the welfare and happiness of Mankind. You that are the Orators and Men of Learning of this City, You I say have Compassion on them, whose Coun∣try is the Nursery of all Learning, and honourable Education. All you who are initiated into the Holy Mysteries, spare and save those by whom ye were instructed. You who have reaped any advantage by ingenious Education, now be grateful for that advantage. You who hereafter hope for improvement
thence, debar not your selves by your Cruelty now. For where shall Strangers be instructed in the liberal Arts, if Athens be destroy'd? Some short Resent∣ment indeed they do deserve for the present Offence, but their many good Acts may justly challenge Returns of kindess and good-will. Besides this merit of the City, if any do but consider the private Circumstances of the Prisoners, there will be just cause and ground found to shew them Mercy. For the Confederates being under the command of their Superiors, are forc'd to be ingag'd in the same War with them. Wherefore though it may be thought just to execute Revenge upon them that were the chief Authors of the In∣juries, yet certainly it's very fit and commendable to pardon such as are Of∣fenders Ant. Chr. 410. against their Wills. What shall I say of Nicias? who from the be∣ginning (favouring the Syracusians) dissuaded the Athenians from this Expe∣dition against Sicily; and was always kind and courteous to all the Syracusians that ever came thither. How base and unworthy then would it be to put Nicias to Death, who was our Advocate in the Senate at Athens, and that he (finding no mercy for all his kindnesses) should undergo a rigorous and im∣placable Revenge for his Obedience to his Governors? So that though Alci∣biades (who was the great promoter of this War) avoided by his flight, Re∣venge both from us and the Athenians, yet he who was the most courteous of all the Athenians, cannot be thought worthy of common favour. Considering therefore the Catastrophies of this present Life, I cannot but compassionate so, unfortunate a condition. For not long ago, he was esteem'd one of the bra∣vest Men of Greece, and most applauded for the integrity of his Life and Conversation; and the Eyes and well-Wishes of all the City every where fol∣low'd him: But now with his Arms Pinion'd in Chains of Captivity, of a P. 345. deform'd Countenance, suffering under the miserable condition of a Slave, as if Fortune in this Man's Life, glory'd to shew the greatness of her power, un∣der whose bountiful indulgence towards us, we ought to carry it (as be∣comes the state and condition of Men) with Humanity and Moderation, and not to insult with barbarous Cruelty, over them who are of the same Stock and Original with our selves. Nicholaus having thus spoken to the Syracu∣sians, ended his Oration, and much affected his Auditors with Pity and Com∣passion. But Gylippus the Laconian burning with implacable Hatred against the Athe∣nians, The Speech of Gylippus. ascends the Tribunal, and speaks thus; I am in great admiration, O ye Syracusians, to see you led aside by inticing Words, even while you are under the smart of your miserable Butcheries you really groan under. If in the very height of Danger you are so cool in your Revenge towards them who came hither on purpose to ruin your Country, why do we contend when we are not at all injur'd? I intreat you by the Gods, O ye Syracusians, to give me leave, while I freely declare to you my Opinion: For being a Spartan, I must be forc'd to speak after the manner of the Spartans: And in the first place, some may inquire, how comes it to pass, that Nicholaus professes himself to bear so much Compassion towards the Athenians, who have made his Old Age the more miserable by the Loss of his Sons? And now appears in the As∣sembly in a mournful Habit, and with the shedding of many Tears, pleads for mercy for them who have murthered his own Children? Certainly he is no good Man, that so far forgets the Death of his nearest Relations, as to, judge Ant. Chr. 410. it fit and just to spare them who were their most bitter and implacable Ene∣mies. How many are here present now in this great Assembly, who are la∣menting for the death of their Children? At which Words, when many of the Assembly sent forth loud Groans, he added, I discern (says he) that those Sighs are the Witnesses of the Miseries suffered. How many Brothers, Kin∣dred and Friends lost in this War, do ye now in vain desire? At which, when many more manifested their Sorrow; Seest thou not, (says Gylippus) O Nicholaus! how many the Athenians have made Miserable? All these without any cause, have they depriv'd of their dearest and nearest Relations, who ought so much the more to hate the name of the Athenians, by how much they bore the greater love to their Relations, Kindred and Friends. How absurd and unjust a thing is it, O ye Syracusians, for Men voluntarily to sa∣crifice their Lives for you, and you not to revenge their Bloods upon their inveterate Enemies? Nay, being so far from praising those who have lost their
lives in defence of the common liberty, as to prefer the Safety of the Enemies, before the Honour of those that have deserved so well. You have made a Law, that the Sepulchers of your Countrymen shall be adorned and beauti∣fy'd: What greater Ornament can ye invent, than to destroy their Murder∣ers? Unless it be (if the Gods permit) that by making these Enemies Free-men of the City, you determine to set them up as living Trophies for the remembrance of your Dead Friends. But now the Denomination of Enemies is changed into that of Suppliants. From whence arises this Tenderness? For they who first compiled Laws concerning these matters, decreed Mercy to the Distressed, but Punishment to them that acted Wickedly. And now under which of these Denominations shall we account the Prisoners? As Distressed Ant. Ch. 41. and Afflicted? But what evil Spirit was it that compell'd them to make War against the Syracusians without any Provocation? and breaking all the Bonds of Peace (which is so desirable amongst all) to plot and contrive the destru∣ction of your City? Therefore as they began an unjust War, let them with Courage or without, suffer and undergo the events of War: For if they had been Conquerors, we should have felt their inexorable Cruelty; but now being subdu'd, they seek to avoid the Punishment in the most low and humble posture of Distressed Suppliants. What if they should be answered, that their Covetousness and wicked Ambition has hurl'd them into these Calamities? Let them not therefore accuse Fortune, nor challenge to themselves the name of Suppliants; for this is only due to them who are fallen into Misfortunes, and yet have preserv'd their Innocency and Integrity: But they who make it the P. 346. business of their Lives to act all manner of Injustice, shut up all the Doors and Passages of Mercy against themselves. What is it that is most base which they will not devise? What Wickedness will they not commit? It's the special property of Covetousness, not to be content with its present Condition, but violently to lust after things remote, and what is not our own; which is most notoriously done by these Men: For though they were the most happy and prosperous of all the Grecians, yet not being able to bear the weight of Ant. Chr. 410. their own greatness, they thirsted after Sicily (though separated from them by so large a Sea) to divide it by Lot amongst themselves. A most horrid and wicked thing it is to make War upon them, who never gave any occasion or pro∣vocation: And this these Men have done. These are they who not long a∣goe entred into a League with us of Peace and Friendship, and then on a sudden begirt our City with their Forces. Certainly it's a great piece of Pride and Presumption, to forejudge the Events of a War, and to order and determine the Punishment of an Enemy, before the Conquest: And this they did not omit; for before they came into Sicily, it was enacted in their com∣mon Assemblies, That the Syracusians and Selinuntians should be made Slaves, and all the rest brought under Tribute. And now when so many complicated Vices center in these Men, as insatiable Covetousness, Fraud and Treachery, insufferable Pride and Insolency, what Man in his Wits can shew them Mer∣cy? especially when it is so well known how they dealt with them of Mity∣lene: For after they had subdu'd them, although they had committed no Of∣fence, but only desir'd to preserve their Liberty, yet they commanded them all to be put to the Sword; a most cruel and barbarous Act, and this a∣gainst Grecians, against Confederates, and against those that had merited bet∣ter things at their Hands. And therefore let them not think it grievous to suffer that themselves, which they have executed upon others: For it's but Ante Chr. 410. just that he who makes a Law to bind others, should be subject to the same himself. But why do I speak of this? when they took A Town in Thessaly. Melus, they most mi∣serably destroy'd all the Youth of the City. And the Scioneans of the Colony of the Meleans underwent the same Fate. So that these Two sorts of People, when they fell into the cruel Hands of the Athenians, were so totally de∣stroy'd, that there was none left to bury the Dead. They who acted these things, are not Scythians; but a People who boast of Humanity and Mercy a∣bove all other. These are they that by Publick Edict, utterly destroy'd these Cities. Now can ye imagin how they would have dealth with the City of Sy∣racuse, if they had taken it? Certainly, they who are so cruel towards their own Confederates, would have invented something more vile and horrid to have executed upon Strangers. By all the Rules of Law and Justice therefore,
there's no Mercy remains for these Men, who have debarr'd themselves of all Pity and Compassion in their present Calamities. For whether can they fly? To the Gods? whose Worship according to the Laws of the Country, they endeavoured to root up? To Men? whom with all their might they were studying and contriving to make Slaves? Will they make their Addresses to Ceres and Proserpina, when they came hither to spoil and lay waste the Island dedicated to them? So it is. But say some, the People of Athens are in no Ant. Chr. 410. fault, but Alcibiades who advis'd, and persuaded to this War. What then? We know that they who advise, for the most part frame their Speeches that way which they conceive is most agreeable to the Humour of their Auditors: And he that is to give his Vote, often trusts to the Orator what he would have to be urged. For the Orator commands not the People, but the People order the Orator to propose what is advisable, and then determine what they think fit. Besides, if we pardon the Malefactors upon their casting the fault upon their Advisers, we furnish every wicked Fellow with a ready Excuse for the clearing of himself. To speak plainly, it would be the unjustest thing in the World, to give thanks to the People for all the good and advantage we at any time reap, and execute Revenge upon the Orators for all the In∣juries we suffer. It's to be admir'd to see some so far besotted, as to judge it fit that Alcibiades now out of our reach should be punish'd, and yet the Prisoners now justly brought to judgment should be discharged; that there∣by it might be evident to all, that the Syracusians are so sottish, as not to have any sense of that which is ill: but admit the truth be so, that the Advisers were the Cause of the War, then let the People accuse them because they have led them into such a Disaster. In the mean time do you (as in Ju∣stice P. 347. you ought) revenge your selves upon the Multitude, by whom you have most injuriously suffered. The Sum of all is this, If knowingly and advised∣ly they have thus wronged you, they deserve to suffer upon that account; if they came upon you rashly and inconsiderately, they are not to be spar'd for that Reason, lest they make it a Practice to injure others others, under pre∣tence of unadvisedness and inconsideration. For it's not just the Syracusians Ant. Chr. 410. should be ruin'd by the rashness and ignorance of the Athenians, nor where the Damage is irrepairable, to admit of an excuse for the Offenders. Yea, by Jupiter! But Niceas (say some) pleaded the Cause of the Syracusians, and was the only Person dissuaded the People from the War. What he said there, in∣deed we heard, and what he has acted here, we have now seen. For he who there argu'd against the Expedition, was there General of an Army against us; and he who was then the Syracusian Advocate, but even now besieg'd and wall'd in their City. He who was then so well affected towards you, lately commanded the continuance both of the War and the Siege, when Demost∣henes and all the rest would have drawn off and return'd. I judge therefore you will not have more regard to Words than things, to Promises than Ex∣periences, to things dark and uncertain, than to those that are seen and ap∣parent. Yet by Jupiter, I confess, it's a very wicked thing to perpetuate En∣mities and differences. But is not the due punishment of those that violate the peace, the most natural way to put an end to Hostilities? It's certainly most unjust, when it's apparent if they had been Conquerors, they would have made the conquered all Slaves, to spare them now they are conquered, as if they had done nothing amiss: For thus getting their Necks out of the Hal∣ter, they'll speak you fair for a time, and perhaps remember the kindness so long as it is for their advantage, but no longer. One thing more I have to say, If you follow this Advice, besides many other Mischiefs, you disoblige the Lacedemonians, who readily undertook this War for your sakes, and sent hither Aids and Supplies as your Confederates, when they might have been Ante Chr. 410. quiet, and suffered Sicily to have been wasted and destroyed. And therefore if you release the Prisoners, and enter into a new League with the Athenians, it will evidently appear that you betray your Confederates; and whereas it's now in your power to ruin and destroy the common Enemies, by discharging of those who are the best of their Souldiers, you put them in a better con∣dition for a Second Encounter. I can never be persuaded that the Athenians who bear such an inveterate Hatred, will ever continue long to be your Friends. Whilst they cannot hurt you, so long they'l make a shew of Kind∣ness,
but when they think they have Power enough, then they'l execute what before they long designed. To conclude, I earnestly beseech thee, O Jupiter! and all the Gods, that the Enemies be not spar'd, that the Confederacy be not deserted, and that another danger of Ruin be not brought upon the Country. And to you, O ye Syracusians, I say if any Mischief happen to you by releasing the Enemy, you leave no colour of Excuse for your selves. Thus spoke the Laconian; upon which the People chang'd their Minds, and confirm'd the Advice of Diocles, and without delay the Generals with all their The Athenian Generals put to Death. Confederates were put to Death. But the Citizens of Athens were adjudg'd, and thrust down into the Quarries. But some of them that had been well bred and instructed in several useful Arts, were by the young Men loos'd from their Fetters and discharg'd. All the rest almost dy'd miserably through ill u∣sage Ant. Chr. 410. in their Imprisonment. CHAP. III. Diocles instituted Laws for Sicily; suffer'd by one of his own Laws. Three Hundred appointed to govern in Athens. The Athenians beaten at Sea by the Lacedemonians at Oropus. Alcibiades recall'd from Banish∣ment. THE War now ended, Diocles prescrib'd Laws for the Syracusians. But Vid. Book 12. The same Story of Cha∣ronidis. one thing very remarkable happened concerning this Man: For being of an inexorable Nature, and rigid and severe against the Offenders, amongst other Laws which he made, one was this; That if any Man came arm'd into the Court, he should be put to Death, without any exception of Ignorance, or of any other Circumstance of the Fact whatsoever. It happened that some Enemies made a sudden Incursion into the Borders of the Syracusians, and he was to go forth against them. In the mean time, a Seditious Tumult arose near the Court; P. 348. Diocles kills himself to confirm his own Law. upon which he hasten'd thither with his Sword by his Side; which being taken notice of by a Private Man, who cry'd out, that he violated the Laws he him∣self had made. No by Jove (says he) I'll confirm them: And so drawing his Sword, ran himself through. These were the Actions of this Year. After this, when Callias govern'd in chief at Athens, the Romans chose Four Olymp. 92. 1. Ant. Chr. 409. Military Tribunes to execute the Office of Consuls, The Greek has not these Names as they are here. Publius Cornelius, Caius Valerius, Cneius Fabius Vibulanus, and Quintius Cincinnatus. At the same time the Ninety Second Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, where Exaenetus of Agrigen∣tum was Victor. At this time the Athenians began to be in contempt by reason of their Misfortunes in Sicily. For soon after the Chians, Samians, Byzantines and a great part of their Confederates, fell off to the Lacedemonians. The People of Athens being upon this Account in great perplexity, laid aside the Demo∣cratical Government, and chose Four Hundred to manage the Affairs of the Four Hun∣dred chosen to rule in A∣thens. Commonwealth. The Sovereign Power being now devolv'd upon a few, they built more Gallies, and rigg'd out a Fleet of Forty Sail. After some Disagree∣ment amongst the Officers, they sail'd to Oropus, where the Enemies Gallies lay at Anchor: Hereupon a Battel was fought, and the Lacedemonians pre∣vail'd, and took Two and Twenty Sail. As for the Syracusians, when the War was ended with the Athenians, they re∣warded the Lacedemonians their Confederates (of whom Gylippus was General) with the Spoils taken in the War, and sent with them Five and Thirty Gal∣lies to assist them against the Athenians, of which Hermocrates, a great Man a∣mong the Citizens, was Admiral. Then all the Booty and Prey was brought together, and out of the Spoils they adorn'd the Temples, and rewarded every Souldier according to his Demerit.
After these things, Diocles a Man of great Authority amongst the People, prevail'd to have the Administration of the Government altered, by chusing the Magistrates by Lot, and ordered that there should be Law-makers appointed both to settle the Commonwealth, and to make new Laws for the future Go∣vernment. The Syracusians therefore chose such from among the Citizens as Ant. Chr. 409. they judg'd most prudent, of whom the chiefest was Diocles: He was a Man of such excellent Parts, and of so great Reputation, that the Laws (though Dioclean Laws in Sicily. made with the joint help of others) were call'd from him the Dioclean Laws. And he was not only admir'd by the Syracusians whilst he liv'd, but when he was dead, they honour'd him as an Demy God. Hero, and built a Temple to his Memo∣ry, which Dionysius afterwards pull'd down when he built the new Wall. All the rest likewise of the Siculi highly valu'd this Man: And upon that account many of the Cities through Sicily used the same Laws that he had instituted, till such time as the Romans brought all Sicily under the power of Rome. And though in times long after Diocles, Cephalus in the time of the Government of Timoleon and Polydorus, when Hiero reign'd, instituted Laws for the Syracusians, yet neither of them were ever call'd Lawmakers, but Interpreters of the Law-maker; because the former Laws being written in old and obsolete Language, were scarce to be understood. And whereas there are many things in these Laws very remarkable, yet the great Hatred against Knavery and Dishonesty appears chiefly from this, That the bitterest and severest Punishments are le∣vell'd against all those that violate Justice. His great dexterity in Civil Af∣fairs is evident hence, That he appointed a certain Mulct or Fine almost for every Offence or Cause Private or Publick, proportionable to the nature of the thing. He's very concise in his Expressions, leaving much to the disquisition of Ant. Chr. 409. the Learned Reader. The sad manner of his Death is a sufficient Testimony of the Virtuous Resolution of his Mind. I am the rather desirous to speak more P. 349. than ordinary of these things, in regard most Authors heretofore mention very little concerning him. But to return to the Athenians, when they heard of the ruin of their Army in Sicily, they took it most grievously, yet slackt nothing in their Contests with the Lacedemonians about the Sovereignty, but prepar'd a greater Fleet, and let their Money fly Abroad amongst all their Confederates that were resolved to stick by them to the utmost extremity, to gain and keep the Sovereign Power. And to that end they gave full Authority to Four Hundred Persons chosen out of the Citizens to rule and govern the Commonwealth: For in their present Four Hundred chosen to go∣vern in A∣thens. circumstances, they preferr'd an Oligarchy before their former Democracy. But the thing did not in the least answer their Expectations; for they were much more unsuccessful afterwards, for they sent forth Two Generals that were at Dissention between themselves, with a Fleet of Forty Sail against the Enemy. And although the present distressed Condition, and bad state of Affairs with the Athenians call'd aloud for Peace and Concord amongst themselves, yet the Ge∣nerals did all they could to widen the breach, and cherish the Enmities and A∣nimosities they bore one against another. At length sailing to Oropus, unawares and unprepared, they fought with the Peloponesians, where through their care∣lesness The Athe∣nians routed at Sea by the Peloponesians. at the beginning, and their sloath and inadvertency in the heat of the Fight, they lost Two and Twenty Ships, and brought the rest with great difficulty into Eretria. Upon this the Confederates of the Athenians (considering the Overthrow in Ant. Chr. 409. Sicily, and the late ill Management of the Two Commanders) join'd with the La∣cedemonians. Darius likewise the King of Persia, sought earnestly to enter into Darius seeks to make a League with the Lacede∣monians. a League with the Lacedemonians: And to that end, Pharnabazus his Lieutenant upon the Sea-Coasts supply'd the Lacedemonians with Money, and sent for Three Hundred Ships from Phenicia, which he had before ordered to be sent to them to Beotia. And now when the Athenians were involv'd in so many Mischiefs at one time, all Men thought the War at an end. For none had the least hopes that the Athenians could make any further opposition, not for the least moment of time. But the thing had a far different issue from that which was com∣monly suppos'd; for such was the brave Spirit of the Athenians, that the event was quite contrary, which happened upon this occasion. Alcibiades being Ba∣nished from Athens, aided the Lacedemonians for some time in the War, and was very useful to them, being an eloquent Orator, daring and bold, of the most
noble Family, and the greatest Estate of any of the Citizens, and therefore e∣steemed the chief Man of Athens. This Man having a great desire to be re-call'd from his Banishment, did all he could to ingratiate himself into the People of Athens, by doing them some remarkable Service, at such a time as when they seem'd to be in the lowest ebb of Fortune. And therefore having a great interest in Pharnabazus, Darius's Lieutenant, and understanding that he design'd to send Three Hundred Ships to aid the Lacedemonians, prevail'd with Ant. Chr. 409. Alcibiades pre∣vents Aid from the Per∣sians to the Lacedemo∣nians. him to alter his Resolution. For he suggested to him that it was not safe for the King to make the Lacedemonians too strong, nor for the advantage of the Persians: And that it was much more their interest to keep the Ballance e∣qual, that so the Two Commonwealths might be in continual War one with another. Pharnabazus conceiving Alcibiades had given him sound and wholsome Ad∣vice, sends back the Fleet to Phenicia: And thus the Aid intended for the La∣cedemonians, was prevented by Alcibiades. A little time after, he was recall'd, Alcibiades re∣call'd to A∣thens. and made General of the Army, and overcame the Lacedemonians in several Battels, and rais'd up his Country from their low Estate, to their former height of glory. But of these matters we shall speak more fully hereafter, lest we should transgress the due order of an History by too much Anticipa∣tion. CHAP. IV. The Government by Four Hundred abrogated in Athens. The Victory by the Athenians over the Lacedemonians at Sea, between Sestus and Abydus. The Persian Garrison driven out of Antandris by the help of the Lacede∣monians. Twenty Two Years of the Peloponesian War ended. Here Thu∣cydides ends his History. AFter this Year was ended, Theopompus govern'd Athens, and the Romans in∣vested P. 350. Olymp. 92. 2. Ant. Ch. 408. Four Military Tribunes with Consular Dignity, Tiberius Posthumius, Caius Cornelius, Caius Valerius, and Caeso Fabius. At this time the Athenians ab∣rogated the authority of the Four Hundred, and restor'd the Democracy. The∣ramenes Democracy stor'd in A∣thens. was the Author of this Change (a sober and prudent Man) who was the only Person that advis'd the recalling of Alcibiades (by whom they reco∣ver'd their Strength) and by many other good Offices perform'd by Theramenes, to the advantage of the Publick, he gain'd great Authority and Favour with the People. But not long after, the following things happened. At this time, in order to carry on the War, Two Generals were chosen by the Athenians, Thrasyllus and Thrasybulus, who randevouz'd a Fleet at Samos, and there train'd and exercis'd the Souldiers every Day to inure them to Fighting at Sea. Mindarus the Lacedemonian Admiral, in the mean while lay for some time at Miletus, expecting the Aids from Pharnabazus, and hearing that Three Hun∣dred Gallies were arriv'd from Phenicia, was confident now he should be able with so great Supplies, utterly to ruin the Athenian State. But presently af∣ter having intelligence that the Fleet was return'd to Phenicia, through the persuasions of Alcibiades (being now out of all hopes of any assistance from him) he furnish'd some Ships he had with him, from Peloponesus, and from other Foreign Confederates, and sends Dorieus with Thirteen Sail, (which some of the Grecians had lately sent him out of Italy) to Rhodes: For he had heard that some innovations were contriving there; with the rest of the Fleet (to the number of Eighty Three) he made to the Hellespont, because he heard that the Athenian Navy lay at Samos. When the Athenian Commanders saw them pass by, they hasted after them with Threescore Sail. But the Lacedemonians arri∣ving at Chios, the Athenians determined to sail to Lesbos, to be supplied with
more Ships from their Confederates, lest they should be overpower'd by Num∣ber. Ant. Chr. 408. While the Athenians were thus busied, Mindarus with the Lacedemonian Fleet in the Night, with all speed makes for the Hellespont, and the next Day ar∣riv'd at Sigeum. The Athenians hearing that they were sail'd off from Chios, having receiv'd from their Confederates at the present only Three Gallies, made after the Lacedemonians; but when they came to Sigeum, they found the Lace∣demonians were sail'd from thence, save only Three Gallies, which fell forth∣with into their Hands. Loosing from thence, they came to A Town in Thrace. Eleuntis, where they prepar'd themselves for a Sea-Fight. On the other side the Lacedemonians when they saw their Enemies were fitting themselves for a Conflict, they like∣wise for Five Days together imploy'd themselves in exercising and trying their Rowers, and then order'd their Fleet, which consisted of Eighty Eight Sail, into a Line of Battel, and stood towards the Asian Shoar. The Athenians on the other side, drew out theirs all along the Tract lying upon the Borders of Europe; they were indeed fewer in number, but far more skilful in Sea-Affairs. The Lacedemonians plac'd the Syracusians in the Right Wing, commanded by Hermocrates; the Peloponesians in the Left, under the Command of Mindarus. Ant. Ch. 408. On the part of the Athenians, Thrasyllus commanded the Right, and Thrasybu∣lus the Left Wing. At the first the great Contest was for the Tide, each striving to gain that. For a long time therefore they sail'd round one ano∣ther; at length being in a narrow Sea, they fought for a commodious Station. For the Battel being between Sestus and Abydus, the Tide in those Streights P. 351. was a great disadvantage to that side it forc'd upon. But the Athenian Pilots far excelling the other, by that means did notable Service, in many respects for the obtaining of the Victory. For although the Peloponesians exceeded the other in Number of their Ships, and Valour of the Assailants, yet the Skill and Diligence of the Athenian Pilots over-ballanc'd all this, and made it of no effect; for when the Peloponesians with all their Force strove to pierce them, the Athenian Ships were plac'd in such excellent order, that no part of their Ships could be toucht, save only the very end of their Beaks. Upon which, Mindarus considering that they assaulted them in vain, commanded that a few Ships, singly by themselves should cope with the Enemy: But neither in this case was the diligence of the Pilots wanting; for with a little motion they easily declin'd the strokes of the Beaks of their Enemies Ships, and so pierced them in their broad-sides, that they disabled many. At length the Dispute waxing very hot, they not only pierc'd Ant. Ch. 408. one another's Ships with their Beaks, but the Souldiers on the Decks Fought Hand to Hand: But neither side as yet could prevail. And now in the very heat of the Battel, there appear'd beyond a Promontory Five and Twenty Sail sent from Athens. Upon which the Peloponesians being in a Consternation at A Battel at Sea near to Abydus, be∣tween the A∣thenians and Lacedemo∣nians. The Athenians Victors. this suddain reinforcement, tackt about for Abydus, and were closely and eager∣ly pursu'd by the Athenians. And thus ended the Battel, in which all the Ships of the Syracusians, Palleneans and Leucadians, Eight of the Chians, Five of the Corinthians, and Eleven of the Ambraciats were taken by the Athenians, who on the other side lost Five, which were sunk. After this, the Army un∣der Thrasybulus, erected a Trophy in the Promontory, where stands the Monu∣ment of Hecuba; and Messengers were sent to Athens, to give intelligence of the Victory; and he himself sail'd with the whole Fleet to Cyzion: For this City a little before the Battel, had revolted to Pharnabazus, Governour under Darius, and to Clearchus the Lacedemonian General. This Place not being fortify'd, was presently surrender'd, and after the Tribute agreed upon, was paid by them of Cyzium, the Fleet return'd to Sestus. In the mean time, Mindarus the Laoedemonian Admiral, who fled to Abydus, resits the Shipping, and orders Epicles the Spartan to Eubea, to bring to him Gallies from thence; who hastens thither, and gets together Fifty Sail, and Ant. Ch. 408. Mindarus Shipwrackt at Mount Atbos. fothwith made to Sea; but in passing under Mount Athos, was overtaken with such a violent Tempest, that all the Fleet was lost, and not a Man escap'd, save only Twelve. In memory of this, there is an Inscription on a Monument at A City in Peloponesus. Coronea, as Ephorus observes in these Words.
Out of the Fifty Gallies of Three Oars, But poor Twelve Men on Rocks were thrown, Of Athos Mount and sav'd. With Wind Sea roars, Rest of the Men or Ships spares none. About the same time Alcibiades with Thirteen Gallies, sail'd to them that lay at Anchor at Samos. The Athenians had before been inform'd, that (through Alcibiades ar∣rives at Sa∣mos, pleads his innocency. the Persuasions of Alcibiades) Pharnabazus would not send the Three Hundred Ships (as he intended) in aid of the Lacedemonians. Being therefore courteous∣ly receiv'd by them that lay at Samos, he made some Proposals for his Re∣turn, and made many Promises to serve his Country to the utmost of his power, absolutely denying the Crimes laid to his Charge, and complain'd of his hard Fortune that he was compell'd (through the crafty Designs of the Enemies) to make use of his Arms against his Country. His Speech was highly applauded P. 352. by the common Souldiers, and by Messengers reported at Athens; upon which he was absolv'd and created one of their Generals; for considering his Valour and great Interest every where amongst the Grecians, they hop'd it would be much for their advantage if they again receiv'd him into his favour. And be∣sides, Theramenes one of the greatest authority in the Commonwealth, a Man eminent for Wisdom and Prudence as ever any before him, advis'd the recal∣ling Ant. Chr. 408. of Alcibiades. When the Messengers return'd to Samos with this account, Alcibiades joining Nine Ships more to these Thirteen he brought with him, sail'd to Halicarnassus, and there forc'd the City to pay him a great Sum of Money. And then making great devastations in An Island in the Archi∣pelago, call'd otherwise Co. Meropides, he returns with much Spoil to Samos; and there divides the Spoil as a common Booty, not on∣ly amongst his own Souldiers, but amongst them in Samos, and by that means gains them all over to his interest. About this time, Antandros with the assistance of the Lacedemonians, drove the Garrison out of their City, and so restor'd their Country to their Liberty: For the Spartans being angry at Pharnabazus, for sending the Three Hundred Ships into Phenicia, entred into League with the Antandrians. Here Thucydides breaks off his History, containing in Eight Books (which Thucydides ends his Hi∣story. Xenophon con∣tinues Thucy∣dides. Ant. Chr. 408. some divide into Nine) the Affairs of Two and Twenty Years. Xenophon and Theopompus begin theirs, where Thucydides ends. Xenophon continues his History for the term of Forty Eight Years; but Theopompus goes on with the Affairs of Greece Seventeen Years, and ends his History at the Sea-Fight at Cnidus, compriz'd in Twelve Books. Thus stood the state of Affairs in Greece and Asia at this time. In the mean time the Romans were in War with the Aequi, and entred their Country with a great Army, and besieg'd their City call'd Volas. Bolasus, and took it.
CHAP. V. Commotions in Sicily. The Carthaginians invited thither by the Aegistines. A Sea-Fight at Darclanum between the Athenians and Lacedemonians. A Sedition in Corcyra. The Sea-Fight at Cyzicum; and at Cleros by Land, wherein the Athenians were Victors. THE former Year ended, Glaucippus was created Archon at Athens, and at Olymp. 92. 3. An. M. 3561. Ant. Ch. 407. Rome, Marcus Cornelius, and Lucius Furius were again chosen Consuls. A∣bout this time the Aegistines (who had confederated with the Athenians) after the War was ended in Sicily against the Syracusians) were in great fear (as they had just cause) lest the Siculi should revenge themselves upon them for the ma∣ny acts of Hostility they committed against them. And therefore when the Se∣linuntines made War upon them concerning some Boundaries that were in Dis∣pute, they submitted, lest the Syracusians should take that occasion to join with the Selinuntines, and so hazard the loss of their Country. But when they en∣croached farther upon their Territories than was agreed upon, the Aegistines desir'd aid of the Carthaginians, and freely offer'd their City to their Protection. When the Embassadors came to Carthage, and had deliver'd their Message to the Senate, the Carthaginians were much perplexed what to resolve: The desire of so convenient a City strongly inclin'd them upon one hand, and the fear of The Cartha∣ginians side with the Ae∣gistines. Ant. Ch. 407. the Syracusians who had lately destroy'd so powerful an Army of the Athenians, discourag'd them on the other. But at length their Ambition to gain the City previal'd. The Answer therefore to the Embassadors was, that they would send them aid. For the management of this Affair (in case it should break out into a War) they made Hannibal General, who was then according to their Law chief Magistrate of Carthage. He was the Grandchild of Amilcar (who was kill'd at Himera at the Battel fought with Gelon) and Son of Geson, who for killing of his Father, was Banish'd, and liv'd at Selinunta. Hannibal therefore in regard he bore a natural Hatred against the Grecians, and desired by his own Valour to wipe off the stain of his Family, was very earnest to make himself P. 353. remarkable by some eminent Service for the advantage of his Country. There∣fore when he understood that the Selinuntines were not satisfy'd with that part of Land which was yielded to them, he together with the Aegistines sends Em∣bassadors to the Syracusians, referring the Controversie to their Determination; in Words seeming to propose all things fair and just; but in Truth with hopes that if the Selinuntines should decline the Arbitration, the Syracusians would cast off their Confederacy and League with them. But when the Selinuntines (who sent likewise their Embassadors) refused to stand to their Decision, and strong∣ly opposed both the Carthaginean and Aegistean Embassadors, the Syracusians were at length resolved both to be at peace with the Carthaginians, and like∣wise to stand to their League with the Selinuntines. Upon which, when the Embassadors were return'd, the Carthaginians sent to the Aegistines Five Thou∣sand Men from Africa, and Eight Hundred from Campania. These were for∣merly Ant. Chr. 407. hired by the Calcideans for the assistance of the Athenians against the Syracusians, but after their overthrow sailing back, they knew not under whom to serve. The Carthaginians therefore bought them all Horses, and giving them large Pay, plac'd them in a Garrison at Aegista. But the Selinuntines who were then both Rich and Populous, valu'd not the Aegistines one jot. At the first with a well form'd Army, they spoil'd the Country next ad∣joining to them; at length in regard they far exceeded the Aegistines in num∣ber, they despis'd them, and dispers'd themselves, ravaging all over the Coun∣try. The Aegistean Commanders watching their opportunity, with the help of the Carthagineans and Campanians, set upon them unawares: And the Assault being sudden and unexpected, they easily routed and put them to flight. They kill'd a Thousand, and took all their Baggage. After this Fight, both sides sent forth their Embassadors, the Selinuntines to the Syracusians, and the Aegi∣stines
to the Carthaginians for Aid; which being readily promis'd on both sides, The Cartha∣ginian War in Sicily. this was the beginning of the Carthaginian War. The Carthaginians foreseeing the greatness of the War, committed the whole management thereof to Han∣nibal, giving him power to raise what Forces he thought sit, they themselves Ant. Chr. 407. in the mean time providing all things necessary. Hannibal all that Summer, and the next Winter, raises many Mercenary Souldiers in Spain, and lists a great number of his own Citizens; and besides these, raises Men in every City throughout all Africa, and equips out a Fleet, intending the next Spring to pass over all his Forces into Sicily. In this Condition were the Affairs of Si∣cily at that time. In the mean time See p. 61. c. 4. Dorieus the Rhodean Admiral of the Italian Gallies, as soon as he had quieted the Tumult in Rhodes, passed over to the Hellespont, with a purpose to join Mindarus, who then lay at Abydus, getting together from all Parts, what Vessels he could from the Peloponesian Confederates. When Dorieus was come as far as Sigeum of Troas, the Athenians (who then lay at Anchor at Sestos) having intelligence of his Course, made out against him with their whole Fleet of Seventy Four Sail. Dorieus altogether ignorant of the Prepara∣tions The Fight at Dardanum. against him, sails on securely: But when he understood what a powerful Navy was making towards him, he was in great Consternation, and seeing no other means left to escape, fled to Dardanum, where he landed his Men; and placing a Garrison in the City, he forthwith furnish'd the Place with abundance of Arms, and plac'd his Souldiers, some upon the Foredecks of his Vessels, and others all along upon the Shoar. But the Athenians making up suddenly Ant. Ch. 407. P. 354. upon them; endeavour'd to hale off the Ships from the Shoar; and by pres∣sing upon the Enemy in so many Places at once, they almost wearied them out. Mindarus the Peloponesian Admiral, hearing the Distress Dorieus was in, forth∣with set Sail from Abidos with his whole Fleet, and made for the Promon∣tory of Dardanum, with Fourscore and Four Sail to assist him. The Land Forces likewise of Pharnabazus were near at Hand, to support the Lacedemonian Fleet. When the Navies came near one to another, both sides prepar'd to Fight. Mindarus commanding a Fleet of Ninety Seven Sail, plac'd the Syracu∣sians in the Left Wing, and he himself commanded the Right. On the Athe∣nians, Thrasybulus led the Right, and Thrasyllus the Left Wing. The Lines of Battel being thus disposed on both sides, and the Sign given by the Admirals, the Trumpets all at once sounded a Charge. And now the Rowers neglect∣ing nothing on their part, and the Pilots every where minding with all dili∣gence their several Helms, a Bloody Fight began. For as often as the Ships forc'd forwards to pierce one another, so often did the Pilots at the same in∣stant of time carefully move and turn the Ship, that the Stroaks only fell upon the Beaks of the Vessels. The Souldiers upon the Decks when at first they saw their Broad-sides lye open to the Assaults of the Enemy, began to be discourag'd, but then again presently when they discern'd that the Charge made by the E∣nemy upon them was eluded by the Art of the Pilot, their Spirits and Courage Ant. Chr. 407. reviv'd. Neither were they less active, who fought upon the Decks, for they who were at a distance, ply'd the Enemy continually with Darts, so that the Place where they fell, seem'd to be covered over. They who fought at Hand, threw their Launces one at another, sometimes piercing through the Bodies of their Opposers, and sometimes the Bodies of the Pilots themselves. If the Ships fell fowl upon one another, then they disputed it with their Spears: And many times when they came close, they would board one another, and fight it out with their Swords. What with the doleful Complaints of them that were hastening in to the Succour of those that were worsted, and the triumphing Shouts of them that were Conquerors, every Place was full of Noise and Con∣fusion. The Fight continu'd a long time with great obstinacy on both sides, till on a sudden Alcibiades (who was meerly by chance sailing from Samos to the Hellespont with Twenty Ships) came in view. Before he came near, both sides hop'd to have Succour from them. And both being confident, they fought with more Resolution on both sides. When he drew near (the Lacedemonians being still in the dark) he presently set up a Purple Flag from his own Ship as a Sign to the Athenians, as it was before order'd and agreed. Upon which, the Lacedemonians in a great Fright forthwith fled. But the Athenians incou∣raged with this happy success, pursu'd them with all their might, and presently Ant. Chr. 407.
took Ten of their Ships; but afterwards a great Storm arose, which much ob∣structed them in the Pursuit: For the Sea was so raging, that the Pilots were not able to manage the Helm, nor could they make any impression with the Beaks of their Ships upon the Enemy, because the Ships aim'd at, were born back by the violence of the Waves. At length the Lacedemonians came safe to Shoar, and March'd to the Land-Ar∣my of Pharnabazus: The Athenians in the mean time endeavour'd to gain the Empty Ships, and press'd on with great Valour and Confidence through many hazards P. 355. and difficulties; but being kept off by the Persian Army, they were forc'd to return to Sestus. Pharnabazus was the more earnest in opposing the Athenians, to the end he might convince the Lacedemonians that he had no ill Design against them, when he sent back the Three Hundred Gallies to Phenicia: For he told them he did it, because at that time the King of Egypt and Arabia had some Designs upon Phenicia. After this issue of the Fight at Sea, the Athenian Fleet arriv'd at Sestus in the Night: And as soon as it was Day, and all their Fleet was got up together, they set up another Trophy near to the former. Min∣darus arriv'd at Abydus about the First watch of the Night, and falls a repairing his shatter'd and disabled Ships, and sends to the Lacedemonians for Supplies both of Land and Sea-Forces. For whilst his Fleet was repairing, he determin'd with his Land Souldiers to join with Pharnabazus, and to besiege the Confede∣rate Ant. Chr. 407. Cities of the Athenians in Asia: The Of Calcis in Eubea, now Negropont. Calcideans, and almost all the Eu∣beans had deserted the Athenians, and therefore were now in great fear (in regard they inhabited an Island) lest the Athenians being Masters at Sea, would invade them; they solicited therefore the Beotians to assist them to stop up Euripus, Euripus a strait of the Sea between Beotia and Eubea. by which Eubea might be annexed to the Continent of Beotia. To which the Beotians agreed, beause by this means Eubea would be but as the Continent to them, and an Island to others. Hereupon all the Cities set upon the Work, and every one strove with all diligence to perfect it. And Orders were sent forth not only to the Citizens, but all Foreigners and Strangers, to attend upon the Business; and all Hands were to be at Work, that it might be with all speed effected. The Mould began at Calcis in Eubea on the one side, and at Aulis in Beotia on the other: For here it was the narrowest. In these straits the Sea was very boisterous and rugged, but after this Work much more unquiet and raging, the Passage being made so very strait and narrow: For there was left only room for one Ship to pass. There were Forts built on both sides upon the extremities of the Mould, and Wooden Bridges made over the Cur∣rent Ant. Chr. 407. for Communication. Theramenes, indeed at the first being sent thither with Thirty Sail, endea∣vour'd to hinder the Project, but being over-power'd with the Number of those that defended them that were imploy'd, he gave over his Design, and made away towards the Islands. And purposing to relieve the Confederate Cities who were under the burden of Contributions, he wasted and spoiled the Ene∣mies Country, and return'd loaden with much Spoil and Plunder. He went likewise to some of the Confederate Cities, and impos'd upon them great Mulcts and Fines, because he understood that they were secretly contriving some Changes and Innovations. Thence he sail'd to An Island in the Ae∣gean Sea. Paros, and freeing the People from the Oligarchy there, he restor'd the Democracy, and exacted a great Sum of Mo∣ney from them who set up the Oligarchy. About the same time, a cruel and bloody Sedition arose in Corcyra, which is A Sedition in Corcyra. said to be occasion'd through private Grudges and Animosities, as much as any other Cause. In no City of that time, were ever such horrid Murthers of the Citizens committed, nor ever was more Rage to the destruction of Mankind heard of: For once before this, in their quarrelling one with another, there Ant. Ch. 407. were Fifteen Hundred Slaughter'd, and all of them the chiefest of the Citizens. But these Murders following were much more miserable, the Sparks of old Dis∣cords being blown up into a devouring Flame: For they in authority at Corcyra, aspiring to an Oligarchy, sided with the Lacedemonians, but the People favour'd P. 356. the Athenians. These Two People contending for the Sovereignty, took different measures: The Lacedemonians set up an Oligarchy in the Cities of their Confederates; but the Athenians establish'd every where in theirs, a Democracy.
The Corcyrians therefore discerning that the great Men of their City intended to betray them into the Hands of the Lacedemonians, sent to Athens for a Gar∣rison, for the defence of their City; upon which, Conon the Athenian Admiral, sails to Corcyra, and leaves there Six Hundred Messenians drawn out from Nau∣pactus; and passing from thence with the Fleet, anchor'd at Juno's Temple. In the mean time, Six Hundred of them that were for the Democracy, rush'd into the Forum, and forthwith set upon them that sided with the Lacedemonians, casting some into Prisons, killing others, and driving above a Thousand out of the City. And because they feared the number and strength of the Exiles, they manumitted all the Slaves, and infranchiz'd all the Strangers. The Exiles pre∣sently fly into the Continent to Epirus, lying over against them. A few Days after, some of the People who favour'd them that were ejected, enter'd the Ant. Chr. 407. Forum in Arms, and sending for the Exiles into the City, laid all at stake, and fought it out. When Night parted them, Proposals were made for a Pacifi∣cation, which taking effect, they all continu'd in their Country with equal Pri∣viledges. And this was the issue of the flight of the Exiles from Corcyra. At the same time Archelaus King of Macedonia march'd against the Pyd∣neans, who had revolted, and besieg'd their City with a great Army; to whose assistance Theramenes came with some Ships; but the Siege continuing longer than he expected, he return'd A City in Macedonia. Pydnea taken. to Thrace to Thrasybulus the Admiral of the whole Fleet. But Archelaus at length takes Pydnea after a strait Siege, and removes the Inhabitants Twenty Furlongs further from the Sea. The Winter now near an end, Mindarus randezouzes his Shipping from all Quarters; for many came both from Peloponesus, and other Confederates. The Athenian Generals who lay at Sestus, hearing of the great Preparations of their Enemies, were in no small fear lest if they should be set upon with their whole Fleet at once, they should lose all their Navy; and therefore hailing down those Ships they had laid up at Sestus, they sail'd round Chersonesus, and An∣chor'd at Cardia, and thence sent to Thrace to Thrasibulus and Theramenes to come to them with the whole Fleet with all speed: Alcibiades likewise they re-call'd from Lesbos. So that now the Fleet was brought together with that Ex∣pedition, that the Admirals long'd to fight, and put all to the hazard of a Battel. In the mean time Mindarus the Lacedemonian Admiral sails in a direct Course for Cyzicum, and there lands all his Forces, and besieges the City. Pharnabazus joins him with a great Army, and by his Assistance takes the Place by Storm. Upon which the Athenian Admirals were resolv'd to make for Cyzicum; and to that end they advanced with their whole Fleet, and sailing round Chersonesus, arriv'd at Eleuntis. Then they contriv'd all they could to pass by Abydus in the Night, lest the Enemy should have intelligence of the number of their Ships: Sailing thence to An Island in the Propontis. Preconnesus, they there lay at Anchor all Night. The next day they landed their Men in the Territories at Cyzicum, with a command to Chareas (who led the Army) to march strait to Cyzicum. The Fleet was divided The Fight at Cyzicum. P. 357. into Three Squadrons, one under the Command of Alcibiades, another under Theramenes, and the Third commanded by Thrasybulus. Alcibiades made out with his Squadron far from the rest, and dar'd the Lacedemonians to Fight. Thera∣menes and Thrasybulus us'd their utmost endeavour to close in the Enemy, so as to prevent their Sailing back to the City. When Mindarus saw only that part of the Fleet which was with Alcibiades, (having no intelligence of the rest) he despised them, and with Fourscore Sail (in great Confidence) attacks them. When he came near to Alcibiades, the Athenians (as they were commanded) counterfeited a Flight: Whereupon the Peloponesians with great joy hotly pur∣su'd them as Conquerors: But when Alcibiades saw that he had decoy'd and drawn them far off from the City, he lifts up his Sign from his Ship. At which, all his Squadron at one instant tackt about full in front upon the Ene∣my: Ant. Chr. 407. Theramenes and Thrasybuls in the mean time making to the City, left them no way to return. Upon this, they that were with Mindarus, considering the strength of their Enemies, and perceiving how they were outwitted, were in a great Consternation. At length the Athenians appearing on every side, and the return of the Peloponesians to the City intercepted, Mindarus was forc'd to fly to a Place upon that Coast call'd Cleros, where Pharnabazus was encamp'd with his Army. But Alcibiades making a hot Pursuit after them, sunk and took many
of their Ships, and forcing the rest upon the Shoar, endeavour'd to hale them thence with grapling Irons. Upon this, there was a greater Slaughter among the Athenians, in regard the Army upon the Shoar assisted the Peloponesians. And indeed the Athenians (lifted up with their Victory) evidenc'd more Valour than Prudence; for the Peloponesians far exceeded them in number; and the Army of Pharnabazus assisted the Lacedemonians with great resolution, and fight∣ing from Land, had the advantage of a certain and fixt station. But when Thrasybulus saw the aid that was given to the Enemy from the Land, he landed the rest of his Men with all speed, in order to succour Alcibiades; and com∣manded Theramenes, that with all expedition he should join the Foot under the Command of Chares, and fight the Enemy at Land. Whilst these Orders were Ant. Chr. 407. in executing, Mindarus the Lacedemonian General, bore all the brunt in preser∣ving of the Ships Alcibiades had laid hold on. Clearchus the Spartan, with the Peloponesians and Mercenary Persians fought with Thrasybulus, who for some con∣siderable time, with his Seamen and Archers bore up with great Valour against the Enemy, killing many of them, but not without great loss of his own: And just when the Athenians were inclos'd round with the Souldiers of Pharnabazus, on a sudden falls in Theramenes with his own and Chares his Foot. Upon this, those with Thrasybulus, who were before almost spent, and quite out of Heart, gather'd Courage; so the Fight was renew'd, and continu'd very hot and sharp a long time after; till the first that gave ground were the Persians, and by little and little their whole Body began to break in pieces. At length the Pe∣loponesians with Clearchus being forsaken of their Fellows (after many Wounds gi∣ven and receiv'd, and Slaughters on both sides) were forc'd likewise to give Ground. These being thus broken and dispers'd, Theramenes hasted to assist Alcibiades, who was sorely press'd in another part. And though now all the P. 358. Athenian Forces were join'd together, yet Mindarus was not at all startled at the approach of Theramenes, but divides the Peloponesians into Two Bodies, and commands the one to ingage the fresh Supply, and keeping the other with him∣self, earnestly adjures them that they would not stain the honour of the Spartan Name; especially when the business was now to be disputed with Alcibiades by Ant. Chr. 407. a Fight at Land. And now the Battel for the safety of the Ships was renew'd with great Gallantry; and Mindarus in the Head of his Men, exposing himself to all manner of Dangers, beats down many of his Enemies; but at length was kill'd by the Souldiers of Alcibiades, though he fought with that Valour as was agreeable to the fame and glory of his Country. Upon his Death the Pelopo∣nesians and their consederates all as one Man fled with great consternation. The Athenians pursu'd them for a while, but understanding that Pharnabazus was hastning after them with a great Party of Horse, they return'd to their Ships; and having regain'd the * City, they set up Two Trophies, one for their Vi∣ctory † Cyzicum. at Sea near the Island Polydorus, as it is call'd, the other for that at Land, where the Enemy first began to fly. The Peloponesians who were left to guard the City, with those that escap'd out of the Battel, march'd away to Pharna∣bazus his Camp. The Athenians being now possess'd of all the Ships, and of a great number of Prisoners, were loaden with abundance of Spoil, the Fruits of the Conquest of Two Potent Armies. When the News of this Victory was brought to Athens, the Success was so unexpected after all their former Losses, that the People were surpriz'd with Joy at such a happy turn of Fortune, and offered Sacrifices to the Gods, and instituted Festivals: And upon this was rais'd a Thousand-Foot, and a Hundred Horse of the most Valiant of the Citizens for the carrying on of the War. The City likewise sent to Alcibiades a Supply of Thirty Sail, to incourage him with greater Confidence (especially now when they were Masters at Sea) to set upon the Cities who sided with the Lacedemonians. Ant. Chr. 407.
CHAP. VI. The Spartans seek for Peace. The Speech of Endius. The Athenians re∣fuse. THe Lacedemonians receiving certain intelligence of their rout at Cyzicum, sent Embassadors to Athens to treat of Peace, the chief of whom was Endius. When he was admitted Audience, he came in, and spoke in the La∣conick manner, in a short and pithy Stile; whose Oration I judge not fitting to omit. The Oration of Endius. WE have determin'd to make Proposals of Peace to you, O ye Athenians, upon these Conditions, That the Cities gain'd on either side be re∣tain'd: That the Garrisons every where be dismiss'd: That all Prisoners be releas'd, one Athenian for one Laconian: For we are not ignorant that the War is very mischievous to us both, but much more to you, which I shall make ap∣parent from the things themselves, if you hearken a while to what I say. For our use all Peloponesus is improv'd and sow'd, but of Attica which is not so large, you have but a part in Tillage. This War has brought over many Confederates to the Laconians; on the contrary, the Athenians have lost as many as we have gain'd. The richest King of the World maintains our Ar∣mies, but you force the charge of the War from the poorest of the Nations. Our Souldiers therefore being so well paid, fight chearfully, but yours (being Ant. Chr. 407. forc'd every one to bear their own Charges) seek to avoid both the Toyl and the Expence. Moreover, when our Fleet is out at Sea, we are more in want of Ships than Men; but the greatest part of your Men are in your Ships. And that which is most considerable, although we are inferior to you at Sea, yet by the Agreement of all we are your Superiors at Land; for the Spartan knows not how to fly in a Battel at Land. On the other hand you fight at Sea, not with any hopes to gain the Sovereignty at Land, but to preserve your selves from utter Destruction. Now it remains that I give you satis∣faction, why when we thus far excel you in feats of Arms, we should seek to you for Peace. In truth, though I cannot say, that Sparta has gain'd any P. 359. thing by this War, yet I dare affirm their Damage has not been so great as that of the Athenians. But it's the height of folly, to take pleasure in com∣mon Calamities, because our Enemies are Fellow Sufferers; whereas it had been much better neither of us had had the Experience. Neither does the content and satisfaction by the destruction of thine Enemy, ballance the sor∣row that is conceiv'd at the loss of thy Friend. But it is not for these Rea∣sons only that we desire to put an end to the War, but we are prompted hereunto by the Custom of our Country; for when we saw by these Wars so many horrid Murthers, and so much Blood lamentably shed, we conceiv'd it our duty to make it manifest both to the Gods and Men, that we are the least concern'd in the causing of it. When the Laconian had spoke this and some other things to the like effect, the more moderate of the Athenians were inclin'd to Peace; but those who were accustom'd to sow the Seeds of Dissention, and to make a private gain of the publick Disorders, were for War. Of this Opinion was Cleopho, a Man of great interest among the People, who coming into the Assembly after he had Ant. Chr. 407. said many things pertinent to the business in hand, he chiefly incourag'd the People, by magnifying the greatness of their late Successes, and urging all in such a manner as if Fortune (contrary to her usual Custom) had now forgot to . dispose and order the Successes of War, by turns and mutual Changes to each
side. But the Athenians at length ru'd this mischievous Advice which was so little to their advantage; for being thus deceiv'd with flattering Discourses fram'd only to please, they were brought so low, that they could never after re∣cover their former Strength and Grandeur; but these things shall be hereafter related in their due Place. The Athenians therefore (being thus puff'd up with their Victories, and being very confident because Alcibiades was their General) concluded they should recover their former Esteem and Reputation in a short time. CHAP. VII. Hannibal the Carthaginian invades Sicily. The miserable destruction of Se∣linunte. The ruin likewise of Himera. The Acts of Hermocrates in Si∣cily. THE Affairs of this Year thus ended, Diocles was chosen Magistrate of A∣thens, Olymp. 92. 4. An. Mu. 3563. Ant. Chr. 406. and at Rome, Quintus Fabius and Caius Furius were Consuls. At that time Hannibal the Carthaginian General musters an Army out of Spain and A∣frica, and puts them on Borad Threescore long Gallies, and provides Fifteen Hundred Transport Ships, to convey Provision, Engines, Weapons, and all o∣ther things necessary for a Siege. Passing over the African Sea with his Navy, he arriv'd at Lilibeum, a Promontory in Sicily over against Africa. About the same time, some Selinuntine Horsemen being in those Parts, when they saw so great a Fleet make towards them, speeded away in all haste, to give intelli∣gence to their Countrymen of the Approach of the Enemy. Upon which, the Selinuntines dispatch'd Messengers to Syracuse, to desire Aid. In the mean time Hannibal landed his Army, and markt out his Camp, beginning at a Pond call'd at that time Lilibeum; but many Years after, it gave name to a Town built in that Place. Hannibal's whole Army (as Ephorus relates) consisted of Two Hundred Thou∣sand Foot, and Four Thousand Horse. Timeus says, they were not much above an Hundred Thousand. He drew up all his Ships into the Creek near Motys, intending the Syracusians should hereby be assur'd, that he invaded not Sicily with a design to make War upon them either by Sea or Land. Then being join'd by the Aegestines and other Confederates, he rais'd his Camp from Li∣libeum, and march'd towards Selinunte. When he came to the River Mazarus, he takes Emporium at the first Assault. Approaching afterwards nearer to the City, he divides his Army into Two Parts, and encamping round the City, raises his Engines and Batteries, and begins to assault the Town with great Vigour: For he built Six high Towers, and brought as many Battering Rams P. 360. to the Walls, and with the multitude of his Darters and Slingers forc'd the Citizens from the Forts and Bulwarks. The Selinuntines had been now a long time disus'd from Sieges; and in regard they were the only People of Sicily Ant. Chr. 406. that sided with the Carthaginians against Gelon, they little expected they should have been brought into such Dangers by them whom they had so far engag'd; and therefore were in great Consternation and Amazement, seeing the abun∣dance of Engines, the greatness of the Army and imminent Danger wherewith they were inviron'd. Yet they were not altogether without hope; but expect∣ing speedy Aid from Syracuse and other Confederate Cities, all the People as one Man join'd together, and drove the Enemy from the Walls. The Young Men couragiously slighted all Hazards: The Old Men ran from Place to Place upon the Walls to furnish the other from time to time with all things neces∣sary for the defence, beseeching them not to suffer the Enemy to enter. The Women and Children brought Meat and Weapons to them who were fight∣for their Country, not regarding that Modesty and Sobriety which in times
of Peace they were commendable for: The Fear was so great, that even Wo∣men were regardless of the Dangers. Hannibal promis'd the Plunder of the Town to his Souldiers, applies his En∣gines to the Walls, and with the best of his Souldiers (whom he reliev'd from time to time with fresh Supplies) begins the Assault. At the first Word of Com∣mand, at one instant the Trumpets sounded to Battel, and the whole Army with a great Shout ran up to their several Posts; the Walls were batter'd by the Rams, and the Souldiers from the High Towers, gall'd the Selinuntines with Ante Chr. 406. their Darts: For the Selinuntines injoying a long Peace, their Hands were not inur'd to Action, and therefore were easily driven from thence, the Wooden Towers being far higher than they. In the mean time, part of the Wall be∣ing batter'd down, the Campanians willing to make themselves remarkable, on a sudden, rush'd into the City, and at the first greatly terrify'd those that were in that part of it; but presently many coming in to assist them, the Enemy was repuls'd with great Loss: For the Rubbish lying in the way where they enter'd, when they were driven back to the Breach, they were so cumber'd, that many were cut off. Night approaching, the Carthaginians drew off. In the mean time the Selinuntines sent forth some Horsemen in the Night to Agrigentum, Gela and Syracuse, to desire aid with all speed; for that they were not able any longer to stand it out against so great an Army. The Geleans and Agrigentines thought it best to wait for the Aids from Syracuse, that with conjoin'd Forces they might set upon the Carthaginians. But the Syracusians ha∣ving certain intelligence that Selinunte was Besieg'd, without delay struck a Peace with the Chalcideans (with whom they were then in War) and gather'd all their Forces together from every Place. But because they suppos'd that the City was only Besieg'd, and not in any danger to be suddenly taken, they pro∣tracted the time to make the greater Preparation. In the mean time, Hannibal as soon as it was light, renew'd the Assault on every side of the Town, and presently possess'd himself of that part of the Wall where the Breach was made, Ant. Ch. 406. and of another Breach made in another part near adjoining; and when he had remov'd the Rubbish, with the choicest of his fresh Men he sets upon the Seli∣nuntines, and forces them by degrees to give Ground, but was not able quite to break them, who now had all at stake. Many fell on both sides. The Cartha∣ginians P. 361. were still supply'd with fresh Men, but the Selinuntines had none to re∣inforce them. And thus the Assault was renew'd every Day, for the space of Nine Days, with great Resolution and Courage, and much loss on both sides. At length when the Spaniards. Iberians began to enter at the Breaches, the Women from the tops of the Houses, fill'd all Places with Cries and Lamentations. And the Selinuntines now judging the Town to be lost, endeavour'd to block up all the nar̄row Passages and Streets, and by that means the Contest continu'd a long time. But while the Carthaginians were making their way by force, the Wo∣men and Children from the Tops of the Houses mawl'd them with Tiles and Stones; so that the Carthaginians for a long time were sorely gall'd, not being able to come up together in those narrow Passages, the Walls on both sides being strongly man'd; and besides being so vex'd with those that cast down Stones upon the Tops of the Houses. This throwing down of Darts and other things from the Roofs of the Houses, continu'd till Evening: But the Cartha∣ginians still renewing the Fight, by pouring fresh Men into the City, the other were tir'd out, their number decreasing, and their Enemies still increasing, so that the Selinuntines were at last forc'd to desert the Straits. The City thus taken, nothing was to be seen but weeping and wailing a∣mong Selinunte ta∣ken and raz'd. the Grecians; and on the other side among the Barbarians, exultation and . Ant. Chr. 406. shouts of Victory: Those were terrify'd with the greatness of their Misery every where before their Eyes; These now Victorious, commanded to kill and destroy where and whom they pleas'd: At length the Selinuntines got in a Body together in the Market-Place, and there fought it out to the last Man. The Barbarians raging in all Parts of the City, rifled all the Houses: The Persons The cruelty of the Car∣thaginians in Selinunte. they found there, they either burnt them and their Houses together, or drag∣ging them into the Streets, without any respect to Age or Sex, whether they were Women or Children, Young or old, without the least pity or commisera∣tion, they put them all to the Sword, and after the barbarous manner of their
Country, they mangled their Carcases; some carry'd about multitudes of Hands tied round their Bodies; others in Ostentation, bore about the Heads of the Slain upon the Points of their Swords and Spears. They only spar'd Wives who fled with their Children to the Temples; and to these only was Favour shew'd, not out of any Compassion to the Miserable, but out of a fear they had lest the Women being desperate, without any hopes of Mercy, should burn the Temples, and by that means they should lose the Riches and Trea∣sures that were laid up in those Places. For these Barbarians so far exceed all other Men in Impiety, that whereas others (lest they should offend the Deity) always spare them who fly to their Temples, the Carthaginians on the contrary moderate their Cruelty towards their Enemies, for that very end and purpose that they may have a better opportunity sacrilegiously to rob the Temples. The razing and ruining of the City continu'd till late in the Night; all the Houses were burnt or pull'd down; every Place was full of Blood and dead Bodies, Sixteen Thousand being there put to the Sword, and more than Five Ant. Chr. 406. Thousand carry'd away Captives. The Grecians who sided with the Cartha∣ginians, seeing the inconstancy of the things of this Life, greatly commiserated the condition of these miserable People; for the Matrons in want of Food and Sustenance amongst the Flouts and Jeers of an insulting Enemy, pass'd all that Night in sorrow and sadness. Some of them were forc'd to be Eye-Witnesses of the sufferings of their Daughters in such a kind as is shameful to relate; for the cruel Lust of the Barbarians sparing neither Girls nor Virgins grown up, afflicted these poor People with unspeakable Misery. The Mothers P. 362. while they considered the Slavery they were to undergo in Lybia, and how they and their Children were subjected in great Contempt and Disgrace to the brutish Lusts of domineering Masters (whose Language they understood not, and whose Actions were altogether Beastly) were in Grief and Sorrow even to see their Children alive; for every Injury and Disgrace offer'd to them, affected them, as if a Dagger had pierc'd their own Hearts, when they were not able to yield them any other Relief but Groans and Lamentations; in so much as they accounted their Parents and Kindred that had lost their Lives in the defence of their Country, to be happy, whose Eyes saw not those Brutish and Beastly acts of Barbarous Cruelty. There were notwithstanding, Two Thousand Six Hundred that escap'd and fled to Agrigentum, where they were received with all manner of Humanity and Tenderness; for the Agrigentines distributed to every Family, Corn out of the Publick Stores, and desir'd every private Person (who yet were very ready on their own accord) liberally to Ant. Chr. 406. supply them with all necessaries for their Sustenance. While these things were doing, Three Thousand of the best Souldiers sent from Syracuse to assist the Selinuntines, came to Agrigentum. But when they heard that the City was taken, they sent Embassadors to Hannibal, to demand the Redemption of the Prisoners, and that he would forbear robbing of the Temples of the Gods. They return'd with this Answer from Hannibal, that in regard the Selinuntines were not able to preserve their own Liberty, they were now justly brought into the condition of Slaves. That the Gods were angry at the Inhabitants, and therefore had forsaken Selinunte. But when they sent Empediones Embassador a Second time, Hannibal restor'd to him all his Estate, because he always favour'd the Carthaginians, and sometime before the City was taken, had advised the Citizens not to withstand: He pardon'd likewise all those Prisoners that were of his Kindred, and permitted those that fled to A∣grigentum to repeople the City, and till the Lands, upon paying Tribute to the Carthaginians. Thus was this City taken, Two Hundred and Fifty Two Years after the Building of it. After Hannibal had demolish'd it, he march'd away with all his Army to∣ward Himera, with a longing desire to ruin this City. For this Town occa∣sion'd the Banishment of his Father; and here it was that his Grandfather A∣milcar Himera Be∣sieg'd. was routed by Gelon, who kill'd an Hundred and Fifty Thousand of the Carthaginians, and took almost as many Prisoners. In revenge whereof, Hannibal speeds away with Forty Thousand Men, and incamps upon an Hill at some distance from the City, and with the rest of his Army (to whom join'd the Sicilians and Sicanians, to the number of Twenty Thousand Men) he Be∣sieges Ant. Chr. 406.
the Place, and Batters the Walls with his Engines in several Places at once; and with fresh Succours even wearies out the Besieg'd; to the effecting of which, the forwardness of his Men (through the late Successes) was of no small advantage. Whilst he was undermining the Walls, he supported them with great Pieces of Timber, and then setting them on Fire, a great part of the Walls on a sudden tumbled down; upon which there was a sharp Con∣flict: These striving to enter by force, the other in dread of undergoing the same fate and destruction with them of Selinunte; so that the Besieged endea∣vouring with all their might, to defend their Parents, Children and Country, beat the Barbarians off, and with all speed repair'd the Wall. For there had before come to their assistance Four Thousand Syracusians, and some other Con∣federates from Agrigentum, under the Command of Diocles the Syracusian. Then Night coming on, it gave a check to the Fury of the Besiegers, and so there was an intermission of the Assault. But as soon as it was Day, the Besieged resolving not to be pen'd up as the P. 363. Selinuntines were (through Sloathfulness) plac'd the Guards upon the Walls, and with the rest of their own, and the Forces of their Confederates, to the number of Ten Thousand, made a Sally, and broke in on a suddain upon the Enemy. Whereupon the Barbarians were struck with Terror and Amazement, conceiving that all the Confederates of the Besieg'd were come to their Relief. Ant. Chr. 406. The Salliants therefore being far more daring and . skilful in their Weapons, and especially the last hope of their safety lying in the good Success of the present Engagement, they cut off all those that first opposed them. And though the whole force of the Barbarians in . great disorder and confusion fell upon them (for they never suspected that the Besiegd durst ever have attempted any such thing) yet they were under no small disadvantages; for Fourscore Thou∣sand Men running in Confusion together, beat down one another, and more incommodated themselves than their Enemies. The Himereans in the mean time being in sight of their Parents, Children, and all their Friends and Re∣lations upon the Walls, exposed themselves without fear, to all dangers for the common safety. The Barbarians therefore astonish'd with the Valour of The Cartha∣ginians routed by a Sally from Himerd. the Enemy, and unexpectedness of the Onset, turn'd their Backs, and fled in great precipitation to their Fellows incampt upon the Hill, whom the Hime∣reans pursu'd, calling one to another not to give any Quarter. In this Encoun∣ter there were kill'd of the Carthaginians above Six Thousand (as Timeus re∣lates) but Ephorus says Twenty Thousand. Hannibal when he saw his Soul∣diers so distressed, drew out those that were encamped, and came to the Re∣lief of his shattered Troops, setting upon the Himereans now in disorder by the Pursuit: Upon which, there began another sharp Dispute, in which, at The Hime∣rians re∣puls'd. Ant. Chr. 406. length the Himereans were put to flight; but Three Thousand of them stood their Ground, and bore the brunt of the whole Carthaginian Army; and after they had signaliz'd their Valour, all died upon the Spot. After this Fight, Five and Twenty Gallies which were sometime before sent to the aid of the Lacedemonians from the Siculi, now returning Home, arriv'd at Himera; but a Rumour spread through the City, that the Syracusians with all their Forces and Confederates were come to the Relief of the Himereans. Hannibal in the mean time imbarques many of his best Souldiers in his Gallies which lay at Motys, in order to Sail for Syracuse, to surprize the City now that it wanted sufficient trength to defend it as he suppos'd. And therefore Diocles, Commander in chief of them who were sent in aid of the Himereans, advis'd the Captains of the Vessels to sail with all speed to Syracuse, lest when they had lost the best of their Souldiers, in the next Fight, their own City should be ta∣ken by force. To which end it was thought advisable to leave the City for a while, and to imbarque one half of Diocles's Forces to go along with the Fleet till they were past the Coasts of Himera, and to leave the other half for the defence of the City till the Gallies return'd. The Himereans took this grievous∣ly, but being it was not in their power to do otherwise, Gallies were fill'd in the Night, with Women and Children, and other things to be transported to Messena. Then Diocles with those under his Command, prepar'd for his Journey back into his own Country, leaving the Bodies of them that were slain unbury'd. And so many of the Himereans with their Wives and Children went along with him,
as could not be otherwise transported for want of Shipping. But they that were left for the defence of the City, watcht every Night in Arms upon the Ant. Chr. 406. Bulwarks. And although the Carthaginiaus constantly upon the approach of Day made frequent Assaults in every Place found the City, yet they upon the Walls indefatigably bore the brunt, believing the Ships would return speedily; to which very Day they held it out couragiously: But the next Day after that the P. 364. Fleet was in sight far off, at that instant the Wall was batter'd down by the En∣gines, and the Spanish Regiment in a full Body, rusht into the City, part of the Barbarians forcing the Guard from the Walls, and another part that possessing the Breaches, made way for the rest of the Army to enter. At length the City was Himcra ruin'd. enter'd, and the Barbarians with all Savage Cruelty, kill'd all in their way, till by the Command of Hannibal they forbore their Butcheries: In the mean time, the Souldiers plunder'd all the Houses of all things . valuable. Here Hannibal robb'd and spoil'd all the Temples, and after he had taken out those that fled thither for Refuge, he set them on Fire, and raz'd the City to the Ground, Two Hundred and Forty Years after the setling of the Inhabitants there. Among the Prisoners, the Women and Children he commanded to be kept safe; but the Men, to the number of Three Thousand, he caus'd to be brought to a rising Ground there near at Hand, where Amilcar his Grandfather perish'd by the Army of Gelon, and there with all sorts of Taunts, and marks of Disgrace, put them all to Ant. Chr. 406. the Sword. Afterwards he disbanded many of his Forces, among the rest, he sent the Sicilians, who sided with him, to their several Countries, and with them the Campanians, who made great complaint of the Injustice of the Carthaginians, for that they contributing so much to their Successes, had not rewarded them pro∣portionably to the Services they had done them in the War. However Hannibal ship'd his Army, leaving a small Guard with his Confede∣rates, and with his Transport Ships and Gallies loos'd from Sicily, and arriv'd at Carthage, loaden with abundance of Prey. The whole City came out to meet him, and receiv'd him with loud and joyful Acclamations, as a General that had performed greater things by far in so short a time than ever any before him. At this time Hermocrates the Syracusian returned into Sicily. He was in great E∣steem Hermocrates returns into Sicily. among the Syracusians, because in the War against the Athenians, he was re∣markably serviceable to his Country. He was afterwards sent as Admiral with Thirty Five Sail to the aid of the Lacedemonians; but by a contrary Faction at Home, being condemn'd to Banishment, he deliver'd up the Command of the Fleet in Peloponesus, to those who were deputed by the Government. Afterwards Hermocrates banish'd Sy∣racuse. having receiv'd a considerable Sum of Money from Pharnabazus, whose Favou∣rite he was, he sail'd to Messina, and there built Five Gallies, and hir'd a Thou∣sand Souldiers with his own Money; and taking likewise with him a Thousand of those that were forc'd from Himera, he attempted with the help of his Friends to return to Syracuse: But being prevented in this Design, he march'd up into the Country to Selinunte, and took in part of the City with a Wall, and Ant. Chr. 406. got together as many of the Selinuntines as surviv'd the late Destruction, and with them and many others which he receiv'd into the Place, he made up a Body of Six Thousand choice Men. From thence he made an Excursion, and spoil'd the Country of the Motyans, overcame them that issu'd out of the City against them, and kill'd many of them, driving the rest within their Walls. Presently after, he broke into the Borders of the Panorma, now Palermo. Panormitans, and carry'd away abundance of Plunder. He kill'd likewise Five Hundred of the Citizens that stood in Battalia before their City to oppose him, and shut up the rest within their Walls, and wasted and spoil'd likewise all the other Countries that were subject to the Car∣thaginians, for which he was in high Esteem among the Sicilians. Hereupon the Syracusians likewise presently began to repent, when they saw that they had Ba∣nisht one whose Valour merited so much to the contrary: So that when he was often nam'd and discours'd of in Publick Assemblies, the People gave many hints and signs of their desire to have him recall'd. Hermocrates therefore understand∣ing that his Name was up among the Syracusians, us'd his utmost endeavour to return, knowing that his Enemies and Rivals would oppose it with all their P. 365. Might: And thus stood things in Sicily at this time.
CHAP. VIII. Thrasybulus assaults Ephesus. The Lacedemonians besiege Pylus; surren∣der Chalcedon, besieg'd by Theramenes; and afterward Byzantium, which was betray'd to Alcibiades. IN Greece, Thrasybulus sent from Athens with a Fleet of Thirty Sail well man'd, Ant. Chr. 406. and with a great Army of Foot, and an Hundred Horse, sail'd to Ephesus; where landing his Men in two places, he assaulted the City; but the Townsmen making a brisk Sally, there began a sharp Engagement; in which four hundred of the Athenians were kill'd, for the whole Strength of the City fell upon them, Ephesus As∣saulted by Thrasybulus. the rest getting to their Ships. Thrasybulus loos'd from thence to Lesbos. But the Athenian Generals, who lay at Cyzicum, pass'd over to A City in Bythinia in Asia, over a∣gainst Con∣stantinople. Chalcedon, and built a Fort call'd Chrysopolis, putting into it a sufficient Garrison; and commanded the Go∣vernors to exact the Tenth part of all Shipping, that pass'd that way from Pontus. Afterwards the Forces were divided, and Theramenes was left with fifty Sail to be∣siege Chalcedon and Byzantium. But Thrasybulus was sent into Thrace, and brought the Cities of that Country, under the Power of the Athenians. Alcibiades having sent away Thrasybulus with thirty Sail with the rest of the Fleet, arriv'd at the Pro∣vince of Pharnabasus. There they wasted and spoil'd all that large Tract, and fill'd the Souldiers with Plunder, and the Generals themselves got together a great sum of Mony, by the Sale of the Spoils, with a Design to case the People of the bur∣den of their Contributions. The Lacedemonians understanding that the Athenian Forces were still about the Hellespont, sent Forces against Pylus, where the Messenians were in Garrison. At Sea indeed they had Eleven Ships, of which Five were of Sicily, man'd with Spartans; but their Land Army was but small. With these they besieg'd the Pylus be∣sieg'd by the Lacedemoni∣ans. Fort, both by Land and Sea. But when Intelligence was brought of this, the Athe∣nians sent out Thirty Sail, under the Command of Anytus, the Son of Anthemion, to the Relief of the Besieg'd. In his Passing thither, a great Storm arose, so that not being able to recover A Pro∣montory. Malea, he return'd to Athens. Upon which the People of Athens were so incens'd, that they condemn'd him to die as a Traitor: Anytus brought into this imminent Danger, redeem'd his Life with a Ant. Chr. 406. Sum of Money; who is reported to be the First Athenian that ever revers'd a Anytus re∣deem'd his Life for Mo∣ny. Sentence for Money. In the mean time, the Besieg'd Messenians in Pylus, stood it out against all Assaults for a time, in hopes of Relief from Athens: But being press'd by fresh and renew'd Succors from the Assailants, by the Loss of Men on the one hand, and through want of Provision on the other, they were forc'd Pylus sur∣render'd to the Lacede∣monians. to surrender upon Terms. Thus Pylus was reduc'd, and brought into the Hands of the Lacedemonians; the Athenians having had Possession of it Fifteen Years, from the time it was fortify'd by Demosthenes. During these Affairs, the Megareans took Nisea, then belonging to the Athe∣nians. Upon which the Athenians sent against them Leotrophides and Timarchus, with a Thousand Foot, and four Hundred Horse. Against whom all the Me∣gareans, with the Assistance of some from Sicily, marched out, and drew up in Battle be∣tween the Megareans and the Athe∣nians. Battalia, upon the Hills call'd the Horns. There the Athenians fought with that Valour, that they put the Enemy to Flight, tho' far more in number than them∣selves. In this Battle, great Slaughter was made amongst the Megareans; but there were only Twenty kill'd of the Lacedemonians: For the Athenians, taking the Loss of Nicea very grievously, wav'd the Lacedemonians, and bent all the Ant. Chr. 406. Heat of their Pursuit after the Megareans, and in a great Rage cut down mul∣titudes The Mega∣reans roated. of them. About this time, the Lacedemonians made Cratesipidas Admiral, and man'd five and twenty Sail, with Supplies sent from their Confederates, and Commanded him to succour their Allies; who spent a long time about Ionia, P. 366. doing nothing Considerable. Afterwards, being furnish'd with Mony, by the Exiles of Chius, he both restor'd them, and took the  Citadel of the Chians. When the Exiles were eturn'd, they expell'd those that Banish'd them, to the Number of six Hundred, who possess'd Themselves of a place call'd Atameus. Atarneus,
opposite upon the Continent, naturally fortify'd; from whence afterwards (grow∣ing Strong) they they weary'd the Chians with frequent Invasions. During these things, Alcibiades and Thrasybulus, having fortify'd Labsacus, left there a suffi∣cient Garrison; and then sail'd with the whole Army to Theramenes, who was then besieging Chalcedon, having a Fleet of Seventy Sail, and five Thousand Men under his Command. The Generals, drawing up the whole Army together in a Body, Block't up the City by a Wall of Timber, drawn from Sea to Sea. Upon which Hippocrates, made Governor there by the Lacedemonians (whom the La∣conians A Fight at the Siege of Chalcedon. call Harmostis) made a Sally both with the Lacedemonians, and all the Chalcedonians: And joyning Battle with Alcibiades (whose Souldiers fought with great Resolution) Hippocrates was slain, and many more kill'd and wounded, and the rest fled back into the City. Afterwards Alcibiades pass'd over into the Hel∣lespont, and Chersonesus, with a Design to raise Monies. But Theramenes came to Terms with the Chalcedonians, and agreed that they should pay the same Tribute Ant. Ch. 406. that they did before; and so drew off his Forces, and came before Byzantium, de∣signing to block up that place. In the mean time, Alcibiades having got together a vast Sum of Mony, pro∣cured Byzantium besieg'd; now Constantino∣ple. many of the Thracians to joyn with him; and then making a League and Association with all them of Chersonesus, he loosed from thence with his whole Amy, and gain'd Selymbria, a City in the Propontis, now call'd Seleu∣ree. Selymbria by Surrender, from whence he exacted a great Sum of Mony; and placing there a Garrison, hasten'd away to Theramenes at Byzan∣tium, where they joyntly assault the Town with their whole Strength: For they were to subdue a City that was very large, and full of Resolute Men; for be∣sides the Byzantines, who were very numerous, Clearchus Harmostes the Lacedemo∣nian, had with him in the City a Strong Garrison, both of Peloponesians and of Mercenaries; insomuch that (tho' they violently assaulted it) for a long time they were not able to make any considerable Impression upon the Besieg'd. But the Governor of the City, being gone to Pharnabazus for Mony, some of the By∣zantines, who had taken a Distaste at his Government (For Clearchus was sharp and rigid) betray'd the City into the Hands of Alcibiades, in this Manner: The Besiegers made as if they would raise the Siege, and Ship off their Army into Io∣nia; and to that purpose, in the Evening, they Sail'd away with their whole Fleet, and drew off their Land-Forces at some Distance from the Town; but at Mid∣night the Army march'd back close to the City; and having before sent back their Gallies with Orders, that they should hale the Ships of the Byzantines out of the Harbour, and set up a great Shout, as if all the Army were there present, they themselves with the Land-Forces kept ready drawn up in a Body, close to the Walls, in Expectation of the Sign. In the Execution of these Commands, whilst some of the Ships were broken in pieces by the Beaks of the Ships of the Athe∣nians, Ant. Ch. 406. and others by Grappling-Irons were hal'd forth, and a great and terrible Byzantium betray'd. Shout was made, the Peloponesians in the City, ignorant of the Treachery, sal∣ly'd out to the Harbour, for the Defence of the City. In the mean time the Traitors gave the Sign from the Walls, and by Ladders took in the Souldiers of Alcibiades, while they of the Garrison were out at the Port. But the Peloponesians being inform'd of the Treachery, left half the Forces in the Port, and with the P. 367. rest, ran with all Speed to guard the Walls, of which the Enemy was now disposess'd. And altho' the whole Athenian Army was broke in, yet the Besieg'd were not in the least discourag'd for a long time; but with the help of the By∣zantines so couragiously oppos'd the Athenians, that the City had never come into their Hands, if Alcibiades had not made Proclamation that none of the By∣zantines should be injur'd; which was a thing very seasonably advis'd: upon which the Townsmen turn'd their Arms upon the Lacedemonians, so that many of them (fighting it out with great Gallantry) were kill'd. The rest, to the number of five Hundred, fled, as Suppliants; to the Altars of the Gods. The Athenians restor'd the City to the Byzantines, and renew'd the League and Confederacy. The Suppliants likewise were receiv'd upon Terms, that they should deliver up their Arms, and that their Persons should be Transported to Athens, there to be dispos'd of, as the People should think fit.
CHAP. IX. Theremenes and Alcibiades return to Athens; are admir'd by the People. Lysander made General by the Lacedemonians. Antiochus, one of the Athenian Generals, beaten at Ephesus, in a Sea-Fight. Agis surprizes part of the Walls of Athens; but was beaten off. Alcibiades accus'd for Assaulting Cuma, a Confederate City. Conon made Admiral in his place. AFTER the End of the Year, Euctemones was made Archon of Athens, and Olymp. 93. 1. the Romans constituted Marcus Papyrius, and Spurius Nautius Consuls. Then was celebrated the Ninety-third Olympiad, in which Eubatus of Cyrene got the An. M. 3564. Victory. At this time the Athenian Generals (now possess'd of Byzantium) gain'd Ant. Chr. 405. all the Cities of the Hellespont, except Abydus. Then they left Diodorus and Man∣titheus, with sufficient Forces, Governours in the Hellespont; and they themselves (after they had perform'd many Famous Exploits, for the Honour and Safety of their Country) return'd with the Fleet, loaden with Spoils to Athens. When they drew near, all the People throng'd out with great Joy to meet them, and a great number of Strangers, both Women and Children ran together into the Pyreum; the Arrival of the Generals filling all Persons with Admiration. For they brought along with them no less than two hundred Ships, which they had taken, and a multitude of Prisoners, with much Spoil; and their own Ships were gloriously adorn'd with Arms, Rich Spoils, and Golden Crowns, and such like. Every Body throng'd one upon another to see Alcibiades, so as the City was even left without an Inhabitant, whilst both Bond and Free long'd to have a View of Him. For he was so highly Admir'd at that time, that none of the Alcibiades receiv'd with great Ap∣plause at A∣thens. former Athenians were judg'd comparable to this Man, who so openly and con∣fidently had stood it out against the People. They who were Poor, and under Mulcts and Fines, now hop'd they had an Excellent Advocate, who by raising Tumults and Disturbances in the City, could free them from their Penuries and pressing Necessities. He was a Man daring above all others, and an Excellent Speaker: In times of War a Brave Souldier, and as Skilful a Commander; ready His Descri∣ption. in undertaking any Desperate Enterprize, of a very Comly and Bautiful Counte∣nance, of a Noble Spirit, and Aspiring Mind. All were so fill'd with Expecta∣tion from him, that they concluded his Return, and the Prosperity of the City, Ant. Chr. 405. were coupl'd together. For, as the Lacedemoniuns were Successful and Victorious whilst he Assisted them, so they hop'd that by his Return, their Affairs would change to the Better. As soon as the Fleet entred into the Harbour, all Eyes were fix'd upon Alci∣biades's Ship; and upon his Landing, they receiv'd him with great Acclama∣tions, and Congratulated his Return and Victories. After he had with all Cour∣teous Behaviour Saluted the People, he call'd an . Assembly, where having made a long Defeence for the Clearing of his Innocency, he so insinuated himself into the Good-will of the People, that all cast the Blame of the . P. 368. Dooms and Judg∣ments against him upon the City it self: And therefore they restor'd all his Estate, not long before Consiscated, and threw the Records of his Condemna∣tion into the Sea; and Revers'd all other things that were Decreed against him: And a Decree was made, That the Certain Priests of A∣thens. Eumolpides should take away, and absolve him from that Curse they had pronounc'd against him, when he was suppos'd to have been guilty of Prophaning the Sacred Mysteries. At last they made him Ge∣neral, and gave him full Power, both by Sea and Land; and committed all their Forces to his Command; upon which he Constituted. other Generals, as he thought fit: That is to say, Adimantus and Thrasybulus; and He Himself, with an Hundred Sail, pass'd over to Andros, and there possess'd Himself of the Fort Alcibiades invades An∣dros. Gaurium, and took it in with a Wall. But the Andrians, with the whole Strenth of the City, and the Succours, sent to them from Peloponesus, sally'd out against them, whereupon a sharp Engagement follow'd, in which the Athenians were Conquerors; a great part of them that came out of the Town, being cum off. Of those that escap'd, some were scatter'd abroad in the Fields, others got within the Walls. After he had several times attempted to take the City by Assault, and saw he could not he prevail, left a sufficient Garrison in the Fort (by him
before fortify'd) under the Command of Thrasybulus, and he Himself sail'd away with the rest of the Army, and wasted and spoil'd, Coos, and Rhodes, and there got a great deal of provision for his Souldiers. As for the Lacedemonians, although they had lost most of their Fleet, and the Command of the Sea, to∣gether with their General Mindarus; yet they were not discourag'd, but created Lysander Admiral of their Navy; a most Expert Souldier, Bold and Daring, Lysander the Lacedemonian General. and ready to undertake any thing, through all Hazards whatsoever. As soon as he enter'd upon his Command, he rais'd no small number of Souldiers, throughout all Pelopenesus, and furnish'd the Eleet with Seamen, as well as in the present Circum∣stances he was able; and presently arriving at Rhodes, he got together as many Ships from thence and the rest of the Towns, as he could, and then sail'd away with what Ships hehad, to Ephesus and Miletus; where being further supply'd from these Ci∣ties, and with others from Chios, he set forth from Ephesus with a Fleet of Seven∣ty Sail. But when he understood that Cyrus; the Son of Darius, was sent from his Father, with Orders to assist the Lacedemonians in the War, he made a Darius sends his Son Cyrus to assist the Lacedemo∣nians. Journy to him to Sardis; and after several Arguments made to encourage the Young Man, to prosecute the War against the Athenians, he forthwith receiv'd from him Ten thousand Fifteen Sh. apiece Gold. Daricans for Pay of his Souldiers, with Command from Cyrus to proceed, without doubting his Assistance; for that he was commanded by his Father to spare no Costs for the Supply of the Lacedemonians, in what∣soever they should undertake. From thence he return'd to Ephesus, and sent for the Principal Men of every Neighbouring Town; and having enter'd into a League and Confederacy with them, promis'd if the War succeeded, he would make every one of them a Prince in his own City. Upon this each strove to exceed another, and sup∣ply'd him with more than was requir'd; in so much as they abundantly furnish'd Lysander with all things . Alcibiades sails to Ephe∣sus. Necessary for the War, sooner than could in reason be imagin'd. When Alcibiades understood that Lysander was preparing a Fleet at Ephe∣sus, he made away with his whole Navy thither; where he enter'd the Port without Opposition, and Anchor'd with many of his Vessels near Notium, and gave the Command to Antiochus, the Captain of his own Vessel, with strict Charge not to Fight till he return'd. In the mean time, He Himself sail'd with several Men of War to Clazomenes; which City (yet standing firm to the Athe∣nians) was greatly oppress'd by the Devastations made by some Exiles. But An∣tiochus, naturally Rash and Hasty, earnestly desirous to perform something Re∣markable by his own Contrivance, without any Regard to the Command of Al∣cibiades, Mans Ten of the Best Gallies, and Commands the Captains and Officers of the Fleet, to be ready and prepar'd, with the rest of the Ships, to fall in where there should be Occasion: Upon this he makes up to the Enemy, and dares 'em to Battle. Lysander, being inform'd by some Deserters, that Alcibia∣des, Ant. Ch. 405. P. 369. with the Best of the Men of War, were gone off, now conceiv'd he had a sit Opportunity put into his Hands, to do something worthy of the Spartan Name: In Order thereunto, he makes forth the whole Fleet against Antiochus; and one of the Ten (which sail'd before the rest, and in which Antiochus was) he presently sinks, and puts all the rest to Flight, and pursues them till the Athenian Officers The Athe∣nian Fleet routed at E∣phesus. in the other Vessels, in great Confusion, came up to their Assistance. And now the Fleets on both sides were wholly engag'd, not far off from the Land: In short, the Athenians (by reason of the Disorder they were in) were beaten, with the Loss of two and twenty of their Ships. Some few of the Men were taken, but the rest swam to Shore. As soon as Alcibiades heard of the Defeat, he sail'd back with all Speed to Notium; and having sufficiently Man'd, and Refitted his Gallies, he sail'd into the Enemies Port; but Lysander, not daring to Engage, it was determin'd to sail away for Samos. While these things were done, Thrasybulus the Athenian General, with fifteen Gallies came up to Thasus, an Island in the Aegean Sea. Thasus, where he routed the Citizens, and kill'd about two hundred of them; and then so straitly besieg'd them, that at length they were inforc'd to receive again those that favour'd the Athenians, into the City, and to take in a Garrison, and renew their Confederacy with the Athenians. Thence Ant. Chr. 405. he sail'd to Abdera, the most Potent City of Thrace, and brought them over to the Athenians. These were the things done by the Athenian Generals from the time they left Athens.
About this time Agis, the Lacedemonian King, lay incamp'd with his Army Agis the La∣cedemonian King near surprizing of Athens. at Deoelea; where having Intelligence, that the Flower and Strength of the Athe∣nians were gone away with Alcibiades, he march'd up to Athens silently in a dark Night, having with him eight and twenty thousand Foot, half of which were Old Souldiers, very well arm'd; the other half were but Raw, and . Lightly Arm'd: Besides these, there follow'd him twelve hundred Horse, nine of which were Beotians, and the rest from Peloponesus. He was not discern'd by the Watch, till he was close at hand; and so fell upon them unawares, and slew some, and forc'd the rest within the Walls. Hereupon the Athenians, both Young and Old, were commanded generally to betake themselves to Arms, to oppose the Ene∣my; upon which, the Walls round the City were presently fill'd with them that ran thither from all Quarters. As soon as it was Light, and the Athenian Commanders saw the Army of the Enemy drawn up . into a Body, four in Depth, and eight Furlongs or Stages in Front; they were at first not little terrify'd, especially two parts of the Walls being now possess'd by the Enemy. But after some time, they sent out a Body of Horse, equal in number to the Lacedemonians: Upon which the Horse on both sides engag'd, in the face of them upon the Walls: and the Contest was sharp for a considerable time: For the Ant. Chr. 405. A Fight by Horse under the Walls of Athens. Foot drawn up, as is said before, were as yet five Stages from the Walls; and the Horse fought close under them. On the one side the Beotians, who had for∣merly routed the Athenians at Delium, look'd upon it as a Dishonourable thing, to be worsted by them, whom they had before Conquer'd. On the other, the Athe∣nians in regard they were known by all them upon the Walls, who were then Eye-witnesses either of their Valour, or Cowardize, resolv'd, through all diffi∣culties whatsoever, to be Conquerours: Accordingly at length they routed the Lacedemonians, and made a great Slaughter, and pursu'd those that fled, even close up to the Body of their Foot; who making up to them, the Horse re∣turn'd into the City. Hereupon Agis (not conceiving it now a fit time to be∣siege the City) incamp'd in A Place near the City. Academia. The next Day, when the Athenians erected a Trophy, he drew out his Army in Battalia, and Challeng'd them to Battel. Upon which the Athenians march'd out, and drew up in a Body under P. 370. the Walls. The Lacedemonians gave the Onset; but by reason of the showers of Darts, wherewith they were gall'd from the Walls, they were forc'd to draw off from the City. And, after great Devastations made in the rest of Attica, they return'd to Peloponesus. As for Alcibiades, he sails with his whole Fleet, from Samos to Cuma, where Ant. Ch. 405. Alcibiades un∣justly wastes Cuma. under colour and pretence of feign'd Crimes, lay'd to the Charge of the Inha∣bitants, he wasts and spoils the Country. And at the first takes a great multi∣tude of Prisoners, and forces them away to his Ships; but the Cumeans, with the whole Power of the City, made out against him, for the Defence and Rescue of their Country-men: Alcibiades for a while bore the Brunt, but being over∣come by fresh Supplies, both out of the City, and from the Country, the Army was forc'd to fly to their Ships, and leave their Captives behind them. Alcibiades, being much troubled to be thus baffled, sent for the Regiments from Mitylene, and drew up his Army against the City, challenging the Cumeans to a Battle. But none coming, forth, after many Devastations, he return'd to Mi∣tylene: But the Cumeans sent to Athens, and put in their Bill against Alcibiades, in form of Law, for that he had wasted and spoiled, a Confederated City and Alcibiades ac∣cus'd at A∣thens by the Cumeans. Country, which had not in the least done them any Injury; and many other Ac∣cusations they brought against him: For some of the Garrison in Samos (bearing him a Grudge) pass'd over to Athens, and accus'd him in the Publick Assembly, that he was a secret Friend to the Lacedemonians, and kept a close and intimate Correspondence with Pharnabasus, for this very purpose; that when the War was ended, he might gain the Sovereignty of Athens. These Calumnies being easily credited by the Common People, the Glory of Alcibiades began to wain; and the rather by reason of his late Ill-success at Sea, and his Miscarriages at Cuma. Henceforward the People of Athens began to be jealous of Alcibiades, and created ten other Commanders, Conon, Lysanias, Diomedon, Pericles, Erasmides, Aristo∣crates, Conon made Admiral. Ant. Ch. 405. Alcibiades lost his Commis∣sion. Archestratus, Protomachus, Thrasybulus, and Aristogenes. From among these they chose out Conon to be Admiral; and forthwith sent him to Alcibiades, to demand the Fleet from him, who gave up his Charge accordingly; but not daring to return to Athens, sail'd only with one Ship to Padyen in Thrace. For, besides the Rage
of the Common People, he was afraid many Crimes would be laid to his charge; many (now he lay under the hatches) contriving how to load him with Accusa∣tions, and to upbraid him with his former Faults; the greatest of which was that concerning the Horses, for which there was set upon him a Mulct of , but in the Margent . Fifty Talents. For when Diomedes his Friend, lent him a Chariot with four Horses, to go along with him, to Olympia, when he subscrib'd his Name (as the Custom was) he affirm'd the Horses to be his own; and when he was Victor by that Chariot and Horses, he not only carry'd away the Glory, but detain'd the Horses from him that so friendly and kindly repos'd a Trust in him. Revolving there∣fore all these things in his Mind, he was afraid the Athenians, now they had an Ad∣vantage Alcibiades avoids Athens. against him, would rip up all his former Miscarriages, and lay the greater load upon him. Therefore he banish'd himself. CHAP. X. Hermocrates kill'd at Syracuse, attempting to surprize it. IN this Olympiad, the . This was a new Race by a brace of Mules in a Chariot, call'd Sinouris. Xen. Hel. lib. 1. Ush. Annal. 155. Synouris was added to the Olympian Games. And Pli∣stonax, King of the Lacedemonians, died, when he had reign'd  but in the Margent . Fifty Years. To whom succeeded Pausanias, who Govern'd fourteen Years. The Inhabitants of Rhodes, out of Ialysus, Lindus and Camirus, Incorporated themselves into one City, now call'd Rhodes. Hermocrates the Syracusian, march'd out of Selinunte with his Forces to Himera, and Encamp'd in the Suburbs of that late ruin'd City. Hermocra∣tes causes the dead Bodies to be con∣vey'd to Sy∣racuse. P. 371. Where after he had by diligent Enquiry, found out in what place the Sy∣racusians had their Post, he gather'd up the dead Bodies of the Syracusians, and put them in Chariots richly adorn'd, and sent them to Syracuse; and he himself accompany'd them, as far as it was lawful for a Banish'd Man to go, who was not to set a Foot within the Confines of the Country; and there he committed the Care of Conveying them to Syracuse to others. He did this to bring an Odium upon Diocles (who oppos'd his Return) for his Neglect in not Burying the Dead; and to regain the Good-will of the People to himself, for his Humanity. When the Bodies were brought to the City, there arose a Dissention amongst the People. Diocles oppos'd the Burial of them, but the People were unani∣mously against him. At length it was resolv'd, That they should be bury'd, and the whole City grac'd the Solemnity with their Presence, and Diocles was Banish'd. However Hermocrates was never the nearer being Restor'd; for they were very jealous of him, that if ever he came into Authority, he would usurp the Sovereignty. When therefore he understood that for the present, it was to no purpose to strive against the Stream, he return'd to Selinunte: But not long after, being sent to some of his Faction, he hastens away with three thousand Ar∣med Ant. Chr. 405. Men, and marching through Geloa in the Night, comes to the Place be∣fore appointed, where all his Souldiers could not readily follow him; so that with a few he comes up to the Gate in Acridana; where he finds some of his Friends, who had before possess'd themselves of the Places; there he stay'd for the rest of his Men, who came slowly on, and at length joyn'd him. But the Design being discover'd, the Syracusians ran Arm'd into the Forum; where (a great multitude of People being got together) they kill'd Hermocrates, and the most of his Accomplices. The rest that escap'd (after they had cited them to Ap∣pear, in order for their several Tryals) they condemn'd to Banishment. Some therefore that were ill wounded, were by their Friends reported to be dead, to avoid the present Fury of the People. Amongst whom was Dionysius, who usurpt the Tyranny.
CHAP. XI. The Acts of Callicratides, the Lacedemonian General. The Fight at Sea in the Harbour at Mitylene, between Conon and Callicratides. THUS things pass'd for this Year, at the close of which Antigenes was chosen Olymp. 93. 2. Ant. Ch. 404. Magistrate of Athens; and Manius Aemilius, and Caius Valerius, Roman Consuls. About this time Conon the Athenian Admiral, made up a Fleet of those Ships that lay at Samos, and sent for others from the Confederates; and having now got together a considerable Navy, he hasted away to fight the Enemy. The Lacedemonians appointed Callicratides Admiral; Lysander being discharg'd of that Command for some time. This Callicratides was a very Young Man, of Callicratides made Admi∣ral of the La∣cedemonians. a Plain and Honest Mind, and an Innocent Conversation; not as yet tainted with the Vices and ill Manners of other Nations, and was highly esteem'd among the Spartans, for his Justice and Integrity; and every Man own'd, that he never swerv'd from the Rules of Justice, either in Publick or Private Affairs: But on the contrary, if at any time any offer'd to corrupt him with Bribes, he highly resented it, and punish'd them accordingly. Having now receiv'd his Commission, he sails to Ephesus, and there had the Fleet deliver'd up to him by Lysander; which His Acts. with the rest that he got together from other parts, made up a Navy of an hun∣dred and forty Sail. The Athenians then lay at Anchor at Delphinum. Delphinum in Chios: Against whom he made with his whole Fleet, and in his way besieg'd a Fort of the Athenians; the Garrison there, being about five hundred, were terrify'd at the greatness of the Navy, and surrender'd the Place upon Articles of Safe Con∣duct. Then Callicratides demolish'd the Fort, and sail'd against A City in Ionia. Am. Chr. 404. P. 372. Teios; and sur∣prizing the Place in the Night, got within the Walls, and sack'd the City. Passing thence to Lesbos, he lay with his Army before Methymna, wherein was an Athe∣nian Garrison. At first he prevail'd little, tho' he press'd hard upon it with daily Assaults: But not long after, being let in by the Treachery of some within, he sack'd the City, but put none to the Sword, and restor'd the Place to the Methym∣neans. Things thus prosperously succeeding, he hasten'd to Mitylene, and com∣mitting the Heavy-Armed Men, to Thorax the Lacedemonian, commanded him to march with all speed with the Land-Army, whilst he himself made with the Fleet, to the Shoar. In the mean time Conon, the Athenian Admiral, so prepar'd his Fleet, Conon the A∣thenian Ad∣miral. (which consisted of seventy Sail) for a Sea-fight, that he excell'd all the Admirals that were ever before him. With these he came to the Aid of Methymna; but when he found it was taken, he lay with his Fleet at an Island, one of those call'd the Hundred Islands. About Break of day next Morning, when he discern'd the Ene∣my's Fleet making up to him, conceiving it not advisable to fight with a Fleet that was more than double his number, he resolv'd to sail off; and having snapt up some of the Enemy's Gallies by the way, determin'd to fight rather at Mitylene; conclud∣ing Ant. Chr. 404. that if he were Conqueror, he could there pursue them with greater Advantage; and if he were Conquer'd, he had the Port near at hand, wherein to shelter himself. Upon this he Embarks all his Souldiers, and commands the Rowers to row but gently and slowly, that the Enemy might come up nearer to him. The Lacedemonians, the nearer they came, were more eager to press on, in confidence that they should overtake and destroy those that were behind in the Rear. But Conon, by degrees falling down behind the rest, the Commanders of the best of the Peloponesian Ships, pursu'd with all Eagerness. By this Means, the Rowers now wax'd faint, and were drawn away far from the rest of the Fleet: which Advantage being observ'd by Co∣non, and that they now approch'd near to Mitylene, he set up the Purple Flag from A Sea-fight at Mitylene, between Conon and Callicra∣tides. his own Ship, which was a Sign to the Officers to joyn Battle. Upon which the Athenians all at one time tack't suddenly about, and made upon the Enemy; and the whole Fleet, reiterated the A Song us'd before Battle. Ant. Chr. 404. Pean, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge. Upon this sudden Change, the Peloponesians were amaz'd, and made what hast they could in this Extremity, to put themselves into a Line of Battle; but having so little time to tack about, they were in great Confusion; especially in regard the Ships, where their proper place was, which they had deserted, were so far behind. Conon therefore, improving the Opportunity put into his Hands, makes straight upon them; and before they could put themselves in Order of Battle, pierces some of their Ships through, and brushes off the Oars of others. But not one of those Ships that en∣gag'd
on that Wing against Conon, stirr'd; but with their Oars revers'd, bravely kept still in one place, till their whole Fleet came up. But the left Wing of the Athe∣nian Fleet put them (with whom they were engag'd) to flight, and hotly pursu'd them a long time. But when all the Peloponesian Fleet came up together, Conon con∣sidering the multitude of his Enemies, drew off, and with forty Ships return'd to Mitylene. In the mean time the whole Peloponesian Fleet, which had spread them∣selves every way, greatly amaz'd the Athenians (who had before pursu'd them that fled) and lying in their way to prevent their Return to the City, forc'd them upon Shoar; whither being closely pursu'd by the Peloponesians, the Athenians (seeing no other Remedy) forsook their Ships, and got to Land, and so fled to Mitylene. Callicratides having thus possess'd himself of thirty Ships, and seeing that the E∣nemy's Fleet was now broken, concluded that for the future he was to fight upon Land; and therefore sail'd straight to the City. Upon which Conon expecting the City would be besieg'd, made what Preparation he could to block up the Mouth of the Haven. For in that part where it was shallow, he sunk small Vessels, loaden with Stones; where it was deep, he fill'd great Ships of burden with Stones, and P. 373. Ant. Chr. 404. sixt them with Anchors. The Athenians, and a great number of Mitylenes, out of the Country, flockt into the City through fear of the War, and forthwith prepar'd all things necessary for their Defence in the Siege. And now Callicratides commanded his Men to Land, and incamp'd near the City, and there erects a Trophy for his Naval Victory. The next Day, with some of his best Ships, he made towards the City, with a Design both to enter the Port, and to break the Enemy's . Boom; giving strict Command that none of them should be far from his own Ship. Conon on the other hand Mans the Smaller Gallies, with some of his Souldiers, and places them in the Mouth of the Haven in Front, against the Ene∣my, and puts on Board the longer Vessels the other part of his Army. Some likewise A Stout Fight in De∣fence of the Haven at Mi∣tylene. were order'd to guard the Shallows, that so the Port might be defended on every side, both by Sea and by Land: And he himself with his own Squadron, fought in that part which was open into the Harbour. They that were in the great Ships, pelted the Enemies with Stones from the Main-Yard: Those that were plac'd near the Shoar, oppos'd them that endeavour'd to Land. The Peloponesians all this while were nothing Inferior to their Enemies, in Courage and Resolution; for, Charging with their Ships in a full Body, and with the Best of thir Men upon the Decks, it re∣sembled both a Fight at Sea and Land together: And they fell on with such Fury, that they even Dar'd to hurl themselves upon the Fore-Castles of the Athenian Ant. Chr. 404. Ships; judging that they whom they had so lately beaten, were not able to stand the Shock. On the other hand, the Athenians and Mitylenes concluding there was no other hopes for Safety left but in Victory, resolv'd to die rather than to desert their Posts. This Obstinacy on both sides continu'd the Fight a long time; whilst every one, without the least Fear, expos'd himself to all manner of Dangers: Many upon the Decks, were sorely gall'd by showers of Darts on every hand: Some mortally wounded, fell from the Decks into the Sea; those that were yet untouch'd, or at least unsensible of their Wounds, were resolv'd notwithstanding to stand it out to the last. Many were kill'd by Stones cast down upon them from the Main-yards, which being both very big, and thrown from an high place, fell with the greater force and violence, At length, after the Fight had continu'd a long time, and many fell on both sides, Callicratides commanded a Retreat to be sounded, in order to refresh his Men: But not long after he puts them on board again, and renews the Fight. And af∣ter a long Conflict, by the multitude of his Ships (which overpower'd the Athenians) and Valour of those upon the Decks, he so far prevail'd, that he drave the Athenians from their Post: Upon which they fled into the inner part of the Harbour; and now the Passage being open, Callicratides casts Ancho close to Mitylene: For, gaining the Place about which the Contest was, he was possess'd of the whole Harbour, which yet was out of the Walls of the City. For the Old City is a little Island, but that which is added of latter tim, lies straight beyond into the Land: Between those two runs a certain Euripus, or Current of the Sea, by which the City is more strong and de∣fensible. Mitylene be∣sieg'd by the Lacedemoni∣ans. Callicratides therefore, having landed his Men, besieg the City, and be∣girt it on every side. And this was the Condition of Mitylene at this time.
CHAP. XII. Therma built in Sicily by the Carthaginians. They raise Forces to invade Italy. The noble Temple at Agrigentum. The ancient Grandeur of that City. The Riches of Gellias a Citizen there, and some others. Agri∣gentum besieg'd. The Syracusians under Daphneus rout the Cartha∣ginians near Agrigentum. Imilcar seizes the Syracusian Fleet, and takes all the Provision going to Agrigentum, which was afterwards quit by the Inhabitants: Their miserable Condition. The Phalarian Bull. IN Sicily the Syracusians sent Embassadors to Carthage, to complain of the late War made upon them, and to persuade them to Peace for the time to come. To which the Carthaginians return'd a doubtful Answer. In the mean time they raise again a numerous Army, and were unanimously resolv'd to do their ut∣most to subdue all the Cities of Sicily: But before they transported their Ar∣mies, P. 374. having got together out of Carthage, and other Cities in Africa many that were willing to transplant themselves, they built a new City call'd Therma, near Therma built in Sicily by the Carthaginians. Olymp. 93. 3. Ant. Chr. 403. the hot Baths in Sicily. The Affairs of this Year concluded; at Athens Callias was made chief Ma∣gistrate, and at Rome, Lucius Furius, and Cneius Pompeius were created Consuls. At this time the Carthaginians pusst up with their Successes in Sicily, and covet∣ing the gaining of the whole Island, determin'd to that end, to raise a great Army; and thereof made Hannibal General (the same that had raz'd Selinunte and Himera) and invested him with full power for the management of the War. But because he endeavour'd to excuse himself by reason of his Age, they join'd Imilco in Commission with him, the Son of Hanno, one of the same Family. These Generals consulted together, and sent some eminent Carthaginians with great Sums of Money, to raise Souldiers both out of Spain and the Now call'd Majorca and Minorca near Spain. Baleary Islands. They rais'd likewise throughout Lybia, Carthaginians and Africans, and out of every City such as were most able for War. There came likewise to them from the Nations and Princes of their Confederates Abroad, both Mau∣ritanians and Numidians, and some from the Parts near to Cyrene. Besides these, there were transported into Africa, Campanians hired out of Italy. These Cam∣panians they had experienc'd to be very useful to them, when those whom they had left in Sicily, by reason of some old Grudge they bore the Carthaginians, were suspected to be ready to side with the Sicilians. At length, when all the Forces together were mustered at Carthage, Timeus reports they were not much above an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Men; but Ephorns affirms that they were Three Hundred Thousand. The Carthaginians now prepare all things necessary for the Transporting of The Invasion of Sicily. Ant. Chr. 403. the Army; they equipt out all their Men of War, and brought together no less than a Thousand Transport Ships. Forty of their Gallies were sent before into Sicily, which were presently encounter'd with as many by the Syracusians at E∣ryx, where after a long and sharp Dispute, Fifteen of the Carthaginian Ships were sunk, the rest by the advantage of Night fled clear away. When the News of this Defeat was brought to Carthage, Hannibal the General sail'd a∣way with Fifty Gallies, contriving both to make the Enemy's Victory fruitless, and the better likewise to secure the transport of his Army. When the com∣ing of Hannibal was nois'd through the Island, all were of Opinion that he in∣tended forthwith to transport all his Forces thither: Upon which, all the Ci∣ties (hearing of the greatness of his Preparations, and that they were now like to lay all at stake) were struck with fear and amazement. The Syracusians therefore sent Embassadors both to the Grecians in Italy, and to the Lacedemo∣nians, to desire aid and assistance. They sent Letters likewise to all the Magi∣strates of the Cities up and down, to intreat them that they would stir up the People to join every where in Arms for the common Defence of the Liberty of their Country. The Agrigentines considering the greatness of the Cartha∣ginian
Army, concluded (as the thing was in truth) that they were likeliest first to feel and undergo the pressure and weight of the War; and therefore determin'd that all the Corn and other Fruits of the Field, and every thing else that was valuable, should be brought out of the Country into the City: For at that time both the City and Country of the Agrigentines were very rich; Ant. Chr. 403. of which it will not be inconvenient to say something here more largely. Their Vineyards were large and very pleasant, and most part of the Country a∣bounded with Olives, so much as that they were transported and sold at Car∣thage. P. 375. A Description of the Riches of Agrigentum in Sicily. For inasmuch as Africa at that time was not planted with this sort of Fruit, the Agrigentines grew very rich by their Trading with the Lybians. Ma∣ny Marks of their great Wealth remain to this very Day; to speak a little of which, I conceive will not be a digression from the present Subject. And First, The stately. Buildings and Ornaments of their Temples, espe∣cially the Temple of Jupiter, do sufficiently witness the Grandeur and Riches of the Men of that Age. The rest of the Sacred Buildings, are either burnt or destroy'd by the frequent Stormings of that City. When the Temple of Jupiter Olympus was near to the laying on the Roof, a stop was put to the Building by the War; and the City being afterwards sackt, the Agrigentines were never able (from that time to this Day) to finish it. This Temple at A∣grigentum was Three Hundred and Forty Foot in length, Threescore in breadth, The Descrip∣tion of the O∣lympian Tem∣ple in Agri∣gentum. Ant. Ch. 403. and in height (besides the Foundation,) an Hundred and Twenty. It's the greatest in the Island, and for the largeness of its Foundation, may compare with any other elsewhere: For though the Design was never finished, yet the ancient Platform is still visible; for whereas some build up their Temples on∣ly with Walls, or compass them round with Pillars, this is built both with the one and the other; for together with the Walls, there rise lofty Pillars round on the outside of the Wall, and Foursquare within. The Compass of every one of these Pillars on the outside, are Twenty Foot, and so far distant one from another, as that a Man may well stand between each; within they are of the compass of Twelve Foot. The largeness and height of the Portico's are wonderful; on the East Side of which, is carv'd the Giants War; of ex∣quisite and incomparable Workmanship. On the West Side is carv'd the De∣struction of Troy, where may be seen all the brave Heroes and Commanders in their proper Habits, most admirably represented. In those former times likewise there was a Pond out of the Walls of the City cut by Art, Near a Mile. Seven Furlongs in Compass and About Ten Yards. Twenty Cubits in depth: Into this, with wonder∣ful Art, were drawn Currents of Water, by which they were abundantly sup∣ply'd with all sorts of Fish ready for their use, at all publick Entertainments. Upon this Pond likewise fell Multitudes of Swans and other Fowl which en∣tertain'd the Spectators with great Delight. The Grandeur of the City was likewise apparent, by the stateliness of the Ant. Chr. 403. Sepulchers, some of which were adorn'd with the charging Horses of the He∣roes there interr'd; others with those little Birds that the Children, both Girls and Boys fed and bred up in their Parents Houses. All which, Timeus affirms he saw in his time. In the Ninety Second Olympiad there were no less than Three Hundred Chariots of Agrigentum all with white Horses, that attended upon Exenetus, the Victor at the Olypmick Games, and brought him mounted in a stately Chariot with great Pomp into the City. Their nice and delicate way of Living (till it came to their very Children) both as to their Food and Raiment, was to that degree, that they wore Garments of Cloth of Gold, and had their Water-Pots and Boxes of Ointment, of Gold and Silver. There was one Gellias the Richest Man of all the Agrigentines, at that time, who built se∣veral Gellias's Ri∣ches. Rooms for publick Entertainment in his own House, and plac'd Porters at his Gates, charging them to invite all Strangers that pass'd by, to come in to be his Guests. Many others of the Agrigentines imitated his Example, who made it their business (after the ancient manner) to converse freely and cour∣teously with them they thus invited. And therefore Empedocles says thus of them— Hospitibus sancti portus, sine labe malorum.
It happen'd once, that Five Hundred Gelonian Horsemen came to his House in Ant. Chr. 403. Winter-time; whom he liberally entertain'd, and furnish'd every one of 'em out of his Wardrobe with Cloaks and Coats. Polyclitus in his History declares, P. 376. that when he was a Souldier in Agrigentum, he saw a Wine-Cellar in his House, in which were contain'd Three Hundred great . Vessels cut out of one and the same Rock, each of which receiv'd an Hundred . Hogsheads. And that near to these was plac'd a Cistern of pure white temper'd Mortar, containing a Thou∣sand Hogsheads, out of which the Liquor ran into the Ves∣sels. It's said that this Gellias was of a very mean Presence, Gellias a Rich Man of Aggenm∣tum, of mean Aspect, but admirable Parts. but of admirable Parts and Ingenuity. Being once sent an Embassador to the Centuripines; a People in Sicily: Their City call'd Centuripinum. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 3. c. 8. Centuripines; when he enter'd into the Assembly, all the People fell a Laughing, seeing the mean Aspect of the Man, so disagreeable to his great Fame and Reputation in the World. Upon which, he made this sharp Retort, That what they saw in him was not to be wonder'd at, because the Agrigentines always send the comliest and handsomest Men to the noblest Cities, but to those that were mean and of little note such as himself. And not only Gellias, but likewise many other Agrigentines were very rich. Antisthenes, another rich Man. Antisthenes surnam'd Rhodes, at the Marriage of his Daughter, feasted all the Citizens through every Street, and procur'd above Eight Hundred Chariots to attend upon the Bride: And not only Horsemen out of the City, but many who were invited out of the Country, went before the new Marry'd Lady in Ant. Chr. 403. great Pomp and Splendour. To add to the Solemnity of the Day, there were great Preparations for Illuminations in the City; for he order'd that as soon as they saw a Flame of Fire upon the top of the Castle, the Altars in all the Tem∣ples, and the Piles of Wood in all the Streets, and the Fewel he had pre∣par'd and provided in the Taverns, should be kindled together all at the same moment: Whose Command being observ'd at the very same instant, when the Bride was led forth by a Multitude that bore Torches before her, the whole City was as it were in a Flame, and the common Streets and Ways of the City were not able to contain those that attended at this Solemnity; all were so zealous to further and incourage the Gallantry and Magnificence of the Man. At that time there were more than Twenty Thousand Citizens of Agrigentum; but taking in Strangers with them, they were no less than . Two Hundred Thou∣sand. It is reported of Antisthenes, when he saw his Son pressing upon a poor Man his Neighbour, and would force him to sell a little Spot of Land to him, he chid his Son, and advis'd him to forbear a while; but his covetous Desire en∣creasing the more, he told him he should not strive to make his Neighbour Poor, but rather desire he should become Rich; for being Rich, he would covet a greater piece of Land, which when he was not able to pay for lack of ready Money, he would be content to raise Money by the Sail of that which he then had. In short, the Excess and Luxury of the Agrigentines, by reason of their Ant. Ch. 403. Riches was such, that not long after, in the very height of the Siege, which end∣ed in the Sacking of the City, a Decree was made, that none of them that were upon the Guard in the Night, should have above a Bed, a Tent, a Woollen Mantle and Two Pillows. When this seem'd a hard Law, and disturbance to their Ease and Repose, we may easily judge how soft and luxurious they were in all other things. As we were not willing to let these things pass altogether, so we shall now break off, lest we omit things more useful and necessary. The Carthaginians having landed their Forces in Sicily, marcht straight against Agrigenttum besieg'd by the Cartha∣ginians. the Agrigentines, and divided their Army into Two Parts, and incamp'd in Two several Places; one Camp was upon certain Hills, where were plac'd For∣ty Thousand Spaniards and Africans; the other was near the City, fortify'd with a deep Trench and a Wall. At the first they sent Embassadors to the Agri∣gentines, P. 377. to invite them to join with them as Confederates, and if they did not approve of that, then that they would be neuters, and enter into League of Peace and Amity with the Carthaginians. When both Offers were rejected, they forthwith press'd on the Siege with all Vigour. Upon this, the Agrigentines listed all that were able to bear Arms, and marshall'd them, some of which they plac'd upon the Walls, and others were appointed as Reserves to relieve
their Fellows as occasion offered. Dexippus the Lacedemonian was the Man that directed them in all things, who was lately come to their Assistance with Five Ant. Chr. 403. Hundred Souldiers from Gela: For he liv'd about that time (as Timeus relates) at Gela, in great Esteem for the sake of his Country: And therefore Applica∣tion was made to him by them of Agragentum, that he would hire as many Souldiers as possibly he could, and come to their Relief: Besides these, they hir'd Eight Hundred Campanians who had formerly serv'd under Imilcar. These kept the Hill Athenea which lay over, and commanded the City, a very commo∣dious Post. Imilcar and Hannibal the Carthaginian Generals having view'd the Walls, and found out a Place where it was most easie to enter, brought Two Towers of Agrigentum Besieg'd. incredible bigness against the City: The first Day out of these they made an Assault, and after they had kill'd and cut off many of the Citizens, sounded a Retreat. The next Night the Besieg'd made a Sally and burnt the Engines: But Hannibal intending to assault the Town in several Places at once, commanded his Souldiers to pull down all the Monuments and Tombs, and with the Rub∣bish to raise Mounts as high as the Walls, which was presently done, forward∣ed by so great a Multitude. But then a sudden Pang of . Religion seiz'd upon the Army; for Thero's Monument (a large and stately Structure) was beaten down by a Thunderbolt, which by the advice of some of the Soothsayers then present, put a stop to the perfecting of the Design, and forthwith the Plague A Plague a∣mong the Car∣thaginians. Ant. Chr. 403. broke out in the Army, by which many were destroyed in a short time, and not a few seiz'd with tormenting and miserable Pains, among whom Hannibal himself perish'd. Some that were upon the Watch, reported they saw in the Night, the Apparitions of them that were dead. Upon this, Imilcar seeing the Souldiers were possess'd with the fear and awe of the Gods, first forbore to demolish the Sepulchers: Afterwards he made (according to the Custom of his Country) Supplications to the Deities, and sacrific'd a Boy to Saturn, and threw Note the ma∣lice of the Devil, and the blindness of the poor Hea∣thens. a Company of Priests into the Sea, as a Sacrifice to Neptune. Notwithstanding all this, Imilcar forsook not the Siege, but choaking up the River with Rubbish close to the Walls, brought up his Engines, and renew'd his Assaults every Day. In the mean time, the Syracusians weighing the Condition of the Agrigentines, and fearing lest they should undergo the same Fate with them of Himera and Se∣linunte, were desirous to send them aid; And to that end having encreas'd their Army by the Forces of their Confederates from Italy and Messina, they made Daphneus General, and having mustered the Army, they set forwards, and in their March were join'd by the Camarineans, Geleans, and some others out of the heart of the Country, and all marcht strait for Agrigentum, having a Fleet of Thirty Gallies, which sail'd all along over against them near the Shoar. Daphneus had with him above Thirty Thousand Foot, and no less than Five Thou∣sand Horse. Imilcar upon intelligence of the approach of the Enemy, sent forth against them the Spaniards. Iberians and Campanians, and no less than Forty Thousand out of the rest of the Army. When the Syracusians had pass'd the River Himera, they were met by the Barbarians: Upon which, Battel was join'd, and after the Dis∣pute Ant. Chr. 403. had continu'd a long time, at length the Syracusians got the Day, who routed the whole Army, with the Slaughter of above Six Thousand Men, and The Cartha∣ginians rout∣ed. pursu'd the rest to the very City. But the Syracusian General perceiving his Men to be in disorder and confusion by their Pursuit, began to fear lest Imilcar breaking in upon them with the rest of his Army should recover the Day; for he remembred how Himereus had formerly lost all by such an Oversight. The P. 378. Barbarians flying into that part of the Camp which lay nearest to Agrigentum, the Besieged concluded they were beaten and fled, and therefore earnestly de∣sir'd their Commanders that they would lead them forth, crying out, Now was the time come for the utter ruin and destruction of their Enemies. But the Officers (whether corrupted by Money (as it was reported) or possess'd with fear lest Imilcar should slip into the Town when the Souldiers were gone forth) would not stir, but commanded the Souldiers to abide within the Town; by which means they that fled, came safe into the Camp. But Daphneus march'd forward, and incamp'd in the place where the Enemy before lay; to whom flockt pre∣sently the Souldiers out of the Town with Dexippus, and forthwith a Council of War was held, where all shew'd themselves very uneasie and discontented,
that the opportunity was neglected in taking full. Revenge of the Conquer'd Ant. Chr. 40. Barbarians, and that their Officers when they might have so easily destroy'd them by a Sally out of the Town, had suffer'd so many Ten Thousands clear∣ly to escape. Hereupon a Tumult arising in the Assembly with a great noise and clamour, one Menes a Camarinean, one of the Officers, stood up, and ac∣cused the Commanders of Agrigentum to such a degree, that he so exasperated the whole Assembly, that they that were accus'd, could not be heard to speak for themselves; but Four of them were out of hand ston'd by the inraged Mul∣titude. The Fifth call'd Argeus, in favour of his Youth, was discharged. Dexip∣pus likewise the Lacedemonian was ill spoken of, that he who was General of so considerable a Body of Men, and ever esteem'd a Man more expert in Martial Affairs than most others, should carry it so basely and treacherously. After the Council was broke up, Daphneus endeavour'd to force the Carthaginians Camp; but discerning it to be excellently well Fortify'd, drew off. Then he blockt up all the Passages with his Horse, intercepted the Forragers, and prevented all Provision being brought in to the Enemy, whereby they were reduc'd to great straits and necessities; for not daring to ingage, and yet in the mean time star∣ving for want of Bread, their Misery was the greater, and many were famish'd to Death. Upon this, the Campanians, and almost all the rest of the Mercenaries in a Bo∣dy came to Imilcar's Tent, to demand their allowance of Bread, and threatned to fall off to the Enemy if they had it not. But Imilcar being inform'd that the Syracusians had loaded their Ships with abundance of Corn for Agrigentum (upon which he rely'd as his last shift) persuaded the Souldiers to be patient Ant. Chr. 403. a few Days, and in the mean time, pawn'd to them the drinking Vessels of the Carthaginian Souldiers: Hereupon he sent for Forty Gallies from Panormus and Motya, and lay in wait for the Ships that brought the Provision. For the Sy∣racusians never suspected the Carthaginians durst appear at Sea, being now Win∣ter, and who had some time before lost their Power and Dominion there. Therefore sailing on with great assurance, they were on a sudden attack'd by Imilcar, with Forty Sail; who presently sunk Eight of their Ships, and drave the rest upon the Shoar: All which being thus taken, the Scene of Affairs was so chang'd on both sides, that the Campanians that were with the Agrigentines P. 379. (perceiving the desperate Condition of the Grecians) corrupted with Fifteen Talents, fell away to the Carthaginians. Besides, the Agrigentines at the begin∣ning of the Siege, when things went ill with the Carthaginians, were very pro∣fuse and prodigal, both in their Corn and other things, and therefore when the Affairs of the Barbarians were much alter'd to their advantage, the Besieg'd (being so many Thousands penn'd up together) were insensibly and by degrees brought into great want. It's reported that Dexippus the Lacedemonian also was brib'd with Fifteen Talents; for he on a sudden told the Italian Commanders, that it was better to withdraw, and carry on the War in some other Place, for here they were likely to be starv'd. The Officers therefore considering of Ant. Chr. 403. what he had said, march'd away with the Army to the Sea, as if now the time li∣mited by their Commissions had been determin'd. After their departure, the Generals with the other Officers met in a Council of War, and ordered that an Account should be taken what Provision was left in the City; and when a Return was made of the Scarcity, they saw it was absolutely necessary to quit the Place; whereupon they commanded all to be ready to be gone the next Night. Upon this, there was a lamentable out∣cry The lamenta∣ble Condition of the Inha∣bitants of A∣grigentum. in every House throughout the whole City, of Men, Women and Chil∣dren, being in a distraction through fear and dread of the Enemy on the one hand, and care of their Goods and Estates on the other, which now they must be forc'd in a great measure to leave to the Rapine of the Barbarians, and as an aggravation, being those very things wherein a little before they plac'd their happiness. However, at length, seeing that Fortune had stript them of all their Riches, they judg'd it was wisdom to do what they could to save their Lives. Then might be seen not only the mighty wealth of a flourishing City forsaken, but also a multitude of miserable People left behind; for those that were sick and infirm, were disregarded by them of their own Family, whilst every one sought to preserve himself; and those that through Old Age could
not remove, were in the like condition. Many that preferr'd Death before the Ant. Chr. 403. leaving of their Country, kill'd themselves, chusing rather to dye in their own Houses. But that multitude of People that did go forth, were guarded by the Souldiers to Gela, so that all the Ways and Country towards Gela, swarm'd with a promiscuous multitude of Women and Children; amongst whom, were young Ladies, who though they had now chang'd their former soft and deli∣cate way of Living, into the fatigues and sorrows of tedious Journeys, yet be∣ing quickned and stirr'd up by fear, bore all Difficulties with eminent Patience. They all came at length safe to Gela; and afterwards Leontium was given to them by the Syracusians to inhabit. Imilcar entring the City with his Army, not without some fear and jealousie, Agirgentum taken by the Carthagineans. kill'd almost all he found in it, not sparing those that fled into the Temples for refuge, but haling of them from the Altars, slew them with great cruelty. There (its said) Gellias, who was so eminent above the rest of his Countrymen, in the great∣ness of his Wealth, and integrity of his Conversation, ended his Life with the Loss of his Country: For he with some others fled to the Temple of Minerva, hoping the Carthaginians would not commit any outrages against the Gods: But when he perceiv'd the cursed Impiety of the Men, he set Fire to the Temple, and together with the Wealth that was there (consecrated to the Gods) burnt himself; by one act preventing Three Evils as he conceiv'd; the Impiety of Gellias, burns himself in the Temple. the Enemy against the Gods, the Rapine and Plunder of the vast Treasure that was there, and (that which was the greatest) the abuse of his own Body. Imilcar having spoil'd and plunder'd all Places both Religious and Prophane, got together from the Spoil so much Riches as a City that had been inhabited by Two Hundred Thousand Men, and never taken before since it was built; and that was the richest of all the Grecian Cities, might by an easie Computa∣tion Ant. Chr. 403. in that time heap together; especially since the Citizens made it their bu∣siness to be stately and magnificent in a wonderful manner in every thing they undertook: For many curious Pictures drawn with admirable Art, and an infi∣nite P. 380. number of Statues of all sorts, cut and wrought with singular ingenuity, were found here by the Conqueror. The best and choicest things (among which was the Phalarian Bull) he sent to Carthage; the rest of the Spoil he The Phalarian Bull. caus'd to be sold under the Spear. Timeus in his History, with great earnest∣ness denies that there ever was any such Bull, when as Fortune since has dis∣prov'd him; for Scipio Africanus Two Hundred and Threescore Years after this destruction when Carthage was raz'd, amongst other things which were then at Carthage, restor'd that famous Bull to the Agrigentines, which remains at A∣grigentum now at the time of the writing of this History; of which I have been the more desirous to speak, because Timeus with much bitterness inveighs against the Historians that were before him as altogether unpardonable; and yet he himself in those things wherein he most pretends an earnest and dili∣gent search after Truth, does nothing but meerly trifle; for in my Opinion we ought to have a favourable regard and respect to those Authors we differ from, because they are but Men, and the truth of things that are long before Ant. Chr. 403. past, are not easie to be discover'd. On the other Hand, those Writers that are careless and negligent in their Inquiries, are justly to be censur'd; and those especially may be well judg'd regardless of Truth, who make it their Bu∣siness to flatter some, and out of Envy to cast Dirt upon others.
CHAP. XIII. The Syracusian Officers accus'd. Dionysius made General of the Syracu∣sians. He moves to have the Exiles recall'd. He's invested with the sole Command. At length by several Artifices gains the Sovereignty. IMilcar having gain'd the City after Eight Months Siege, a little before the Winter Solstice, did not presently sack it, to the end the Souldiers might quarter there all the Winter. When the ruin of Agrigentum was nois'd A∣broad, the whole Island was struck with such Terror, that some of the Si∣cylians fled to Syracuse, and others transported themselves, their Wives, Chil∣dren and Moveables into Italy. When the Agrigentines that had escap'd, came to Syracuse, they accus'd the Commanders, affirming that they had betrayed their Country into the Enemies Hand; but the Syracusians cast the blame upon the other Sicilians, because they chose such a sort of Officers who endanger'd the loss of all Sicily by their Treachery. But when a Senate was call'd at Syracuse, they were in such a Consternation as none durst move or advise any thing concerning the War. And being all thus at a stand Dionysius the Son of Hermocrates renew'd the Accusation a∣gainst the Officers, That they had Betrayed Agrigentum to the Carthaginians, and stirred up the People forthwith to take Revenge, and not to wait for Formalities of Law in execution of Justice. But Dionysius being Fin'd accor∣ding Ant. Chr. 403. to Law by the Magistrates as a disturber of the publick Peace, Philistus (who afterwards writ a History, a very rich Man) paid the Fine for him, and bid him speak his Mind freely, and promis'd him to pay whatever was im∣pos'd upon him, if they fin'd him all the Day long. Dionysius being thus encouraged, he stirr'd up the People, and fill'd the As∣sembly with Tumult by his Criminations, charging the Commanders, that for Dionysius's Ac∣cusation of the Officers at Agrigentum. Bribes they had drawn off and forsaken the Agrigentines. He accus'd likewise many others of the best of the Citizens, traducing them that they aim'd to in∣troduce an Oligarchy; and told the Senate, That Commanders were not to be chosen according to their greatness in Power, but according to the Good Will and Regard they bore towards the People: For the Great Ones Lording it over them, had them in Contempt, and inrich'd themselves by the Losses of their Country; but Men of Low Fortunes never attempt any thing of such a nature, knowing their own disabi∣lity. When he had spoken what he had design'd, and so agreeable to the Hu∣mour P. 381. of the People, he set all the Assembly on a Flame; for the People be∣fore bore a secret Hatred to the Commanders, because they were suspected to have dealt falsly in the management of the War, and now being the more exasperated by the Speech of Dionysius, they forthwith depriv'd them of their Commands, and chose others in their room, amongst whom was Dionysius, a Dionysius cho∣sen one of the Generals. Man of great Esteem and Reputation with the Syracusians, for his approved Valour in several Battles against the Carthaginians. Having gain'd this step of Preferment, he contriv'd all ways imaginable how to advance to the Sovereign Power over his Country; for after he was in∣vested Ant. Chr. 403. His Contri∣vances to gain the Sovereign. Power. with the Command, he never associated with the other Commanders, nor join'd with them in any Council of War. In the mean time he caus'd Ru∣mours to be spread Abroad, that they kept secret Correspondence with the Enemy, hoping thereby to get them laid aside, and so to have the sole Com∣mand of the Army lodg'd in himself. While he was executing these Pro∣jects, the most prudent Citizens suspected him, and every Assembly gave very hard and ill Words. On the other hand, the common People ignorant of his Deceit and Fraud, prais'd every thing he did, and published every where, that now at length they had got a faithful and constant Guardian and Defender of the City.
The Consults concerning Preparations for War being very frequent, and Dionysius discerning that the Syracusians were in a great Fright, he advised to recall the Exiles: For he said it was a very absurd thing to receive Aids of Strangers from Italy and Peloponesus, and yet to be backward in making use of their own Countrymen to withstand the common Danger, who are solicited by the Enemy with great Promises of Reward to join with them, and yet are content to wander up and down amongst Strangers, and dye rather than do any thing prejudical to their Country. For though they were Banish'd for stir∣ring Ant. Chr. 403. up Sedition in the City, yet such kindness shew'd 'em, would in gratitude oblige them to fight chearfully for their Country. When he had spoken many things to this purpose, he at length procur'd the Suffrages of the People; for none of his Collegues durst contradict him, for that they both fear'd the Rage of the People, and likewise plainly saw, that nothing would redound thence, but hatred to themselves, and more love and favour to him. Dionysius did this, for that he look'd upon the Exiles to be Men fit for his purpose, such as were given to change, and therefore ready Tools to make use of to serve his Ambition; who would delight to see their Enemies Throats cut, their Goods and Estates confiscate, and themselves restor'd. The Decree therefore for the recalling the Banish'd being publish'd, they presently re∣turn'd. And now Letters coming from Gela, to desire Assistance to be speedily sent them, Dionysius made use of this fair opportunity for the carrying on his De∣sign; for he forthwith marched to Gela with Two Thousand Foot, and Four Dionysius re∣lieves Gela. Hundred Horse, where Dexippus the Lacedemonian was Governor, with a strong Garrison: When he found the City in a Seditious Uproar rais'd by some a∣gainst the People, he condemns them that were accus'd in a Publick Assembly, puts them to Death, and confiscates their Estates, and with part of the Mony paid the Souldiers, that were in Garrison under Dexippus, all their old Arrears, and the rest he distributed amongst the Souldiers that came with him from Sy∣racuse, declaring their Pay order'd by the City should be double. By this Ant. Chr. 403. means he wan both the Hearts of the Souldiers at Gela, and of those that went with him thither. The Geleans likewise cry'd him up to the Skies, as one that had freed them from Slavery: So that out of Envy to the great Men of the City, they decreed the Supream Power to Dionysius: Upon which, they sent Ambassadors to Syracuse to publish there his Praises, and likewise to shew the Decrees of the City, by which they had honour'd him with many marks of respect. In the mean time Dionysius endeavour'd to bring over Dexippus into his Coun∣cils, P. 382. but not being able to prevail, he determin'd to return to Syracuse with all his Forces. But the Geleans hearing that the Carthaginians had determin'd to set upon their City with their whole Power before any other, earnestly in∣treated Dionysius that he would not leave them, nor suffer their City to under∣go the same Calamity with them of Agrigentum. To whom he promis'd to return in a short time with greater Forces; and so left Gela. Afterwards when the People came from the Theater from the Plays, Dio∣nysius at that very Hour return'd into Syracuse; whereupon the Citizens came thronging about him, and inquir'd what News he brought concerning the Car∣thaginians: To whom he answer'd, That he had nothing to say of them, in regard their own Officers and Governors were more mischievous to the Commonwealth than the Enemies themselves; for whilst the Citizens led a∣way Ant. Chr. 403. by their Flatteries, were diverted with Sports and Plays, they them∣selves impoverished the Commonwealth, and defrauded the Souldiers of their Pay. And now, that the Enemy at this very time, is making incredible Preparation for War, and are even upon the Borders of Syracuse, with a mighty Army, yet it is not at all by them regarded. To what end they acted thus, he suspected long since, but now he saw clearly their Drift. For Imilcar (he said) had sent by an Herald to him, pretending to redeem some Captives, but in truth secretly to persuade him not to use that Autho∣rity he had, to pry too narrowly into things that were in doing, or at least not to obstruct them, if he was not willing to join in the Execution. Therefore he declar'd he was not willing any longer to be General, but
was ready to lay down his Commission. For it was altogether intollerable that he only should hazard the loss of all he had with the rest of the Ci∣tizens, whilst others made Merchandize of their Country: Yea, by this means, he should become Partaker with them in their Treachery. The Peo∣ple being inrag'd by what he had said, and his Words divulg'd through the whole Army, every one went to his own House, in great fear and perplexi∣ty. The next Day an Assembly was called, where he loaded his Fellow Com∣manders with many Accusations; and by stirring up the People against them, greatly advanced his own Reputation. At length some in the Assembly cry'd out, to make him Generalissimo; and not to have the thing to be done when the Enemy was even Battering the Walls; alledging that the greatness of the War requir'd a General that was able to do eminent Service for the Com∣monwealth. And for the Traitors, it was better to inquire of them in ano∣ther Ant. Chr. 403. Assembly hereafter; being now it was not so agreeable to the present po∣sture of Affairs. It was also remembred, that heretofore, when Gelon had sole the Command, they had overcome . Dionysius made sole Ge∣neral. Three Hundred Thousand Cartha∣ginians. Upon this, the People (who are always apt to close with the worst Ad∣vice) suddenly made Dionysius General with sole and absolute Power. After things thus succeeded according to his Hearts Desire, he sign'd an Order, that the Souldiers should receive double Pay; alledging, that hereby they would be encouraged to fight more readily and chearfully; and bid the Syracusians not trouble or disturb themselves about Money, for there would be ways readily found out to bring in sufficient Supplies. But when the Assem∣bly was broken up, there were many of the Syracusians that condemn'd what was done, as if they had had no hand in confirming it: For after they had more seriously considered the thing, they foresaw Tyranny would follow. Thus while they sought after Freedom, they most imprudently plac'd a Tyrant over their Country. Dionysius therefore to prevent the change of the Peoples Minds, began to contrive how he might procure a Guard for his Person: If he could gain this point, he concluded he could easily fix himself in the Sovereignty. Upon this, he commanded all that were able to bear Arms, not above Forty Years of Age, with Thirty Days Provision and their Arms, to march to the City Leontium: For this City was a Garrison belonging to the Syracusians, full of P. 383. Strangers and Exiles; whom he hop'd would be assistant to him, being Men given to Innovations; and to this he was the more encouraged, for that he Ant. Chr. 403. knew but few of the Syracusians would be there. For the better effecting of this Design, he encamp'd all Night in the Field; and as he lay there, he Dionysius his Project to get a Guard. feign'd a Plot against his own Person, and caus'd a great Noise and Clamour to be made by his Servants and Attendants, upon which he fled to the Castle: Where after he had kindled several Fires, he sent for a strong Guard, and so pass'd that Night. As soon as it was Day, and the Multitude were got together into the Leontium. Ci∣ty, he used many probable Arguments suted to the matter in Hand, and brought over the People to give him liberty to chuse Six Hundred Men, such as he thought best for his Guard. And herein Dionysius is said to imitate Pi∣sistratus the Athenian, for he wilfully wounding himself (as if he had been as∣saulted by Treachery) came forthwith into the Assembly, and by that means (as it's reported) got a Guard from the Citizens, by whose help he gain'd the Supream Authority. By the same Fraud, Dionysius cheating the People, became absolute Lord and Master over his Country; for he presently chose above a Thousand Men, such as were strong in Body, and low in Purse, and put them in Arms, and en∣couraged them with many large and glorious Promises. Then he brought all the Mercenary Souldiers to an intire Observance, and Obedience to him, by his winning and courteous Speeches. He made an alteration likewise in the Ant. Ch. 403. Regiments, giving Commissions to them that he could most trust. Then he sent away Dexippus the Lacedemonian into Greece, for he suspected him, lest he should become an Head to the Syracusians, in case they should take an occasion
to seek to recover their Liberty. And now he sends for the Mercenaries from Gela, and gets together from every Place, all the Exiles and Lewd Fel∣lows, not doubting but by the help of these to establish himself in the King∣dom. After his Return to Syracuse, when he had lodg'd his Forces in the . Dionysius de∣clares himself King. Arse∣nal, he openly declar'd himself King: The Syracusians took this grievously, but were necessitated to be silent, because it was not in their power to do any thing else: For the whole City was full of Strangers that were in Arms, and all were in fear of the Carthaginians, who had a vast Army near at Hand. Dionysius now presently marries the Daughter of Hermocrates (he who had routed the Athenians in Sicily) and gave his own Sister in Marriage to Po∣lyxenus, Hermocrates his Brother in Law. This he did to strengthen himself, by matching into an Honourable Family. After this, he summon'd a Gene∣ral Council, and contrived all ways imaginable, how to be rid of Daphneus and Demarchus, the most powerful of all his Adversaries. Thus Dionysius from a Scrivener, and a Man of poor and mean Abstract, got the Sovereignty of the greatest City among the Grecians, and maintain'd Ant. Chr. 403. his Dominion all the Days of his Life for the space of Thirty Eight Years. What things he afterwards did, and how he inlarged his Dominion, we shall relate in its proper Place: For very probably he gain'd the largest Dominion, and of the longest continuance of any that ever hath been compass'd by Usur∣pation. After the Taking of the City Agrigentum, the Carthaginians transported to Carthage all the dedicated things laid up in the Temples, the Statues and Things of greatest value; and having burnt all the Temples to Ashes, and plunder'd the City, they quarter'd there all Winter: And in the mean time furnish'd themselves with Engines and all sorts of Weapons, with a Design to Besiege Gela, the first thing they did the next Spring. CHAP. XIV. The Famous Battle of Arginuse at Sea, wherein the Athenians, were Victors. The Officers accus'd for not Burying the Dead. The Speech of Diomedon. The Death of Sophocles. THE Athenians weaken'd with continual Losses, made all Strangers and Fo∣reigners Free of their City that would engage with them in the War. When a great multitude were Incorporated into the City, the Commanders Listed all that were fit for War, Equip'd out of a Fleet of Sixty Sail, with which (every way well provided) they sail'd to Samos, where they found other Commanders, who had brought together Fourscore more Gallies from other Islands; and having procured P. 384. ten more from the Samians, they weighed Anchor, and made with their whole Fleet (consisting of an Hundred and Fifty Sail) to the Islands Three Is∣lands, lying between Les∣bos and Eo∣lis, near to Cane. Arginuse, with a Design to raise the Siege at Mitylene. But Callicratides, the Lacedemonian General, having In∣telligence of the Approach of the Enemy, left Etonicus with a great Force, to main∣tain the Siege, and sail'd himself with all Speed, with a Fleet of one Hundred and forty Sail, well Man'd, to Arginuse. These Islands were then inhabited, and had a lit∣tle Town in them Peopl'd by the Eolians. They lye between Mitylene and Cuma, near to the Continent and the Promontory Or Cane. Ant. Ch. 403. Catanides. The Athenians, in regard their Na∣vy, The Famous Battle of Ar∣ginuse. lay not far from thence, heard time enough of the Advance of the Enemy's Fleet: yet because the Wind was very high, they wav'd fighting that day, and prepar'd to engage the next. The like did the Lacedemonians; for the Augures on both sides dis∣swaded each from fighting. For the Head of the Lacedemonians Sacrifice, being laid upon the Shore, was suddainly wash'd away by the violence of the Waves. Upon
which the Priest foretold the death of the Admiral: To which it is reported Calli∣cratides made Answer, That the Glory of Sparta would not be obscur'd by his Death. Thrasybulus likewise, the Athenians Admiral, who had the Chief Command that Day, had this Dream; the Night before, he dreamt that he, and six other Commanders, in a full Theater at Athens, acted the Tragedy of Euripides, call'd Phenissa, and that the Enemies acted that call'd The Suppliants; and that at length he obtain'd a Thebes was built by Cadmus, and call'd Cadmea; and the Thebans lost so many (tho' they got the Victory) in the Old War of Thebes, that it was call'd Cadmea Victoria. The seven Ge∣nerals that came against Thebes, were all kill'd but one. See Diodor. lib. 4. 267, 268. Cadmean Victory, and all of them were kill'd, like those at the Siege of Thebes: which when the Sooth-sayer heard, he interpreted it, That seven of the Chief Commanders should fall in the Fight. But in regard that the Intrails portended Vi∣ctory, they commanded nothing should be said of their Deaths, but only to their Friends; but that they should publish abroad to the whole Army, that Victory was certainly promis'd by the View of the Sacrifices. Then Callicratides calling the Souldiers together, made a Speech to them suited to the Occasion; and further added, I am so chearful and ready to undergo all hazards for The Brave Speech of Cal∣licratides. the sake of my Country, that altho' the Augur has foretold my Death, by the Portents of the Sacrifice; yet inasmuch as he has also pronounc'd assured Victory to You, I am im∣patient of delay, and ready and willing presently to die. And that the Army may not Ant. Chr. 404. be disturb'd, and in confusion by the Death of their Admiral, I now appoint another, who may succeed me, in case I fall; and that is Clearchus, a Man known to be an expe∣rienc'd good Souldier. Callicratides stirr'd up many with these words, to imitate his Va∣lour, and to hasten the Battle. The Lacedemonians now encouraging one another, im∣barqu'd; so likewise the Athenians (hearten'd by their Officers) went aboard, and every one plac'd themselves according to their Squadrons. Thrasybulus and Pericles command∣ed the Right Wing, (this was Pericles the Son of that Pericles, the Famous Orator, whose Surname was Olympus.) But the Command of part of this Wing he deliver'd to Thera∣menes, who was at first but a Common Souldier, but afterwards at several times, com∣manded considerable Forces: the rest of the Officers he plac'd in their Order through∣out the whole Fleet; and compassing the Islands call'd Arginuse, he drew out his Fleet in a Line, as long as possibly he could. On the other side, Callicratides advancing into the open Sea, commanded the Right Wing: The Beotians were in the Left, com∣manded by Thrasonidas the Theban. But when they saw that they could not reach to equal the Line of the Enemy, because the Islands stretcht out so far, he divided his Navy into two parts, and fought in two places. This amaz'd the Beholders from all Ant. Chr. 403. P. 385. parts, as if four Fleets, with no less than three hundred Sail, close together, were hotly engag'd. For this was the greatest Sea-Fight that ever was fought, by Grecians against Grecians, that any History commemorates. And now at one instant all the Trum∣pets were commanded by the Admirals to sound a Charge, and the Armies on both sides set up great Shouts in their turns, one against another, and plying their Oars with great heat and earnestness, every one strove who should be the first in making the Onset. For there were many, that by reason of the long continuance of the War, were well instructed for Fights at Sea; and the Battle was very hot and obstinate on both sides, in regard the Best and Stoutest Men were got together to fight, in order to get or lose all at once: For none doubted but this Battle would put an end to the War, which side soever got the Victory. But Callicratides, knowing by the Predi∣ctions of the Augurs, that he was to die, endeavour'd to make his Death Honourable and Glorious. Therefore he made up fiercely upon the Gallies of Nausias, the Vice-Admiral, whom he sunk, with those next to him, at the first Charge; others he dis∣abled, striking them through with the Beaks of his Ships, and others he made useless for Fight, by brushing off their Oars. At length he struck the Ship of Pericles with such violence, that he tore off one great part from another. But the Fore-part of his own Ship was so fix'd by the Fierceness of the Stroak in the Prow of his Enemies Ship, that he could not clear himself off: Upon which Pericles cast Grappling-Irons into Ant. Chr. 403. Callicratides his Vessel, and so forc'd him up close side to side; and thereupon the Athe∣nians in a great Body, boarded him, and put all in the Ship to the Sword. Here it is reported, that Callicratides (after he had behav'd himself with great Gallantry a long time, and receiv'd many Wounds in all parts of his Body) at length weary'd out, fell Callicratides kill'd. down dead: The Report of his Death, running through the Fleet, the Peloponesians struck with a Pannick Fear, began presently to fly: But tho' the Right Wing fled, yet the Beotians in the Left, stuck to it, and fought stoutly for some time; for they of Eubea (being in the same common Danger) were very Faithful to them, and all those
that had revolted from the Athenians, were afraid lest they (if they recover'd their former Power) would revenge themselves upon them that had deserted 'em. But when the Beotians saw that the greatest part of the Fleet was routed and broken in pieces, and that they were more and more press'd upon by multitudes that made up upon them, they fled outright. Some of the Peloponesians fled to Chius, others to Cumea. But the Athenians pursu'd 'em very far, and fill'd all the Sea-Coasts with Carcasses of the Dead, and Wrecks of Ships. After this, some of the Commanders advis'd, that the Bodies of those that were slain, should be taken up, because the Athenians us'd severely to punish them, who neglected that last Office. Others were rather for sailing back forthwith to Mitylene, and in the first place to raise the Siege: But pre∣sently arose a most violent Tempest, by which the Ships were greatly shatter'd and broken; so that by this, and the toil of the late Engagement, the Spirits of the Souldiers were very low, so that the taking up the Bodies of the Dead was defer'd. Atlength, the Storm rag'd and increas'd to that degree, that they could neither gain Mitylene, nor Ant. Chr. 403. perform what they ought for the Dead: So that being driven back by the Storm, they arriv'd with the Fleet at Arginuse. In this Fight the Athenians lost five and twenty of their Ships, and most of their Men in them. But the Peloponesians seventy seven. There The Athe∣nians Victors at Arginuse. were so many Ships and Men destroy'd, that all the Sea-Coasts of Cumea and Phocea, seem'd to be fill'd with Carcasses and Wrecks. Eleonicus, who was besieging Mitylene, having certain Intelligence of the Defeat Mitylene re∣liev'd. P. 386. of the Peloponesians, sent away all the Shipping to Chios; he himself march'd away with the Land-Army, to a Confederate City of the Tyrrenians, being afraid, lest, by a Sally out of the Town, when the Athenian Fleet came up, his whole Army should be cut off. When the Athenians arriv'd at Mitylene, they took thence Conon along with them, with forty Sail, and pass'd over to Samos, and there wasted and spoil'd all their Ene∣my's Country. After these thing, the Lacedemonians in Eolis and Ionia, and the dispers'd Islands, met in a Common Council at Ephesus; and after many Bandings and Discourses, pro and con, they at length resolv'd to send an Ambassador to Sparta, to desire that Lysan∣der might be constituted Admiral of the Navy: For that he approv'd himself with great Commendation, when he was in Command, and was judg'd to be the most Ante Chr. 403. Shilful General. But because the Lacedemonians would not alter the Ancient Custom of their Coun∣try, they made Aratus Admiral; and sent Lysander with him, as a Private Man, to be his Assistant; with this strict Command, That the General should always follow his Advice and Councel. Thus being sent forth to manage the Command of the Fleet, they got togetherfrom Peloponesus and their Confederates, as many Gallies as possibly they could. The Athenians when they receiv'd the happy Tydings of their Success at Arginuse, highly applauded the Commanders for the Victory; but were very angry that they neglected to bury those, who had lost their Lives in the Defence of the Government. Theramenes and Thrasybulus, coming before the rest to Athens, the other Offi∣cers The Officers accus'd at A∣thens for not Burying the Dead. suspecting they would accuse 'em to the People for their Neglect, in not Bury∣ing the Dead, sent Letters against them, whereby they signify'd, that the Care of In∣terring them that were slain, was committed to them, which was the Chief Cause of all the Mischief that afterwards fell upon the other Officers. For whereas they might before have easily made Theramenes, and the rest of his Party, their Patrons and Ad∣vocats in the Accusations laid against them, being Men that were excellent Speakers, and of great Interest; and that which was most considerable, were best acquainted with every thing that was done in the Battle; Now on the contrary, they had so Ant. Chr. 403. far disoblig'd 'em, that they became their most bitter Enemies and Prosecutors. For when the Letters were read to the People, they were presently all on fire against The∣ramenes: But he having clear'd himself, their Rage was all turn'd again upon the other Officers. The People therefore assign'd 'em a Day to be heard, and order'd the For∣ces to be deliver'd over to Conon, whom they exempted from this Bill; all the rest they commanded by an Absolute Decree forthwith to return: Among whom Aristo∣genes and Protomachus, fearing the Rage of the People, fled: But Thrasyllus, Calliades, Lysias, Pericles, and Aristocrates, return'd to Athens, with agreat number of Ships, upon this Confidence, that by the Mediation of those they had brought along with them, who were very many, they should be acquit. But after the Assembly came together, the People yielded a quick Ear to the Accusations, and whatever the The Ora∣tors, or Coun∣sel for the People. Demagogues said, it was well taken; but when the Accus'd began to speak, a Tumult arose, and
they could not be heard in their own Defence. And besides, the Relations of them that were kill'd, did no little further their Ruin; who came weeping and wailing into the Senate, earnestly desiring that the Commanders might suffer for their Neglect, The Brave Athenian Offi∣cers put to Death by the People. in not Burying them, who had valiantly lost their Lives for their Country. At length, the Friends of the Dead, and those that prosecuted with Theramenes (of whom many were then present) prevail'd. And thereupon the Commanders were condemn'd to die, and their Estates to be conficate. Sentence being thus given, just as they were leading to Execution by the , She∣riffs. Lictors, Diomedon, one of them, an Excellent Souldier, and reputed a Just Man, and Eminent in all other Virtuous Qualifications, stood up, and Silence being made through the whole Assembly, thus began:—Ye Men The Speech of Diomedon. of Athens, we heartily wish that the Sentence now pronounc'd against us, may issue in the Prosperity and Happiness of this City: But since Fortune has prevented us Ant. Ch. 403. from paying our Vows, and giving Thanks to the Gods, for the Victory, 'tis most just and fit You should perform it: See therefore that Ye do it to Jove, to Apollo, and P. 387. the Glorious Goddesses; for by Prayers to them, we have overcome the Enemy. When he had said this, he was hurry'd away with the rest to Execution; many of the Best of the Citizens bemoaning his Fate with Tears, For he who now went to suffer, ne∣ver in the least complain'd of the Hardness of his Case, but only advis'd his Coun∣trymen: (who then acted so wickedly) to make their Addresses to the Gods; which was a clear Indication of a Man of a Pious and Generous Spirit, little deserving such base and unworthy Usage. In short, the Eleven Commanders were all put to Death, by the Officers appointed by Law, tho' they had never done the City the least Injury; but on the contrary, benefited their Country, by a Victory gain'd in a Sea-Fight, the Greatest that was ever fought, by Grecians against Grecians; and besides were Men whose Valour had been remarkable, in several Battles, and who had had Statues before erected in Memory of their Victories. The People were then so desperately mad and Ant. Ch. 403. enrag'd by the Orators, beyond all Bounds of Justice, that they gratify'd their Anger and Revenge, upon Men that were not only Innocent, but deserv'd rather Honour and Rewards. But not long after, both the Accusers that stir'd up the People, and the People themselves, who gave Credit to their Criminations, sorely Repented of what was done, as if God himself had taken Revenge of them for the Fact: For they that were so willing to be deluded by these Malicious Instigations, not long after receiv'd the Reward of their Folly; when not One, but thirty Domineering Masters were by force set over them. Then was Callixeus (he that gave Sentence of Death against the Ac∣cus'd) upon this Change of the People, charg'd as one that had deceiv'd them, and without being admitted to any Defence, was Committed, and carry'd to the Common-Goal; but by the help of some Friends, breaking through the Walls, he fled to the Enemy at Deoelea; so that by the Avoiding of Death at this time, he was pointed at, as it were, by the Finger, for his Notorious Wickedness, not only at Athens, but a∣mongst all the other Grecians abroad, all the Days of his Life after. These are almost all the Things that are reported to be done this Year. Amongst Philistus the Historian. the Writers, Philistus concludes the First Part of the Affairs of Sicily with this Year, and with the Taking of Agrigentum; comprehending in seven Volumes; the History of above Eight hundred Years. He begins the other Part where the former ended, and proceeds in his Relations contain'd in four Books. About this Time died Sophocles, the Death of So∣phocles. Tragedian, the Son of Theophilus, ninety Years of Age. He gain'd eighteen Victories upon the Stage: It's reported of him, That when he Acted his last Tragedy, and Euripides. came off Conqueror, he fell into so violent a Laughter, that he fell down dead. Ap∣pollodorus, Ant. Chr. 403. a Writer of Chronicles, reports that Euripides likewise died this Year. But others relate, That being entertain'd with Archelaus, King of Macedonia, once walk∣ing abroad into the Fields, some Dogs met him, by whom he was torn in pieces; and so miserably perish'd, a little before this Year.
CHAP. XV. Lysander made Sole Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet. He takes Cara∣mium. The Ruin of the Athenian Fleet at Aegos Potamos. Athens taken by Lysander. The End of the Peloponesian War. THE Year next before being ended, Alexias was made Archon of Athens this Year; Olymp. 93. 4. and at Rome three Military Tribunes again executed the Places of Consuls, Caius Julius, Publius Cornelius, and Caius Servilius. During their Magistracy, after the Com∣manders An. M. 3567. were put to Death, the Athenians made Philocles General of the Army; and Ant. Chr. 403. delivering the Fleet to him, sent him away to Conon, Commissioning them with a Philocles and Conon, joyntly Commission'd Joynt-Power, in the Management of the War. When he came to Conon at Samos, he Man'd all the Ships to the number of an hundred seventy three. Twenty of these he left there, and with the rest he and Conon set Sail for the Hellespont. Lysander, in the mean time, High-Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet, with 35 Sail, P. 388. which he had got together from Peloponesus, and their Confederates, next adjoyning, Ant. Chr. 403. pass'd over to Ephesus; and fitted out a Fleet, which he sent for from Chios. Then he goes to Cyrus, the Son of Darius, and receives from him a great Sum of Mony, for A cruel Sedi∣tion at Miletus. Payment of the Army. Cyrus being sent for by his Father into Persia, intrusts the Ma∣nagement of the Affairs of his Provinces to Lysander; and commands all the Tribute The Feast of Bachus. Ʋsher's Annal. 161. to be pay'd to him: who being now fully supply'd with all things necessary for the War, returns to Ephesus. At this Time some in Miletus, that favour'd an Oligarchy, by the help of the Lacedemonians, abolish'd the Democracy. And to that End, in the beginning of the Sedition, when the Dionysian Festivals were celebrated, forty that were the Greatest Enemies against their Faction, were surpriz'd in their Houses, and murther'd. Afterwards, observing their Opportunity, when the Forum was full of People, they cut off the Heads of 300 of the Richest of the Citizens. In the mean time, above 1000 of the most Considerable Persons of Quality, who were for the Democracy, afraid of the Present imminent Danger, fled to Pharnabasus, the Persian Lord-Lieutenant, who receiv'd them very courteously, and bestow'd upon every one a Worth 15 Shill. English. Stater of Gold, and order'd The Island mention'd Acts 27. 16. Ʋsh. An. 161. Clauda, a Castle of Claudia for their Residence. Lysander, with a great Navy, making for This is said to be mistaken for Caramium, a Bay in Caria; for that Tha∣sus is an Isle, and lies far off, and was taken some time af∣ter. Ʋsh. Ann. 160. Aemil. Probus in the Life of Lysand. Thasus, a City of Caria, in League with the Athenians, takes it by Storm, and puts all the Men to the number of 800 to the Sword, and sold all the Women and Children for Slaves, and raz'd the City to the Ground. After this he sail'd to Attica, and many other Places; but did nothing me∣morable. Therefore we have nothing to write further concerning these Matters. The Sum of all is, having taken Lampsatus, he dismiss'd the Athenian Garrison there, and sent them Home; and after he had , Sub ha∣sta vendidit. Ant. Ch. 404. plunder'd the City, restor'd it to the In∣habitants. The Athenian Admirals, having Intelligence that the Lacedemonians had besieg'd Lampsacus with all their Forces, got together all their Fleet from every place, and with all speed made for Lampsacus, with an hundred and fourscore Sail; but hearing that it was taken, they Anchor'd at In the Strait of the Helle∣spont. Aegos Potamos, and there lay. Not long after they weigh'd Anchor, and made out against the Enemy, and dar'd them every Day to a Battle; but when the Peloponesians would not stir, the Athenians began to consi∣der what was best to be done, for that they could not stay long there with the Fleet. Hereupon Alcibiades came to them, and assur'd them that Medocus and Seuthes, Kings of the Thracians, who were his special Friends, had offer'd him a great Army, if he would fight against the Lacedemonians; and therefore, if he might have some share in the Command, he ingag'd either to force the Lacedemonians to sight at Sea, or to fight them at Land, by an Army out of Thrace. This Alcibiades did to evidence how great his desire was to procure some Eminent Advantage to his Country, and by fresh Ser∣vice, to regain their former good Opinion of him. But the Athenian Commanders Ant. Chr. 403. concluded, that if matters fell out ill, all the Blame would be laid upon them; and if well, Alcibiades would reap all the Honour of the Victory. Therefore they order'd him to withdraw, and not to come near the Army for the future.
The Enemy still avoiding a Fight, and Provision growing scarce in the Army Phi∣locles, The Surprize of the Athe∣nians at Ae∣gos Potamos Egos, or Pota∣mos. who commanded that day, order'd the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, to ship their Men, and follow him, who having thirty Sail in readiness, forthwith loos'd out of the Harbour. Lysander having Intelligence of this, by some Deserters, makes out to Sea with his whole Navy, puts Philocles to Flight, and sails up to the rest of the Athenian Fleet. Hereupon the Athenians which lay there (in regard they had but few of their Men on Board) were all in a great Fear, and Consternation, through the unexpected Approach of the Enemy. Lysander therefore, understanding the Confusion and Dis∣order of his Enemy's Fleet, commanded Etonicus on Shoar with the Land-Army, who P. 389. forthwith being now landed, judg'd it highly necessary to improve the present Op∣portunity; and therefore suddainly forces into part of the Enemy's Camp: And Ly∣sander himself coming up with all his Fleet, well Man'd and provided, hal'd as many of the Athenian Vessels as there were in the Harbour, with Grappling-Irons, to the Shoar. Upon this the Athenians were so amaz'd, and struck with such a suddain asto∣nishment, Ant. Chr. 40. (not having time either to make out to Sea with their Ships, or to form themselves into a Body at Land) so that after a short Resistance, they turn'd their Backs. Hereupon some forsook their Ships, others fled out of the Camp; every one seeking where he could best preserve himself. Scarce ten of all the Commanders and Officers of the Fleet escap'd; amongst whom was Conon, who not daring to return to Athens, out of fear of the People, fled to Evagoras, Prince of Cyprus, his special góod Friend. Many of the Souldiers fled by Land to Sestos. Lysander possess'd himself of all the rest of the Fleet, and took Philocles, one of the Generals, prisoner, and carry'd him to Lampsacus, where he put him to death. Then he commanded Messengers to Lace∣demon The total Rout of the Athenians at Aegos Pota∣mos. to carry the News of the Victory; and order'd one of the Best of the Gallies to transport 'em, magnificently, adorning it with the Arms and Spoils taken from the Enemy. Next, he march'd with his whole Army to Sestos, in pursuit of those that fled thi∣ther, took the City, and dismiss'd the Athenians upon Terms. From thence he sail'd with all speed to Samos, and forthwith prepares to besiege the City; but sent away Gylippus (he who so eminently assisted the Syracusians at Sea) to Sparta, with fifteen Ant. Chr. 403. hundred Talents of Silver, besides the Spoils. The Mony was made up in little Bags, and to every Bag was fix'd a A little Thong of Parchment, wrapt about a Staff, and then taken off; which would agree exactly with another Staff at Sparta when it was lapt about it; and so the Letters could be read. Seytale, upon which was written the Sum of Mony therein contain'd. Gylippus, being ignorant of what was done, unties the Bags, and takes out three hundred Talents; but his Theft being discover'd to the Ephori, by the Scytales, he fled, and thereupon was condem'd to die. Clearchus, the Father of Gylippus, in former times, for his having receiv'd Mony of Pericles, not to invade Attica, likewise fled, and was adjudg'd to die, and liv'd all his Days a Banish'd Man among the Thurians in Italy. These two Men, who were otherwise Virtuous; yet by these sordid Acts, stain'd and blemish'd all the Worthy Actions of the rest of their Lives. When the Athenians were fully satisfy'd that they were totally ruin'd, they deter∣min'd to strive no longer to be Masters at Sea; but now employ'd all their Care to re∣pair their Walls; and block't up the Haven, expecting nothing more certain than a Siege, which happen'd accordingly; for presently both Agis and Pausanias, the Lace∣demonian Generals, broke into Attica with great Forces, and incamp'd under the very Walls of Athens. And Lysander entred the Pyraeum, with above two hundred Sail. The Athenians, tho' they were press'd on every side with so many Mischiefs, yet stood out, and easily defended the City for some time. But the Peloponesians resolv'd in Council, in regard it would be very difficult to force the Place, to withdraw their Forces out of Attica, and by their Navy, to hinder all Provision from being brought into the City: Which being put in Execution, the Athenians were reduc'd into ex∣tream Want of all things, especially of Food; which was us'd to be imported to them by Sea. Want pressing upon them every day more and more, the City was fill'd with the Dead. Upon which, those that surviv'd sent forth Ambassadors, and procur'd the Terms and Conditions following; viz. That the Long Fortifications of the Piraeum, Athens taken. Ant. Chr. 403. and their Walls should be demolish'd: That they should never have above ten Long Ships: That they should leave all the Cities, and be Subject to the Lacedemonians. And The End of the Pelopone∣sian War. thus ended the Peloponesian War, after it had continu'd Seven and twenty Years; a War of the longest Duration of any come to our Knowledge.
CHAP. XVI. Agrigentum sackt by Imilcar the Carthaginian. The Carthaginians besiege Gela. Dionysius goes to the aid of Gela. The Skirmishes before Gela. Camarina deserted by the Order of Dionysius. The Souldiers inrag'd at Dionysius, he hastens to Syracuse. Imilcar makes Peace with Dionysius, and returns to Carthage. The end of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius. A Little while after. Darius Nothus, who ordered the rebuilding of the Temple. P. 390. Darius King of Asia died, having reigned Nineteen Years; Artaxerxes Mnemon, in whose Twentieth Year Nehemiah came to Jerusalem. The Carthaginians Spoils in Sicily. Artaxerxes his Eldest Son succeeded him in the Kingdom, and reign'd 43 Years. About this time Apollodorus the Athenian re∣ports, that Antimachus the Poet flourish'd. Imilcar the Car∣thaginian General, at the return of the Spring, sack'd the City Agrigentum in Sicily, and carry'd away the Carv'd Work, and richest Furniture out of all those Temples that were not utter∣ly consum'd by the Fire. From hence he made an inroad with his whole Army into the Country of Geloa. From whence, and from the Camarineans (having made great Devastations,) he fill'd his Camp with all sorts of Plunder. Then marching for Gela, he incampt at a River of the same Name. There was a brazen Statue of Apollo, of a wonderful bigness at Gela in the Suburbs of the City, which the Carthaginians took and sent a∣way Ant. Chr. 403. to Tyre. The Geleans had dedicated it by the Command of the Oracle of Apollo. But the Tyrians some time after, when they were Besieg'd by Alexander the Mace∣donian, reproach'd the Image, as if it sided with the Enemy. But after that Alexander had taken the City, the very same Day of the Week, and the very Hour (as Timeus reports) that the Carthaginians committed the Sacriledge against Apollo at Gela, the Grecians honour'd the God with many magnificent Gifts and costly Sacrifices, as he by whose help they had won the City. Though these things happen'd in times far distant one from another, yet because the thing . The Cartha∣ginians be∣siege Gela. was very remarkable, I thought it no digression to compare one Event with the other in this Place. The Carthaginians when they had cut down all the Trees about Gela, fortify'd themselves by a Wall and deep Trench drawn round their Camp; for they expected that Dionysius would come to the aid of the Besieg'd with a great Army. They of Ge∣la had at the beginning of the Siege to avoid Danger, determin'd to send away their Wives and Children to Syracuse; but when the Women all ran together to the Altars in the Forum, earnestly praying that they might undergo the same Fate with their Husbands, they were suffered to stay. After this, the Souldiers in the Town divi∣ding Ant. Chr. 403. themselves into several Squadrons, sent out part Abroad; who being well ac∣quainted with all the Ways and Passages, fell upon the Enemy that were straggling here and there, and not only brought in Prisoners every Day, but kill'd many. And when the Carthaginians had batter'd down part of the Walls with their Rams, the Besieg'd stoutly defended them, and what was beaten down in the Day, both Wo∣men and Children join'd with the rest and repair'd in the Night: For they that were young and able, were continually in Arms, and ingag'd with the Enemy; the rest were diligently imploy'd in working and other necessary Services. To conclude, they bore the brunt with that Valour and Resolution, that though their City was unfor∣tify'd, and they receiv'd no Aid from their Confederates, and their Walls were broke down in many Places, yet Fear did not at all abate their Courage. In the mean time Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse, sent for the Grecian Succours in Dionysius ha∣stens to aid Gela. Italy, and Aids from his Confederates, and imploy'd every one almost that was a∣ble to bear Arms in Syracuse, and join'd the Army of the Mercenaries with the rest. The whole amounted not to above Fifty (as some report) but (as Timeus relates) not above Thirty Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, with Fifty Sail of Ships. With these Forces he hastens to the Aid of Gela. When he arriv'd at the City, he encamp'd near the Sea: This he did that his Forces might not be divided, but might fall upon the Enemy both by Sea and Land at once; for by skirmishing with his Ant. Chr. 403. light Arm'd Men, he prevented their Foraging. And by his Horse, and the help of P. 391. his Shipping, he endeavour'd to intercept all Provisions that should be brought to the Carthaginians from any part of their Dominions. However he effected nothing, after he had continu'd there Twenty Days. After this, he divided his Foot into Three
Bodies; one he deliver'd into the Hands of the Sicilians, with a Command that ha∣ving the City on the Left, they should fall upon the Trenches and Fortifications of the Enemy: Another Body made up of Succours from the Confederates, he order'd should leave the City on the Right, and march to the Shoar. He himself with the Mer∣cenaries design'd to pass through the City, to the Place where the Carthaginian En∣gines were plac'd; and commanded the Horse, that as soon as a Sign was given by the Foot, they should pass the River, and disperse themselves over the Fields; and if they discern'd that their own Party prevail'd, they should join 'em, and if worsted, should succour them. He commanded likewise the Officers of the Fleet, that as soon as the Italian Bands came up, they should sail near to the Enemies Camp. While e∣very one was executing the Orders given him in charge, the Carthaginians oppos'd the Enemies landing, and made it their business to defend that part of their Camp towards the Shoar where it was not fortify'd. At the very same instant, the Italians coming in near the Shoar, set upon the Carthaginians Camp, and there intercepted many that had issu'd out to prevent the Landing: And when they had put them to Ant. Chr. 403. flight that were left to guard that part, they assaulted the whole Camp. Upon which the Carthaginians with the greatest part of their Army (now return'd) hotly ingag'd them, and with much ado drave them back beyond the Trenches which they had gain'd, and pass'd. The Italians being overpowr'd with the multitude of the Barba∣rians, were forc'd to retreat, and fell into a straight and narrow Pass within the Lines, none of their Fellows advancing to support them; for the Siculi who were far off, came not up in convenient time; and Dionysius's Mercenaries because they could not march swift enough through the Streets of the City, could not succour them. Indeed the Gelns for a little way made a Sally to relieve the Italians, but fearing the Walls would be left naked, they halted and return'd; so that the Iberians and Campanians, with the Carthaginian Auxiliaries, fell very sharply upon the Greeks of Italy, and kill'd above a Thousand of them; but the Pursuers being driven back by Darts and other Shot from the Ships, the rest came safe into the Town. In the mean time the Siculi being ingag'd with the Carthaginians in another part, kill'd ma∣ny of them, and pursu'd the rest up to their very Camp. But both the Iberians, Campanians and Carthaginians coming to the aid of the Africans, the Siculi having lost Six Hundred Men, return'd into the City. The Horse likewise when they saw all was lost, made to the City, especially for that the Enemy was pressing upon them on e∣very side. Dionysius having passed through the City with his Mercenaries with great difficulty, when he understood that his Army was broken, marcht back, and shelter'd himself within the Walls of the Town: Then calling a Senate of those that were Ant. Chr. 403. Friends, they consulted concerning the present state of the War; where it was con∣cluded by all, that (because the Enemy was so strong) that was now no Place to put all to hazard. Dionysius therefore sent forth a , an Herald. Trumpet in the Evening, to gain a Cessation of Arms for the burying of the Dead till the next Day. Then about the first Watch of the Night, he sent a Multitude of People out of the Town, and he himself about Midnight march'd forth with the Army, leaving behind him 2000 light Arm'd Men, commanding them to make Fires all the Night long, and set up continual Shouts that the Enemy might believe that the whole Army was still in the Town; but as soon as it began to be light, those left behind with a swift March follow'd Dionysius's Army. When the Carthaginians understood the Cheat, they led P. 392. the Army into the City, and made a Prey of whatever was left in the Houses. When Dionysius came to Camarina, he caus'd all the Citizens, with their Wives The Sedition of the Cama∣rineans and Geleans. and Children to remove to Syracuse; and because Fear would not admit of any de∣lay, some carry'd what Gold and Silver they were able; others with their Parents and little Children hasten'd away, without the least regard to their Estates. Some who were old and sick, were left behind by their Friends and Relations, every one thinking that the Carthaginians were at his Heels: For the late ruin and destruction of Sclinunte, Himera and Agrigentum struck all with such a terrour, and fill'd every one with such an apprehension of the Beastly cruelty of the Barbarians, as if it had been then present before their Eyes; for they put all the Captives to the Sword, shew'd no Compassion to any; some they crucify'd, and others they tormented with intole∣rable Scoffs and Reproaches. The Souldiers of Dionysius seeing Men, Women and Children driven in Droves from Two several Cities in one and the same Country, were much incens'd, pitying the sad Condition of the miserable People: For when they saw young Gentlemen and Ladies in marriagable Estate, unbecoming their State and Age, tumultuously and regardlesly to be driven, led and drag'd in Droves
through the High-ways, the time not allowing any regard or respect either to old and grave Men, or young and tender Women, they were not a little affected: And especially it greatly griev'd them, to see decrepit old People forc'd beyond the strength of nature, to go as fast as those that were young. These were the things that enflam'd the Souldiers with Rage against Dionysius; for they suspected that he did this on purpose, that he might gain the Sovereignty over the rest of the Cities, through their fear of the Carthaginians: For they mutter'd among themselves, how small a time he gave his Assistance; that none of his Mercenary Souldiers were kill'd; that he fled so hastily when he had suffer'd so little Loss, and especially when no Enemy pursu'd. Therefore all those who had long wisht for an opportunity to revolt, now did their utmost to shake off the Yoke of his Tyranny, prompted there∣unto . as it were by the instinct of a Divine Providence. So that all the Italians forth∣with left his Camp, and marcht homewards through the Heart of the Country. The Syracusian Horsemen likewise watch'd for an opportunity how they might readily kill the Tyrant on the Road: But observing the Mercenaries constantly to attend Ant. Chr. 403. close to his Person (unanimously with one consent) they set Spurs to their Horses, and rode away to Syracuse, where they enter'd into the Arsenal without any opposi∣tion; A Revolt by the Horsemen from Diony∣sius. the Guard being altogether ignorant of what was done at Gela. Upon their coming there, they forthwith rifled Dionysius's Palace, and carry'd away all his Gold, Silver and rich Furniture out of his House, and most cruelly and filthily abus'd his Wife, to vex and molest the Tyrant the more, and that this sort of Revenge might Their vile a∣buse of his Wife. be a clear Evidence to him, of the Conspiracy against him. Dionysius suspecting upon his March what was done, hastens to the City with all the Horse and Foot he could confide in, with all possible speed; for he concluded he had no better course to take to disappoint the Horsemen that were gone, than to pre∣vent all intelligence, judging his Design would be more easily accomplish'd, if he were sooner at Syracuse than they could believe; which happen'd accordingly: For the Horsemen thought that Dionysius durst neither stay with, nor be far from his Ar∣my. And therefore now as confident that they had gain'd their purpose, they nois'd Abroad that Dionysius pretended to fly from Gela for fear of the Carthaginians, but in truth he fled from the Syracusians. In the mean time Dionysius having marcht with∣out stop almost 19 Leagues, or 50 English Miles. P. 393. 400 Furlongs, came about Midnight to the Gates of Acradine, with 100 Horse, and 500 Foot, and finding them shut against him, caused Reeds there ready gather'd out of the Fenns (with which the Syracusians used to burn Lime) to be put to the Gates: While the Gates were on Fire, those that marcht flower came up to him: And when they were burnt down, he forthwith entred through Acradine with all the Forces with him. Upon which, those Horsemen (who were very few) that were of the Noblest Birth, and greatest Wealth (without staying for the Peoples help) got together in the Market-Place to oppose the Enemy; but were presently surrounded with the Mercenaries, and every Man kill'd with Darts and Pikes. Then Dionysius scouring the Streets of the City, put all to the Sword he met that were run∣ning Dionysius's Rage and Cruelty in Syracuse. here and there to aid their Fellows; and not only so, but enter'd likewise into the Houses of those he took to be his Enemies, of whom, he cut the Throats of some, and banish'd others. The rest of the Horsemen escap'd out of the Walls to that part of the City call'd Acradine. About break of Day the next Morning, all the rest of the Mercenaries, and the whole Sicilian Army came to Syracuse; but the Geleans and Ca∣marineans incens'd against Dionysius, turn'd off to Leontium. Imilcar at length forc'd by the Circumstances of his Affairs, sends an , in Modern Times a Trumpet. Herald to Syracuse, to offer Terms of Peace to the Conquer'd: This was very acceptable News to Dionysius, and thereupon Peace was made upon these Conditions, That besides the ancient Colonies the Sicanians, Selinuntes, Agrigentines and the Himereans, should be under the Power of the Carthaginians: That they of Gela and Camerine should be suf∣fer'd Ant. Ch. 403. A Peace by the Cartha∣ginians with Dionysius. to inhabit in their own Cities, yet without Walls, and be Tributary for the future to the Carthaginians: That the Leontines, Messenians and all the Sicilians should be free, and injoy all their own Laws and Liberties, save that the Syracusians should be subject to Dionysius. When all these Articles were ratify'd, the Carthaginians past over to Ly∣bia, after they had lost above one half of their Army by the Plague, which afterwards raging through Lybia, Multitudes perish'd both of the Carthaginians and their Confe∣derates. And now we are come to the end of the Wars; of the Peloponosian War in Greece, and of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius in Sicily: And so having finished what we hitherto design'd, we shall treat in the next Book of those Affairs thar fell out afterwards.
BOOK XIV. IT's Common and Natural to every Man to be touch'd to the Quick, to hear him∣self PREFACE. Evil spoken of. For even they that are so notoriously Wicked that they cannot escape Reproaches, yet if they be told of their Faults, are presently in a Rage, and do all they can to palliate and cover their Crimes with fine∣spun Excuses. Every one therefore ought to be very careful to avoid the doing of that which is of bad report, especially those that are in high Place and Power, and advanc'd above others in Dignity. For their actions, by reason of their eminency in the World, being more conspicuous than others, their Faults and Miscarriages likewise are more obvious. Therefore, let none in such places of Power and Authority, think to a∣void Censures and Reproaches, if they are Corrupt and Unjust in their Administration. For should they escape Infamy and Disgrace during their Lives, yet let them be assur'd, that after-times will publish that Truth (to the stain of their Memory) which was stifled and smother'd some time before. Let this therefore startle wicked Men to consider, that they leave behind them an ugly Representation of themselves, to the view of Posterity for ever. For though those things that follow after Death do nothing at all concern us, (as some Philosophers have spread abroad among the Common People) yet a wicked Course of Life is far the worse, inasmuch as the remembrance of it is hateful to all Posterity. Of which truth, he who seriously considers things related in this Book, may find ready at hand most clear and evident Examples. For the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, who by their Covetousness and Ambition involv'd their Country in dreadful Calamities, thereby in a short time not only lost their Authority, but left behind them an immortal stain and dishonour to their Names. And the Lacedaemonians, who had undoubtedly gain'd the Sovereignty of all Greece, lost what they gain'd, when they began to oppress their Asso∣ciates and Confederates: For the Thrones of Princes are supported by Justice and Mercy, but are overturn'd by Cruelty and Oppression of their Subjects. As we may see in the Example of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, who though he had the smiles of Fortune above all the other Princes before him, yet Plots were to intrap him all his Life long; so that for fear of being Assassinated he was necessitated to wear an Iron Breast-plate upon his Coat, and after his Death, became an Instance and Example of the Peoples hatred to all succeeding Generations. But we shall speak of these things P. 396. in their proper Places. And now we come to those Affairs that have a Coherence with them before related, only distinguish'd by difference of Times. For in the foregoing Books we have treated of Things that were done from the sacking of Troy, to the End of the Peloponnesian War, and the Athenian Dynasty; which comprehends the space of Seven hundred Seventy nine Years. In this we shall add what next follows in order, and begin with the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, and from thence come down to the Taking of Rome by the Gauls, wherein is contain'd the History of Eighteen Years.
CHAP. I. A Peace between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. The Athenians disagree a∣bout the Manner of their Government. The Government by Thirty. The Cruelty of the Thirty Tyrants, and especially towards Theramenes. BY the Dissolution of the Government at Athens (which happen'd the Seven hundred and Eightieth year current from the Destruction of Troy) the City was involv'd in an Olymp. 94. 1. An. M. 3568. Ant. Ch. 402. Anarchy; at that time werefour Military Tribunes appointed at Rome to execute the Con∣sular Dignity, Caius Furius, Caius Servilius, Caius Valerius, and Numerius Fabius. And this Year was celebrated the Ninety Fourth Olympiad, in which Cocynas of Larissa was Victor. About this time the Athenians (their Power being broken) obtain'd a Peace with the Lacedae∣monians, and liberty to govern according to their own Laws, upon Condition they demo∣lish'd their Walls, which they pull'd down accordingly, but could not agree among them∣selves about the Form of their Government. For they that were for an Oligarchy gave their Votes for the restoring that ancient Government. But the greatest part who stood up for the Democracy, preferr'd the Government by the Senators, declaring that to be the truest Democracy. When this banding one against another had continu'd some days; they for the Oli∣garchy sent to Lysander the Spartan, hoping thereby to gain the Point, in regard he was order'd (now the War was at an End) to settle the Government of the Cities, and in every Place he set up an Oligarchy. To this end they sail'd to him to Samos, where he then was, having lately taken the City. When they arriv'd and had crav'd his assistance he promis'd them his Aid; and thereupon (after he had made Thorax Governor of Samos) pass'd over to the Pireum with an hundred Sail. Then calling a General Assembly, he ad∣vis'd them to chuse Thirty Men, who should Govern the Common-wealth, and Manage all the Affairs of the City. Theramenes oppos'd this Proposal, repeating the Articles of Ant. Ch. 402. the Peace, whereby it was agreed, That they should be govern'd according to the Laws of their own Country; and declar'd it would be a most intolerable piece of Injustice, The Thirty Ty∣rants chosen at Athens. if (against the Sacred Ties of an Oath) their Liberties must be thus ravish'd from them. Lysander answer'd, That the Athenians had first broken the League themselves, because they did not pull down their Walls within the time agreed, and grievously threaten'd Theramenes, and told him, That unless he desisted from his Oppositions against the Lacedae∣monians, he would put him to Death. Upon this, both Theramenes and the People, being in a great Fright, were forc'd by a general suffrage to abolish the Democracy: and Thirty Men were forthwith chosen to be Governors of the Common-Wealth, in Name call'd Fit Magistrates, but in Deed and in Truth nothing but Tyrants. But because the Justice and Moderation of Theramene P. 397. was evidently discern'd by the People, they judg'd he would be a Bridle to the Covetous∣ness Theramenes chosen one of the Thirty. of the rest of those plac'd over them, and thefore chose him to be one of the Thirty. The Duty and Office of these Men was to chuse the Members of the Senate; to create Magistrates, and to make Laws for the Government of the City. But they forbore to make any Laws upon many specious pretences. Yet they fill'd the Senate and all the Ant. Ch. 402. Places in the Magistracy with their own Creatures; who were call'd Pretors, but in truth, were meerly the Tyrants Tools. At first they executed Justice upon Malefactors with great Severity, to the putting of them to Death: So that as yet they were well spoken of, and commended by every ho∣nest Citizen. But not long after, when they resolv'd to be Lawless, and set up an Arbi∣trary The Cruelty of the Thirty Ty∣rants of A∣thens. Power: they sent for a Garison from the Lacedaemonians, upon pretence that they would mould all things in the Government to the advantage of their Interest. For they knew very well that without a Foreign Force, they could not execute those Slaughters and Butcheries they design'd, for that all would as one Man rise up against them in their own defence. When the Garison from Lacedaemon was come, they presently gain'd the Governor Cal∣libius, with Bribes and other fawning and flattering Addresses. Then they singled out some of the richest Citizens, such as they thought fit, and charging them as Innovators, and Plotters against the Government, put them to Death, and consiscated their Estates. But when Theramenes oppos'd his Collegues, and others (who were Zealous for the Com∣mon-Wealth) stood up for the Defence of their Liberties; the Thirty call'd a Senate, in Ant Ch 402.
which Critias, the President, loads Theramenes with many grievous Crimes, and chiefly, that he betray'd that Government, in the Administration of which he himself voluntarily accepted a share with the rest. Theramenes, in Answer to what he said, so clear'd himself of every particular laid to his Charge, that he gain'd the good Opinion of the whole Se∣nate. Upon which, Critias, with the rest of his Faction, (being afraid lest this Man should Theramenes accus'd by the Tyrants. overturn the Oligarchy) surrounded him by the Soldiers, with their Swords drawn, with an intent forthwith to seize him. But Theramenes foreseeing their purpose, rushes through, and flies to the Altar in the Hal'd from the Altar in the Senate. Senate-house, crying out, That he fled to the Gods, not that he hop'd thereby to save his Life, but that the Impiety of his Murtherers might be the more aggravated, by the violation of the Sacreds of their Religion: But though he was thence violently hal'd by the Sheriffs, . Lictors, yet bore all with an undaunted Spirit, being well principled in the Precepts of Philosophy, by his late Master Socrates. The People generally lamented his sad Misfortune, and un∣worthy Usage; but none durst rescue him by reason of the Soldiers that clos'd him round. But Socrates the Philosopher, and two of his Servants ran in, and endeavour'd to hinder the Lictors. But Theramenes intreated them they would forbear, declaring he could not but honour their Love and Courage shew'd on his behalf, but that it would be his greatest Misery if he should be the Cause of the Death of those who so greatly lov'd him. Socra∣tes therefore, and the rest, (when they saw none to come in to their assistance, and that Ant. Ch. 402. the stronger Faction more and more increas'd) let fall their design. Theramenes thus forc'd from the Altars, was led through the Market-place to Execution by the Officers, who had him in charge. But the common People (affrighted with the arm'd Men) Theramenes Executed while they bewail'd the Condition of this miserable Man (as one most unjustly condemn'd) at the same time likewise deplor'd their own Bondage and Slavery. For every poor Man seeing the Virtue of Theramenes so despis'd and trampled under foot, foresaw that they by reason of their mean and low Condition, would be valu'd no more than things set behind the Door. After they had executed him, the Thirty, upon false Accusations, put to death several Many other: Executed. others of the rich Men whom they had written down in a List, and when they were dead, seiz'd upon all they had: Among whom was Niceratus, the Son of Nicias the Ge∣neral, who was formerly sent against the Syracusians. He was a Man civil and courte∣ous to all, and almost the Richest and of greatest Interest of any Man in Athens; there was not therefore a Family but it lamented his Death, the Memory of his kind and sweet Disposition forcing Tears from every one. yet the Tyrants did not in the least remit any thing of their acts of Injustice and Violence, but growing still rather worse and worse in all manner of Villanies, they cut the Throats of Threescore of the richest Men in They cut the Throats of the Richest in the City. Ant Ch. 402. P. 398. the City, that they might rowl in their Estates. The miserable Citizens being thus Slaughtered and Butchered, every day, almost all that had any thing to lose fled out of the City. Then they put to death Autolicus, a most excellent and fluent Orator. And at length, every Man that was in any respect Eminent or Remarkable, they sacrific'd to their raging Lusts. By these Cruelties they so wasted and destroy'd the City, that a∣bove The Cruelty of the Tyrants. one half of its Inhabitants ran away and left it. And although the Lacedaemonians saw the City thus spoil'd and ruin'd, yet they laugh'd in their Sleeves, having no desire it should ever recover its strength any more, as was very evident by many convincing arguments. For they made a Decree, that all the Fu∣gitives from Athens in every part of Greece, should be carry'd back bound to the Ty∣rants; and whosoever did oppose the Execution of this Decree, should be fin'd Five Talents. This was in truth look'd upon as a very cruel and inhumane Edict, but the other Ci∣ties stood so much in awe of the Power of the Spartans, that it was every where obey'd. But the Argives were the first that shew'd their Abhorrence of the Lacedaemonian cruelty, and pitying the miserable Condition of the Exiles, receiv'd them with all tenderness of Compassion. The Thebans likewise decreed a Mulct to be impos'd upon him that did not to his power assist any Fugitive whom he saw to be carry'd away by Force. To this pass were brought the Affairs of Athens.
CHAP. II. Dionysius his Projects to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty of Sicily. The Syracusians Revolt. They are dispersed. IN the mean time Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily having made Peace with the Carthagi∣nians, Ant. Ch. 402. bent all his Care to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty. For he judg'd that the Syracusians, now brought under by the War, had nothing to do but to seek after the recovery of their Liberty. Perceiving therefore the Island belonging to the City (which was naturally fortify'd) would be easily defended by a small Garrison, he divided it from the rest of the City by a strong Wall, in which he built many high Towers, near one to Dionysius strengthens himself in Sici∣ly. another, and under it Guard-houses and Lodgings, which would contain great numbers of Men: He built likewise there at great expence a . Castle which commanded the City, that it might be a shelter ready to fly to upon any suddain commotion; with the same Wall he took in the Arsenal near to the little Port call'd Laccius capable to receive Threescore Sail, and had a Gate through which only one Ship at a time could enter. Then he mark'd out the best pieces of Land, and gave them to his Friends and Officers: the rest he equally distributed amongst the Citizens, and in the number of Citizens he accounted Manumitted Slaves, and call'd them Neopolites, New Citizens. He bestowed likewise Houses every where upon the common People (except those Houses that were in the Island) and those he gave as a Reward to his Friends and Mercenaries. Having now firmly fix'd himself in the Throne (as he conceiv'd) he march'd out with an Army against the Sicilians, with a design to being them into Slavery, who as yet were free, especially those who had lately assisted the Carthaginians. To this end he lay Dionysius be∣sieges Herbes∣sus, now call'd Palazzulo. Ant. Ch. 402. before the City of Herbessus, and furnish'd himself with every thing necessary for the Siege. They of Syracuse that were listed upon this Expedition, having got Arms into their hands, met together in private Cabals, and blam'd one another for that they did not assist the Horsmen in deposing of the Tyrant. It happen'd at that time, that one of Dionysius's Captains threatning a Soldier for his saucy Language, and presently offer∣ing to beat him upon his sharp Retorts, the Soldiers were so enrag'd, that they kill'd the Officer, whose Name was Doricus; and calling out with a loud voice to the Citizens to A Conspiracy against Dio∣nysius. stand up for their Liberty, they sent for the Horse from Aetna; for they at the beginning of the Tyranny left the Tyrant and possess'd themselves of that Castle. Dionysius being now terrify'd with the defection of the Syracusians, broke up the Siege, and hasts away with all speed to Syracuse, and to possess himself of the City before any of his Enemies. Upon his flight thither the Fomenters of the Rebellion created them their Captains and Leaders, who had kill'd the Officer, and being join'd with the Horse from Aetna, they encampt in the Hills over the City. Epipoli (as they are call'd) lying over against the Tyrant, blocking up his passage into the open Field. These Revolters likewise continually sent Messengers to Messina and Rhegium to sollicit their aid at Sea for the recovery of their Liberty. For these Cities at that time commonly set forth no less than Fourscore Gallies well Mann'd which they then sent to the Syracusians to assist them. Besides all this, they in the Epipoli promis'd by the Common Cryer a great reward to him that should kill the Tyrant; and, P. 399. that they would Enfranchize all Foreigners that would come over to them. And now having provided Engines for the battering down of the Wall, they Assaulted the Island every day, and kindly receiv'd all Strangers that came to them. Upon this, Dionysius Dionysius penn'd up in the Island. Ant. Ch. 402. seeing himself forsaken of the Mercenaries, and that he was so straitly penn'd up, call'd his Friends together to consult what was best to be done in the present Exigency. For he so far despair'd of keeping the Sovereignty, that he did not so much as seek how he might subdue the Syracusians, but by what kind of Death he might put an end to his Life; lest he should be forc'd to a shameful Abdication of the Government. Heloris one of his Friends, (but others say the Poet his Father) told him, that the memory of his being a King, would be the Glorious Ornament of his Sepulcher; and Polyxenus his Father-in∣law advis'd him to break through upon the swiftest Horse he had, and get away to those parts under the power of the Carthaginians, and crave help of the Campanians, whom Imilcar had left to defend his Conquests in Sicily. But Philistus (who afterwards writ the History) gainsaid Polyxenus, and said, Dionysius, it doth not become thee by the swiftness of thy Horse to fly away from thy Principality, but rather . with thy whole strength to hold it fast within thy very Thighs. Dionysius clos'd with this Advice, and resolv'd
to suffer any thing rather than voluntarily lay down the Power he had gain'd. Whereup∣upon he sent Commissioners to them in Rebellion to desire liberty for himself and those with him to depart out of the City; and in the mean time a Messenger was secretly sent to the Campanians to promise them as much Money as they should demand, if they would come and raise the Siege. Matters being agreed upon, the Syracusians consented that Ant. Ch. 402. the Tyrant should have liberty to be gone with Five Ships only. After this, things be∣gan to cool; and a part of them that lay at the Siege, were discharg'd and drawn off as useless; and many of the Foot rov'd about in the Fields, as if the Tyranny had now been altogether at an end. In the mean time the Campanians encourag'd by such gene∣rous Promises, first march'd to Aegyrus, and there leaving their Baggage with Aegyris The Campani∣ans come to as∣sist Dionysius. the Prince of the Place, with Twelve hundred Light Horse speeded to Syracuse; where suddainly arriving, they surpriz'd the Syracusians, and killing many of them, they broke through into the Fort to Dionysius. About the same time Three hundred Mercenaries arriv'd, and came in to the assistance of the Tyrant; so that now he began to pluck up his Spirits. But the Syracusians when they perceiv'd that the Tyrant began to gather strength again, were divided into Parties, some were for continuing the Siege, others were for disbanding the Army, and leaving the City. As soon as Dionysius came to understand this, he Sallies out with what he had, and coming upon them when they were in a di∣straction, Dionysius makes a Sally and routs the Syracusians. Ant. Ch. 402. easily put them to flight, and pursu'd them to the place call'd the New City: Yet he kill'd not many there; for riding amongst his Men, he commanded them not to kill those that fled. The Syracusians were now suddenly scatter'd all over the Fields; and a while after above Seven thousand in a body came up to the Horsemen, and surrendred themselves. After the Burial of the Syracusians that were kill'd, Dionysius sent Messengers to Aetna to invite the Exiles there to lay aside their animosities, and to return to their Country, faithfully promising them that he would pardon and forget all that was past. Upon this, some who had left Wives and Children behind them (through the irresisti∣ble force of natural Affection) comply'd with the invitation. The rest (when the Mes∣sengers cry'd up his Humanity in burying of the Dead) answer'd, That Dionysius him∣self deserv'd no other Courtesie, and pray'd to the Gods that he might presently meet with P 400. it. So that these at Aetna could not by any means be wrought upon to trust the Tyrant's Word, but continu'd at Aetna, waiting for a fit opportunity to pull him down. Dionysius carry'd himself with all the Respect and Tenderness imaginable towards those that return'd, to encourage the rest to come back to their Country. Then he discharg'd the Campanians with great Rewards, for he durst not trust their fickle and unconstant Hu∣mour. When they came to Entella they prevail'd with the Citizens to receive them in∣to the Town, and to infranchise them as natural Inhabitants: but in the Night they trea∣cherously The Cruelty of the Campani∣ans at Entella fell upon the Townsmen and cut all their Throats, and Marrying their Wives, possest themselves of the City. CHAP. III. The Lacedemonians establish an Oligarchy in every City; Dionysius disarms the Sy∣racusians. Alcibiades kill'd; the manner of his death. Clearchus his Tyranny in Bizantium. The Battle of Porus by him against his Country-men the Lacede∣monians. Lysander projects to out the Heraclides of the Sovereign Power. IN Greece, after the end of the Peloponnesian War, the Lacedemonians, by the general con∣sent of all, had the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land. Whereupon they Created Lysander again High Admiral, with Power to establish the Those for an Oligarchy. Hermoste (as they call'd them) in every City where-ever he came. For because the Democratiste were Enemies to the Lacedemonians, they order'd an Oligarchy to be setled in every City, and impos'd a Tribute upon all they subdu'd. And althô they made no use of Money at any Ant. Ch. 402. time before, yet now they Treasur'd up from the Tributes paid in by the Cities a Thou∣sand Talents every Year. When they had setled the Affairs of Greece, as they thought best for the support of their Aristus snt by the Lacede∣monians to Syracuse. Authority, they sent Aristus, a Noble Person to Syracuse, under colour to abrogate the Tyranny, but in truth and underhand to confirm it. For they concluded, that if they
were instrumental to fix him in his new got Empire, they should ever oblige him to be a Friend to them. Aristus after he came to Syracuse had private Conference with Diony∣sius concerning these Matters; and yet in the mean time encourag'd the People with fair promises to restore them to their former Liberties: But instead of that he betraid Nicote∣les, Aristus betrays some of the Ci∣tizens to the Tyrant. the General of the Syracusians, and others who trusted in his Fidelity, and caus'd them all to be put to death, by which he strengthn'd the Tyrant, and by so base an Act stain'd his own Reputation, and dishonour'd his Country. After this, when the People of Syracuse had left the City in the time of Harvest, to gather the Fruits, Dionysius enters into every one of their Houses, and takes away all the Dionysius dis∣arms the Citi∣zens. Arms he could find: and presently after draws another Wall about the Castle, builds Shipping, and takes into Pay a great number of Strangers, and prepares whatever was necessary for the supporting of his Dominion; having experienc'd that the Syracusians would endure any thing rather than Slavery. While these things were acting here and there, Pharnabazus, Darius's Lord-Lieutenant, to gratifie the Lacedemonians, surpriz'd Alcibiades and kill'd him. But in regard Ephorus Alcibiades kill'd. gives an account of other things to be the causes of his death; I conceive it may not be altogether unprofitable if we relate what this Author hath recorded concerning the man∣ner how Alcibiades lost his Life. In his Seventeenth Book he says, that Cyrus secretly compacted with the Lacedemonians to make War against Artaxerxes, which coming to the Ears of Alcibiades, he forthwith hasts a∣way The manner of Alcibiades his death. to Pharnabazus, and informs him of the Intrigue, and desires from him a Passport to go to Artaxerxes, judging it fittest for him to give the first information of the Conspiracy to the King. But that when Pharnabazus heard this, he was resolv'd to be the first discoverer himself, and therefore forthwith sent a Messenger in whom he could most confide, and by him laid all open before the King. That when Alcibiades saw that Pharnabazus would not p. 401. furnish him with Letters to make way for him to the King's Palace, he made a Journey to the Lieutenant and Governor of Paphlagonia, and desir'd his assistance to get to the King: And that Pharnabazus fearing lest the King should come to understand the Truth, sent some to lie in wait for Alcibiades in the way, and to murther him: and that these finding him in his Inn in Phrygia, rais'd up a Pile of Wood round his Lodging in the Night, and set it on fire; and that Alcibiades endeavouring to save himself in the midst Ant. Ch. 402. of the Flames, partly by the Fire, and partly by Darts cast at him by his Enemies, there perish'd. About the same time Democrates the Philosopher died, being Ninety Years of Age. And Lasthenes the Theban who wan the Prize this Olympiad, is said to run a Race on foot with a Running Horse, from From Coro∣nea to Thebes 30 Miles, both in Beotia in Greece. Coronea to the Walls of Thebes, and won the Match. In Italy the Volsci set upon the Roman Garrison at Verulanum in Latium. Olymp. 94. 2. Ant. Ch. 401. Verugine, took the City it self, and kill'd ma∣ny of the Garison-Soldiers, After the Affairs of this Year thus past, Euclides became Chief Magistrate of Athens. And Four Military Tribunes bore the Consular Dignity at Rome, Publius Cornelius, Nu∣merius Fabius, Lucius Valerius, and Terentius Maximus. During the time of their Governments, the Affairs of Byzantium were but in an ill posture, by reason of their intestine Se∣ditions, and their Wars with the Thracians their Neighbours. Not being able to put an end to their Civil Discords, they desir'd a Governor from the Lacedemonians; to which end Clearchus was sent to them, who after the whole Power was put into his hands, got together a great number of Mercenaries, and acted more like a Tyrant than a Governor. For First, having invited the Magistrates of the City to a Feast, after a publick Sacrifice Clearchus acts like a Tyrant in Byzantium. he caus'd them all to be put to Death. Presently after when there was none left to Go∣vern the City, he strangled Thirty of the Chief Men of Byzantium, and seiz'd upon all their Goods to his own use. He likewise put to death some of the richest of the Citizens under colour of pretended Crimes, and others he banish'd. Having thus enrich'd him∣self, Ant. Ch. 401. he Listed vast numbers of Foreign Troops, and confirm'd and strengthen'd himself in the Sovereignty. When the Cruelty and Power of the Tyrant was spread abroad; the Lacdemonians at the first sent Messengers to him to advise him to lay down his Go∣vernment: But when he flatly refus'd, they sent an Army against him under the Com∣mand of Panthedas; but when Clearchus heard of his coming, he march'd away with his Forces to Selymbria, of which he had before possess'd himself. For by reason of his Cruel∣ty in Byzantium he foresaw, that not only the Lacedemonians, but the Citizens would be his Enemies; and therefore concluding that he could with more safety march out against his Enemies from Selymbria, he brought all his Money together with his Army thither. When he came there and heard of the approach of the Lacedemonians he withdrew out to meet them, and at a place call'd Porus they engag'd. The Battle was doubtful à long
time, but at length the valiant Spartans prevail'd, and the Tyrants Army was miserably Clearchus routed at Se∣lymbria by the Lacedaemoni∣ans. Is employ'd by Cyrus the Bro∣ther of Arta∣xerxes Mne∣mon. Ant. Ch. 401. destroy'd. Clearchus with a few escap'd to Selymbria, and was there a while besieg'd, but afterwards in a great fright he fled out of the Town in the night, and sail'd over to Jo∣nia, where becoming familiar with Cyrus the King of Persia's Brother, he was made Ge∣neral of his Army. For Cyrus being made Chief of all the Princes and Governors of the Sea Coasts, and being of an high and aspiring Spirit, determin'd to make War against his Brother Artaxerxes; Looking therefore upon Clearchus to be a fellow of a bold and daring Spirit ready for any adventure, furnish'd him with Money, and order'd him to raise an Army of as many Foreigners as he could, hoping he had new got fit a Compani∣on to assist him in the execution of those bold Attempts he had taken in hand. As for Lysander the Spartan, after he had setled all the Cities subject to the Lacedaemonians, ac∣cording P. 402. to the Orders and Directions of the Ephori, some to be govern'd by a , a Decemvi∣rate, a Govern∣ment under 10 Persons. Decemvi∣rate, others by an Oligarchy, became of great Note and Reputation at Sparta: For by his Conduct he had put an end to the Peloponnesian War, and thereby had gain'd for his Country the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land without controul. Being puft up with this Success, he design'd to put an end to the Reign of the Heraclidae, and to that end endeavour'd so to contrive the matter, as to procure a Decree, That any Spartan whatsoever should be capable of being elected King. Thereby he hop'd that the Regal Power would presently be devolv'd upon himself, for the Great and Noble Services that he had done. But considering that the Lacedaemonians were led much by Lysander con∣trives to cut the Line of the He∣raclidae, and to be chosen King of Sparta; Seeks to bribe the Oracles. the Answers given by the Oracle, he resolv'd to bribe the Prophetess of Delphos with a large Sum of Money: For he concluded, that if he were favour'd by the Oracle, his Business was done according to his Heart's desire. But when he saw that by his repea∣ted and continual Promises of Reward, day by day, he could not prevail, he address'd himself upon the same account to the Priest of the Oracle at Dodona, by one Pherecrates of the Family of Apolloniatus, who was familiarly acquainted with the Officers of that Temple. But being disappointed here likewise, he took a Journey to In Africa near Carthage. Cerene, under colour to pay a Vow to Jupiter Hammon, but in truth to no other purpose than to bribe that Oracle: To that end he carry'd with him a great Sum of Money to bring over the Priests of that Temple to his Interest: For Lybis, the King of that Country, had been his Father's Guest, and for the great Love and Friendship that there was between them, the Brother of Lysander, was call'd Lybis. But notwithstanding all his hopes to prevail, by his Interest in the King and the Fulness of his Purse, he was not only frustrated of his Ant. Ch. 401. Hope there, but the Priests of the Oracle sent Ambassadors to Sparta, and accus'd Lysander for his offering of Bribes to corrupt the Oracle. Upon which, when he was return'd to Lacedaemon, he was call'd to answer to the Charge: But he so subtilly manag'd his Cause, that he came off clear; and nothing was discern'd concerning his Prospect to abolish the Government of the Heraclidae. But, a little after his death, when some Notes of Accounts were sought for in his House, there was found a Speech eloquently penn'd, which he had fram'd to persuade the People, That the King's might be chosen out of any of the Fa∣milies of Sparta.
CHAP. IV. Dionysius his Actions in Sicily. The Oropians subdu'd by the Thebans. The Lacedaemonians quarrel with the Eleans. Dionysius fortifies the Epipodae. AS soon as Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, after his Peace made with the Carthagi∣nians, had quieted all at home, he prepar'd to bring all the Towns and Cities of the Chalcideans into his Power; that is to say, Naxus, Catana, and Leontiúm. And he was the more earnest to gain these, because they lay near unto Syracuse, and would much facilitate the Enlargement of his Dominions. To this end he marches with his Forces to Enna, and takes the Castle, the Exiles there not being able to resist so great an Army. Thence he goes against the Leontines, and encamps at the River Tyria, not far from the The Acts of Dionysius in Sicily, in order to enlarge his Dominion. Ant. Ch. 401. City, where he presently draws out his Army, and sends a Trumpet to the Town, com∣manding them to surrender the Place, supposing that out of Fear they would submit. But when he perceiv'd the Leontines slighted his Commands, and prepar'd to furnish them∣selves with all things necessary for a Siege; having not then with him his Engines of Battery, he drew off for the present, and wasted and spoil'd the Country round about. Thence he march'd against the Siculi, pretending these were the People he chiefly aim'd at in the War, thereby to make the Naxians and Cataneans the more secure. When he lay near to Enna, he persuaded Acimnestus of Enna to take upon him the Sovereignty, promising to assist him. This Acimnestus accomplish'd. But when he would not receive Dionysius into the City, he began to storm, and change his Measures, and stirr'd up the Enneans to throw off his Authority. Upon this, toregain their Liberty, they suddenly ran P. 403. together arm'd into the Market place; and now the City was full of Tumult and Confu∣sion; at which instant Dionysius hearing of the Sedition, and getting together his trustiest Friends, he advanc'd to a Place where was no Guard, and there on a sudden rushing into the City, takes Acimnestus, and delivers him up to the Wills of the Enneans, and return'd without doing any hurt to the Place. Not that he did this either out of Love to Justice, or to them; but that he might be trusted for the future by the rest of the Cities. Removing from thence, he besieg'd the City of Now St. Ni∣cholas in Sici∣ly. Ant. Ch. 401. Erbita; but not succeeding there, he made Peace with them, and led away his Army against Catana; for Arcesilaus the Gover∣nor had promis'd to betray it: And in accomplishment of his Treachery, about midnight let him in within the Walls, and so he gain'd the City. Then he disarm'd all the Citi∣zens, and plac'd there a sufficient Garison. Afterwards Procles the General of the Na∣xians (won over by Promises of great Rewards) betray'd the City to Dionysius. When he had rewarded the Traitor, and set all his Kindred at liberty, he raz'd the City, and gave the Spoil thereof to his Soldiers, and carry'd away all the rest of the Citizens as Slaves. He dealt not better with the Inhabitants of Catana, whom he , i. e. sub hasta ven∣didit, sold under the Spear. sold for Slaves to the Syracusians. The Country of the Naxians he gave to the neighbouring Sicilians, but the City of Catana he bestow'd upon the Campanians for an Habitation. From thence he again mov'd to Leontum and besieg'd it with all his Forces, and by his Messengers requir'd them to submit to his Government, and join themselves as one Bo∣dy to the City of Syracuse. The Leontines seeing no hope of Relief, and considering the ruine of the Naxians and Cataneans, were seiz'd with great terror, lest they themselves should be swallow'd up in the like destruction, therefore they concluded it most advisa∣ble to yield to the present time, and so submitted to the Conditions offered, and left their Country, and went to Syracuse. Archonide, Prince of the Erbitans (after the People of Erbita had made peace with Dio∣nysius determin'd to build a new City, for he had many Mercenaries, and a mixt multi∣tude Alesa built by Archonides. of Strangers who fled thither for fear of the War by Dionysius; and many likewise of Erbita freely gave up their Names to follow him to this new intended Colony. With this multitude he possess'd himself of a little Hill, Eight About a mile. Stages or Furlongs from the Sea, and there laid the foundation of the City Alesa: But because there were other Ci∣ties in Sicily that bore that name, he added to it, as it were, a Sirname, and call'd it from himself Alesa Archonidis. In process of time when the City abounded in wealth, partly by reason of its Traffick by Sea, and Priviledges granted to it by the Romans: Ant. Ch. 401.
a great desire to finish this Fortification, with all speed he gets together a great multitude from all parts of the Country, out of which he chose Threescore thousand that were Free-Men and fit for his purpose, and proportion'd the several parts of the Work amongst them. To every Furlong he order'd an Overseer or Master-Workman, and to every About 20 Yards. Plethrum a Mason, and Two hundred Labourers. Besides these, a great number were imploy'd in cutting out of the Quarries rough and unwrought Stone. He had likewise Six thousand yoke of Oxen appointed in several places for carrying on of the Work. The multitude of the Workmen wrought great admiration in the Spectators, whilst every one was diligent to perfect that which was allotted to his share. For Dionysius to encourage 'em, promis'd great Rewards here to the Architects, there to the Carpenters, and here again to the Labourers; and he himself with his Friends, would often oversee the Work, whole Days together, going every where from one place to another, taking care to ease and relieve them that were tir'd out. At length laying aside all State and Majesty, he wrought like a private person, and would be the first that Ant. Ch. 400. should set upon Works of the greatest difficulty, and endure as much hardship as the meanest Labourer; by which means every one striv'd who should do most, insomuch, as besides their daily Labours they wrought some part of the Night; so great was the Am∣bition of the very common People to finish the Work; so that (beyond what could have been believ'd or imagin'd) Almost four Miles. the Wall was finish'd in the space of Twenty Days, Thirty Furlongs in length, and so proportionable in height; that for its strength it seem'd to slight the force of any Assailant. For it had many high Towers that stood at conve∣nient distances one from another, and it was built of hewen Stone most artificially join∣ted and compacted, every Stone Four Foot square. CHAP. V. The War beeween Cyrus and his Brother Artaxerxes King of Persia. Cyrus rout∣ed. The Grecian Forces in straits; their brave Behaviour; and long and trouble∣some March out of Persia into Greece. AT the end of the Year Exenetus was made Archon or Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Six Military Tribunes, Publius Cornelius, Cesus Fabius, Spurius Nausius, Caius Valerius, Marcus Sergius, and Junius Lucullus executed the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time Cyrus Chief of all the Lord-Lieutenants of the Maritine Provinces, now de∣termins Olymp. 94. 4. Ant. Ch. 399. Cyrus makes War against Artaxerxes. to prosecute that War against Artaxerxes his Brother, which he had long before been ruminating in his Mind: for this young Man was of a very high Spirit, and much addicted to Martial Affairs. To this end he Musters a great Army of strangers, and fur∣nishes himself with all things necessary for the Expedition; but did not as yet discover to his Army what he intended, but gave out that he rais'd an Army to go against some Ty∣rants in Cilicia who had rebell'd against the King. He sent moreover an Ambassador to the Lacedemonians to put them in mind of the Services he had done 'em in the War against Athens, and to desire their Aid in the design he had now on foot. Upon this, the Lacedemonians conceiving this War would be their advantage, forthwith decreed Aid to be sent to Cyrus, and presently sent Orders to Samus the Admiral, of their Fleet, to observe whatever was commanded him by Cyrus. Hereupon Samus having then Five Ant. Ch. 399. and twenty Gallies of three Tire of Oars under his Command, with these passed over to Ephesus to Cyrus's Admiral, offering his Assistance in every thing he should be Com∣manded. The Lacedemonians sent over likewise under the Command of Chricosophus, Eight hundred Corseteers. One Tamos was Admiral of the Barbarian Fleet, and had under his P. 406. Command Fifty Gallies well equipp'd. As soon as the Spartan Fleet arriv'd, both Fleets set Sail, as if they intended for Cilicia. When Cyrus had got together at Sardis the choicest Soldiers of Asia, and Thirteen thousand Mercenaries, he made those Persians that were of his kindred, Governors of Lydia and Phrygia, but the Chief Command of Jonia and Eolia he bestow'd upon his tru∣sty Friend Tamon of Memphis. Having settled these Matters, he then presently march'd with his Army towards Cilicia and Pisidia, a Rumor being spread abroad that some of those Nations had made a Defection. He had out of Asia Seventy thousand Men, of which Three thousand were Horse: Out of Peloponnesus and other parts of Greece Thirteen thou∣sand Mercenaries. Clearchus the Lacedemonian was General of all the Peloponnesians, except the Acheans: Proxenus of the Beotians; Socrates of the Acheans; and Meno commanded
the Thessalians. The Persians led the Barbarians every one in their proper Companies and Regiments, and Cyrus was Generalissimo; who had now discover'd the design of this Expedition to his Officers, but wisely conceal'd it from the Common Soldiers, lest by the greatness of the Attempt they should be discourag'd, and so desert him. And fur∣ther, considering the great Journey they were to march, he took special care of the Sol∣diers, was very familiar with every one, and made plentiful Provision for them in every Ant. Ch. 399. place. At length, having pass'd through Lybia and Phrygia, and the Countries bordering upon Cilicia, they came to the Borders and Gates leading into Cilicia. The Passage there is very straight and rugged for the space of Twenty Two Miles and an half. Furlongs, hemm'd in on either side with vast and very high and inaccessible Mountains. From these Mountains on both sides a Wall was drawn cross the Passage to defend it, in which were those Gates before mentiond. When his Forces had pass'd through this way, he entred into a Champain Country, in∣ferior to none in Asia for sweetness and pleasantness: Through these pleasant Fields he march'd to Tarsus, the largest City of Cilicia, which he easily forc'd to submit. When Syennesis, King of Cilicia, heard of this great Army, he was greatly perplex'd what to do, because he saw he was in no condition to cope with so great a Force. But being sent for by Cyrus with promises of safe Conduct, he came to him, and being ac∣quainted with the Design, promis'd his assistance against Artaxerxes, and straitway join'd Cyrus with a small Party, under the Command of one of his Sons: But being a crafty Man, and preparing for the Worst, he sent the other secretly to the King to inform him of the great Forces that were coming against him; and that though he himself (much against his Will) was forc'd to join with Cyrus, yet he was still Loyal and Faithful to the King, and would fall off and return to the King's Standard when he had opportunity. In the mean time, Cyrus spent Twenty days in refreshing his Army, and Listing of more Soldiers. Then breaking up his Camp, he acquainted all the Common Soldiers, that this Expedition was intended against Artaxerxes. Upon this every one weighing the thing seriously with himself, and considering the vast length of the Way they were to march, and how many Enemies Nations they were to pass through, took the Matter very grievously. For a Rumour was spread abroad that it was four Months march to Bactria, Ant. Ch. 399. and that the King had an Army of . Four hundred thousand Men. Upon which the Soldiers were so transported with Fear and Rage, that they resolv'd to kill all their Offi∣cers as Traytors. But when Cyrus (not without many Intreaties) interpos'd his Autho∣rity, and assur'd them that he not did intend to lead them against the King, but against a certain Governor in Syria, the Mutiny ceas'd: And upon the Increase of their Pay, they all return'd to their former Love and Esteem of their General. Having now march'd almost through all Cilicia, he took Shipping and arriv'd at last by P. 407. Sea at Issus, the utmost City of that Country near the Sea-side. At the same time, the Lacedaemonian Fleet arriv'd there, and landed their Men, assuring him of the Friendship of the Spartans, where they deliver'd to Cyrus Eight hundred Foot, under the Command of Chirosophus: They pretended that these were sent privately to Cyrus, by his Friends, when in truth, all was done by the Decree and Order of the The Senate at Sparta. Ephori. For the Lacedae∣monians had not as yet proclaim'd open War against the King, but kept their Counsels se∣cret till they spy'd a fit Opportunity, and how things were like to go. Decamping from thence, Cyrus moves towards Syria, and order'd the Admirals to sail along near unto the Shore, and attend upon him as he march'd by Land. When he came to the Gates. Pile (as they are call'd) and found the Entrance without any Guard, he was much pleas'd; for he was full of Fear lest some had seiz'd the Passes before him. For the Place is naturally very streight, and defended by Craggy Rocks on every side, so that it may be kept by a very few Men. For there are two Mountains that rise up on ei∣ther side near one to another, the one mounting up with sharp Rocks of a prodigious height, and the other call'd Libanus, beginning at the very Entrance into the only Passage Ant. Ch. 399. that leads through those Places, and runs out as far as to Phenicia. The space lying between these two Mountains is about A Quarter and an half of a Mile. Three Furlongs wide, strongly fortify'd, shut up with streight and narrow Gates. When Cyrus had pass'd through here, he discharg'd the Fleet, and sent it back to Ephesus; for he had no occasion to use it, being now to march through the Heart of the Country. After twenty Days march he came to Thapsacus, near to the River Euphrates. After he had continu'd here Five days, and had gain'd the Hearts of the Soldiers by plenty of Provision, and rich Spoils and Booties, he call'd a Council, and discover'd to 'em his whole design. But perceiving that the Army was very uneasy upon what he said, he ear∣nestly intreated all of them, that they would not now Desert him, and endeavour'd to
pacify them, by promising (besides other Rewards) a 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. Mina apiece to every Man, as soon as he came to Babylon: Upon which, being thus encourag'd, and having their Expecta∣tions rais'd high, they at length consented. Hereupon, Cyrus pass'd his Army over Eu∣phrates, and went forward without making any Halt; and as soon as he came to the Bor∣ders of Babylon he gave leave to his Army to refresh themselves. Artaxerxes the King, had some time before notice given him by Pharnabazus, of the se∣cret Preparations of Cyrus against him, but now having certain Intelligence of his March, he call'd all his Forces together from every place to Ecbatana in Media; and with what Force he then had march'd against Cyrus, not being willing to stay for the Aids from In∣dia and other Nations, who he perceiv'd would be too long in coming up to him by rea∣son of the great Distances of the several Places from whence they came. His Army (as Ephorus relates) amounted to no less then Four hundred thousand Horse and Foot. When he came within the Borders of Babylon, he Encamp'd at Euphrates, purposing there to leave his heavy Baggage: For he knew the Enemy was not far off, and therefore Ant. Ch. 399. had just Cause to fear their desperate and daring Attempt: He drew therefore a Trench Threescore Foot in breadth and Ten in depth, and Barricaded it with Carts and Car∣riages as with a Wall; here he left his Baggage and those that were Sick and Weak with but a slender Guard, but he himself with a swift March made towards the Enemy who were then near at hand. When Cyrus saw the King's Army advancing, he forthwith commanded all his Army P. 408. The Battel be∣tween Cyrus and Arraxerx∣es: It was fought at a Plac'd call'd Cynaxa, 500 Furlongs from Babylon. Plut. Artaxerxes. to their Arms. The Lacedaemonians and some Mercenaries were in the Right Wing, stretch'd out to the River Euphrates, under the Command of Clearchus the Macedonian, with whom were join'd above a Thousand Paphlagonian Horse. The Lest Wing was commanded by Arideus, consisting of Phrygians and Lydians, and in this were about a Thousand Horse more. In the middle Battel was Cyrus himself, with a Guard for his Person consisting of the best Persian Soldiers and other Barbarians, to the number of Ten thousand Men; be∣fore whom march'd as a Vaunt-guard a Thousand Horse gallantly accoutred, with Gre∣cian Swords and Coats of Mail. On the other side, Artaxerxes plac'd a great number of hook'd Chariots in front of his whole Army, and committing the two Wings to the Com∣mand of Persian Officers, he himself remain'd with the Main Body, guarded with no less then Fifty thousand choice Men. When the Armies came within A Quarter and half of a Mile. Three Furlongs one of another, the Grecians sang the The Pean was a song to Mars before the Fight, and to Apollo after the Victo∣ry. Ant. Ch. 399. Pean, and then silently led the Van; and as soon as they came within the Cast of a Dart they ran in upon the Enemy with great Fury; for so Clearchus had ordered them, con∣ceiving, that if they fought at a great Distance, their whole Bodies would be Marks for their Enemies, during all the time of the Fight; whereas if they engag'd close at Hand, they would be less subject to the Darts and Arrows of the Persians. As soon as the Main Body with Cyrus came up to the King's, a Shower of Darts and Arrows like a Tempest, fell upon them, as great as can be imagin'd might be discharg'd by a Body of Fifty thou∣sand Men. But after they had fought a while with their Darts at a distance, at length they fell to it hand to hand. The Lacedaemonians and Mercenaries at the first Charge rou∣ted that Part of the Army that oppos'd them, far exceeding the Barbarians both in dexte∣rity of Fight and the resplendant brightness of their Arms. For all the Barbarians were but lightly arm'd, and many of the Regiments were of the meanest Soldiers, and the greatest part but raw and unexpert in War. The Grecians on the contrary, by so long and conti∣nual exercise of their Arms in the late Peloponnesian War, were grown very skilful and ex∣cellent Soldiers; so that they put their Adversaries presently to flight, and made a great slaughter of the Barbarians. It so happen'd that both the Generals (who were contending for the Kingdom) being in the main Battel on either side, and weighing how fatal the issue would be, made one against the other, purposing to decide the Controversie by their own hands; and Destiny seem'd now to engage these two Brothers in a Duel, as if it had been in imitation of that ancient and stout Combat between The Sons of Oedipus King of Thebes, kill'd one ano∣ther in a Com∣bat, fighting for the King∣dom. Plut. Lives. Ant. Ch. 399. Eteocles and Polynices, so memoriz'd by Poets in their Tragedies. Here Cyrus made the Onset, and at a di∣stance threw his Javelin with all his force at the King, and brought him down to the Ground, who was presently taken up as dead, and carry'd out of the Fight by them that were about him. Upon this Tissaphernes, a Noble Persian, steps into the King's place, en∣courages the Soldiers and sights valiantly himself; endeavouring to revenge the suppos'd Death of the King, flew about into every Place with the choicest of the Troops, and made a dreadful Slaughter where-ever he came, insomuch as his Heat and extraordinary Courage was taken notice of by them that were at a great distance. Cyrus likewise lifted up with the Success of his Arms, siercely rushes into the midst of the Battel, and signaliz'd his Courage with the slaughter of many of his Enemies. But
rashly, running himself into eminent Dangers, he at length receiv'd a mortal Wound from a common Soldier of the Persians, and there fell down dead: Upon whose fall the Spi∣rits of the Royalists reviv'd and renew'd the Fight, and at last by the Number of their Forces, and Confidence of success, weary'd out their opposers. Arideus, Cyrus's General and Commander in the other part of the Army, at the first P. 409. valiantly receiv'd the Charge of the Barbarians: But afterwards (the Wing of the Enemy stretching in length far beyond him, and the Rumour of the Death of Cyrus coming to him, as a further Discouragement) he retreated with those under his Command to a Post very commodious for that purpose. Clearchus perceiving the main Body of their Army to be routed, and the rest ready to fly, stopp'd his own Men in their pursuit; for he fear'd that if the whole Army of the Barbarians should fall upon the Grecians, they would be all utterly cut off. In the mean time, the Body where the Persian King immediately com∣manded, having routed the Party that engag'd them, rifled Cyrus's Camp. Afterwards Ant. Ch. 399. (it now growing towards Night) in one Body they made against the Greeks, who vali∣antly (like Men of brave and generous Spirits) receiv'd the Charge; the Barbarians did Cyrus's Army Routed. not long stand their ground, but being worsted by the Valour and Dexterity of the Greci∣ans were presently put to flight. Clearchus, after he had made a great slaughter among them, (it being now dark) erected a Trophy, and then retir'd to his Camp about the time of the second Watch. The Bat∣tel thus ended, an account was taken of those that were slain on the King's side, which amounted to above Fifteen thousand, the greatest part of whom were kill'd by the Lace∣daemonians and Mercenaries, under the Command of Clearchus. On the other side, of Cy∣rus his Army were slain Three thousand. No account is given of any of the Grecians that were slain, but only a few wounded. The next day, Arideus, who retir'd to his former Post (as we have before related) sent to Clearchus to desire him to join their Forces, that so they might better secure them∣selves by the advantage of Places near to the Sea side. For Cyrus being dead, and the King's Forces now Victors, a Terror seiz'd the whole Army, and every one repented himself of his bold and rash attempt to Depose Artaxerxes. Hereupon Clearchus call'd a Council of War of all the Captains and Officers of the Army, to advise what was to be done in the present Exigent of Affairs. While they were in Consult, there came to them Messengers from the King, the Chief of whom was one Philenus, a Grecian, of the Island Now Zant. Zacyns. When they were introduc'd, they declar'd their Message in this manner: Thus saith King Artaxerxes; In as much as Cyrus is kill'd, and I am now Conqueror, lay down your Arms, make haste to my Gates, and consider how to ap∣pease me, that ye may find some favour. Upon these words all the Officers answered as Leonidas Ant. Ch. 399. had done in time past when Xerxes sent to the Guard at Thermopyle to give up their Arms, which was to this purpose, That if at any time after they should become Xerxes's Friends, they should be more able to do him service with their Arms than without them; and if they were forc'd to be his Enemies they could better defend themselves in fighting against him. After Cle∣archus had return'd this Answer to the same effect, Proxenus the Theban, said thus: We have now lost almost all we have, only our Hearts and our Arms are still our own, and as long as we keep these we doubt not but by our Courage we may be able to better our Condition; But when we part with our Arms our Valour is Useless and Unprofitable: And therefore bid them tell the King, That if he design'd any Attack upon them, they were ready with their Arms to oppose him. Sophilus likewise, one of the Commanders, is reported to have said, That he wonder'd at the King's demands; For, says he, if the King thinks himself stronger than the Grecians, let him draw down his Army upon us, and take our Arms by Force: But if he means only to per∣suade us, and intends to give us thanks for the favour, let him first say so. To this Socrates P. 410. the Achean added, The King, said he, deals with us without Sense or Reason; for that which he would have to be taken from us, he demands forthwith to be delivered to him, and that which we are to expect in return, we must seek for after as Suppliants, by Petition and Entreaty. To conclude, If he be so ignorant how things stand, as that he thinks fit to Command the Conquerors, as if they were Conquered, that he may learn the better to judge whether side carries away the Victory, let him set upon us with his innumerable Army. But if he very well knows that we Ant. Ch. 399. are Conquerors, and yet seeks deceitfully with a Lie to circumvent us, how can we rely upon his Promises for things to come? The Messengers were dismiss'd with these Answers, and so departed. Clearchus afterwards marched with his Squadron, to the Place where the rest of the Army The troublesome March of the Grecians out of Persia into their own Coun∣try. that escap'd out of the Battel were posted; and when all the Forces were got together they enter'd into a Council of War concerning their marching back to the Sea-side, and so from thence how to go on. In this Consult it was judg'd most adviseable, not to re∣turn
the same way they came; for that a great Part of it was Desert and Barren, and the more Hazardous, because the Enemy would be pressing continually upon their Heels: At length it was resolv'd, with a swift March to lead the Army towards Paphlagonia, yet not so fast but that they might furnish themselves with Provision in the way. But the King, as soon as he begun to be heal'd of his Wounds, and heard of the Enemy's being retir'd, supposing that they fled, hasten'd after them with all speed; and because they mov'd but slowly, at last he overtook them, and Night drawing on Encamp'd near at hand. About break of day next Morning the Grecians drew up in Battalia; upon which he sent Messengers to them, and for that time granted to them a Truce for three Days: within which it was agreed that the King should suffer them to pass quietly through his Country, and that he should allow them Guides to the Sea-side, and furnish them with Provision in their march for their Money. And that all the Mercenaries under the Com∣mand Ant. Ch. 399. of Clearchus and Arideus should pass peaceably through all places, provided they committed no outrages. Upon which, they set upon their Journey, and the King march'd back with his Army to Babylon, and there rewarded them that had behaved themselves couragiously in the Battle; amongst whom Tissaphernes was judg'd the bravest Man, and therefore he honour'd him with many Rich and Princely Gifts, and bestow'd his Daugh∣ter upon him in Marriage, using him ever after as his fast and faithful Friend. He made him likewise Governor and Lord-Lieutenant of all the Provinces that had been under the Command of Cyrus, upon the Sea-Coasts. But Tissaphernes perceiving that the King was Tissaphernes pursues the Grecians. irreconcileably incens'd against the Grecians, promis'd to destroy 'em all if he would fur∣nish him with an Army, and be reconcil'd to Arideus: for through him, he said, he should be able to circumvent all the Grecians in their Journey. This Advice was very acceptable to the King, and therefore he suffer'd him to chuse the best of the Soldiers, and as many as he thought fit out of the whole Army, Within the Parenthesis this, or some thing like in sense is omitted in the Greek. With these in all haste he pursu'd the Grecians, and at length encamp'd not far off from them, and sent Messengers to them to desire that Clearchus and the rest of the Commanders would come to him and hear what he had to say to them. Upon which, almost all the Colonels and Captains (as became them) went along with Clearchus to Tissaphernes; and about Two hundred Soldiers follow'd after to buy Provision. Tissaphernes call'd all the Co∣lonels and Chief Officers into his Tent, but the Captains and other inferior Officers stood without. In a short time after upon the putting forth of a Purple Flag from the top of his Pavilion, the Commanders within were  seiz'd, and others (appointed for that Ant. Ch. 399. Tissaphernes's Treachery in killing the Grecian Com∣manders. purpose) kill'd all the rest that stood without; and the other Soldiers that came to buy Victuals were kill'd in every place here and there as they were found; only one made his escape to the Camp, and there related the Slaughter. Upon the hearing of this bloody Fact the Soldiers in great Consternation ran in confusion to their Arms, having neither General, Colonel, or almost any other Officer. When none was willing to undertake the Charge, they chose several Officers from Cheirisophus chosn General of the Greeks. P. 411. amongst themselves, and fix'd upon one of those to be the General, which was Cheiriso∣phus the Lacedemonian. The Army hereupon being Marshall'd by these Officers into that Order which was judg'd best, set forward towards Paphlagonia. Tissaphernes in the mean time sends the General and the other Commanders bound in Chains to Artaxerxes, who put them all to death, but only Menon whom he releas'd: for he was suppos'd to have been willing to have deliver'd up the Grecians, because he was angry with them for not surrendring themselves. After this horrid Act, Tissaphernes with his Forces pursu'd the Greeks, and pick'd up stragglers here and there, but durst never face their whole Army, because he was afraid of the rage and valour of Men in a desperate condition. And therefore setting upon them now and then only in such places as he judg'd most for his advantage, he made no great slaughter of them, but with small and inconsiderable loss on the Grecians part, pursu'd them as far as the Country of the The Carduci∣ans are People in Media, not subject unto Persia. Carducians. But then per∣ceiving he was not likely to gain any advantage by attacking the Enemy thus in the Rear, he marches away with his Army towards Jonia. But the Grecians spent seven days in passing over the Mountains of the Or Carduchi. Carducians, and in that time suffer'd very much from the Inhabitants being a Warlike People, and well acquainted with the Passes in those parts. They were a free People, and Enemies to the King, and very good Soldiers, especially skilful and experienc'd in Hurling great Ant. Ch. 399. Stones out of Slings, and shooting in Bows of a vast bigness, and more than ordinary strength. These People gall'd the Grecians from the rising Grounds, killing, and misera∣bly wounding many of them; for their Arrows being above Two Cubits long, pierc'd both their Shields and Breast-plates, so that no Armour could repel their force. And it's said that these sort of weapons were so extraordinary big, that the Grecians us'd to cast these as Saunians instead of their Thong-Darts.
When they had pass'd this Country with great difficulty, they came to the River Which di∣vides Armenia from the Car∣duchi. Centrites, and pass'd over here into Armenia, which was then under the Government of Teribazus, Lord-Lieutenant to the King of Persia, with whom they made a League, and so passed quietly as friends through his Province. But as they march'd over the Moun∣tains of Armenia, the Snow was so very deep, they were in danger every Man to be lost. For at the first when the Wind begins to rise, the Snow falls but leisurely and by degrees, so that it occasions no great molestation or trouble to the Travellers: But then presently the Wind increasing, the Snow falls so tempestuously, and on a suddain covers the ground so thick and deep that none can possibly see before them, nor know where they are. Hence Fear and Terror seiz'd upon the whole Army, seeing nothing but certain Destru∣ction Ant. Ch. 399 was behind 'em if they return'd, and no possibility to advance forward by reason of the depth of the Snow; besides, Winter was then very sharp and coming on apace, A Tempest up∣on the Greci∣ans at Land. and such a Tempest of Wind, with a storm of Hail arose, and blew like a Whirlwind in∣to their very Faces, that the whole Army was forc'd to stand still. For none being able to endure so sad and lamentable a March, every Man was necessitated to abide in the place where the Storm found him: And thô all were in extream want, yet they patient∣ly endur'd that whole Night and Day the sharpness of the Winter's Cold, attended with all manner of uncomfortable circumstances. For all their Arms were cover'd with Snow which fell continually in great abundance. Their Bodies were stiff and benum'd with Ice (which became more sharp and biting, after the Air was calm and still) and so grie∣vous were the pressures they lay under, that they took no Rest all the Night long. Some indeed cherish'd themselves with a little Fire they had kindled; others had their Bodies so benum'd with Cold, that little hopes of Life remain'd, having all their Fingers and Toes perish'd. When the Night was over, they found most of their Carriage-Horses and Cat∣tle Lame and Useless, many Men dead, and not a few there were, who tho' they had some Life remaining, yet through the sharpness of the Cold their Bodies were immove∣able; and some were as if they were stricken blind by the whiteness of the Snow, and P. 412. every Man had certainly perish'd if they had not by going a little further found some small Villages, where there was plenty of Supplies for their necessities: Here the Peo∣ple went down under-ground by steps, and the Cattle by other passages made through the Earth; and in these little Cells were stor'd both Hay for the Cattle, and great plen∣ty of all things necessary for the support and sustenance of Man's Life. After they had staid here Eight Days, they came at length to the River In Colchis running into the Euxine Sea. Phasis. There they abode Four Days, and then pass'd through the Country of the Chaoniti. rather Colchi. Chaoniti and Phasians, where being fall'n upon by the Inhabitants in their march, they made a great slaughter among 'em, and possess'd themselves of their Towns, which were full of Provision and other rich booty, and there they rested Fifteen Days. Thence marching through the Country of the Chalcideans, in the space of Seven Days they arriv'd at the River call'd A River in Caria. Harpasus About 132 Yards. Four Plethra broad. From thence they march'd through the Plains of the Tascutians, where they had plenty of all things, and spent three Days in refreshing themselves. In four Days after they came to the great City call'd Belonging to the Macrones, a People of Pontus. Ant. Ch. 399. Gymna∣sia. Here the Prince of the Country entred into a League with them, and allow'd 'em Guides as far as to the Sea: After Fifteen days journey they came to the Mountain Che∣nius, where they that were in the Van, as soon as they discern'd the Sea afar off, were transported with exceeding Joy, and gave up so great a shout, as they that were in the Rear suddainly put themselves in a posture of Defence, supposing some Enemy had broke in upon them; But as soon as they all came to the top of the Hill, from whence they might have a prospect of the Sea, they lift up their hands and gave Thanks to the Gods as if now they were past all danger for the future. There they got together great heaps of Stones, and of them rais'd up high Altars, upon which they fix'd the spoils taken from the Barbarians as Eternal Monuments of their Expedition. They bestow'd a Silver Cup and a Persian Garment upon the Guide; who pointing to them the way to the A People of Pontus. Macrones, took his leave. After the Grecians entred the Country of the Macrones, they made a League with them; in confirmation of which the Grecians received a Spear from the Barbarians, and gave another to them: for this was a certain pledge of the faithful observance of their Leagues (receiv'd from their forefathers) as the Barbarians alledg'd: When they had pass'd the Mountains in these parts, they came down into the Country of the Colchians, where a great body of the Inhabitants came forth against them, whom the Grecians rout∣ed, and kill'd vast numbers of them: Then possessing themselves of a Hill, naturally de∣sencible, thence they wasted the Country, and bringing all the spoil thither, they plen∣tifully refresh'd themselves. In these places were multitudes of Bees-hives, from whence
might be had large Honey-combs: But a mischief to admiration happen'd to them that The strange ef∣fect of a sort of Honey. tasted of them; for as many as eat never so little went presently Mad, and lay upon the ground as if they were dead. And because many fed themselves with these Combs, a great multitude lay up and down here and there as if they had been slain in a Field-Bat∣tle. This was a very sad day to the whole Army, being amaz'd with the strangeness of the thing, and the number of those that lay groveling upon the ground. But the next Ant. Ch. 399 day about the same hour all came to themselves again, and rose up of sound and perfect Mind, and found themselves in no other condition than as if Health and Strength had been restored 'em by drinking of a Medicinal potion. Being thus recover'd, three days after they came to City in Ca∣padocia. P. 413. Trapezon a Greek City. This is a Colony of A People of Pontus in the City Sinope. Gymnick Plays, i. e. Wrestling, Leaping, Run∣ning, Quits, Fighting with Clubs, in which sports they were na∣ked. Isidor. Origin. Lib. 18. C. 17, 18. Sinopians, and belong∣ing to the Colchians: Here they continu'd Thirty Days, being bountifully entertain'd by the Citizens, and there sacrific'd to Hercules and to Jupiter Soter, and celebrated the A City in Pontus. Gym∣nick Games. It's the common Fame that the Ship Argos with Jason and his companions arriv'd here. Hence Cheirisophus the General was sent to Byzantium to procure Shipping to convey them thither; for he and Anaxibius the Bizantian Admiral were accounted in∣timate and special friends; thither therefore he speedily sails. The Grecians in the mean time being furnish'd with two small Vessels by the Trapezons, made incursions both by Sea and Land upon the neighbouring Barbarians. Thirty days they had waited for the return of Cheirisophus: but he staying longer than they expected, and their Provision now growing scant, they departed from thence, and after three days reacht unto * Ge∣rasunta, which is likewise a Grecian City, built by the Vide antea. Ant. Ch. 399. Sinopians, After they had staid here a few days they march'd into the Country of the Mesynecans, but here they were as∣sail'd by the Inhabitants in great Bodies, and in an Engagement kill'd a great number; those that escap'd fled to a Town they inhabited, defended with wooden . Towers, Se∣ven Stories of Chambers one above another. This Town the Grecians assaulted, and at length took it by Storm. This Place was the Metropolis and chiefest Fort of the Coun∣try, and in the highest part stood the King's Palace. It is the Law of the Country here, that the King must continue in this Palace during his Life, and thence issue out all his Edicts to the People. The Grecians related that they pass'd through no Nation more barbarous than this: for the Men stick not to have carnal knowledge of the Women in open view; and the better and richer sort fatten their Children with boil'd Walnuts. and are stigmatiz'd with divers marks burnt into their Flesh, both upon their Backs and Breasts. The Grecians march'd through this Country in Eight days, and through the next call'd Tibaris in Three. Thence they pass'd to Gotyora a Greek City and Colony of Ant. Ch. 399. the Sinopians, where they abode Fifty days, wasting and spoiling the barbarous Nations bordering upon Paphlagonia. Here the Heraclians and Sinopians furnish'd them with Ship∣ping, in which both they and their Cargo were convey'd into their own Country. Sinope was built by the Milesians, situated within the Confines of Paphlagonia; of the greatest account and Authority of any in those parts. Here Mithridates (so famous in our Age by his Wars against the Romans) kept his Court. Cheirisophus (who was sent away for Shipping, but all in vain) return'd to the Army. But the other Sinopians ha∣ving entertain'd them with all the demonstrations of Kindness and Humanity, took care to convey them to Heraclea, a City of the Megarensians. From thence the whole Fleet arriv'd at a Peninsula call'd Acherusia, where Hercules (as the Fable is) drew Cerberus out of Hell. Thence they march'd by Land through Bithynia, where they fell into great ha∣zards and hardships by the Attacks of the Inhabitants, who assaulted them in every place as they pass'd. However, at last (with great difficulty) they came to Chrysopolis, a City of Chalcedonia This is mista∣ken, as appears afterwards by the number of those that went with Xeno∣phon into Thrace. Vide postea. Olymp. 95. 1. Three thousand eight hundred being only left of Ten thousand. From hence some of 'em with ease and safety return'd every Man into his own Country; the rest join'd in a Body at Chersonesus, and besieg'd a City bordering upon Thrace. And this was the issue of Cyrus his Expedition against his Brother Artaxerxes.
CHAP. VI. Thrasybulus opposes the Thirty Tyrants. The Cruelty of Psammiticus King of Aegypt, towards his old Friend Tamos that fled to him for succour from the Persians. Dercyllidas sent General against the Persians into Asia. Conon made Admiral of the Persian Fleet. IN the mean time, the Usurping Tyrants at Athens every day were banishing or put∣ting The Cruelty of the Thirty Ty∣rants at A∣thens continu∣ed. The Acts of Thrasybulus. to Death some or other. At which Cruelty while the Thebans were much In∣cens'd, and courteously entertain'd the Exiles, Thrasybulus, Sirnam'd Tyrius, (but a Citi∣zen of Athens, and forc'd to fly to avoid the Rage of the Thirty Usurpers) by the aid of the Thebans, underhand posses'd himself of a Place in Attica call'd Phila. It was a very strong Castle, an Twelve Mile and a half. P. 414. Hundred Stages distant from Athens: By which means an easie Passage might be had at all times to invade Attica. As soon as the Tyrants had Intelligence of what was done, they led forth their Forces in order to Besiege the Place; but as soon as they were set down before it, there fell a great Snow: Whereupon, while some were very busie in removing their Tents, the Com∣mon Soldiers concluded that some of their Army was put to flight by an Enemy at hand, that had broke in suddenly upon them; upon which, being struck with a * Panick Fear, . they drew off and Encamp'd in another Place. The Thirty, when they saw the Citizens of Athens (those that had no share in the Administration of the Commonwealth with the Xenophons Hellen. Lib. 2. Ant. Ch. 399. Three thousand) to be hot and earnest to Dissolve the Government, Encamp'd in the Pireum, and over-aw'd the City with Foreign Soldiers; and in the mean time put to Death some of Elusina and Salamis, for joining in a Conspiracy with the Exiles. Whilst these things were acting, great numbers of the Fugitives flock'd to the Camp of Thrasybulus, Not in the Greek, but in the Latin, yet necessary for the Sense. and at the same time there came to him Ambassadors from the Thirty, under co∣lour to treat concerning some Prisoners, but in truth privately to advise him to dismiss the Fugitives, and to share with them in the Covernment of the City in the room of Thera∣menes, and that he should have liberty to restore any Ten of the Exiles to their Country, such as he thought fit to chuse. To which Thrasybulus answer'd, That he look'd upon his Banishment to be far more honourable than the whole Power and Dominion of the Thirty, and that he would never put up his Sword till all the Citizens from every Place were receiv'd, and the People restor'd to their former Liberties, descended to them from their Ancestors. When the Tyrants perceiv'd the Defection increas'd (through hatred of their Tyran∣ny) and that the Number of the Exiles increased, they sent their Ambassadors to Sparta to desire aid; and they themselves in the mean time got together what Forces they could, and Encamp'd at a Place call'd Acarnas. Thrasybulus leaving but a small Guard in the Ca∣stle, marches out against them with Twelve hundred of the Exiles, and setting upon them in the Night at unawares, kills many of them, and the rest (being terrify'd with the Tu∣mult and Confusion occasion'd by the Surprize) he forces in great precipitation to fly in∣to the City. And presently after the success of this attack, he marches against the Pireum, and possesses himself of Munychia, a barren Hill, but strong and well fortify'd. Upon this the Tyrants brought all their Forces into the Pireum, and assaulted Munychia by Critias Ant. Ch. 399. their General; whereupon was a sharp Encounter a long time. For the Tyrants had the advantage of Number, and the Exiles of the strength of the Place. At length the For∣ces of the Thirty (being discouraged and Critias slain) retir'd, but the Exiles judg'd it not advisable to pursue them. Frequent Assaults were afterwards made upon the Exiles; at length the Army of Thra∣sybulus broke in on a sudden with great violence upon the Enemy, and not only routed them, but gain'd possession of the Pireum. A great Multitude who hated the Tyranny, continually flock'd out of the City into the Pireum, and all the Exiles from every place (hearing of the Success of Thrasybulus) hasted thither to him, so that at length the number of the Exiles exceeded the other; up∣on which Encouragement they began to besiege the City. But they within, to the end a Peace might be concluded upon fair terms, cast off the Thirty, and sent them out of the City, and Established a Decemvirate with Sovereign Power. But as soon as these Ten were setled in the Magistracy (instead of minding any thing relating to the Peace) they turn'd absolute Tyrants, and sent to Lacedaemon for Forty Ships and a Thousand Soldiers,
under the Command of Lysander. Pausanias then King of Lacedaemon, both out of Envy to The Thirty De∣posed, Liberty restored to A∣thens. P. 415. Lysander, and for that he understood the rest of the Greeks had an evil Eye against Sparta, march'd with a great Army to Athens, and reconcil'd the Exiles and the Citizens. Thus at length the Athenians were restor'd to their Country, and now began to govern accor∣ding to their own ancient Laws. Those that were afraid lest they should suffer due Pu∣nishment for their former Wickedness, had Liberty to remove themselves to Elusina. Ant. Ch. 399. About this time they of Elis fearing the Power of the Lacedaemonians, made Peace with them upon these Terms, That they should deliver their Ships to the Lacedaemonians, The Eleans make Peace with the Lace∣daemonians. and suffer the neighbouring Cities to govern according to their own Laws. And now Lacedaemon being at leisure and at Peace with all her Neighbours, prepares for War against them of Messina. Some of them then held a Castle in Cephalenia, others inhabited in Nau∣pachus (within the Country of the Locrians (call'd Hesperians) formerly given to them by the Athenians. But they cast them out of both, and restored the Castle to the Cephalenians, and the other to the Locrians. The miserable Messinians (through the ancient hatred of the Lacedaemonians) were expell'd every where, and were forced to leave Greece marching away with their Arms; some sail'd to Sicily, and Listed themselves Soldiers under Diony∣sius; others to the number of Three thousand made to A City in Ly∣bia in Africa. Cyrene, and join'd with other Exiles there: For at that time a great Sedition was among the Cyrenians after Aristo with some others had possess'd themselves of the City, by whom Five hundred of the principal Men of the City on a sudden were slain; upon which, all the Persons of Quality fled out of the Town. Hereupon, the Exiles of Cyrene join'd with the Messinians, and march'd in a Body against them who kept the City: The Parties engag'd, and in the Fight a great slaughter was made of the Cyrenians, and almost all the Messinians were cut off. After the Fight, Messengers were sent to and fro, and the matter at length was compos'd by the Cyrenians among themselves, who engag'd by solemn Oath one to another, That all Inju∣ries should be afterwards for ever forgotten; so that they liv'd together from that time peace∣ably in the Government of their Common wealth. About this time the Romans sent Co∣lonies to them call'd Velitrae. Ventras. The Year ended, Laches was made Lord-Chancellor of Athens. At Rome the Consular Ann. M. 3572. Olym 95. Ant. Ch. 398. Dignity was given again to Military Tribunes, Manlius Claudius, Livy says Marcus Emi∣lius, Appius Claudius, Marcus Quin∣tilius, Lucius Julius, Mar∣cus Posthumi∣us, and Luci∣us Valerius. Marcus Quintius, Luci∣us Julius, Marcus Furius, and Lucius Valerius. Then was celebrated the Ninety Fifth O∣lympiad, in which Minos the Athenian was Victor. At the same time Artaxerxes King of Asia, after the Defeat of Cyrus, sent Pharnaba∣zus is here put for Tissapher∣nes. Ush. An. 169. Tissaphernes to take into his Care and Charge all the Governments on the Sea Coasts; upon which the Provinces and Cities which had sided with Cyrus were greatly terrify'd, lest they should be punish'd for what they had done a∣gainst the King: And therefore sought to qualify Tissaphernes by their Messengers; and every one to the utmost of his Power endeavour'd to procure his Favour. But Tamos, the Chiefest of them, (Lord-Lieutenant of Ionia) put his Wealth and all his Children on board, (except one call'd Gaus, who was afterwards the King of Persia's General) out of fear of Tissaphernes, and sail'd into Aegypt for Protection, to Psmammiticus the King, (De∣scended from the ancient Psammiticus) whom he had formerly oblig'd by several good Offi∣ces, and therefore hop'd he should find there shelter and safe Harbour, to secure him from the impending Storm of the King's Wrath. But Psammiticus neither valuing former Be∣nefits, nor regarding the Law of Nations to them in distress, (out of Covetousness to gain the Money and the Ships) cut the Throat of his Friend and Suppliant, and of all his Chil∣dren. The Cruelty of the King of Aegypt. In the mean time, the Graecian Cities throughout Asia, hearing of the Descent of Tissa∣phernes, sent Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, and earnestly intreated them, that they would not suffer them to be utterly destroy'd by the Barharians. Upon this they promis'd forthwith to send them Aid, and by their Ambassadors sollicited Tissaphernos, that he would not invade the Graecian Cities with his Army. However, regardless of their Ambassadors, P. 416. he set upon the Cumeans in the first place, and wasted and spoil'd the Country round a∣bout, and took a vast Number of Prisoners: And afterwards besieged the City; but by reason of Winter coming on, he could not take it, and therefore (after he had receiv'd a great Sum of Money for the Redemption of the Captives) he rais'd his Siege. Ant. Ch. 398. The Lacedaemonians in defence of the Greek Cities, made Thimbro General in the War against the King, and gave him the Command of a Thousand Spartans, with Orders to War between the Lacedae∣menians and Persians. raise as many Men more from among their Confederates, as he thought fit for the pre∣sent Service.
Upon which, Thimbro goes to Corinth, and mustering the Aid he had got together from several places, he passes over to Ephesus, with no more than Five thousand Men: After he had raised Two thousand more from the Confederate Cities and other places (having with him not above Seven thousand Men) he march'd an About Fifteen Miles. Hundred and twenty Stages, and took Magnesia at the first Assault, a City within the Government of Tissaphernes. Then he came to Trallis, a Town in Ionia, and determin'd to Besiege it; but not being able to effect any thing to purpose there, by reason of the strength of the place, he return'd to Magnesia. This place was then unwall'd, therefore (fearing lest. Tissaphernes should re∣take it after he was gone;) he remov'd it higher to the next Hill, call'd Thorax. From whence he made several incursions upon the Enemy, and loaded his Soldiers with varie∣ty of Plunder. But hearing that Tissaphernes was near at hand with a great Body of Horse, he forth∣with retir'd to Ephesus. About this time part of those Soldiers that went along with Cyrus against his Brother, return'd into Greece, every one to their own Country. Others, (the greater part of them that were always accustomed to Military Employment) to the number almost of Five thousand, chose Xenophon for their General, who with those Forces made an Ex∣pedition against the Thracians. who inhabited A Promonto∣ry in Pontus. Salmidessus. This is a long Creek lying shooting out along the Left side of Pontus, well known for the many Ship-wracks that have been there: by reason whereof the Thracians near those parts use to seize upon the Merchants that have escap'd to Shore, and carry them away as Captives. Xenophon there∣fore with his Forces breaks into their Country, overcomes them in Battle, and burns ma∣ny of their Towns and Villages. From hence they are sent for by Thimbro, with pro∣mise Ant. Ch. 398. of being well paid, upon which they march'd to him, being very eager to assist the Lacedemonians against the Persians. During these Actions, Dionysius in Sicily, builds a Town at the foot of Aetna, and from a certain famous Temple, calls it Adranus. In Macedonia, King Archilaus when he Dionysius builds Adra∣nus in Sicily. was Hunting was kill'd by Craterus (whom he dearly lov'd) after he had Reign'd Se∣ven years; and his Son Orestes (yet a Child) succeeded him. After the death of Ar∣chelaus Aetropus, the Tutor and Guardian of Orestes Govern'd the Kingdom for the space of Six years. At the same time in Athens, Socrates the Philosopher accus'd by Anytus Socrates con∣demn'd. and Melitus of Atheism, and corrupting the Youth, was condemn' to dye, and after executed by drinking of a Cup of Poison. Of which wicked Action the People in a short time after repented, when in vain they could have wish'd that Excellent and wor∣thy Man alive again: therefore they turn'd all their Fury upon his Accusers, and kill'd them, without staying for any Formalities of Law. When the Year was ended, Aristocrates bore the Office of Archon at Athens for the Year ensuing: And at Rome, Six Military Tribunes were invested with Consular Dig∣nity, An. M. 3573. Olymp. 95. 2. Ant. Ch. 397. P. 417. Caius Servilius, Lucius Virginius, Quintus Sulpitius, Aulus Manlius, Manlius, † Capitus, Quintus Ser∣vilius. Clodius, and Marcus Ser∣gius. Marcus Ancus. During their Magistracy, the Lacedaemonians understan∣ding that the Affairs of the War were ill managed by Thimbro, sent Dercyllidas General into Asia. Upon his arrival, he forthwith march'd with the Forces against the Cities of * Capitolinus. Troas, and in a trice took For Larissa. Arisba, Hamaxitus, and Colone, afterwards Ilium, Cebrene, and all the rest of the Cities in the Territory of Troas, some by Tricks and Surprize, and others by Storm. After this, he and Tissapher∣nes. A Sedition at Heraclea. Pharnabazus agreed upon a Truce for eight Months; and in the mean time he fell upon the Thracians in Bythinia, and wasted their Country, and then drew his Army into Winter-Quarters. At that time a great Sedition broke out in Heraclea in Thrachinia, and thereupon the Lacedaemonians sent Eripidas to compose the Differences, who when he came there, pro∣cur'd a Council to be call'd, and having beset the Senate round with arm'd Men, seiz'd the Authors, and put all to death, to the number of Five hundred Men. He likewise march'd with an Army against the Inhabitants of Oetas, who had made a Defection; and after many Hardships he had reduc'd them unto, he forc'd them out of those Places, and the greatest part of them, with their Wives and Children, fled into Thessaly, and five Years after were transplanted into Boeotia. During these Affairs the Thracians in great Bodies made an Irruption into the The Cherso∣nese is an Ist∣mos near the Hellespont, containing 37 Furlongs, i. e. above Four Miles from one Sea to another. Xenoph. Hell. Lib. 3. Cherso∣nese of Thrace, wasting and ravaging the Country every where, where they possess'd them∣selves of all the fenced Cities. Upon this, they of the Chersonese sent for Dercyllidas the Lacedaemonian out of Asia, who transported his Army thither, and drave the Thracians out of the Country; and drawing a Wall cross from one Sea to the other, fortify'd the Chersonese so as that by this means he prevented the Incursions of the Thracians for the
time to come, and so he return'd with his Forces into Asia, after he had been bountifully Ant. Ch. 397. rewarded for his Services. During the time of the Truce, Tissapher∣nes Conon made Admiral by the Persians. Pharnabozus went up to the King, and he and others persuaded him to equip a Navy, and make Conon the Athenian Admiral, for he was a very skilful and expert Soldier, the best that was then in Cyprus, with King Evagorus. Pharnabazus having wrought upon the King, and receiv'd Five hun∣dred Talents for that purpose, forthwith made it his business to set forth a Fleet, and after he had sounded Conon, concerning his acceptance of Chief Command at Sea, he created him Admiral, making him many great and fair Promises in the King's Name. Hereupon Conon accepts the Place, in hopes not only to recover the Sovereignty of the Seas for his Country, by subduing the Lacedemonians, but to advance his own Reputa∣tion by the success of his Arms. But in regard the whole Fleet was not as yet ready, he sailed away only with Forty Sail into Cilicia, and there prepared himself for the War. Pharnabazus likewise, and Tissaphernes having rais'd Men out of their several Provinces,. The Persians and Lacede∣monians make a Truce near Ephesus. Ant. Ch. 397. march'd forth, and made their way towards Ephesus, because the Enemies Forces lay there. There were with them under their Command Twenty thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse. Dereyllidas the Lacedemonian hearing of the Enemies march, drew forth his Army, having no more than Seven thousand Men; but when the Armies drew near one to another, a Truce was agreed upon, and a certain time prefixt, within which, Pharnabazus might send the Articles to the King to know his pleasure, whether he would have Peace or War, and that Dereyllidas might inform the Spartans how Affairs stood in the mean time. And upon these terms the Armies drew off into their several Quar∣ters. CHAP. VII. The War between the Rhegians and Dionysius: He prepares to make War upon the Carthaginians. Most of the Cities submit to Dionysius. He returns to the Siege of Motya. It's taken. Forces sent from Carthage against Dionysius. A Sea-fight between the Carthaginians and the Sicilians. Syracuse Besieg'd. The Speech of Theodorus against Dionysius. A grievous Plague in the Carthaginian Ar∣my. A great destruction of the Carthaginian Fleet in the Harbour of Syracuse. The miserable condition of Imilco in his own Country. The Troubles of the Car∣thaginians. THE Rhegians, formerly a Colony of the Chalcideans, were now uneasie under the growing Power of Dionysius, for he had enslav'd the Naxians and Gataneans, who were P. 418. The Rhegians jealous of Dio∣nysius. of their own Blood and Nation; and the Rhegians seeing that they themselves were in the same common danger with those already express'd, were in a great Consternation, lest they should all be brought under the same Calamity. Therefore they judg'd it most advisable, and highly to concern them, to make War upon him, while they had an op∣portunity, before the Tyrant grew too strong. Those that were banish'd from Syracuse by Dionysius join'd in this War, being furnish'd with all things necessary for that purpose by the Rhegians: for there was a great multitude of them at that time at A City in Italy. Rhegium, who (being press'd by the Rhegians, with the necessity and advantage they were likely to reap by the War) resolv'd to make use of the first opportunity. To that end Officers were at length chosen, and with them they sent Six thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse, with Fifty Crabyes, when they were landed they sollicited the Messenian Commanders to join with them, telling them it would be a most dishonourable thing if they should suffer The Rhegians invade Sicily, a Grecian City, and next to them, to be utterly destroy'd by a Tyrant. The Officers being thus persuaded, led forth the Soldiers without the order of the State. The number was Four thousand Foot, and Four hundred Horse, and with them Thirty Gallies. Be∣fore they had march'd to the utmost borders of Messina, there was rais'd a great Mutiny Ant. Ch. 397. among the Soldiers, by a Speech made to them by Laomedon a Messinian; For he ad∣vis'd 'em not to be the Agressors upon Dionysius, who had not hitherto offer'd them any injury. Upon which the Soldiers of Messina (because the People had not by their Suf∣frage order'd this War (presently follow'd his Advice, and forsaking their Captains re∣turn'd The Rhegians return. home. Whereupon the Rhegians considering themselves not able to carry on the
War alone, now the forces of Messina were fallen off, return'd likewise to their own City. As for Dionysius, he had (upon the first notice of the Design upon him) drawn out his Forces to the utmost Confines of Syracuse, expecting the Enemy; but hearing by his Spies that they were march'd back, he likewise return'd with his to Syracuse. After this, when they of Rhegium and Messina sent Ambassadors to him to treat upon Terms of Peace (he conceiving it much to the advantage of his Affairs to prevent all other Hostilities and Disturbances from these Cities) made Peace with them. He like∣wise observ'd, that many of the Grecians ran into the Carthaginian Garisons, not only bring∣ing along with them their Goods and Estates, but the Laws and Customs of their several Cities; and therefore concluded, that as long as the Peace continu'd with the Carthagi∣nians, those that were yet his Subjects would from time to time be sheltring themselves Ant. Ch. 397. under their Protection; to remedy which, he conceiv'd that if he renew'd the War against Carthage, all those that were fled to them being oppress'd by the Carthaginians would return to him. And he was the more encourag'd, for that he heard that in Africa a Plague then rag'd, and swept away many of the Carthaginians. Having now therefore a fit opportunity to declare War against them, as he conceiv'd, he determin'd to make it his chief Care to prepare Necessaries for so great an Expedition, being to engage with the most Potent Nation that then had any footing in Europe; and judging (as he very well might) that it was likely to be a great War, and of long continuance. To this end he forthwith gets together all sorts of Artificers, some out of the Towns and Cities of his own Dominions, and others hir'd with more than ordinary Wages out of Italy and Greece. For he resolv'd to make a vast number of all sorts of Arms and Weapons; likewise Gallies, both of three Oars on a Bank, and of Five, which last were never us'd before. For this purpose a great multitude of all sorts of Workmen were brought together, to every one of whom he order'd their proper Work according to their several Trades, and appointed some of the best and most substantial of the Citizens to be Overseers, promising great Rewards for the encouragement of the diligent. He himself directed the Form and Fashion of every sort of Weapon, because Mercenary Soldiers came flock∣ing in to him out of many different Countries: for he purpos'd that every one should P. 419. use such Arms (both Offensive and Defensive) as they were accustom'd unto in their own Nations; for he concluded, that as it would strike a greater Terror into his Ene∣mies, Ant. Ch. 397. so his Soldiers would Fight much the better with those Arms that they had most commonly us'd. The Syracusians did all they could to forward him in his design; so that every one strove who could most advance the Work. For not only the Porches and back parts of the Temples, but the publick Schools and Walks, and Galleries about the Forum, and every place up and down were full of Workmen; and besides these publick places, Arms were made in great number in every large House belonging to any Citizen. The Art of ma∣king . Engines to hurl great Stones was now first known at Syracuse, for that at this time the most excellent Artificers were met together from all parts. For the great Wages and large Promises of Rewards to the perfecting of the Work, made the Tradesmen and Ar∣tificers very intent and industrious. And besides all this, Dionysius himself came every day to oversee the Workmen, speaking kindly and courteously to them, and when he saw any more than ordinarily diligent, and quick of dispatch, that Man would be sure to re∣ceive some Reward or Honour as a mark of his Favour, and sometimes for further en∣couragement he would invite such to Dine or Sup with him. The Artificers thus en∣courag'd, wrought with all diligence (striving to out-vie one another) so that there were made a vast number of strange Weapons, and Warlike Engines for Battery. He Ant. Ch. 397. built likewise Gallies with their Boats, both of Three and Five Oars on a Bank, of which last he was the first Inventer. For when he understood the first Galley of Three Oars was made at Corinth, he was desirous a Colony from thence (as the Syracusians were) should be the first that should enlarge the number. Having therefore provided plenty of Materials to be brought over from Italy, he sent away one half of the Work∣men to Mount Aetna (where in those days were abundance of Firr and Pitch Trees) the rest he commanded to sail to Italy, and order'd them Carts to convey the Timber to the Sea side, and Ships and Seamen there to receive them, and thence without delay to transport them to Syracuse. When Dionysius had got together Materials sufficient for his purpose, he forthwith set about building above Two hundred Gallies, and to resit an Hundred and Ten. Besides, he built several Holds round the Harbor for the receiving of the Ships, to the number of an Hundred and sixty; of which, many would receive two Ships apiece. He likewise repair'd and cover'd over with new Planks, and Hundred and fifty old and useless Vessels: This
great preparation struck the Beholders with admiration, to see so vast a number of Ships and all belonging to them, built together in one place. For indeed the preparation was such, that if a Man did cast his Eies upon the Ships, and consider the great Costs and Expences in fitting them out, he would presently conclude, that all the Power and Riches, of Sicily were there imploy'd. And then to turn and look upon the Army and En∣gines, he would judge that there was no Art or Trade, but what there had shew'd the height of their skill, to the utmost of what could possibly be done in that kind. And tho' he had perform'd all these with so much Cost and Care, that nothing seem'd to be want∣ing, or could be added to make them Magnificent and Glorious; yet for further State Ant. Ch. 397. and Grace to the preparation he made, an hundred and forty thousand Bucklers, or Tar∣gets, as many Swords and Helmets, and caus'd to be forg'd Fourteen thousand Corssets, of all sorts of excellent Workmanship: These he appointed and order'd to the Horse, and to the Colonels and Captains of the Foot, and to the Mercenaries who were of his Life-Guard. He prepar'd likewise Engines of Battery of all fashions, and a vast num∣ber of Darts. The City of Syracuse provided one half of the long Ships, with Masters, Pilots, and Rowers of their own Citizens. For the rest Dionysius hir'd Foreigners. After all the Ships and Arms were ready and compleat, he then began to call his Army toge∣ther: for he thought it not advisable to do it before, to the end to avoid Charge and Ex∣pence. About this time Astydamus the Writer of Tragedies began to open his School; he liv'd Sixty years: And this year the Romans as they were besieging the Veians, by a P. 420. Sally out of the City were totally routed, and shamefully put to flight. After the former Year expir'd, Ithycles was made Lord Chancelor of Athens, and at Rome Six Military Tribunes bore the Consular Dignity; Lucius Julius, Marcus Furius, An. M. 3574. Olymp. 95. 3. Ant Ch. 369. Marcus Emilius Ma∣mercus. Emilius Marcus Cneius Cor∣nelius. Caius Cornelius, Cesus Fabius, and Lucius Va∣lerius. Paulus Sextus. This Year Diony∣sius the Tyrant of Syracuse when he had finish'd his preparation of Ships and Arms (as is before Declar'd) began to muster his Forces. To this end he chose out of the City Companies, such as he thought fittest for his purpose, and sent for such as he thought most serviceable from those Towns that favour'd his Interest: He hir'd likewise Soldiers out of Greece, and especially from the Lacedemonians: For from them (to whom he ow'd the growth and increase of his Power) he receiv'd as many Soldiers as he would for the compleating of his Army: For designing to raise a numerousArmy of Strangers, and to this end offering large Pay, he had multitudes came in to him; and because he had determin'd upon a War which would be very great, he carry'd himself with all the camplacency imaginable to all the Cities through the Island, with a purpose thereby to gain their good Will and Approbation. Knowing likewise that they of Rhegium and Messina who border'd upon the Sea, were able to bring great Forces into the Field, he began to fear lest they should join with the Carthaginians when they return'd into the Island, for he concluded that no small advantage would accrue to that side to which those two Cities inclin'd. Being in this perplexity, he gave to the Messinians a large part of the Country next adjoining to them, thereby the more to oblige them to his Interest. He dispatcht likewise Ambassadors to Rhegium, to desire that they would contract affinity with him, and to that end bestow upon him a Virgin of their own City to be his Wife; in grateful remembrance of which he would give them a large portion of Land next ad∣joining to their Territories, and that he would endeavour to advance and increase the Wealth and Prosperity of the City, to the utmost of his Power. For after he had lost his former Wife, the Daughter of Hermocrates, who was kill'd in the late defection of the Horsemen, he desir'd Issue by another, supposing he should firmly settle himself in his So∣vereignty by the kindness and obliging demeanor of his Children towards the People. But a Council being call'd at Rhegium to consider of the Proposal, after great banding Ant. Ch. 396. The Rhegians refuse Affinity with Diony∣sius. on both sides it was resolv'd not to enter into any such Affinity. Dionysius being disappointed in this Project, sends Ambassadors to Locris upon the same Embassy: They embrac'd the Motion: Upon which he Marrys Dorides, the Daughter of Xenetus, at that time the most eminent Citizen of that place. A few days before the Marriage he sends to Locris a Gally of . Five Oars on a Bank (a piece of new and rare Workmanship) adorn'd with Gold and Silver Flags, and Streamers to convey her over, and receives the Lady upon her Landing at Syracuse, into the Castle. He Mar∣ry'd likewise a Noble Lady of Syracuse, call'd Aristomacha, whom he brought to his Pa∣lace in a  Chariot drawn with four white Horses. Upon his celebrating this double Mar∣riage at one and the same time, he often Feasted both the Soldiers and most of the Citi∣zens. For now he laid aside his Cruelty as a Tyrant, and minding the distribution of Justice, carry'd himself more courteously and favourably towards his Subjects, forbear∣ing his former bloody Slaughters and Proscriptions.
Some few days after his Marriage he call'd a Senate, and there stirr'd up the People of Syracuse to a War against the Carthaginians, urging that they were the most implacable Ene∣mies P. 421. Dionysius stirs up the Citizens of Syracuse to a War against Carthage. of the Grecians in the World, and especially, were continually plotting and contri∣ving how to ruin the Sicilians. The reason, saith he, that they are now at present qui∣et, is because the Plague rages so violently amongst them, and hath swept away great numbers of the Africans; but you'll presently see that as soon as they are free, and have recover'd their strength they'l invade Siily with all their Power, which Island they have for a long time most greedily gap'd after. Therefore, said he, it is much safer and bet∣ter Ant. Ch. 396. to fall upon them now they are weak, than to stay till they have recover'd them∣selves. He added moreover, that it would be a most unjust and dishonourable thing to suffer Barbarians to enslave the Cities, who the more they coveted their Freedom, and the fonder they were of their Liberties, would be certainly more ready to engage in the common Cause with their Country-men. Having debated this Matter in a long Discourse, he easily gain'd upon the Syracusians for their consent, for they were as desirous of the War as Dionysius himself: and especi∣ally they hated the Carthaginians, because by their means they had been brought under the power of the Tyrant: and then they hop'd that out of fear of the Enemy abroad, and Plots by them that had been oppress'd at home, Dionysius would be more moderate than he had been in former times. And that which weigh'd more than all was, that they hop'd if they were Conquerors in this War (and Fortune favour'd them) they should recover their ancient Liberties. When the Assembly was dissolv'd, he granted License to the People of Syracuse, to seize upon all the Goods and Estates of the Carthaginians; for there were many of them in Syracuse that were very rich; and many Merchants had Ships then lay loaden with rich Goods and Merchandize in the Harbor. The Syracusians therefore on a suddain flew up∣on the Prey. Other Cities likewise in Sicily drave out the Carthaginians that inhabited amongst them, and took and carry'd away all their Estates. For tho' they all hated the Tyranny of Dionysius, yet it was a delight to them to join in the War against the Car∣thaginians, by reason of the barbarous and beastly cruelty of the Men. And therefore those Ant. Ch. 396. Grecians that inhabited the Cities within the power and jurisdiction of the Carthaginians, when they saw that now open War was Declar'd against them by Dionysius, gave instan∣ces likewise of their hatred against the Africans: for they not only seiz'd upon all their Estates, but likewise their Persons, and executed all manner of Cruelty and Disgraces upon the Bodies of these miserable wretches in memory and retribution of those that they themselves before suffer'd when their Cities were destroy'd by them, And they went on and continu'd this sharp Revenge upon them, to the end they might learn for the fu∣ture by this example of Retaliation, not to execute such barbarous Cruelties upon them, they should afterwards subdue. For hereby they would be taught (having learnt by ex∣perience) that in the events of War, and common Turns of Fortune, the Party subdu'd, must expect to suffer that which they themselves before executed, upon those they had conquered, Dionysius having now prepar'd all things necessary for the War, determin'd to send Mes∣sengers to Carthage to denounce War against them, in the name of the People of Syra∣cuse, P. 422. unless they restor'd all the Greek Cities they had subdu'd to their Ancient Laws and Liberties. Thus were the Thoughts of Dionysius at this time employ'd. With this year Ctesias ends his History of the Persians brought down from Ninus and Semiramis. At Ctesias his Hi∣story ends. this time flourish'd the famous Poets for Dithyrambick Verse, Philoxenus, Cythereus, Timotheus, Philesius, Telestes of Selinunte, and Bolyeidus an excellent Limner and Musician. Upon the expiration of the former Year Lisiades entred upon the Chief Magistracy An. M. 3572. Olymp. 95. 4. Ant. Ch. 395. at Athens. And six Military Tribunes were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome, viz. Publius Mellius, Marnius Spurius, Furius Lucius, and three others. At that time the Sy∣racusian Tyrant (being furnish'd with all things necessary for the War, according to his Hearts desire) sends an Herald with a Letter to the Senate at Carthage, in which was written, That the People of Syracuse had Decreed to make War upon the Carthaginians, unless they quitted all the Grecian Cities in Sicily. The Herald, according to Order, Sails over into Africa, and delivers the Letter to the Senate, which being read first in the House, and then to the People, it occasion'd no small disturbance and perplexity to the Car∣thaginians, through fear of the War coming so suddainly upon them, for the Plague had destroy'd an infinite number of People, and they were altogether unprovided of every thing necessary. Therefore they had now nothing to do but to observe how far the De∣signs of the Syracusians would proceed, and whither they would tend, and in the mean time, to send some of the Senate, with a considerable Sum of Money to raise Soldiers out of Europe.
Dionysius now marches out of Syracuse towards Aeryx with Syracusians, Mercenaries and The Second Car∣thaginian War with Di∣onysius. Ant. Ch. 395. Confederate Auxiliaries. Not far from this Hill stood the City Motia, a Colony of Car∣thage, which was a strong Castle and in-let into Sicily: By reducing of this they hop'd they should gain no small advantage, and prevent the Enemy. To this end he stirr'd up the People every where to Arms, and Auxiliaries from all the Greek Cities came in to him all along in his March. For they were eager and hot for the War, both because they hated the Slavery they suffer'd under the Carthaginians, and were likewise prick'd forward with the ardent Desire and Hopes they had at length to recover their Liberties. First the Camerineans join'd him: then the Geloans and Acragentines. Then he sent to them of Himera, who inhabited further off in another part of Sicily: With these and the Selinun∣tines who join'd with him in his March, he came to Motya; His Army consisted of Four∣score thousand Foot, and above three thousand Horse. In his Fleet he had little less than Two hundred long Gallies, or Men of War, and to attend these, there were at least Five hundred Ships of burden, full of Warlike Engines, and all manner of Provision. When they of Eryx saw the wonderful Preparation that was made, and being terrify'd with the greatness of the Army, and withal hating the Carthaginians, they sided with Di∣onysius. But they of Motya, in expectation of Aid and Relief from Carthage, were not af∣frighted at the Greatness of Dionysius's Army, but were resolv'd to abide a Siege. For they knew very well that the Syracusians would besiege them in the first place, because they were so wholly devoted to the Interest of Carthage. This City is situated in an Island a∣bout Motya besieg'd by Dionysius. Ant. Ch. 395. half a League from the Shore of Sicily, large and beautifully Built, and the Inhabi∣tants very Rich. A straight and narrow Way had been made by Art from the Island to the Shore; which they of Motya at that time ruin'd, to prevent so ready an access for the Enemy. Dionysius after he had taken a View of the Situation of the City with his Archi∣tects, began to fill up the Place between the Island and the Shore with Rubbish, and brought his Gallies into the Mouth of the Harbour, and lay at Anchor with his Ships of Burden near to the Shore. This done, he leaves Leptinus the Admiral of his Fleet to carry on the Siege, and he himself with the Land Army sets upon the Cities that were Confederated with the Carthaginians. All the Cities of Sicily terrify'd with the greatness of his Army, presently submit to him, except only Five, viz. Ancyra, Solas, Egista, Panormus, and Entella: Upon which he Spoils and Wastes the Territories of the Solantines, Panormitans, and Ancyreans, and cuts down all their Trees: But besieges the City of the Egistines and Entellans, and by fierce and continual Assaults, uses his utmost Endeavour to take them by Storm. And thus now stood the Affairs of Dionysius. In the mean time, Imilco, the Carthaginian General, was busie in Raising of Men from all Parts; and making other Preparations, but forthwith sends away the Admiral with P. 423. ten Gallies, with a Command secretly to weigh Anchor and make straight for Syracuse, and in the Night to destroy the Ships that he should then find in the Harbour. His Pro∣ject was by this means to divide the Enemies Forces, constraining Dionysius to send away part of his Fleet to defend Syracuse. The Admiral without delay observes his Orders, and entring the Harbour of Syracuse in the Night privately (not discern'd of any) breaks in pieces, sinks and destroys almost all the Ships that were then in the Port, and sails back towards Carthage. Dionysius having wasted and spoil'd the Fields and Territories of all them that were un∣der the Protection of the Carthaginians, and driven the Enemy every where within their Ant. Ch. 395. Walls, returns with his whole Army to Motya; supposing that when he had reduc'd this the rest would all presently surrender. And now setting more hands at work he speedily fills up the Channel with heaps of Stone and Rubbish, and by that means makes his ap∣proaches with his Batteries nearer to the Town. But, About this very time, Imilco the Carthaginian General, hearing that Dionysius had brought his Ships into the Harbour, forthwith Mann'd an Hundred of his best Gallies, supposing that by a sudden and unexpected Attack, he should easily possess himself of the Fleet as Imilco arrives in Sicily. they lay in the Harbour, (none being out at Sea to obstruct his Design) which if it suc∣ceeded he should raise the Siege at Motya, and carry the War to Syracuse. To this End, he looses from Carthage with an Hundred Sail, and arrived in the Night upon the Coasts of Selinunte, and so sailing round the Promontory of Lilybeum, about break of Day reaches Motya; where surprizing the Enemy he breaks some of their Ships to pieces, and burns others, Dionysius not being able then to afford any assistance. Then he enters into the Port, and so orders and places his Ships, as if he design'd to set upon the Fleet as they lay. Upon this, Dionysius commands his Army to march down to the Mouth of the Harbour: But seeing that the Enemy had possessed themselves of the Passage, he
durst not bring his Ships out of the Port; for he knew that the Mouth being very nar∣row and straight, a few Ships were able to Fight with many above their Number, and Ant Ch. 395. to Advantage. And therefore, having many Soldiers, he easily drew the Ships over the Land into the Sea, at a further distance from the Harbour, and so preserv'd them. In the mean time, Imilco pressing upon those Gallies that lay foremost and next to him, was by multitude of Darts repuls'd; for many Darters and Slingers were plac'd upon the Decks. The Syracusians likewise from Land kill'd great numbers of the Enemy, by their sharp Arrows shot out of their Engines of Battery. And in truth these sort of Darts struck great terror into the Enemy, being the first time that they were us'd and found out. When the Carthaginian saw he could not accomplish his design, he drew off and sail'd back for Africk, judging it in nowise prudent to Engage in a Sea-fight with an Ene∣my double his number. When Dionysius, by the help of many Workmen had perfected the Bank or Rampier, he applied all sorts of Engines of Battery to the Walls, battering the Towers with the Rams, and driving the Defendants from the Bulwarks with the shot from the . Engines. He approach'd likewise to the Walls with , With 6 Cham∣bers one above another. six floor'd Towers which mov'd upon Wheels, and were as high as any House. However, the Citizens of Motya, although they were now in imminent Danger, and destitute of all aid from their Consederates, yet fear'd not all the Force and Power of Dio∣nysius, but . P. 424. Ant. Ch 395. bravely opposing the Assailants, they first plac'd Soldiers cloath'd in Coats of Mail upon the Masts of their Ships, who hoisting up their Main-yards threw burning Firebrands and Sticks dipp'd in Pitch, down upon the Engines, which set them presently on Fire; upon which the Sicilians ran in, and having quench'd the Flame, so ply'd their work, that with the frequent and Repeated Batteries by the Rams, a great part of the Wall fell down. Upon which both sides rushing into the Breach with great Fury, there was a sharp Engagement: For the Sicilians thinking the Town now had been their own, endur'd any thing out of the insatiable desire they had to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians, for the many Injuries they had suffer'd by them. On the other hand, the Besieg'd to a∣void A brave De∣fence at Mo∣tya. the misery of Bondage and Slavery, and seeing no hopes to escape either by Sea or Land, resolved valiantly to Die. At length despairing to defend the Walls any longer, they stopt up all the Sally Ports and betook themselves to the Hold and Buildings at the Foot of the Walls, which were perfectly built as another strong Wall. From hence the Soldiers of Dionysius were put harder to it than they were before; for when they had got within the Walls (thronging in one upon another) and thought they had now gain'd the Town, they were presently most miserably gall'd by them that were on the Tops and Roofs of these Buildings. However, with all the speed they could by the help of their wooden Towers, they advanc'd their Scaling-Ladders to the Houses that were next to them; and now they sought hand to hand from the Towers and the Tops of the Houses which equall'd one another in height: And here the Motyans stood to it, and fought with un∣daunted Resolution, having their Wives and Children in their Eyes, and possess'd with the sense of the imminent danger of the Ruine and Destruction both of them and theirs: For some mov'd with the earnest Prayers of their poor Parents then present, intreating them not to suffer them to be made a scoff and scorn to their Enemies, renew'd their Courage, and without any regard to their Lives rush'd into the midst of the Assailants: Others hearing the Cries and Complaints of their Wives and Children, made the more haste ra∣ther Ant. Ch. 395. to die valiantly, than to see the Captivity and Slavery of their dearest Relations. There was no way left to escape or fly out of the City, for they were hemm'd in by the Sea, which was commanded by their Enemies. The Cruelty of the Graecians which they had already executed upon their Prisoners, and in all likelihood would execute upon them, was that which chiefly terrify'd the Carthaginians and made them desperate. And there∣fore nothing remain'd but either to Conquer or Die. This Obstinacy of the Besieged, occasion'd great Toil and Hardship to the Sicilians: For they were lamentably hurl'd off the Scaffolds which they had made; and besides, the straitness of the Place (by which they were greatly prejudiced) they fought with Men that were Desperate and prodigal of their Lives. Thus therefore being Engag'd, some giving and receiving Wounds fell on the one hand, others repuls'd by the Motyans, were thrown down Headlong from the Scaffolds and House Tops, and so miserably perish'd on the other. At length the Assault having continu'd on this manner several whole days together, and every Evening Dionysius by a Trumpet sounding a Retreat to his Men, the Motyans were inur'd now to this way of Fighting: After therefore both sides were drawn off, Dionysius sent forth Archylus the Thurian, with some of the best Regiments, who on a sudden in the dead of Night by Scaling-Ladders go
over the shatter'd Houses, and having possessed himself of a convenient Pass, presently the rest (which were sent to his assistance by Dionysius) came in to him. But when the Motyans perceiv'd it, with great Courage and Resolution they set upon them to beat them back, and though they had not tim'd it right, yet their Valour was not in the least im∣pair'd: So that there was now begun a fierce Encounter: Upon which (many more like∣wise mounting over) the Sicilians with much ado (over-powering them by their multi∣tude) at length drave them from the Post; and presently by the Mould and Bank that Ant. Ch. 395. P. 425. Motya taken. was rais'd Dionysius his whole Army broke into the City, and now every place was strew'd with dead Bodies. For the Sicilians resolving to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians for their former Cruelties, without any regard either to Age or Sex, slew all before them, putting Man, Woman, and Child to the Sword. But Dionysius having a mind to sell all the Citizens for Slaves, thereby to raise Money, commanded the Soldiers to forbear kill∣ing the Prisoners: But when he saw that none regarded him, but that the Sicilians rag'd like wild Beasts, he order'd a Cryer by publick Proclamation to declare, That he would have the Motyans to fly for refuge to the Graecian Temples. Upon which the Common Soldiers stopp'd their hands, but forthwith sell a plundering and spoiling all through the City, and carried away abundance of Silver and Gold, rich Garments, and all sorts of other Wealth and Treasure. For Dionysius for the Encouragement of his Soldiers for the time to come, had given them the Plunder of the City. After all was over, he rewarded Archylus who first mounted the Wall, with an Hun∣dred Above 300 l. Minas, and all the rest every one according to his Merit. As many of the Motyans as were left alive he sold for , Sold under the Spear. Slaves: But Daimenes and some other Greeks who join'd with the Carthaginians and were taken Prisoners, he commanded to be . Crucify'd. After this he put a Garison into Motya, and made Bito the Syracusian Governor; the greater part of the Garison were Sicilians. Then he order'd Leptinus the Admiral with an Hundred and Twenty sail, to watch the Carthaginians at Sea; and likewise to make Incursions (as he had before design'd) upon Egista and Entella. He himself return'd with the Army to Syracuse, Summer now drawing near to an End. At this time Sophocles the Son of So∣phocles, began to make Tragedies at Athens, and came off Twelve times a Conqueror. Sophoeles the Tragedian. When this Year was ended, Phormio entred upon the chief Magistracy at Athens; and at Rome six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Authority; Cncius Genusius, Lucius An. M. 3576. Olymp. 96. 1. Ant. Ch. 394. Atilius, Marcus Pomponius, Gains Duilius, Marcus Veturius, and Valerius Publius. At this time was celebrated the Ninety Sixth Olympiad, in which Eupolis of Elis was Victor. In the time of their Governments, Dionysius, Lord of Syracuse, marched from thence with his Army, and invaded the Territories of the Carthaginians. When he was wasting Dionysius still carries on the War against the Carthagi∣nians. and spoiling the Country, the Halicyans out of Fear of him sent. Ambassadors to his Camp, and became Confederates. But they of Egesta made a sudden and unexpected Sally upon the Guards of the Besiegers and burnt their Tents, which caus'd a great Consternation and Tumult through the Camp, For the Flame catching and running along at a great distance was not easily quench'd, so that some of the Soldiers in quenching of the Fire were destroy'd, and many Horses were burnt and the Tents together: But Dionysius went on spoiling and wasting the Country without any Opposition. In the mean time, Leptinas the Admiral, who lay then with the Fleet at Motya, was very intent in observing the Enemy at Sea. And the Carthaginians having certain Intel∣ligence Ant. Ch. 394. of the strength of Dionysius, resolv'd to exceed him in all warlike Provision and Pre∣paration whatsoever. To which end (according to their Laws) they made Imilco their King, The great Pre∣parations of the Carthagini∣ans against Dionysius. and rais'd Forces out of all parts of Africa and Spain, of which some were their own Con∣federates, and others Mercenaries: At length they got together an Army of above Three hun∣dred thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, besides Chariots to the number of Four hun∣dred. They had likewise a Fleet to the number of Three hundred long Gallies, for Men of War, and Six hundred Ships of Burden (as Ephorus relates) to Tranport all manner of Provision, Engines of Battery, and all other Necessaries for the War. But Timeus affirms, P. 426. that not above a Hundred thousand were transported from Africa into Sicily, with which Three thousand of the Sicilians join'd when they came over. Imilco deliver'd Commissi∣ons seal'd up to every one of the Officers, with a Command they should not open them till they were out at Sea, and then to Execute their Orders. He did this, that the Spies which might be amongst them, might not be able to inform Dionysius of the Design of the Fleet. The Orders were, That they should make straight to Panormus; Upon this they all set sail with a fair Wind: The Transport Ships made directly in to the open Sea, but the Gallies sail'd along the Coast of Africa.
When the Transport Ships and Ships of Burden with a fresh Gale came within sight of Sicily, Dionysius sent out Leptines with Thirty Sail against them, with Order to Sink and De∣story as many as he could, who forthwith made up to them, and fought those he first met with, and sunk several with all the Men in them. The rest (though they were heavy loaden) by the help of the Wind fortunately veering about, easily escap'd; but about Fifty were sunk down right, in which were lost Five thousand Soldiers, and Two hundred Ant. Ch. 394. Chariots. In the mean time, Imilco arriv'd at Panormus, and landing his Men march'd directly against the Enemy, Comanding the Fleet to sail along upon the Coast near to him. In his march he entred Eryx by Treachery; and thence hasten'd with all speed to Motya: Motya reta∣ken by Storm. And because Dionysius was then busie in besieging of Egista, Imilco had the Opportunity to take Motya by Storm. Although the Sicilians were very earnest and desirous to fight the Enemy, yet Dionysius judg'd it more advisable for him to draw off to some other Place, because he was both far off from his Confederates, and his Provisions too began to grow very low. Deter∣mining therefore to be gone, he advis'd the Sicilians for the present to quit their Cities, and join themselves to the Army, promising to plant them in a richer, and in no less a Country than their own, and telling them that when the War was ended, as many as would, might return to their former Habitations: upon this, some few of them embrac'd the Offer, lest if they refus'd they should have been plunder'd by the Soldiers: The rest desert∣ed, together with the Haliceans, who sent Ambassadors to the Carthaginians, and renew'd their League with them. Dionysius therefore made with all speed to Syracuse, spoiling and wasting the Country all along as he march'd. But Imilco seeing all things succeed accord∣ing to his Hearts desire, march'd with his Army against Messina, earnest to possess him∣self of that City, by reason of its fit and convenient situation; for the Haven there was very commodious, capable to receive his whole Fleet, which consisted of about Six hun∣dred Ant. Ch. 394. Sail; and by that means having the Command of the Sea in those parts, he judg'd he should be able to intercept all the Shipping that should be sent both from Italy and Pelo∣ponnesus; to aid them of Syracuse, While he was musing and considering of these things, he made Peace with them of Hymera, and the Inhabitants of Cephalaedium. And taking in the City of Lipara, he impos'd a Mulct of Thirty Talents upon the Islanders. Then Imilco march∣es to Messina in order to be∣siege it. he march'd straight away with his Forces for Messina (his Fleet sailing near at hand over against him) and in a short time encamp'd at Pelorides, not above a Betwixt Se∣ven and Eight Miles. Hundred Stages from thence. When they of the City-heard of the approach of the Enemy, they began to disagree about the concerns of the War. For some of them understanding the great strength of the Carthaginian Army, and seeing how they deserted by their Con∣federates, and that they wanted their Horse which were then at Syracuse, were of Opi∣nion that the City could not be defended. Besides, to their further discouragement, their Walls were down in many places, and they had now no time to make necessary P. 427. Preparations for their Defence. Therefore they sent away their Wives and Children, and all their choicest Goods, and the richest of their Treasures to the neighbouring Ci∣ties. Others there were who remembred an old Prophesie, whereby it was foretold by the Oracle, That the Carthaginians should be carriers of Water in that City: which was commonly interpreted in that Sense, as might portend most advantage to themselves, as if the Carthaginians should be Slaves in Messina. From hence they were very confident, and by this means greatly encourag'd others, so that they resolv'd to undergo the ut∣most extremity in defence of their common Liberty. They sent out therefore presently a select number of their briskest young Men to Pe∣lorides to prevent the Enemies Inroads into the Country; who did according to Order: Upon which, Imilco seeing the Messinians dispers'd and scatter'd, in order to oppose his Descent, he commanded Two hundred Ships to make towards the City; For he hop'd Ant. Ch. 394. (as he might easily conjecture) that the whole Garrison of Messina would be so earnest in opposing his breaking into their Borders, that the City would be left unguarded, so that it would be easie for his Fleet to enter; and at that time the North Wind blew fresh, by which means the Ships were carry'd with a full Gale straight into the Harbor; and though the Guard sent to Pilorides hasten'd back with all speed, yet the Enemies Fleet was in before they return'd. And now the Carthaginian Army coming in on every side, speedily batter'd down the Walls, entred and took the City Messina. As many of the Messinions as engag'd with the Enemy died valiantly upon the spot; the rest fled to the next Cities: many of the common People fled to the Mountains near at hand, and were dispers'd and scatter'd into several Garrisons in the Country: Some were taken by Messina taken by the Cartha∣ginians. the Enemy, others that were got into narrow Creeks about the Harbour, flung them∣selves
into the Sea, thinking they should be able to swim over to Which is not above a Mile and an half to Rhegium in Italy. Land on the other side; but of Two hundred scarce Fifty recover'd the Shoar of Italy. Afterwards Imilco entred Messina with his whole Army; and the first thing he set upon, was the Besieging the Castles and Forts near to the City, but being very strong and bravely defended by them that had fled thither, when he saw he could not win them by force, he return'd to the City; And having refresh'd and recruited his Army, resolv'd to march against Syra∣cuse. The Sicilians bearing an inveterate hatred to Dionysius, having now a fair opportunity all of them (except the Assarines) fell to the Carthaginians. Dionysius therefore, to the end he might be supply'd with Men, sets free all the Slaves and Servants of the Syracu∣sians, and with them sufficiently Mann'd Threescore Gallies: he was furnish'd likewise Ant. Ch. 394. with a Thousand Mercenaries from the Lacedemonians: Passing likewise from place to place through the Country, he fortify'd all the Castles and strong Holds, and furnish'd them with Provision. But his greatest care was to fortifie the Castles of the Leontines, and to that end laid up Stores and Magazines there, brought in from all parts. He like∣wise persuaded the Campanians, who at that time inhabited in Catana, to remove and re∣side at the City Aetna, because it was a place of great strength. After things thus setled Dionysius led forth his Army an hundred and sixty Stages from Syracuse, and encamp'd near to a place call'd Taurus. He then had with him Thirty thou∣sand Foot, and something above Three thousand Horse: His Navy consisted of a Hun∣dred and fourscore Ships, of which there were but few that had Three Oars on a Bank. In the mean time Imilco demolish'd Messina, and commanded his Soldiers to pull down Messina raz'd. the Houses to the ground, so as not one stick should be left standing, or one Stone up∣on another; which was effectually executed by burning some and pulling down others. For by so many hands the business was done in a trice: and such was the ruine and de∣solation of the City, that that place which was so lately full of Inhabitants, could now scarce be known where it stood. For Imilco considering how remote it was from the P. 428. Confederate Cities, and yet the best Port and Situation in all Sioily, judg'd it absolutely necessary either to ruine it as he had done, or at least so far to destroy it, as that it could not be repair'd in a long time, And thus Imilco, having sufficiently discover'd his im∣placable hatred to the Grecians, commanded Mago the Admiral to sail with the whole Fleet to the Promontory of Taurus. Here the Sicilians inhabited in great numbers, but Ant. Ch. 394. without any Head or certain Commander. Dionysius had heretofore given the Country of the Naxians to these Sicilians; but they induc'd by the Promises of Imilco then dwelt upon this Hill (which was naturally fortisy'd) and there at that time they were, and so continu'd after the War, in a City strongly Wall'd, call'd Tauromenium, from its situa∣tion Tauromeni∣um built. upon Taurus. Imilco himself by swift marches came with his Army to the before mention'd place of Naxia, Mago sailing all along near to the Coast: But because Mount Aeina had a little before vomited out Fire as far as to the Shoar; the Army at land could not march so as to have the Fleet near at hand to attend them. For the passages by the Sea-Shoar were so spoil'd and choak'd up by Rivers and Streams of Fire from Aetna, that the Ar∣my Imilco's march hinder'd by streams of Fire from Aetna. was forc'd to take a Compass and march round the Mountain. Therefore Imilco commanded Mago to sail towards Catana, and he himself with the Army hasten'd thro the heart of the Country to join again with the Fleet at that City. For he was afraid lest when the Forces were divided and far asunder, the Sicilians should set upon Mago by Sea; which happen'd accordingly. For Dionysius having intel∣ligence that Mugo sail'd very slowly, and that the Land Army was engag'd in along and difficult March, hasten'd with all speed to Catana, that he might fight Mago by Sea be∣fore Imilco's Army came up. For he hop'd that being upon the Shoar near at hand with his Land Forces, it would much encourage his own, and discourage the Enemy: And that which was the most considerable was, That if his Fleet were worsted, both Ships and Men had a place ready to retreat unto for their safety Ant. Ch. 394. Things thus order'd, he sent forth Leptines with the whole Fleet against the Enemy, commanding him to engage in close Order, and not to break his Line upon any account, unless he were over press'd with multitude. There were in Mago's Fleet Ships of burden A Fight at Sea between Mago and Leptines. and Gallies with brazen Beaks, to the number of Five hundred. The Carthaginian's, as soon as they saw the Coasts full of Ships, and the Grecian Navy making out straight upon them, were greatly amaz'd, and began to tack about and make into the Shoar But pre∣sently recollecting themselves, they consider'd the insuperable hazard they should run themselves into, if they should fight, both with the Soldiers at Land and them in the Ships at one time, therefore they resolv'd to try it out at Sea, and so putting themselves
into a Line of Battel, waited to receive the Enemy, Leptines eagerly forcing on with Thirty of the best Gallies in the Van (with more Valour than Prudence) began the Fight, and presently falling in upon the first Squadron, sunk several of their Ships: But when Mago with his Fleet all join'd together, they surrounded the Thirty Sail, the first ex∣ceeding in Number, and the other in Valour. And now was begun a sharp Engagement, which look't like a Fight upon Land, the Ships grapling close one to another, for there was no distance left for them to strike with their Beaks, but they fought hand to hand with their Forecastles close in front together: Some, while they were attempting to board their Adversary, were hurl'd over-board; Ant. Ch. 394. P. 429. others effecting what they design'd, fought valiantly aboard in the midst of their Enemies Ships. At length Leptines over-power'd with number, was forc'd to hoise up Sail, and fly; the rest of the Fleet coming on upon the Enemy, who were in disorder, were easily routed by the Carthaginians; for the Flight of the Admiral encourag'd them, and greatly discourag'd and distracted the Sicilians. The Fight thus ended, the Carthaginians made a very hot pursuit, and sunk and de∣stroy'd, above a Hundred Vessels; and they that were in the Transport-Ships that lay along the shoar, kill'd the Seamen as they saw them swimming to get to the Forces that were upon the Land; so that many being kill'd near the Land, the Shoar was full of Carcasses and Wrecks: the Dionisians being not able in the least to help them. Many Dionysius's Fleet routed. were kill'd on the Carthaginians side; but there were above a Hundred Gallies of the Si∣cilians sunk and taken, and more than Twenty thousand Men kill'd. After the Fight, the Carthaginian Navy anchor'd at Catana, whither they brought along with them the Ships they had taken, and drawing them up to the shoar, refitted them, that the Eves as well as the Ears of the Carthaginians might be entertain'd with the Greatness of their Victory. Upon this Misfortune, the Sicslians judging that by returning to Syracuse they should suffer much, and be brought into great Straits by being suddenly besieg'd, persuaded Dio∣nysius rather to fight Imilco; alledging, That by an unexpected Onset, the Barbarians would be terrify'd, and by that means they might in great probability repair their late Dionysius marches back to Syracuse. Overthrow. Dionysius inclining to this Advice, and preparing to march against the Ene¦my, some of his Friends told him he ran a great hazard, and had reason to fear lest Imilco would invade Syracuse with his whole Fleet, and so he should lose the City. Upon this he alter'd his Resolution, knowing that Messina was lately lost by such an Oversight; hereupon he hastned to Syracuse, not thinking it safe for that Place to be without a strong Garison. Many of the Sicilians upon this were much displeas'd, and therefore some re∣turn'd to their own Habitations, and others dispers'd themselves into several Castles and Forts near at hand. Imilco in two days march came to Catana, and caus'd the Ships that were there to be drawn up into the Harbour, by reason of the present Wind and Storm: Here he staid some days and refresh'd his Army, and from thence sent Ambassadors to the Campanians at Aetna to court them to a Defection from Dionysius, promising to bestow on them large Possessions, and that they should be equal Sharers in the Spoils of the War. He likewise acquainted them, that the Campanians of Entella had sided with the Carthaginians, and had supply'd them with Aids against the Sicilians. In sum, he told them that the Greoians bore an inveterate Hatred to all other Nations whatsoever. But the Campanians having given Hostages to Dionysius, and sent the best of their Soldiers to Syracuse, were forc'd to stick to the League they had made with him, tho' they had a desire rather to fall to the other side. After these Misfortunes, Dionysius being now afraid of the Power of the Carthaginians, Dionysius sends for Aids to other Countries. sends Polyxenus, his Father-in-Law, Ambassador to the Greoians in Italy, Lacedaemon; and Corinth, to desire their Assistance, and that they would not stand by, and see the Greek Cities in Sicily to be utterly destroy'd. He sent likewise several , Pressmasters, or one to list Fo∣reigners. Ant. Ch. 394. P. 430. Paymasters into Relo∣ponnesus, with great Sums of Money to raise what Men they could, not sparing any Cost. But Imilco now enters with his Navy, richly adorn'd with his Enemies Spoils, into the great Haven of Syracuse; this fill'd the Citizens with Terror and Amazement; for a Navy of Two hundred and eighty Sail of Men of War, in excellent order, enter'd the Port; and after them came in above a , pro . Thousand Transport-Ships, wherein were above  deest. Imiclo enters the Part of Sy∣racuse with his Navy. Five hundred Soldiers: So that the Ships were near Two thousand Sail; insomuch as the whole Haven (tho' it were large) was so fill'd with Shipping, that it was almost covered over. When the Navy had cast Anchor in the Harbour, presently appear'd the Land▪ Army on the other side, consisting (as some report) of Three hundred thousand
Foot, and Three thousand Horse, besides Two hundred Long-Ships. Imilco the Gene∣ral Encamps near the City. pitch'd his Tent in the Temple of Jupiter; the rest of the Army encamp'd round him, about A male and a half. 12 Stages distant from the City. A while after, Imilco draws out his whole Army in Battalia under the Walls of Syracuse, daring the Syracusians to Battel; and at the same time ordered a Hundred of his best Ships to enter into all the rest of the Harbors, the more to terrifie the Syracusians, and to con∣vince them that the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea; but when he saw none durst come out against him, he march'd back to the Camp. After this, he most shamefully, for the space of Thirty days, wasted and spoil'd all the Country round about, to the end to gratifie his Soldiers on the one hand, and to discourage his Enemies on the other. He wan also the Suburbs of Part of Sy∣racuse. Achradina, and plun∣der'd the Temples of Ceres and Proserpina. But he paid for his Sacrilege within a short time after; for his Fortune began to change, and things to go worse and worse with him every day. And whenever Dionysius took Courage and skirmish'd with the Enemy, the Syracusians came off Conquerors. Such Terror sometimes seiz'd the Carthaginians in the Camp, that in the Night they would run with great Terror and Confusion to their Arms, as if an Enemy had broken in upon them. Besides, a Disease at length seiz'd upon them, which was the cause of all the Mischiefs which afterwards overtook them, of which we Ant. Ch. 394. shall speak hereafter, that we may observe due course and order of Time in the Relation. Imilco now eager to block up the City, demolishes almost all the Sepulchres, amongst which were the Monuments of Gelo and his Wife Demareta, of rich and excellent Work∣manship. He rais'd likewise three Forts near the Sea, one at Plenmynium, another about the middle of the Port, and the third near the Temple of Jupiter. In these he laid up Stores of Meat and Drink, and all other Necessaries, believing the Siege would continue long. He sent away likewise the Transport-Ships to Sardinia and Africa, to bring from thence Corn and all other Provisions. About this time Polyxenus, Dionysius's Father-in-Law (being return'd from Italy and Pelo∣ponnesus) brought with him Thirty Galleys (Men of War) from the Confederates, under the Command of Pharacidas the Lacedaemonian. After this, Dionysius and Leptines made out to Sea with some Galleys to endeavour to get some Provision into the Town; and while they were cruising about, the Syracusians from the City espy'd a Ship loaden with Provision coming up to Imilco's Army; upon which, they made out with Five Sail upon it, and took it and brought it into the Town. As they were sailing away with their Prize, Forty Sail of the Carthaginians pursu'd them; upon which, the whole Syracusian Fleet presently hoisted up Sail, and engag'd, took the Admiral, and sunk and destroy'd The Syracusi∣ans beat the Carthaginians at Sea. P. 431. Twenty Ships more: The rest they put to flight, and pursu'd the Carthaginians to their main Fleet, and dar'd them to Battel; but they amus'd with this sudden Disaster, stirr'd not. Then the Syracusians fastned the Gallies they had taken to the Poops of their own Ships, and brought them into the City. Being now puff'd up with this good Success, they proudly vaunted, That Dionysius was often overcome by the Carthaginians, but that now when they had not him with them, they triumph'd, and were return'd Conquerors. And in their Cabals here and there they would frequently discourse, and ask one another, why they should suffer themselves Ant. Ch. 394. Designs to de∣pose Dionysius. to be made Slaves by Dionysius, especially when they had now so fair an Opportunity to depose him? For till of late they said they were disarm'd, but now by occasion of the present War, they had again got Arms into their Hands. While these things were thus whisper'd up and down, Dionysius lands at the Port, and presently after calls an Assembly, and in an Harangue highly praises the Syracusians, wish∣ing them; That as they had done, so they would still continue to shew their Valour and Courage for the time to come, promising them, that in a short time he would put an end to the War. When the Assembly was ready to break up, Theodorus a Syracusian, a Man of great Authority among the Nobility, and one that had done remarkable Ser∣vice for his Conntry, stood up, and boldly made this Speech concerning their Li∣berties. The Speech of Theodorus. ALthough Dionysius has interlac'd his Discourse with many Lyes, yet what he said in the close of his Harangue, That he would make a speedy dispatch of the War, he may truly perform, if he himself (who has always been beaten) be not the General, but forthwith restore us to our own Laws and Liberties: For there are none of us that can freely and chearfully venture our Lives in the Field, when there's not a Pin to
chuse whether we be conquer'd by the Carthaginians, or being Conquerors become Slaves at home to Dionysius: For whilst Conquerors or Conquer'd, we are sure either to serve the Carthaginians on the one hand, or a more severe and tyrannical Master on the other. If the Carthaginians prevail, by paying of Tribute we shall enjoy our Laws, but this Tyrant robs our Temples, seizes our Estates, takes away our Lives, and deprives Ant. Ch. 394. Masters of their Servants to fill up the number of his Mercenaries. And he that has act∣ed as great cruelties in a time of Peace, as any that have been executed upon the storm¦ing of Cities in a time of War, now promises to put an end to the Carthaginian War. But it as highly concerns us (Oh fellow Citizens) to be rid of the Tyrant within our Walls, as to put an end to the War without. For the Castle which is now Garison'd by our own Slaves, is built as a Fort against the City it self, and the Mercenary Soldiers are kept in Pay to keep the Syracusians in Slavery, and he himself Lords it over the City, not as a good Magistrate for the execution of Justice; but as sole and absolute Lord, to Rule ac∣cording to the Dictates of his own insatiable Desires. The Enemy now enjoys but a small part of the Country, but Dionysius has bestow'd all that he has conquer'd upon them that have given assistance to the advancement of his Tyranny: Why are we content so long tamely to suffer these base Abuses? such, as a generous Spirit would rather chuse to Die, than to be brought into a hazard and danger to suffer and undergo. We (to say the Truth) courageously endure the extreamest hardships in fighting against the Car∣thaginians; but we are so poor-spirited, that we dare not speak a word for the Laws and Liberties of our Country against a most cruel Tyrant. We that dare bravely Charge so many thousands of our Enemies, are dastardly afraid of one  Tyrant, that has not the Courage of a generous. Slave: No Man ever presum'd to compare or equal Dionysius with Gelo, for he (through the innate goodness of his Disposition) with the assistance of the Syracusians and other Sicilians restor'd all Sicily to their Liberty: But this vile Man when he found the Cities free, either exposed them to the Will of the Enemy, or he himself made them perfect Slaves. The other, after he had fought many Ant. Ch. 394. Battels in the Cause of Sicily, was so successful that an Enemy was not to be seen: But this Tyrant running away from Motya through the whole Island, at length penn'd him∣self up, not daring to look his Enemy in the Face, yet fierce and cruel enough towards the Citizens. The other for his Valour and remarkable Services done for his Country, had the Sovereignty freely and willingly bestow'd on him, not only by the Syracusians, but by all the Sicilians. But this Man who has usurp'd the Sovereign Power, to the ruine of the Confederates, and slavery of the Citizens; Why should he not be hated P. 43. by all, who is not only unworthy of the Supream Power, but deserves a thousand Deaths besides? Through him Gela and Camerina are spoil'd, Messina raz'd and laid in rubbish, and Twenty thousand of our Confederates destroy'd. And things are now brought to that pass, that all the Greek Cities throughout Sicily are ruin'd, and we are all coop'd up into one. Among other Mischiefs and Miseries Naxus and Catana are by him sold for nought; many of the best situated and Confederate Cities raz'd to the ground. He fought twice with the Carthaginians, and was beaten in both. As soon as ever the Sovereign Power was given into his hand, he forthwith depriv'd the Citi∣zens of their Liberties, putting to death all those that stood up for the Laws of their Country, and banishing those that were Rich to gain their Estates; giving their Wives in Marriage to their Servants, and to the lowest of the People, and putting Arms into the hands of Strangers and Barbarians. All these wickednesses, Oh, Jupiter, and all Ant. Ch. 394. the Gods! has this hangman and base mean fellow committed. Where is now the love of the Laws and Liberties among the Syracusians? Where are the noble Actions of our Ancestors? by whom were destroy'd at Himera Three hundred thousand Carthaginians; not to say any thing of the Tyrants depos'd by Gelo. But that which is to be most admir'd is, that tho' your Fathers, even but yesterday, did rout so great an Army of the Athenians that came against Syracuse, and that in such a manner, as that they left not one to be a Messenger of their destruction; though (I say) you have so fresh an Example of your Fathers Valour, yet that you should bow your Necks to the Yoke of Dionysius, and at this instant time when you have Arms in your hands, is most strange. Certainly some good providence of the Gods has brought you now hither together in Arms, that you may have an opportunity to regain your Liberty. Now is the day come wherein you may shew your selves Men of Courage, and unanimously rescue your selves from so base and shameful a Slavery. It was an easie matter when we had no assistance, and the City was full of Mercenary Soldiers to keep us under, but now that we are Arm'd, now that we have Confederates to assist us, and stand by us as Spectators of our Valour, let us not yield an Inch, but make it manifest to all, that it
was not Cowardize but want of opportunity that made us seem to be willing and con∣tent to be Slaves. May we not be asham'd to have an Enemy to be our General, one who has Sacrilegiously robb'd all the Temples in the City; to entrust one in matters of the greatest publick concern, that none (in his wits) would trust with his own pri∣vate Estate. And when we see that all Men generally are more than ordinarily Religi∣ous in times of War and imminent Dangers; Can we hope that such a notorious Atheist as this should be instrumental to put an happy issue to this War? And if any Man will Ant. Ch. 394 but seriously consider, he may easily conclude, that Dionysius is more afraid of Peace than War. For he knows that the Syracusians (through fear of the bad consequences of commotions at this present) dare not attempt any thing against him: But he fore∣sees that if the Carthaginians be conquer'd, the Syracusians being then in Arms, and en∣courag'd with the success will seek to redeem themselves, and regain their Liberty. And this was the cause (as I conceive) that in the former War he most treacherously depo∣pulated Gela and Camerina, and stript 'em of all their Inhabitants; and likewise agreed as part of the Articles of the League; That many of the Greek Cities should never after be inhabited by the Grecians. This was likewise the Cause, that afterwards in a time of Peace, And against the Conditions agreed on, he enslav'd Naxus and Catana, raz'd the one down to the ground, and gave away the other to the Campanians, a Colony out of Italy. and when he perceiv'd that after the Cities were thus ruin'd, the rest were continually plotting how to rescue themselves from this Tyranny, he then for a diversion began this Second War against the Carthaginians. For the Sacred Bonds of an Oath did not so much awe him to the keeping of his League, as the fear of these Sicilians that remain'd did torment him, whose destruction he continually watch'd all opportunities to effect. When the Enemy, lately weak and weather-beaten, landed at Panormus, tho' he might P 433. Ant. Ch. 394. easily then have fallen upon them with his whole Army, yet was very far from doing any such service for his Country. Afterwards he suffer'd Messina (that large City and commodious Port) for want of Relief, to be laid wast, not only because there were ma∣ny Sicilians by that means cut off, but likewise that all Aids by Shipping from Italy and Peloponnesus might be intercepted by the Carthaginians. Then at last he fought upon the Coasts near to Catana, even close to the City, that the Enemy if they were beaten might have ready shelter in the Port of their own Allies. After this, and the Fight was over, a Storm arose, by reason whereof the Carthaginians were forc'd to draw up their Ships into the Harbour, at which time we had a fair opportunity of ruining them, their Land-Army not being then come up, and their Ships, many of them thrown up∣on the Shoar by the violence of the Storm. If we then had set upon them with our Land-Army, they must all necessarily have either fallen into our hands, if they had come to Land, or by the violence and rage of the Sea the Shoar had been fill'd with wrecks. But I know I need not spend many words in accusing Dionysius among the Syracusians: For if the incurable Injuries and Wrongs themselves will not raise the Spirits of the Suf∣ferers, How can words prevail to take revenge of this Miscreant? When besides all that they have suffer'd they may clearly see, That he's the most impious wretch of the Citi∣zens, the cruelest Tyrant, and most slothful and careless General: For as often as we fight the Enemy under his Conduct, so often are we beaten: But now when we lately Engag'd our selves without him, we routed the Enemies whole Fleet with a few Gal∣lies. We ought therefore to provide a new General, lest while we make use of one who has Sacrilegiously robb'd the Temples, we fight against God himself. For the Deity Ant. Ch. 394. apparently opposes them who make such an Atheist their Head and Governor. For to see all our Forces in the height of their strength dispers'd and scatter'd when he is with them, and yet a small part of our Army Conquerors when he is absent, What does it but evidence to all the special and remarkable Presence of the Gods? Therefore, Oh ye Syracusians, if he will freely . Abdicate his Covernment, let us as freely consent that he may depart out of the City with all that belongs to him: But if he refuses so to do, now we have an opportunity to regain our Liberty. We are now here all together, we have Arms in our hands, and those that will assist us both out of Italy and Pelopon∣nesus are near at hand. And by the Law the Chief Gommand in the Army ought either to be given to some of the Citizens, or to some of the Corinthians, who are the natural Inhabitants, or to the Spartans who now Command all Greece. When Theodorus had thus spoken, the Syracusians (much perplex'd in their Minds) and * . doubtful what to do) look'd back upon their Confederates, Upon which, Pharacides the Lacedemonian Admiral of the Fleet (lately sent to their assistance) ascended the Tri∣bunal; and every Man now hop'd he would be very earnest in persuading of them to
stand up for their Liberties. But he being Dionysius his Guest, and then one of his Fa∣mily, told them that he was sent by the Lacedemonians to assist the Syracusians and Dionysius against the Carthaginians, and not to deprive him of his Kingdom: and while he was (contrary to all Mens expectations) opposing what had been said, the Mercenary Sol∣diers Ant. Ch. 394. all flock'd about Dionysius, but the Syracusians, no little amaz'd, sate still; but rag'd in their Minds against the Spartans: For not long before, Aretas the Lacedemonian had betraid 'em under the Covert and Pretence of being sent to free them from their Slave∣ry; and now Pharacides obstructed the Syracusians in their endeavours to free themselves. However, Dionysius was now in a great fright, and forthwith Dissolv'd the Assembly; and afterwards courted the People with very fair and smooth words, presenting some with large Gifts, and inviting others to his Feasts and Banquets. But as to the Carthagi∣nians, A Plague in the Carthagi∣nians Army. P. 434. after they had ruin'd the Suburbs, and rifled and plunder'd the Temples of Ceres and Proserpina, a Plague seiz'd upon their Army, and the more to increase and sharpen the Vengeance of the Gods upon them, both the time of the year and the multitudes of Men thronging together, greatly contributed to the inhancement and aggravation of their Misery: For the Summer was hotter than ordinary, and the place it self was the great occasion that the distemper rag'd above all bounds. For the Athenians in the ve∣ry same place, not long before, were in multitudes swept away by the Plague, for that because it was a marshy and spungy Ground. In the beginning of the Distemper, before the Sun arose, through the coldness of the Air that came off from the Water, their Bo∣dies would fall a shaking and trembling; but about Noon, being so close pent up toge∣ther, they were choak'd with the heat. The Infection was brought in among them by the South Wind, which swept them away in heaps, and for a while they bury'd them: Ant. Ch. 394. but the number of the Dead increasing to that degree, that those that attended the Sick were likewise cut off, none durst come near to the infected, and (besides the want of attendance) the Distemper seem'd to be incurable. For first, Catarrhs and Swellings of the Throat were caused by the stench of the Bodies that lay unbury'd, and the putri∣faction of the Soil. Then follow'd Feavers, Pains in the Back, Heaviness of the Loins, Dysenteries, Botches and Biles over the whole Body. Thus were many tormented by this Plague; others were struck Mad, and ran about the Camp like Wild Beasts, and beat eve∣ry one they met. All the help of Physicians was in vain, both by reason of the violence of the Distemper, and the suddain dispatch it made of many: For in the midst of great Pains and horrible Torments, they died commonly the Fifth or at the most the Sixth Day; so that they who died by the War, were accounted happy by all. And it was further observable, That all that attended upon the Sick, dy'd of the same Distemper: And that which aggravated the Misery was, that none were willing to come near to the Distress'd and Languishing Persons in order to administer to them any sort of help. For not only Strangers, but even Brothers, and dear and familiar Friends and Acquaintance, were forc'd out of fear of the Infection, to avoid and forsake one another. Dionysius therefore hearing of the miserable condition of the Carthaginians, mann'd Fourscore Sail, and or∣der'd Ant. Ch. 394. Pharacides and Leptines the Admirals at spring of Day to fall upon the Enemies Fleet. And he himself before the Moon was up in the Night, got his Army together, and march∣ing to the Temple of Cyanes, came up without being discover'd to the Enemies Camp about break of day: He had sent the Horse, and a Thousand Foot of the Mercenaries before him, to fall upon that part of the Enemies Camp that lay up further into the Land. These Mercenaries hated Dionysius more than any other that were about him, and were often making disturbance, and mutining upon all occasions; Therefore Dionysius order'd the Horse, as soon as they were engag'd with the Enemy, to fly and leave the Mer∣cenaries to be cut off, which was accordingly observ'd, and they were all kill'd upon the spot. Dionysius himself determin'd to assault the Camp and the Castles both at once. The Barbarians upon this suddain and unexpected incursion of the Enemy, running in great consusion and disorder to their Arms, gave him an opportunity to take the Castle, call'd Polictma by Storm. On the other side, in the mean time, the Horse, with some Gallies made to the Fort near Dascon, and took it; And forthwith came up the whole Fleet, and the Army Assaulted the rest of the Forts with a mighty Shout, which struck the Barbarians with great terror and amazement; For at the first they all ran to defend their P. 435. The miserable condition of the Garthagini∣ans. Ant. Ch. 394. Camp, but now seeing the Enemies whole Fleet come up, they bestirr'd themselves as much to preserve their Navy that then lay at Anchor: But all their Care was to little purpose, for they were prevented by the suddainness of the surrprize. For while they were ascend∣ing the Decks, and hasting on board, the Enemies Ships came up with that fierceness upon them, and so pierc'd their Broad sides, that some were sunk down right at the first shock; others by repeated and frequent Assaults were broken in pieces, so that the
Carthaginians were fill'd with dread and horror. And while the best and greatest of their Ships were up and down pierc'd through and through, the Air resounded with a terrible noise by the crashing of the Vessels, broken by the Beaks of the Gallies, and the Shoar over against them was presently fill'd with dead Bodies. The Syracusians still more and more encourag'd by their Success, while each strove who should first leap in∣to their Enemies Ships, in every place killed and dispersed and scattered Barbarians, a∣stonish'd and amaz'd with the fear of the present destruction. Neither was the Land Army wanting in their Assistance, in which Dionysius then was (by chance) having rid to Dascon some time before. For finding there Forty Ships of Fifty Oars apiece, be∣sides Ships of Burden that lay near to them, and some Gallies, they threw Fire amongst . The strange burning of the Carthaginian Ships. them; upon which the Flame mounting up, and spreading it self far and wide, set all the Ships on fire, and neither Merchants nor Mariners were able to stop the violence of the Flame, which (the Wind being then high) ran along from the Ships at Anchor and catcht upon the Transport Ships which lay near to them; And the Men to avoid the Fire, leaping out of the Ships into the Sea, and the Cables snapping asunder, the Ships fell foul one upon another, by reason whereof some broke in pieces, many were burnt, and others by the violence of the Winds scatter'd and dispers'd here and there, so that all one way or other were destroy'd. And here a Show, as upon a Theatre was represented to the Citizens while the Fire ran through the Transport Ships from one to another, and the Flame mounted the Masts, and consum'd the Main Yards, and the ruine of the Barbarians seem'd like the overthrow of such as were destroy'd for some no∣torious Ant. Ch 394. Impiety by Thunder and Lightning from Heaven. Upon these Successes both young and old that were able took Boats and pass'd over to the Harbour, to rifle those Ships that were almost consum'd by the Fire, and to save such as might be refitted, and those that were yet sound and untouch'd, to tow them by their Boats to the City. Yea, such was the exceeding Joy and Emulation of all to share in the Honour of the Victory, that those whom Age might well have excus'd from intermedling with matters of War, yet now beyond their Age and natural Strength made themselves remarkable, And now the Victory spread swiftly through the City, upon which the Women and Children and whole Families left their Houses and ran to the Walls and fill'd them with Spectators, of whom some lift up their Hands to Heaven, and gave thanks to the Gods, others cry'd out that the Barbarians were justly punish'd for their prophaneness in rissing and plun∣dering of the Temples. For indeed it seem'd as if the Gods themselves were engag'd in the Fight, where so many Ships were on fire with the Flame mounting into the Air, above the Masts, and the Grecians only standing by (with joyful Acclamations) as Eye-witnesses of every happy Event. And on the contrary, the Barbarians amaz'd and asto∣nish'd Ant. Ch. 394. with the dreadful misfortune (in great Confusion, and with mournful Cries) bewailing themselves. But Night put an end to the Battle, and Dionysius encamp'd near to the Barbarians at the Temple of Jupiter. The Carthaginians being thus routed both by Sea and Land, sent Ambassadors privately to Dionysius to offer him Three hundred Talents, which they had then ready in their Camp, if he would permit the remainder of their Army to transport themselves into Africa. To this Dionysius answer'd, that he could not suffer all to be gone, but he was content that those who were Citizens of Carthage might depart privately in the Night, but no other. For he knew well enough that neither the Syracusians nor his Confede∣rates P. 436. would ever suffer him to grant to them any such liberty. But he did this because he was unwilling utterly to destroy the Carthaginians, that the Syracusians (through fear of them) might find no opportunity or leisure by disturbing of him, to seek after the regaining of their Liberty. Having therefore agreed with the Carthaginians that they should be gone the fourth Night next after, he draws his whole Army into the City. Up∣on which, Imilco deliver'd the Three hundred Talents to some appointed for that pur∣pose, Imilco gives 300 Talents to Dionysius to have liberty to depart into Africa. who convey'd them secretly in the night into the Castle; When the time appoint∣ed was come, Imilco fill'd Forty Gallies with Citizens of Carthage, with an intent to be gone, leaving the rest of the Army behind him. And he was no sooner entred into the Port, but some Corinthians discerning that Dionysius trifled away the time in getting the Soldiers and Officers together, were impatient, and forthwith made after them. And by rowing hard, at length got up to the Carthaginian Ships that were in the Rear, which they sunk, by piercing them through with the Beaks of their Ships. Afterwards Dionysius drew The Carthagi∣nians pursu'd. Ant. Ch. 394. out his Army; but the Sicilians, who sided with the Carthaginians, were almost all fled through the heart of the Country, and escap'd to their several Cities, before the Syra∣cusians could reach up to them. In the mean time when Dionysius had plac'd Guards at several Passes to intercept them that fled, he march'd with his Army in the Night to the
Enemies Camp: Upon which, all the Barbarians now betraid both by their General and the Carthaginians, and likewise by the Sicilians, fled away in great fear and amazement, of whom part were taken falling in among their Enemies Guards, that way-laid them; others, and the greatest part, threw away their Arms, and cry'd for Quarter. But the Spaniards with their Arms got into a Body, and sent a Trumpet to Dionysius to offer them∣selves to him as Confederates: Upon which, he made a League with them, and join'd them to the Regiments of his Mercenaries. The rest of the common Soldiers he took, and whatever was left of the Bag and Baggage he gave for Plunder to the Soldiers. And thus was the suddain change and turn of the Carthaginian Affairs; From whence all Men may learn, That whoever they be that above measure exalt themselves, may come in short time to be convinc'd how weak and inconsiderable creatures they are, They, who a little before were possest of all the Cities of Sicily but Syracuse (which they accounted themselves likewise sure of) were presently brought into such a strait, as to be afraid lest they should lose their own Country: And they who lately destroy'd the Sepulchres of the Syracusians, were now Eye-witnesses of a Hundred and fifty thousand Carcasses of their own Men that perish'd by the Plague, lying rotting upon the ground without the Ho∣nour of Burial. They who had before burnt up all before them belonging to the Syra∣cusians, by a sudden change of Fortune now, saw their whole Fleet wrapt up, and con∣sum'd Ant. Ch. 394. in Flames. They who not long ago in great Pride and Ostentation entred into the Port of Syracuse, boasting of their Successes, little thought that within a while after they should be forc'd to fly away in the night, and treacherously leave their Confede∣rates to the Mercy of their Enemies. The General himself, who had pitch'd his Tent in the Temple of Jupiter, and had robb'd the Temples of the Riches laid up in them, shamefully fled away with a few to Carthage, and tho' he escap'd with Life, yet he could Imilco's Mise∣ry in his own Country. P. 437. not fly from the Vengeance of the Gods for his Impiety; but liv'd all his Days in disgrace in his own Country, reproach'd and scorn'd by all. Nay, he was reduc'd to that ex∣tremity of Misery, that he wander'd about round all the Temples of the City in Rags, convinc'd of his own Impiety, and doing Penance for his notorious Wickedness; and and at length Murther'd himself, and Dy'd in extream Want and Poverty; by his ex∣ample Murthers him∣self. leaving behind him an awe of the Gods among the Citizens. For presently after, many other calamities of War overtook them: For this overthrow being spread all over Africk, their Consederates who hated them before, now for their treacherous deserting of the Soldiers at Syracuse, abhorr'd the Carthaginians much more than they did before. And therefore stirr'd up by Rage on the one hand, and encourag'd to contemn the Carthagi∣nians by reason of their late misfortune on the other, they resolv'd to stand up for their The Confede∣rates rise up in Arms against the Carthagi∣nians. Liberty. And having sent Ambassadors into all parts, they rais'd an Army, and at length encamp'd themselves in the Field. Upon which, there presently came in to them, not only Free Men but Slaves, so that in a small time they made up a Body of Two hundred thousand Men. In the first place they took Tunis, not far from Carthage from thence they march'd in a body, fought and beat the Carthaginians, and drove them within their Walls. At length the Carthaginians (against whom the Gods thus apparently fought) with faint and trembling Hearts, assembled themselves together to supplicate the Deity to be appeas'd and to put an end to his Wrath and Indignation against them. And presently a Spirit of Ant. Ch. 394. Devotion (join'd with Fear) possess'd the whole City, whilst every one expected to be∣come miserable Slaves. Therefore all were of Opinion that the Gods who were offend∣ed, should by all means in the first place be atton'd. And altho' they never before Sa∣crific'd to Proserpina or Ceres, yet now the chiefest of the Citizens were consecrated to be Priests for this Service. And having set forth the Statues of the Gods with all Pomp and Solemnity, they order'd the Sacrifices for the future to be made according to the Gre∣cian Rites and Ceremonies. And they carefully made use of those Grecians that were with them, and who were best acquainted with the Rites of their Religion, to offici∣ate in the Sacrifices. But after this they prepar'd another Navy, and all other things necessary for the carrying on of the War. In the mean time the Rebels, tho' they were a vast number of Men, yet they wanted good and expert Officers; and that which was worst of all, they wanted sufficient Pro∣vision for such a multitude, which the Carthaginians were supply'd with, having enough brought to them by Sea from Sardinia. And besides all this, the Revolters fell a quarrel∣ling among themselves about the Supream Command of the Army; and some, bribed with Money by the Carthaginians, fell off and deserted the common Cause. And hence it came to pass, that (through want of Provision, and Treachery of some of their Asso∣ciates) this great Rabble broke in pieces, and were dispers'd here and there, every one
to their own Country, and Places of Habitation, and so freed Carthage from the great Ant. Ch. 394. Fright they were lately in. And this was the State of Affairs in Africa at this time. As for Dionysius, he discerning that the Mercenaries bore him no Good Will, and there∣fore, lest they should depose him, seiz'd upon Aristotle their General, upon which the common Soldiers ran to their Arms, and in great Rage demanded their Pay. But he, to appease them, told them, That he would send Aristotle to Lacedemon to be try'd there by the Democracy, and gave them (who were about Ten thousand) the City and Coun∣try of Leontum for their Pay, which they readily accepted for the sweetness and plea∣santness of the Place, and divided the Land amongst themselves by Lot. Then he rais'd other Mercenaries, to whom, and to those that were Freemen of his own Family, he committed the Care and Protection of his Government. After the Overthrow of the Carthaginians, all those that remain'd of them that belong'd to the Cities that were taken by the Carthaginians throughout Sicily, got together, and be∣ing restor'd to their several Countries, began to get Strength again. And Dionysius re∣peopled Dionysius re∣peoples Messi∣na. Messina with a Thousand Lecrians, Four thousand Medimneans, and Six hundred Melesians of Peloponnesus, who were Exiles from Zacynthus and Naupactus. But when he discern'd that he had offended the Lacedemonians, by planting the Messinians (whom they had driven out) in so eminent and considerable a City, he remov'd them into another Ant. Ch. 394. Place in the Province of Abacena, near the Sea, limiting them within certain Bounds. The Messinians call'd this City Tyndarides, and living peaceably among themselves, and re∣ceiving P. 438. many into the Freedom of their City, they increas'd in a short time to above the Number of Five thousand. After many Expeditions and Incursions into the Territories of the Sicilians, they took Smenteum and Morgantium, and enter'd into League with Agyris the King of the Agyroneans, and Damon the Petty Prince of the Centorrippineans, likewise with the Erbiteans and Astorines. Cephaledium, Selunta, and Enua, were also brought un∣der their Power and Government by Treachery. And they made Peace with them of Erbissa, and so stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time. CHAP. VIII. Agesilaus made General against the Persians by the Lacedemonians; goes to Ephe∣sus. They send to the King of Egypt for Assistance. The Persians routed at Sipy∣lus by Agesilaus. Tissaphernes's Head cut off in a Bath at Larissa. The War between the Phoceans and Baeotians. IN Greece, when the Lacedemonians foresaw the great War they were likely to have with the Persians, they made Agesilaus, one of their two Kings, their General, who raising Six thousand Men, and chusing Thirty of the most eminent Citizens to be Mem∣bers of the Senate, pass'd over out of Europe to Ephesus. There he rais'd Four thousand more, and so march'd into the Field with an Army of Ten thousand Foot, and Four Ush. Ann. 174. rather Four thousand Horse. . Hundred Horse. After the Camp follow'd a Rabble, (for the sake of Pillage and Plunder,) not infe∣rior in Number to the Army it self. He ran through the Plains of the Caystrions, and wasted and spoil'd all that belong to the Persians as far as to Cumae. Moving from thence, he spent the greatest part of the Summer in spoiling and wasting Phrygia, the Country next adjoyning; and having loaded his Army with Pillage and Spoil, about the latter end of Autumn return'd with his Army to Ephesus. While these Things were acting, the Lacedemonians sent Ambassadors to Otherwise called Nephe∣rites. Nephreus King of Egypt, in order to procure his Assistance in the War; who sent to the Spartans Tackle and Furniture for a Hundred Gallies, and Five hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat in∣stead of Soldiers. Pharax therefore, the Lacedemonian Admiral, loosing from Rhodes with a Hundred and twenty Sail, arriv'd at Cassandra a Castle of Caria, distant a Hundred Ant. Ch. 394. The King of Egypt sends Tackle for Ships and Wheat to the Lacede∣monians. and fifty Stages from Caunus. Setting sail from thence, he besieg'd Caunus and Conon the Persian Admiral, who then lay there with a Fleet of Forty Sail. But Artaphernes and Pharnabazus approaching to the Relief of Caunus with a great Army, Pharax rais'd his Siege, and return'd with his Fleet to Rhodes.
After this, Canon got together Fourscore Gallies, and with these sails over the Chersones. In the mean time, the Inhabitants of Rhodes refuse to suffer the Peloponnesian Fleet to en∣ter Rhodes re∣volts foom the Lacedemo∣nians. their Harbour, and Revoit from the Lacedemonians, and receive Conon with his Navy into their Port and City. And presently after, they who brought Corn out of Egypt, (design'd for the Lacedemonians,) not knowing any thing of the Defection of the Rho∣dians, sail'd boldly to the Island. Upon which, Conon the Persian Admiral, with the help of the Rhodians, brought them and their Loading into the Port, and stor'd the City with Corn. And there came likewise other Ships to Conon, Ten from Silicia, and Fourscore from Phenicia, under the Command of the Lord Lieutenant of the Province of Sdon. But afterwards Agesilaus drawing out his Army into the Plain of Caystrus, and the Pla∣ces Ant. Ch. 394. Agesilaus p∣lages in Asia. near to Sipylus, plunder'd and spoil'd the Inhabitants. Upon which, Tissaphernes, with an Army of Ten Thousand Horse, and Fifty Thousand Foot, came upon the Backs of the Lacedemonians, and kill'd all the Stragglers as they were forraging and ranging about the Country. But Agesilaus, with a Phalanx (drawn up in a Square) possess'd himself of the rising Grounds at Sipylus, watching his opportunity to set upon the Enemy: and from thence over-ran all the Country as far as to Sardis, and amongst others wasted and P. 439. destroy'd a Paradise. Garden belonging to Tissaphernes, set with all sorts of Trees, and other Things for Delight, and Divertisement in time of Peace, beautifi'd with very great Art and Cost. Marching thence, when he came half way between Sardis and Thyberne, he sent Xenocles the Spartan in the Night with Fourteen hundred Men into a Wood to lie in Ambush, in order to intercept the Enemy, he himself (about spring of Day) marching forward with the Army: As soon as he had passd the Ambuscade, the Barbarians in great Routs Tissa∣phernes by an Ambuscade. Fury on the sudden set upon his Rear; upon which he forthwith wheel'd about, and when they were hotly engag'd, he lift up a Sign to them in Ambush, who forthwith with a great Shout came in and fell upon the Enemy, who seeing themselves surrounded, (in great Fear and Terror) betook themselves to their Heels, of whom Six thousand were kill'd in the Pursuit, and a great number of Prisoners taken, and the Lacedemonians seiz'd the Enemies Camp, which was very rich. Tissaphernes himself amaz'd at the Valour of the Spartans, in a great Fright fled out of the Battel to Sardis. Agesilaus was mov'd to march up higher into the other Provinces, but because the Sacrifices did not point out to him any good Success, he return'd with his Army to the Sea-side, Artaxerxes King of Asia hearing of the routing of his Army, was both Afraid and An∣gry; Afraid of the Lacedemonians, and Angry at Tissaphernes, who was the occasion of the War. And Parysatis the Queen-Mother had not long before pray'd Artaxerxes, even upon her Knees, to take Revenge upon Tissaphernes; for she bare him a mortal Hatred, Ant. Ch. 394. because he was instrumental to frustrate the Expedition of her Son against his Brother, Artaxerxes therefore makes Tithraustes General, and commanded him to seize Tissaphernes, giving him likewise Letters directed to all the Cities and Governors of the Provinces, or∣dering them to observe his Commands. As soon as Tithraustes came to Colosse in Phrygia, by the help of the Governor of Larissa he seiz'd Tissaphernes in a Bath, and cut off his Tissaphernes kill'd by the King's Order. Head and sent it to the King. After which, he made a Truce with Agesilaus for Six Months. While Affairs went thus in Asia, the Phoceans made War upon the Boeotians, and pray'd War between the Boeotians and Phocian, call'd the Boeo∣tian War. Aid and Assistance from the Lacedemonians. Upon which, Lysander was sent thither with a few Soldiers, who rais'd more after he came to Phocis; but not long after, Pausanias King of Sparta was sent to Phocis with Six thousand, whereupon the Boeotians drew out their Forces, and being join'd by the Athenians their Confederates, found Haliartus besieg'd by Lysander and the Phoceans. Whereupon a Battel was fought, in which Lysander, and many of the Lacedemonians with their Confederates, were kill'd. The Boeotians pursu'd not far, but Two hundred Thebans lost their Lives, by falling down some steep Precipices through their own Carelesness. This was afterwards call'd the Boeotian War. But Pausa∣nias hearing of the Defeat of the Lacedemonians, enter'd into a Truce with the Boeotians, and return'd with his Army into Peloponnesus. In the mean time, Conon the Persian Admiral committed the Care of the Fleet to Hiero∣nymus and Nicodamus, two Athenians, and he himself hasten'd away to the King sailing Ant. Ch. 394. Conon em∣ploy'd by the King of Per∣sia against the Lacedemo∣nians. P. 440. to Silicia, and from thence passing to Thapsacus in Syria, he put himself in a Barge, and sail'd down the River Euphrates to Babylon. Here being admitted to the King, he pro∣mis'd, That if the King would but furnish him with Money and other Necessaries as he should think fit, he would undertake to ruin the Lacedemonian Fleet. The King was much pleas'd, and highly Commended and Rewarded him, and order'd a Paymaster to attend him, and pay him as much Money as he should from time to time require He gave him likewise liberty to chuse what Persian he would to be his Collegue and Assistant in the
Command; and he thereupon chose Pharnabazus, and after he had taken Order for all Things, (according to the utmost of his Power,) he went down to Sea. CHAP. IX. The Confederate War by the Argives and others against the Lacedemonians. The Battel at Aricas. The Fight at Nemea. Pisander the Lacedemonian Admiral routed in a Sea-Fight at Cnidus by the Persian Fleet, commanded by Conon the Athenian. The Corinthian War against the Lacedemonians, and the great Sedi∣tion there. AT the end of the year Diophantus was made Lord Chancellor at Athens, and at Rome Six Military Tribunes were invested with the Consular Authority; that is to say, Olymp. 96. 2. Ant. Ch. 393. Lucius Valerius, Marcus Furius, Quintus Servilius, Quintus Sulpitius, Mistaken. Claudius Marcus Va∣lerius Maxi∣mus. Ogron, and Lucius Fu∣rius. The Confederate War. Marius Appius. In the time of their Governments, the Boeotians and Athenians, the Co∣rinthians and the Argives, Confederated: For they conceiv'd, that if they (being the most considerable and largest Cities of Greece) did but stick close one to another, they might easily overcome the Lordly Power of the Lacedemonians, and the rather for that they were hated of their Confederates for their Tyrannical Government. To this end they first order'd a General Assembly of Members from the several Cities to meet at Co∣rinth, where being met, they order'd all Things necessary concerning the War. After∣wards they sent Messengers from City to City, and by that means took off many from siding with the Lacedemonians. And presently there join'd with them all Eubea generally, the Leucadians, Acarnanians, Ambraciots, and Chalcideans of Thrace. They then endea∣vour'd to bring into the Confederacy the Inhabitants of Peloponnesus; but none of them would hearken to them: For Sparta lying close to the sides of Peloponnesus, was as a Castle or Bulwark for the Defence of the Country. Medius, the Prince of Larissa in Thessaly, was about that time engag'd in a War with Lycophrone Tyrant of the Phera a City in Macedonia. Phereans, to whom upon his Request this General Assembly sent in Aid Two thousand Men, who being fur∣nish'd with these Aides, takes Pharsalus, (a Lacedemonian Garison,) and sells all the Inha∣bitants for Slaves. After this, the Boeotians, with them of Argos, separating themselves from Medius, took Heraclea in Trachinia, being let within the Walls in the night, and there they put all the Lacedemonians to the Sword; but suffer'd the Peloponnesians to depart with all that belong'd to them. Then they recall'd the Trachinians to inhabit the City, whom the Lacedemonians had forc'd to till the Land, though they were the ancient Inhabitants of the Country. And not long after, Istmenias the General of the Boeotians leaving the Argives to guard the City, caus'd the Eneans and Achamaneans to desert the Lacedemonians, and having rais'd among them and other Confederates many Soldiers, he march'd with an Army of no less than Six thousand Men against the Phoceans. Not long after he encamp'd near Aricas, a City of Locris, (the Birth-place of Ajax, as 'tis said,) where the Phoceans, under the Ant. Ch. 393. Conduct of Lacisthenes a Laconian, came out against him and fought him: The Dispute was very sharp for a long time, but at length the Boeotians got the Day, and pursu'd the The Battel at Aricas. Enemy till it grew dark, of whom they kill'd above a Thousand, and lost Five hundred of their own. After this Battel, both Sides disbanded their Armies, and the Phoceans returned to their own Country, and the other to Corinth; where having call'd a Senate, and encourag'd by this good Success, (as they conceiv'd of it,) they muster'd at Corinth (rais'd out of all the Cities far and near) to the Number of about Fifteen thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse. The Lacedemonians seeing that the greatest Cities of Greece had confederated against them, determin'd to send for Agesilaus, and the Army he had with him, out of Asia. Yet P. 441. in the mean time they march'd out against the Enemy with Three and twenty thou∣sand The Battel at Nemea. Foot, and Five hundred Horse, which they had rais'd out of their own City, and from among their Confederates. And not long after a Battel was fought at the River Ne∣mea, which continu'd till Night parted them, wherein part of the Army on both sides prevail'd one against the other. There fell of the Lacedemonians and their Confederates, Eleven hundred; but of the Boeotians and their Confederates, were slain Two thousand Eight hundred.
As soon as Agesilaus had landed his Army in Europe, he was encountred by a great Body Ant. Ch. 393. of Thracians, whom he routed, and kill'd the greatest part of them. Thence he march'd through Macedonia, on purpose to pass that way Xerxes had formerly done, when he came with a powerful Army into Greece. Having therefore pass'd through Macedon and Thessaly, he went on forward to the Straits of Thermopylae, and pass'd through that way. In the mean time Conon and Pharnabazus, the Persian Admirals lay at Doryma in the Cher∣sonese with a Fleet of more than Ninety Men of War; and being inform'd that the Ene∣mies The Sea-fight at Cnidus. Navy lay at Cnidus, they prepared for a Sea-Fight. Periarchus is here mista∣ken for Pisan∣der. Ush. Ann. 179. Periarchus the Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet weighing Anchor from Cnidus, arrived at Physeus in Chersonesus with Eighty five Gallies; and loosing from thence, fell upon the King's Fleet, and had the advantage against those Ships he first attack'd: But upon the Persian Gallies coming up in a full Body to rescue their Fellows, his Confederates fled, and made to the Shoar; but he judging it a base and dishonourable thing for a Spartan to turn his Back, tack'd about to front the Enemy, and fighting with great Gallantry, (after he had destroy'd many of the Persians in the heat of the Fight) was at length kill'd, and so fell with Honour wor∣thy Pisander kill'd, and the Lacedemo∣nians routed at Sea. of his Country. Then they with Conon pursuing the Lacedemonians to the Shoar, took Fifty of their Gallies, but the most part of the Men swam to Land and escap'd, only Five hundred were taken Prisoners; and the rest of the Gallies came to Gnidus. But Agesilaus being strengthen'd with Forces from Peloponnesus, entred with an Army Ant. Ch. 393. into Boeotia, where the Boeotians and their Confederates forthwith met him at Coronea, and The Lacede∣monians beat the Boeotians. engag'd, in which Battel the Boeotians put that Wing of the Lacedemonians to slight that oppos'd them, and pursu'd them to their Camp; but the rest, after a small Resistance, were routed by Agesilaus and his Party. Whereupon the Lacedemonians looking upon them∣selves as Conquerors, in token of Victory erected a Trophy, and gave Leave to the Ene∣my to bury their Dead. For there were kill'd of the Boeotians and their Confederates above Six hundred; and of the Lacedemonians and their Associates above Three hun∣dred and fifty; Agesilaus himself being sorely wounded, and carry'd to Delphos to be cur'd. After the late Sea-fight, Pharnabazus and Conon invaded the Confederates of the Lace∣demonians with their whole Fleet; and first forc'd them of Coos to a Defection, from the Lacedemonians, then those of Nisea, a Town on the East-side of the Isthmos of Peloponne∣nesus. Nisea, and Tios, a City in Paphligo∣nia. Tios or Teium. Afterward the Chians (forcing out the Garison there) revolted to Conon. The Mitylenes, Ephesians, and Erythreans likewise follow'd the Examples of the former. And thus all the Cities on a sudden revolted, some of which (casting out the Lacedemo∣nian Garisons) took the opportunity absolutely to free themselves; others from that time gave themselves up into Conon's Hands, and from that time forward the Lacedemonians lost the Sovereignty of the Sea. Conon determining to sail for Attica with his whole Fleet, weighs Anchor, and by the P. 442. way beinging over the Islands of the Cyclades, Islands of the Aegean Sea near Delos, ly∣ing in a Round, and therefore so call'd. Cyclades to his side, he makes straight for Cythera, an Island over a∣gainst Crete. Cythera, which he gain'd upon the first Approach, and taking Hostages of the Cythereans for their Fidelity, he sent them away to Laconia; and when he had put a strong Garison into the City, he sail'd for Corinth, where he had Audience of the Senate; and then entring into a League, and leaving Money with them for the carrying on of the War, he return'd into Asia. About this time Eropus King of Macedonia dy'd, after he had reign'd Six Years; his Son Pausanias succeeded him, and reign'd only One Year. Theopompus of Chius ends his History with this Year, and with the Sea-fight at Cnidus, containing the Relation of the Grecian Affairs in Twelve Books; begun at the Sea-fight at Cynossema, where Thucydides ends, comprehending Seventeen Years. Ant. Ch. 393. After the end of the last Year, Eubulides was made Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Olymp. 96. 3. An. M. 3578. Ant. Ch. 392. Six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Dignity at Rome, (Lucius Sergius, Aulus Posthumius, Publius Cornelius, Sextus Centius, Quintus Manlius, and Lucius Juli∣us, and Luci∣us Furius. Anitius Camillus.) At that time Conon the Persian Admiral arrived in the Pireum at Athens with Fourscore Sail, and promis'd the Citizens to rebuild the Walls of the City. For the Walls and long Thighs of the Pyream were demolish'd by the Lacedemonians, according to the Articles of the Peace when the Athenians were brought very low, and their Power broken by the Peloponnsian War. To this end Conon hir'd many Workmen, and order'd several out of Conon comes to Athens. the Fleet to be assisting to the carrying on of the Work, so that the greatest part of the Builds the Walls of the Pireum. Wall was finish'd in a short time. For the Thebans sent in Five hundred Carpenters and Masons, and several other Cities gave their Assistance. But Teribazus, General of the Land Forces in Asia envying Conon's Successes, contriv'd falsly to charge him, as if he
only made use of the King's Soldiers to get Towns and Cities for the Athenians; there∣fore sending for him to Sardis, upon his appearance he seiz'd him and threw him into Ant. Ch. 392. Prison. But now at Corinth some that had thirsted after the chief Rule and Command in the Government, entred into a Conspiracy, and at the time of the publick Plays kill'd many The Sedition at Corinth. in the Play-house, and fill'd the City with Tumult and Sedition. And being assisted by the Argives they cut the Throats of a Hundred and Twenty Citizens, and Banish'd Five The Corinthi∣an War. hundred more. The Lacedaemonians raised Forces in order to reduce these Murderers by Force of Arms: But the Athenians and Beotians came with an Army to their assistance, but with an Eye to bring the City into their Subjection. But the Exiles with the Lacedae∣monians and other Confederates, in the Night came up to the Lecheum and . Arsenal, and took it by Storm. The next day the Townsmen drew out their Forces under the Com∣mand of Iphicrates, but were routed by the Lacedaemonians, who slew a great number of them. After this, the Beotians and Athenians together with the Argives and Corinthians, march'd down with their Forces to the Lecheum, and at first (after a short Resistance) forced their way into the Castle. But the Lacedaemonians and Exiles (Valiantly renewing the Fight,) drove out the Beotians, and all with them, who were forced to return into the City, with the loss of about a Thousand Men. And now the time of Celebrating the Isthmian Games approached, and a Contest fell out amongst them concerning the Ordering and Management of the Sports: And after much wrangling, the Lacedaemonians prevail'd, and gave to the Exiles the Authority of or∣dering that Affair: And because almost all the Skirmishes and Encounters in this War happen'd near to Corinth, it was call'd the Corinthian War, and lasted Eight Years. CHAP. X. The Quarrel between the Rhegians and Dionysius. Mago the Carthaginian settles Affairs in Sicily. Routed at Abacena by Dionysius. Rhegium near surpriz'd by Dionysius. The Acts of Iphicrates at Corinth, Phlias, and Sicyon. A∣myntas lost his Kingdom of Macedonia, but was restor'd. The Romans take Veii; Dedicate a Golden Cup to Apollo. Their Ambassadors are taken by the Pi∣rates of the Lipari-Islands, but discharg'd by Timasitheus. MOreover, about this time they of Rhegium quarrelled with Dionysius in Sicily, be∣cause P. 443. Ant. Ch. 392. Quarrels be∣tween the Rhe∣gians and Dio∣nysius. he had fortify'd Messina, as if he intended thereby some Mischief against them. Upon which they receiv'd into their Protection all that were driven out by Dio∣nysius, and all others that hated his Government. Then they gave Mylas to the late Inha∣bitants of Naxus and Catana to be inhabited by them; and sent Heloris with an Army to besiege Messina; and while he in the first place besieg'd the Castle, the Townsmen with the Mercenaries of Dionysius drew out and fell upon him, routed him, and kill'd above Five hundred of his Followers. Then they presently set upon Mylas and took it, and and discharg'd all the Naxians that were there . upon terms of mutual Friendship, who went to the Sicilian and Grecian Cities, some to one place and some to another. Dionysius now having made a League with the Cities that lay upon the Sea-Coasts, de∣termin'd to pass over with an Army against Rhegium: But for the present his Design was retarded by the Sicilians at Tauromenum, whom therefore he resolv'd in the first place to re∣duce; Dionysius be∣sieges Tauro∣menium. to which end he marched thither with all his Forces, and Encamp'd on that side towards Naxos, and continu'd his Siege all Winter, in hopes that the Sicilians would leave the Hill, because they had not been long there. But they having heard their Fathers de∣clare that the ancient Sicilians (the former Inhabitants of that Place) were expuls'd thence by the Grecians when they arriv'd there, and built Naxus, they therefore concluded they had just cause both to defend their own Country, and to revenge the Injury done to their Ancestors by the Greeks, and so they defended the Place with great Resolution. In the mean time, while the Dispute was hot on both sides, . Ant. Ch. 392. the Winter Solstice drew near at hand, and Winter coming on apace all the Places near the Castle were full of Snow; and Dionysius conceiving that the Sicilians by reason of the strength of the Place and height of the Walls, kept but a slender Guard in the Castle, he ascends those high and steep Places in a dark and tempestuous Night, and with much difficulty (by reason of the steep∣ness
of the Rock, and depth of the Snow) at length with a scarr'd Face and half blind with Cold and Snow; possess'd himself of one part of the Castle: Then presently forcing into another, he laid open a Passage for his Army into the City: Upon which the whole Power and Strength of the Sicilians ran together, and drove the Dionystans out of the City and Castle; and he himself (by a blow upon his Brigandine) in the pursuit was knock'd down, and was very near falling alive into the hands of his Enemies. And in regard the Sicilians had the advantage of high Ground (from whence they gall'd the other) above Six hundred of Dionysius's his Men were kill'd, and many lost their Arms, Dionysius him∣self Dionysius near killing. sav'd only his Corslet. After this Misfortune, they of Agrigentum and Messina (those that sided with Dionysius being at a great distance) were altogether intent upon regaining their Liberty, and therefore sent back Dionysius's Ambassador, who was order'd to them to renew and continue the Confederacy and League that then was between them and the Tyant. About this time Pausanias, King of Sparta, fled out of his Country, by reason of some hainous Crimes laid to his charge by the Citizens when he had reign'd Fourteen Years: Agistpolis his Soft succeeded him, and continu'd as many years more? Then likewise dy'd Pausania; King of Macedon, whom Amyntas treacherously murther'd after he had reign'd only one Year. Amyntas, who thus thus got the Kingdom, held it Four and twenty Years. At the End of the Year, Demostratus was chosen Archon of Athens, and six Military Olymp. 96. 4. Ant. Ch. 391. Tribunes, Lucius Titinius, Publius Licinius, Publius Melius, Quintus Maenius. The Acts of Mago in Sici∣ly. P. 444. Mallius, Gneius Genu∣tius, and Lucius Attilius, govern'd as Consuls at Rome. In their time Mago, the Cartha∣ginian General was busie in Sicily, endeavouring to settle the Affairs of Carthage there, which were then but in an ill Condition, since the last slaughter and ruin of their Army. To this end he carry'd himself with all Mildness and Humanity towards all the Cities within his Government, and receiv'd all others into his Protection that were Enemies to Dionysius, and enter'd into Leagues with many of the Sicilians. At length he rais'd an Ar∣my, and march'd against Messina, and when he had wasted the Country he return'd with rich Booty, and Encamp'd near Abacena, a City of his Confederates. But Dionysius with his Army march'd up to him, and upon his approach both Armies were drawn out in or∣der of Battel, upon which there was a sharp and hot Engagement, in which the Cartha∣ginians were routed and fled to the City, with the loss of above Eight hundred Men: And Dionysius return'd to Syracuse. But within a few days after he made an Expedition against Dionysius sets upon Rhegium in Italy. Rhegium with an hundred Sail well Mann'd; and coming upon them on a sudden in the Night, he set the Gates on Fire, and rear'd Scaling-Ladders to the Walls. A few only of the Rhegians at first ran to repulse the Enemy, and busied themselves in extinguishing the Fire; but by the advice of Heloris the Governor, they left the Fire, and fell with all their force upon the Enemy, and by that means sav'd their City. For if they had continu'd Ant. Ch. 391. still in quenching the Flames, so small a number could not have kept out the Dionysians till the rest of the Citizens had come in to their assistance. For by throwing of Timber and other combustible matter from the Tops of the Houses next adjoining, they rather in∣creas'd the Fire. Dionysius being thus disappointed in his design, wastes and destroys all the Country round about with Fire and Sword; but afterwards made a Truce with them for one Year, and so return'd to Syracuse. In the mean time, the Grecians in Italy perceiving that Dionysius his Covetousness and The Grecians confederate in Italy against Dionysius. Ambition extended as far as to their Countries, enter'd into a general League, and ap∣pointed a publick Place for their Common Assemblies. By this means they hop'd that they should both be able to oppose Dionysius, and likewise have an Army always ready to fight the Lucanians, who were ever and anon making inroads upon them. While these things were doing, the Exiles that were in the Lecheum at Corinth, being let into the City in the Night, endeavour'd to possess themselves of the Walls, but were The Lacedae∣monians bea∣ten by Iphicra∣tes near Co∣rinth. driven out again by Iphicratis, and forc'd to fly to the Arsenal, with the loss of Three hundred Men. Within a few days after, part of the Spartan Army march'd through the Territories of Corinth, and were suddenly fallen upon by Iphicrates and some other Con∣federates, who out off the greatest part of them. And marching from thence with his Light-arm'd Men against Phlias, he engag'd with them that came out of the Town, and kill'd above Three hundred of them. Hence he made against Sicyon, who drew out un∣der Ant. Ch. 391 the Walls and fought him, but were beaten and forc'd into the City, with the loss of Five hundred Citizens.
After these things, the Argives with all their Forces came against Corinth, and took both Corinth taken by the Argives. the Castle and City, and join'd that Territory to their own. Iphicrates the Athenian had had a design to be Master of that Territory, as a Place conducing much to the gaining and keeping the Principality of Greece. But the People opposing it, he Abdicated the Government, and the Athenians ordered Cabrias to Corinth in his room. In Macedonia Amyntas, the Father of Philip, was ejected out of his Pella. City by the Illyri∣ans, who made an inroad into his Country, and despairing to keep his Kingdom, he gave the Furius Ca∣millus. Olynthians the Territory next adjoining to them. However, though he lost his Kingdom at this time, yet soon after he recover'd it by the help of the Thessalians, and reign'd afterwards Four and twenty Years. Yet there are some that write, that after the Ex∣pulsion of Amyntas, Argeus reign'd in Macedonia for the space of Two years, and then Amyntas was restor'd. About the same time Satyrus, the Son of Sparticus, King of Bosphe∣rus, P. 445. dy'd, after he had reign'd Fourteen years, and Leuco his Son succeeded him for the space of Forty years. In Italy, after Eleven years Siege of the Veians, the Romans created Cornelius Scipio. Ant. Ch. 391. The Romans take Veii. Marcus Furius, Dictator, and One of the Isles of Lipari near Sicily. Publius Cornelius, General of the Horse. Having rais'd an Army they storm'd Veii by undermining the Castle, raz'd the City and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves; after which the Dictator triumph'd, and the People of Rome dedicated a Golden Cup to the Oracle at Delphos, out of the Tenth of the Spoils. But they that carry'd the Offering were fallen upon by * Thieves or Pirates belonging to the Isles of Lapari, and were carry'd * Like them of Algier. thither. Yet when Timasatheus who was then chief Magistrate of * Lisopara, heard of it, he not only protected the Messengers from all Injuries, but caus'd the Cup to be restor'd, and suffer'd them to pass safely to Delphos: Who, when they had deliver'd the Cup into the Treasury of the Messana in Peloponnesus. Messinians, return'd to Rome. And when the Romans understood how nobly Timasatheus had dealt with the Ambassadors, they presently so far honour'd him, as to enter into a League of Alliance and Friendship with him; and an Hundred thirty and seven years after, when they took Lipara from the Carthaginians, they order'd all the Po∣sterity of Timasatheus to be quit of Tribute, and free in all other respects. CHAP. XI. The Acts of Thrasybulus the Athenian General. The Carthaginians under Mago begin a new War in Sicily against Dionysius. A Peace concluded. Rhodes falls off from the Athenians. Evagoras becomes King of Salamis in Cyprus. Makes War against the Persians. The Acts of Thimbro, the Lacedemonian General in Asia. WHen the Year was ended, Philocles was made Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and Olymp. 97. 1. Ant. Ch. 390. six Military Tribunes Publius Cor∣nelius Scipio, Publius Sextus, Publius Cornelius Cossus. Thrasybulus made the Athe∣nian General. The Acts of Thrasybulus Crassus, Ceso Fabius, Lu∣cius Furius, Quintus Servilius, and Marcus Valerius executed the Office of Consuls at Rome. At this time was celebrated the Ninety Seventh Olympiad, in which Terites was Victor. And then the Athenians order'd forth their General Thrasybulus with Forty sail of Men of War, who hasten'd to Ionia, and there being furnish'd with Money from the Confede∣rates, he weigh'd Anchor from thence and arriv'd at Chersonesus, where he staid a while and procur'd Medocus and Seuthes, Princes of Thrace, to become Confederates. Presently after, he pass'd over to Lesbos, and anchor'd with his Fleet near to Eressus: But by a vio∣lent Storm Three and Twenty of his Ships were then lost. However, with those that were left he endeavour'd to reduce the Cities of Lesbos to their Obedience, for all had made a Defection, except Mitylene; and first he sets upon Methymna, and fought with the Citi∣zens led by Therimacus, a Spartan, whom he kill'd, with many of the Methymnians his fol∣lowers, and drove the rest within their Walls; and after he had made great Spoil and Havock in the Country, Eressus and Antissa were surrendered to him: Then (being furnish'd with Shipping from Chius and Mitylene,) he fail'd to Rhodes. And now the Carthaginians having (after the Slaughter at Syracuse) at length recover'd Mago invades Sicily with an Army from A∣frica, and o∣ther Parts. their Strength, resolv'd to renew their Attempts for the bettering their Affairs in Sicily; and because they determin'd to try their Fortune by a Battel at Land, they pass'd over but with a few long Ships; but raised Soldiers out of Africa, Sardinia, and from among the Barbarians in Italy, and arm'd them all compleatly at their own Charge, and with these
they Landed in Sicily to the number of Fourscore thousand, under their General Mago; who marching through the Territories of the Sicilians, caused many Cities to desert and fall off from Dionysius, and at length Encamp'd at the River Chrysa in the Country of the Argyrineans, near the Road leading to Morgantinum: But when he could not bring over Ant. Ch. 39. the Argyrineans to join with him either by fair means or foul, he made an Halt, and espe∣cially because he heard an Army was upon their march against him from Syracuse. For P. 446. Dionysius having intelligence of the Motion of the Carthaginians through the Heart of the Dionysius marches a∣gainst the Car∣thaginians. Country, without delay, got together what Forces he could, both Syracusians and Mer∣cernaries, and march'd against the Enemy with no fewer than Twenty thousand Men. And when he came near to the Enemy's Camp, he sent Ambassadors to Agyris, Prince of the Agyreans, who at that time was the greatest and most Powerful Prince of Sicily next to Dionysius: For he had almost all the Castles and Strong holds lying round about, under his Power and Government, and the City of the Agyreans, which he commanded, was at that time very Populous, having in it no less than Twenty thousand Citizens. Be∣sides, it was sufficiently provided with all sorts of Victuals, and a vast Treasure was laid up in the Castle, which Agyris had hoarded up from the Confiscations of the Richest of the Citizens whom he had put to Death. Dionysius therefore entring with a few into the City, gain'd Agyris to join with him, promising to bestow on him a large Territory next adjoining to him if he succeeded in the War. Agyris then Freely and Liberally furnish'd Dionysius's Army with Bread and all other Agyris joint with Dionysi∣us. Ant. Ch. 390. Provision, and afterwards drew out all his Forces, and join'd with him in the War against the Carthaginians. But Mago being in an Enemies Country (and every day more and more pinch'd with want of every thing that was necessary) was very uneasie. For the Argyreans being well acquainted with all the Ways and Passes, often surpriz'd his Men and intercepted all Pro∣vision. The Syracusions were for fighting with all speed; but Dionysius would not yield to that, affirming, That Time and Want would ruin the Carthaginians without Fighting. Upon this delay the Syracusians were so enrag'd that they deserted his Camp: Hereupon he was in a great Fright, and forthwith made free all the Slaves. Yet afterwards the Car∣thaginians sending Ambassadors to treat upon Terms of Peace, he made Peace with them Dionysius makes Peace with the Car∣thaginians. and forthwith restor'd the Servants and Slaves to their Masters. The Conditions were like the former, but something fuller in this, That the Sicilians should be Subject to Dionysius, and that he should have Tauromenium. When the Articles were Sign'd and Confirmed, Mago left Sicily, and Dionysius after his taking possession of Tauromenium, banish'd thence most of the Sicilians; and plac'd in their room the Choicest of his Mercenaries. Thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at this time. And in Italy the Romans took Rather Pha∣lerium. Falerum, a City of the Falisci by storm. After the End of the Former, this Year Nicoteles executed the Office of chief Magi∣strate Olymp. 97. 2. Ant. Ch. 389. at Athens, and three Military Tribunes, Marcus Furius, Caius Aemilius, and Catlus Berus were vested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time they of Rhodes that sided with the Lacedaemonians, expell'd all the Citizens that favour'd the Athenians; and when they got together in Arms to defend their Interest, the Lacedaemonian Confederates routed them with the slaughter of many, and proscrib'd all the rest that made their Escape. And The Lacedae∣monians fled to Rhodes. because they were afraid lest the Citizens should be contriving some Innovations, they sent for Aid from Lacedaemon. Upon this, the Lacedaemonians setting out seven Gallies, sent away Eudocimus, Philodicus, and Diphila, to manage Affairs there; who arriving at Samos, caus'd the City to fall off from the Athenians. Then coming to Rhodes, they busy'd them∣selves in settling and composing Matters there. And now the Lacedaemonians seeing their Affairs to succeed and prosper, they resolved again to recover the Dominion of the Sea, Prepare a Fleet. and to that end prepar'd a Fleet, and by degrees brought in more and more Confede∣rates to join with them. And for the same purpose they fail'd to Samos, Rhodes, and Cnidus, and getting together Shipping from all Parts, they Listed from thence the best Seamen they could get, and at length bravely Equipped a Fleet of Twenty seven Gal∣lies. P. 447. At that time Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemon, hearing that the Argives lay Encamp'd at the Siege of Corinth, made an Incursion into the Territories of Argos with all the Forces of Sparta, except one Regiment, and having Plunder'd and Spoil'd the People of their Goods and Cattel, and cutting down the Trees all along through the Country, he re∣turned to Sparta.
In Cyprus Evagoras of Salamis, a Man of a Noble Family, (for he was descended from Ant. Ch. 389. the Founders of that City) who was then sometime before expuls'd the City by a Sedi∣tion, Evagoras made King of Salamis. (but return'd not long after) with a small number of Men his Consederates drave Abdemon the Tyrrian, Petit-Prince of Salamis (a Friend and Allie of the King of Persia) out of the City, and so at first became King only of Salamis, the Greatest and Richest City of Cyprus, but in a short time after, growing Rich, he raised an Army and purpos'd to bring the whole Island under his Dominion. To which end he gain'd some Cities by Force, and others he wan by fair Promises. But the Amathusians, Solians, and Citians, (resolving to stand it out) sent Ambassadors to Artaxerxes for aid, and charg'd Evagoras The King of Persia prepares for War against Evagoras. with the Killing of Agyris, the Persians Confederate, and promis'd to be assistant to the King in getting the Island into his Hands. The King therefore both to clip the Wings of Evagoras that he might not grow too strong, and for that he consider'd the commodious Situation of the Place for the supply and provision of the Shipping, whereby he might defend Asia, gave order to send Aid to the Islanders. Dismissing therefore the Ambassadors, he sent Letters to all the Sea-Port-Towns and their Governors, to build with all speed what Ships they could, and to furnish them with Tackle, and all things necessary for the Use of the Navy. He commanded likewise Hercatom∣nus. Hecatomnus, Lord-Lieutenant of Caria, to make War upon Evagoras: And he himself (going through the Cities of the Upper Asia) sail'd thence with a great Army to Cyprus. And such were the Affairs of Asia at this time. In Italy the Romans, after they had made Peace with the Falisci, began the Fourth War against the Equi; and took Sutrium by Storm, but lost the Town of Verrugo. When this Year ended, Demostratus was chosen Archon, or Lord-Chancellor of Athens; Olym 97. 3. and Lucius Lucretius, and Servilius Sul∣pitius. Ant. Ch. 388. Thimbro sent into Asia. Servilius Cossus, were Roman Consuls. At this time Artaxerxes declar'd Strutha his General, and sent him down with an Army to the Sea-Coasts against the Lacedaemonians; and they hearing of his March sent Thimbro their General into Asia against him, who possess'd himself of the Castle Jonda, and of the high and steep Moun∣tain Corossus, about Forty About 5 Mile. Stages distant from Ephesus. From thence he wasted and spoiled the King's Provinces with Eight thousand Men that he had rais'd in Asia. But Struthas (who with a great Body of Horse, and Five thousand Heavy-arm'd Men, and with a∣bove Twenty thousand Light-arm'd, Encamp'd near to the Lacedaemonians) at length, when Thimbro was out with a Party, and had loaded himself with Plunder, on a sudden and by surprise, fell upon him and kill'd him, and took and kill'd many of his Soldiers, and the rest (being but few) escap'd to the Castle Cnidiniam. At the same time, Thrasybulus the Athenian General, loosing from Lesbos, arriv'd with his Fleet at Aspendus, and Anchor'd at the River Eurymedon, and thô he receiv'd Contri∣butions from them of Aspendus, yet some of his Soldiers Ravag'd and Plunder'd the Coun∣try, P. 448. which highly provok'd the Aspendians, in so much, that in the Night, they set upon the Athenians, and kill'd many of them, together with Thrasybulus himself; which struck Thrasybulus kill'd. Ant. Ch. 388. such a Terror into the Captains and Officers of the Fleet, that they forthwith return'd to their Ships, and sail'd to Rhodes, where finding that the City had deserted them, they join'd with the Exiles, that posess'd themselves of a certain Castle, and put themselves in Array against the City. But as soon as the Athenians heard of the Death of Thrasybulus, they dispatch'd away Argyrius to be General in his room. Thus stood the Affairs of A∣sia at that time.
CHAP. XII. Dionysius his Expedition against Rhegium. The War between the Lucanians and Thurians in Italy. The Thurians cut off by their own rashness. Leptines gene∣rously sav'd those that swam to his Ships, though he was a Friend to their Enemies. Dionysius his second Expedition into Italy, Besieges Caulonia and routs Heloris. Makes Peace with the Rhegians. Razes Caulonia to the Ground, and transplants the Inhabitants to Syracuse. Watches an Occasion to be reveng'd on them of Rhe∣gium. Besieges it. He sends rich Chariots to the Olympick Games. His Poe∣try ridicul'd. IN Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, though he had a Design, and did what he could to bring all Sicily and the Neighbouring Greeks in Italy under his Power, yet de∣ferr'd the Expedition against them to some other time, as we said before. Having there∣fore Dionysius pre∣pares to Besiege Rhegium. in the mean time, consider'd how greatly it would advance his Affairs if he could gain Rhegium (the Key of Italy) he now drew out his Army into the Field. He had then under his Command Twenty thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, and a Hundred and Twenty Gallies. With these he pass'd over to the Borders of Locris, and thence march∣ing through the Heart of the Country he wasted and spoiled all the Territories of Rhe∣gium with Fire and Sword: His Fleet attending over against him he at length Encamp'd with all his Forces near the Sea. But the Italians hearing of the Arrival of Dionysius, and his Design upon Rhegium, with all speed put forth sixty Sail from Crotona for the aid of the Rhegians. Whereupon, Dionysius made forth against them with fifty Gallies, and though they made to the Shore to avoid him, yet he pursu'd them so close that he threw Grap∣pling-Irons into them, to draw them off from Land; and all the Sixty Sail had cettainly Ant. Ch. 388. fallen into his hand, if the whole Body of the Rhegians had not with showers of Darts forc'd him from the Shore, and by the Advantage of a Storm (that then arose) hal'd up Dionysius o∣vertaken by a Storm. the Ships to Land. And thô Dionysius fought very Valiantly, yet he lost seven Gallies, and no less than Fifteen hundred Men on the Rhegian Shore; and both Ships and Men being thrown upon the Shore by the Storm, many of the Seamen were taken Prisoners by the Citizens. The Tyrant himself flying in a Vessel of Five Oars escaped drowning very narrowly, and landed at length with much difficulty, about Midnight at the Port of Mes∣sina. And because Winter now drew on, having made a League with the Lucanians, he return'd with his Army to Syracuse. Returns out of Italy to Syra∣cuse. After this, the Lucanians made an Incursion into the Territories of the Thurians, upon which they sent forthwith to their Confederates for assistance: For the Greek Cities throughout all Italy had agreed together, That if the Lucanians fell upon any one of them, all the rest should come into the help of them that were so oppress'd. And if any City should not have their Forces ready to defend them, the Chief Commanders should be put to Death. As soon therefore as the Cities had notice by the Posts of the march of the Enemy, the Thurians all unanimously prepar'd for the Encounter, and hastily and unadvisedly in an imprudent Heat, (not waiting for their Confederates) with above Fourteen thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse, march'd against the Enemy. The Lucanians hearing of their approach, suffer'd them to enter into their Country: Ant. Ch. 388. Upon which they pierc'd into Lucania with great Violence, and at the first were so suc∣cessful as that they took a Castle, and carry'd away thence much Plunder, which was in truth but as a Bait laid in their way for their Destruction. For while they were puff'd up and grown high-crested with this Success, they contemned the Enemy, so far as that they daringly ventured through straight and craggy Passages (through the heat of Am∣bition and Covetousness) eager to possess themselves of a City and Country so bless'd with The Thurians miserably En∣trap'd by the Lucanians in Italy. P. 449. the Fulness of all things as that was: But as soon as they came into the Plain surrounded with high and steep Hills on every side, the Lucanians coming in with their Forces from all Parts intercepted all the Passages, leaving them no hopes of return any ways. And shewing themselves on every side from the tops of the Hills, the Grecians were struck with great Fear and Terror, both with the Greatness of their Army, and the Difficulty of the Places: For the Lucanians were no fewer than Thirty thousand Foot, and Four thou∣sand Horse. While the Graecians were in this perplexity, unexpectedly surrounded with
insuperable danger, the Barbarians march'd down into the Plain, and Battle being join'd' the Italians were over-power'd by multitude, and above Ten thousand of them kill'd up∣on the spot; (for the Lucanians gave no Quarter, as they were before order'd) the rest fled to a Hill near the Sea side, from whence espying some long Ships sailing towards them, hoping that they came from Rhegium (out of eagerness to save themselves) they leap'd in∣to Ant. Ch. 388 The generosity Leptines to the distressed the Sea, and some of 'em by swimming got to the Ships. But this Fleet proy'd to be Ships sent by Dionysius to the assistance of the Lucanians, under the Command of Leptines his Brother, who very generously receiv'd them that swam into his Ships, and set them all on Shoar (being about a Thousand) and prevail'd with the Lucanians to accept a Thurians. Mina for every Man for their Ransom, and he himself engag'd for the payment, and so order'd Matters among them, that the Lucanians and Italians made peace one with an∣other. Mina about 3 l. 2s. 6 d. From this time Leptines was in great favour and much esteem with the Italians, having made an end of the War, more to his own, than to the advantage of Dionysius; who was in hopes that by means of the differences between the Lucanians and the Greeks of Italy, he should be able with much ease to accomplish his Designs there: but if he should make Peace, he judg'd his Conquest would be difficult. Therefore he discarded Leptines, and created Thearides his other Brother Admiral of the Fleet. During these Transactions the Romans divided the Country of the Veians; distributing to every one Four Plethra, an hundred Foot, or an Acre. Plethra of Land, but as others say Eight and Twenty. At the same time they made War upon the Aequi, and took Liflus by Storm. They sent Forces likewise against the The Volsci, whose Chief City was Ve∣litta.. Olymp 97. 4. Ant. Ch. 387. Dionysius pas∣ses again into Italy. Veliter∣nines who had revolted. Satricum likewise made a Defection; and a Colony was sent forth into * Certium. At the close of the year Antipater was chosen Chief Governor of Athens, and Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius were Roman Consuls. Now Dionysius King of Syracuse De∣clar'd openly his Design of a Descent upon Italy, and to that end loos'd from Syracuse with a numerous Army: For he had with him above Twenty thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse, a Navy of Forty long Ships, or Men of War, besides Three hundred Transport Ships for carrying of Corn and Provision. He arriv'd at Messina the Fifth day, and there refresh'd his Army; from thence he sent away Thearides his Brother with For∣ty Sail to the Lipari Islands, for it was reported that Ten Ships of Rhegium lay there; Thearides therefore hastning thither found out the Ships in a place fit for his purpose, and possessing himself of them, with all their Men on board, he forthwith return'd to Messi∣na to Dionysius, who deliver'd the Prisoners bound in Chains to the custody of the Mes∣sinians. Then he Transported his Forces to Or Caulum in Locris. P. 450. Heloris made General for the Italians a∣gainst Diony∣sius. Caulonia, and laid close Siege to the Caulonia be∣sieg'd by Dio∣nysius City on every side, and batter'd it with his Engines. But the Greeks in Italy as soon as they heard of the Landing of Dionysius's Forces, rais'd Men and got together an Army from all parts. Crotona at that time was very populous, and many that fled and that were forc'd out of Syracuse inhabited there. The Chief Com∣mand and management therefore of the War was committed to them, and Heloris the Syracusian was made General of all the Forces. He was a valiant Man, and they conclu∣ded he would be faithful, because he hated the Tyrant, who had banish'd him out of his Country. When he had muster'd all the Confederate Army at Crotona, and order'd all things as he thought fit, he hasted away with a swift March towards Caulonia, hoping by coming upon them suddainly and unexpectedly, he should not only raise the Siege, but likewise rout them with ease, being harass'd and tyr'd out with their continual toil and labour in assaulting the Town. His Army consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, and Two Ant. Ch. 387. A Fight be∣tween Heloris and Dionysius near Caulonia. thousand Horse. Having marched the greatest part of his way, he encamp'd at the Ri∣ver Heloris; thereupon Dionysius drew off from the City to meet the Italians: Upon which, Heloris at the head of Five hundred of the choicest Men in the Army march'd before the rest. Dionysius encamping about Forty Furlongs Five Miles. Stages from the Enemy, understood by his Spies that the Italians drew near, upon which he forthwith very early in the Morning, rouz'd his Soldiers from Sleep, and commanded them to march forward, and about break of day fell upon the Helorians, with his Army in good order of Battle, giving the Enemy no time to get into a Body: so that Heloris was in a great strait, and with those he had with him, bore the brunt of the Enemies whole Force; but in the mean time he sent away some Friends to the Camp to bring up the rest of the Army with all speed, who diligently executed their Orders; Upon which, the Italians hearing in what hazard their General was, ran in a great hurry to his assistance. But Dionysius with a well-order'd Body of Men, doing execution in every place, cut off Heloris and almost all his Party, tho' they fought with great Resolution and Gallantry. For the Italians coming in to their help, but scattering, and by parties,  Sicilians (keeping orderly together) easi∣ly
overcame them. However, the Crecians for some time despis'd danger, and suffer'd Dionysius routs the Ita∣lians. Ant. Ch. 387. much, tho' they saw great numbers of their fellows lie dead upon the spot. But when they heard of the death of their General (in great confusion) they trode down and kill'd one another, and at last, being totally discourag'd and out of heart, they fled out-right: Upon which many were kill'd up and down in the fields, and the rest betook themselves to a Mount sufficiently fortify'd and very defensible, save that it wanted Water. Dionysius block'd up the place with his Army, and closely guarded it all that day, and the follow∣ing night: The next day they that were in the Hill (being much incommoded by the heat, and by lack of Water) sent a Trumpet to Dionysius, that they might have liberty to ransom themselves:) Who at length (growing moderate in the height of his good Fortune) sent them word that they should lay down their Arms, and surrender them∣selves upon discretion. Upon return of these harsh and hard Terms, they held out long∣er for some short time: But being grievously press'd by the necessity of Nature, and al∣most Starv'd, they surrendred themselves about the Eight Hour. Dionysius hereupon numbred them as they came down, by striking the ground with a Staff, and they amount∣ed to above Ten thousand. They were all afraid he would have been as cruel as a wild Dionysius deals nobly with the di∣stressed Itali∣ans. Beast; but he then approv'd himself the mildest of all Men living. For he discharg'd all the prisoners without Ransom, and made Peace with them, and suffer'd the Cities to Go∣vern according to their own Laws. For which great Grace and Favour he was highly Honour'd, and his Name was so great that they presented him with Golden Crowns. And this was the most worthy Action that ever he did almost throughout his whole Life. From hence he march'd with his Forces against Rhegium, with a design to besiege it. He marches to Rhegium. to be reveng'd for their slight of him, in denying him a Wise from some of their own City. The Rhegians were greatly terrify'd at his approach, for they had neither Con∣federates nor Forces of their own sufficient to cope with him; besides, they foresaw that there was no Mercy to be expected, if the City were taken: Therefore they sent an Am∣bassador P. 451. to him to intreat him to shew them Favour, and to use them like Men. Upon which he demanded a Tribute of Three hundred Talents, and that they should deliver into his hands all their Fleet (which were Seventy in number) and send out to him an Hundred Hostages, all which terms were agreed unto. Whereupon he mov'd towards Caulonia, and transported all the Inhabitants of that place to Syracuse, and incorporated them into the City, and granted to them freedom from the publick Taxes for the space of Five Years. As for Caulonia it self, he raz'd it to Caulonia raz'd. the Ground, but gave the Territory to the Locrians. About the same time, the Romans (after the taking of the City Lifaeca from the Aequi,) celebrated the stately Plays which the Consuls had vow'd to Jupiter. After the end of the year, Pyrrhio executed the Office of Lord Chancelor of Athens Olymp. 98. 1. Ant. Ch. 396. the next, and Four Military Tribunes, Lucius Lucretius, Servius Sulpitius, Caius Aemilius, and Caius Rufus, were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. Then was acted the Ninety eighth Olympiad, wherein Sosippus the Athenian carry'd away the Prize. About * Lucius Fu∣rius. the same time Dionysius the Prince of Syracuse entred A City of the Brutians in Italy. Hipponium with his Army, and Transported all the Citizens to Syracuse, and when he had raz'd the Town, he gave the Lands to the Locreans; for he was always very desirous to oblige them, because they so readily comply'd with him in the business of his Marriage. On the other hand he stu∣died Revenge upon the Rhegians for their denial. For when he sent an Ambassador to them to Treat with them to send him a Virgin of some of their Citizens to be his Wife: It's said the Rhegians answer'd his Ambassadors, that he should have none from them except it were the Hangman's Daughter. Being highly incens'd at this gross abuse (as he took it to be,) he continually studied how to be reveng'd. For he made not peace with Ant. Ch. 386. them the year before out of any design of Kindness or Friendship with them, but only out of a desire he had to possess himself of their Fleet of Seventy Sail. For he knew he could easily take the City, when they could have no aid or assistance by Sea. To this end he made several Halts, and delayd as much as he could his drawing his Forces out of Italy, waiting for some colourable pretence or occasion to break his League with the Rhe∣gians, without any refleicton upon his Honour. Drawing therefore his Forces down to the Sea side, he prepares all things necessary for his passage; and then desires that the Rhe∣gians wou'd furnish him with Provision for his Army, and he would send them as much back again from Syracuse. His design in this was, that if they refus'd to supply him, he thought he might have a just ground to raze their City; and if they readily answer'd his Request, then, after their Corn and Provision was spent (upon laying Siege to the Town) he might with more ease (through their scarcity of Food) possess himself of the
place. The Rhegians, not suspecting any thing, for some few days furnish'd him liberally. But when he delaid and trifled away the time, sometimes pretending himself sick, other times framing other excuses; they at length smelt his design, and therefore forbore send∣ing any further Provision to his Camp. Upon which, Dionysius seeming to be much en∣rag'd at this affront, return'd to them all the Hostages, and beging the Town round with his Forces, assaulted it every day; and with a great number of Engines (of an in∣credible bigness) so batter'd the Walls, as if they had been shaken by a Storm and Tem∣pest, so earnest was he to gain the City. The Rhegians on the other hand, (having made Ant. Ch. 386. Dionysius as∣saults Rhegi∣um. Phile their General) order'd all that were of Age and Strength to take up Arms, and to keep strict Guards; and spying a fit opportunity, they made a vigorous Sally; and burnt the Enemies Engines; and often skirmish'd out of the Walls with that Valour, and Re∣solution (to the exasperating of the Enemy) that they both lost many of their own, and kill'd no few of the Sicilians: Nay, Dionysius himself was so wounded with a Lance P. 452. about the Privy Parts, The Scrotum. that he was very near losing his Life, it being a long time before he recover'd. Notwithstanding, tho' the Siege was tedious, and the Rhegians resolv'd to defend their Liberty, yet he imploy'd his Soldiers in continual Assaults, not in the least receding from his former design and purpose. The Olympick Games in the mean time drawing on, he sent to that Solemnity many Chariots drawn with Four Horses apiece, Sends Chariots and Gifts to the Olympick Games. and exceeding swift; and likewise Tents glistering with Gold, and adorn'd with rich and various Embroideries of admirable Workmanship; and with these he sent likewise the most skilful Singers to advance his own praise by the reciting of Poems compos'd by him∣self; For he was (even to madness) given to Poetry, and he committed the care and oversight of all these things to his Brother Thearides, (who when he came to the ground (by the multitude of the Chariots, and richness and splendor of the Tents and Pavilions) attracted the Eyes of all the Beholders. And when the Singers began to recite the Poems of Dionysius, the People at first ran together, and greatly admir'd the sweet and pleasant Airs of . Ant. Ch. 396. the Stage-Players. But as soon as they perceiv'd how bad and Ballad like the the Verses were, they ridicul'd Dionysius, and despis'd him to that degree, that they rist'd the Tents. Lystas likewise the Orator then at Olympid, advis'd the People that they should not admit any of those Procurators sent by so wicked a Tyrant to have any thing to do with those Sacred Sports. At which time he made the Speech styl'd by him The Olympick Oration. And how the Race began, and it so happen'd, that the Chariots of Dionysius were some of 'em driven out of the Line, others were broken in pieces by dashing one upon another. Neither did the Ship prosper better which convey'd the Procurators: For in their return from the Games to Sicily, they were forc'd by violence of a Tem∣pest to Tarentum, a City in Italy. And it is reported that when they came to Syracuse they spread it abroad, That the badness of Dionysius's Verses had not only disgrac'd the Sing∣ers, but prejudic'd both the Chariots and the Ship. However, tho' he knew that his Verses were hiss'd at, yet still he addicted himself to Poetry, being told by his Flatterers, that those thrt envy'd every thing that was Noble and Brave, would at length admire what they then despis'd. At that time the Romans slew a great number of the Volsci in the Bat∣tel at Gurasum. CHAP. XIII. The Peace of Antalcidas. The War by the Persians against Evagoras in Cyprus The miserable Condition of Rhegium: It's Surrender'd. The cruel usage of Philo the Governor of Rhegium, and of his Son. The Expedition of the Galls against Italy. The Romans routed by the Galls at the River Allia. Rome taken by the Galls. The Romans Besieg'd in the Capitol. The Volsci Revolt from the Ro∣mans. The Galls routed by Marcus Furius in their return. All cut off afterwards in the Plains of Trausium. WIth these Actions the year ended, and now Theodotus was made Chief Magi∣strate Olymp. 98. 2. Ant. Ch. 385. of Athens, and Six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Authority at Rome: Quintus Caesus, Sulpitius Aenos, Caesus Fabius, Quintus Cervilius Quintus Sulpicius. Publius Cornelius, and Servius Cor∣nelius. The Peace of Antalcidas. Marcus Claudius. At this time the Lacedemonians tir'd out with the War both against the Greeks and Persians, order'd their Admiral Antalcidas to go to Artaxerxes to strike up a Peace. When he had deliver'd his Ambassage to the King, he answer'd, that he would
make Peace with the Grecians, upon condition, that all the Greek Cities in Asia should re∣turn to their Obedience, and that the rest of the Grecians should all Govern their Cities, according to their own Laws; and that if any should stand out and not submit to these Conditions, it should be lawful for him to make War upon them, by them that did agree. These Terms were allow'd, and so the Lacedemonians rested from War. But the Atheni∣ans and Thebans, with some others were much vex'd, and highly concern'd to see the Ci∣ties of Asia thus betray'd, but not being able to contend with Persia by their own strength they were forc'd to embrace Peace upon the same Terms. And now the King being free from the long and tedious War with the Grecians; he prepar'd and made ready an Army for the Cyprian War. For Evagoras had rais'd a vast P. 453. Army almost throughout all Cyprus, taking advantage of Artaxerxes his being engag'd in a War with the Greeks. In the mean time Dionysius having continu'd the Siege of Rhegium now for the space of Eleven Months, and obstructed all ways and means of Relief, he brought the Besieg'd to the utmost extremity, through want of all things necessary, For it's reported that at that time a Bushel of Wheat was sold for Five 15 l. 12 s. 6 d. The miserable condition of Rhegium. Ant. Ch. 385. Minas: and the Famine was so great that they first eat up their Horses, and then all other Beasts of Burden, and at length fed upon boild Skins and Leather. And at the last they came out of the Town, and like Cattle began to eat the Grass that grew under the Walls: so that to supply Nature they were forc'd to feed upon those things proper to the Beasts of the Field for want of Man's ordinary Food. When Dionysius heard what the Rhegians did, he was so far from com∣miserating them who were sunk in Misery, below the common condition of Mankind, that he added to their Affliction, and put in his Carriage Horses, and other Draught Cattle to Graze there where they us'd to feed, and so eat up all that poor Provision which Rhegium sur∣rendred. was only left for them. The Citizens being thus overcome by extream Famine (no longer to be born) were forc'd to deliver up themselves and their City to the Tyrant's Mercy. When he entred he found heaps of Carkasses lying in the Streets who perish'd for want of Bread: and those that were alive were like walking Ghosts, lean, and al∣most pin'd away by Famine: However, he got together above Six thousand Prisoners, and sent them to Syracuse, with Orders, that whoever paid a Mina might be redeem'd: and for those that were not able, he sold them all for Slaves. Phyto the Governour he The cruel usage of Phito the Governor of Rhegium. bound in Chains, and caus'd his Son to be hurl'd into the Sea, and fastned Phyto himself to the top of one of his highest Engines, that the severity of his punishment might be taken notice of by all, and sent one of his Guard to tell him that his Son was drown'd the day before; to whom Phito answer'd, that his Son was by one day more happy than his Father. After this he order'd him to be whip'd through the City, and to be scoff'd and scorn'd, and undergo all sorts of Cruelty; A Cryer the mean time making Procla∣mation; That the Raseal was so severely dealt with, because he stirr'd up the City to the War. But Phito (who had all along thro the Siege approv'd himself a valiant Commander, and during Ant. Ch. 385. his whole Life was Esteem'd and Honour'd) was not then the least discourag'd at Death, but with an undaunted Courage cry'd out That he thus suffer'd because he would not betray the City to Dionysius; However, God would revenge him of the Tyrant in a short time. This admirable Courage and brave Spirit of the Man began to work compassion in some of Dionysius's Soldiers; so that they began to murmur: Upon which, Dionysius (being afraid lest Phito should be rescu'd) left off tormenting him, and order'd the miserable Man with all his Kindred to be drown'd in the Sea. Thus suffer'd this worthy Man, who deserv'd much better than to undergo so heavy and dreadful a punishment. And ma∣ny Grecians there were who griev'd for his sad misfortune, and several Poets in after times made Elegies upon his mournful and lamentable end. At the same time when Dionysius lay at the Siege of Rhegium, the Gauls who lay beyond the Alps pass'd over those straits with a numerous Army, and possest themselves of all the Country lying between the Apenine Hills and the Alps, driving thence the Tyrrheni∣ans The Galls en∣ter Italy. the natural Inhabitants. Some say they were Colonies sent thither from Twelve Cities in A Province in Italy. Tyrrhenia; Others say they were Pelasgians, who before the Trojan War fled out of Thessaly at the time of Deucalion's Flood, and setled themselves in these parts. As for the Gauls they were a People that were divided into several Tribes, and dwelt in se∣veral Countries. Those call'd the Senones inhabited the Mountain furthest from the Sea of all the other Mountains, and because the Heat was excessive and troublesome to Ant. Ch. 385. P. 454. them, they resolv'd to seek for themselves some more commodious Habitations. To this end they sent forth the ablest of their young Men well Arm'd, to find out some other Seats, who making an irruption into Hetruria. rather. Tyrrhenia with Thirty thousand Men, wasted and spoil'd the Territories of the Caulonians.
About this time the Romans sent Ambassadors into Tyrrhenia to gain intelligence what this Expedition of the Gauls meant: Who when they came to Clusium, and saw the Ar∣mies Hetruria. on both sides drawn up in Battalia ready to engage, with more Valour than Pru∣dence, they join'd with them of Clusium, and sought with the Enemy. And one of the Ambassadors by good fortune kill'd one of the Noblest Commanders of the Gauls; who when they heard of it, sent Ambassadors to Rome, to require the Ambassador who had kill'd the Gaul to be deliver'd up to them, as one that had begun an unjust War. Upon which, the Senate would have persuaded the Ambassadors to have accepted Money in sa∣tisfaction of the injury; But when they refusd it, it was Decreed that the Person should be deliver'd. Upon this, the Father of him who was to be given up into the Enemies hands (being then of Consular Dignity, and one of the Military Tribunes, and being likewise very rich, and of great Interest and Account with the Commonalty) referr'd the decision of the matter to the People, and so easily procur'd the Judgment and Decree of the Senate to be repeal'd. From this time the People began to rescind the Decrees of the Senate, tho' ever before they always submitted to them. Ant. Ch. 385. But the Ambassadors of the Gauls return'd to their Camp, and Declar'd what Answer was given them by the Romans: Upon which they were in a great Rage, and increas'd their Army with new rais'd Forces out of their own Country, and forthwith march'd to∣wards Rome with above Seventy thousand Men. When the news came to Rome, the Military Tribunes commanded all that were able to bear Arms, to List themselves, who marching out of the City pass'd over Tyber, and came with all their Forces unto a Allia, Ten Miles from Rome. River Fourscore Furlongs from Rome; where when they understood that the Enemy was near at hand, drew up their Army in this manner; Their best Soldiers, to the number of Four and twenty thousand, they posted all along from the River to the Hills adjoining, the rest were plac'd upon the rising Grounds. On the other hand the Enemy out winging the Romans, their strongest and ablest Soldiers (whe∣ther on purpose or by chance is uncertain) fronted those weaker and unexperienc'd Sol∣diers on the Hills. And now the Trumpets on both sides sounded a Charge. Where∣upon the Armies ran one upon another with a great shout. And those Gauls that set up∣on them that were upon the Hills, presently clear'd the place of them, who fled in great confusion to their own Men into the Plain; so that by their flight, and the hot pursuit of the Gauls, they broke and disorder'd their own Army, and put them likewise to the Run. And while the greatest part of them made to the River, and in great pre∣cipitation The Romans routed by the Gauls. Ant. Ch. 385. and confusion, trode down one another, the Enemy without intermission kill'd all still that were in the Rear, so that the whole Field was cover'd with dead Bodies. Some of the stoutest of those that fled to the River, swam over with their Arms, pri∣zing them as much as their Lives: But many of them, (through the violence of the Stream, and the weight of their Arms) were drown'd. Some with great difficulty (after they had fled a long way, and in by paths, with much a do) escap'd. However, many (still pursu'd close by the Enemy, who made a great slaughter among them up∣on the Bank of the River,) threw away their Arms and swam over Tiber. And tho' the Gauls had cut off so many upon the Shoar, yet such was their continu'd Rage, that they cast their Darts and Javelins after them that took the Water. And many Darts being P. 55. hurl'd amongst shoals of them that were swimming, no small execution was done, so that some were kill'd forthwith, and others so wounded, that through loss of Blood, and strength of the Current, they were spent and carry'd away by the Stream. The greatest number of those that escap'd from this sad Overthrow of the Romans, took into Ve lately ruin'd by them, and fortifying the Place as well as they could, re∣ceiv'd the rest that fled thither. Those few who swam the River, and return'd un∣arm'd into Rome, related how the whole Army was destroy'd, which sad News greatly amaz'd all those that were left in the City: For the Strength and Flower of the Citizens being now cut off, they look'd upon themselves unable in the least to resist. And be∣sides, Ant. Ch. 385. to aggravate their Misery, it seem'd to them impossible to fly with their Wives and Children, without the greatest Hazard imaginable, the Enemy being so near: Therefore many of the ordinary sort remov'd with their whole Families to the neighbouring Towns and Villages. But the City-Magistrates encouraging the People, order'd that Victuals and all other Necessaries should be brought into the Capitol; by which means, both the Castle and Capitol was fill'd not only with Meat and Provision, but with Silver and Gold, and all sorts of rich Garments and Attire, Goods of all kinds throughout the whole City being heap'd together in this one Place; for they had but three Days time to remove what was moveable, and to fortifie the Place: For the Gauls spent the first Day (according to the Custom of their Country) in cutting off the Heads of those
that were slain; the other two Days they lay quiet in their Camp, now close to the City. For when they discern'd that the Walls were left bare and undefended, and yet heard a confus'd Noise (occasion'd by the bringing in of Houshold-Goods and other Things useful into the Capitol) they suspected some Stratagem was designing against Rome taken. them. But the fourth Day, when they came to understand the Truth, they broke down the Gates, and laid all the City in rubbish, except a few Houses upon Mount Pallatine: And tho' afterwards they press'd upon them in the Capitol with continual Assaults, yet they within suffer'd little by it, but many of the Gauls perish'd. However, they stuck The Capitol be∣sieg'd. close to the Siege, hoping tho' they could not gain the Place by force, yet at least in time, when all the Provision and Victuals was spent, they might possess themselves of the Fort. While the Roman Affairs were thus perplex'd, the Tuscans their Neighbours made an Incursion with a great Army into their Territories, and wasted and destroy'd all before them. But when they had got many Prisoners and much Spoil and Plunder into their hands, the Romans that had fled to Veii set upon them on the sudden, and put them to flight, and not only recover'd all the Spoil, but likewise possess'd themselves of all their Tents: And by this means being furnish'd with a great number of Arms, they arm'd Ant. Ch. 385. their Fellow-Soldiers, who hitherto were unarm'd since the late Defeat, and got toge∣ther a Company of Country-Fellows from several Parts, and likewise arm'd them: For they had a design to raise the Siege of the Capitol, but were most perplex'd and con∣cern'd how to give notice of their Purpose to the Besieg'd, in regard the Gauls so straitly block'd it up. Upon this, one Pontius Caminius undertook to get into the Capi∣tol; to which end he pass'd on himself alone, and privately in the night swam over the River, and ascending a steep Rock of the Capitol with great difficulty, drew himself up, and so came to the Besieg'd, and acquainted them that they of Veii were in a Body, and that they intended to fall upon the Gauls upon the first Opportunity; and having deli∣ver'd his Message, he return'd to Veii the same way he came. But when the Gauls per∣ceiv'd, by the Impressions of a Man's Feet, that some Person had lately pass'd that way into the Castle, they determin'd to attempt to make an Entry by climbing the Rock in that part: And to that end, about midnight (the Guards being careless, trusting to the Strength of the Place) some of the Gauls got up to the top, but were not taken notice of by the Watch, but the Geese, dedicated to Juno, that fed there (seeing them appear P 456. above the Walls) presently made a great gagling and noise, which so alarm'd the Watch, that they all ran to the Place; upon which, the Gauls now betray'd and afrighted, durst not proceed any further. In the mean time, that famous Man Marcus Manlius hasting to the Defence of the Place, cut off the Hand of a Gaul, as he was raising himself to recover the Wall, and by Ant. Ch. 385. a thrust in his Breast with the Boss of his Buckler, cast him down headlong from the top of the Rock; and another being destroy'd after the same manner, the rest in all haste retir'd; and because the Rock was very steep (being in a great terror and amazement) they all miserably perish'd. The Romans hereupon sending Ambassadors to 'em to treat upon Terms of Peace, obtain'd it upon these Conditions: That upon receiving a Thousand pound weight of Gold, they would leave the City, and depart out of the Ro∣man Territories. After this, because the Houses were destroy'd, and many of the Citizens kill'd, the Romans gave leave to every one that would to build, and roof'd and cover'd all the Hou∣ses at the Publick Charge, which were therefore ever after to this day call'd the Publick Houses. And because every Man built according to his own Humour where he pleas'd, the Streets were made very narrow and crooked, which (notwithstanding the Riches of the City) in succeeding Times could never be reform'd. Some have reported, that the Roman Matrons gave all their golden Ornaments for the redeeming of their Country; for which they have this Honour allow'd them, That they may at any time be carry'd in Chariots through the City. The Romans being thus impoverish'd and brought low by the late Calamity, the Volsci took the advantage, and rais'd Arms against them. Upon which, the Consular Tribunes got their Forces together, and march'd out into the Campus Martius (as 'tis call'd) and encamp'd about 25 mile. Ant. Ch. 385. Two hundred Stages from the City. The Volsci far exceeded the Romans in number, and set upon their Camp: Upon which, the Senate, much concern'd for them in the Field, made Marcus Furius Dictator, who ordered the young Men in the City to take up Arms, with whom he march'd out in the night, and came upon the backs of the Volsci (when they were very busie and intent in assaulting the Romans) and easily put them to flight: Upon which, they within the Camp sallying out, the Volsci by this means
were hemm'd in on every side, and almost all cut off. And thus this Nation, who were before a strong and potent People, by this Overthrow were brought extream low and weaker than any of the Nations round about them. The Dictator afterwards hearing that Bola was besieg'd by the Aequi, march'd thither, and kill'd most of the Besiegers. Thence he mov'd to Sutrium. Sutrinum, a Colony of the Ro∣mans, but then possess'd by the Aequi, and falling upon them on the sudden, he made a great Slaughter among them, and restor'd the City to them of Sutrinum. About this time the Gauls in their march from Rome besieg'd Veascus, a Confederate City of the Romans; upon which, the Dictator march'd against them, fought and rou∣ted them, and seiz'd their Bag and Baggage, amongst which was the Gold weigh'd at Rome, and recover'd almost all the Prey and Plunder they had gain'd in taking of the City. And though he had perform'd all this good Service, yet the Tribunes of the People Ant. Ch. 385. through Envy deny'd him a Triumph. Yet some relate, that he did Triumph in a Cha∣riot drawn with four white Horses for the Victory against the Thuscans, and within two Days after was fin'd by the People in a great Sum of Money, which we shall mention here∣after in its proper place. Those Gauls that went to Japygium, design'd to return through the Roman Territories; but the Cerii laid an Ambush for them in the Night, and cut them all off in the Plains of Trausium. Callisthenes the Historian began his Grecian Memoirs from this Year, wherein the Peace P. 457. was made between the Graecians and Artaxerxes, and ended them with the Year the Tem∣ple of Delphos was taken and rifled by Philomelus the Phocian, comprehending an Account of Affairs for the space of Thirty Years in Ten Books. And now being come to the Peace between Artaxerxes and the Greeks, and the Danger threatned to Rome by the Gauls, according to our purpose at the beginning, we shall put an end to this Book.
BOOK XV. HAving throughout the whole Work us'd the Common and accustom'd Li∣berty P. 458. PREFACE. of an Historian, we have both prais'd the Good, and condemn'd the Bad as they have fallen in our way, to the end that those whose Ge∣nius and Inclination prompts them to Virtue, may be the more encourag'd to Noble Actions, in hopes of having the Glory of their Names continu'd to all succeeding Generations; and on the other hand, that they that are bent to Wicked∣ness may be curb'd and restrain'd from the Heat, at least, of their Impiety, by those marks of Dishonour and Disgrace fix'd upon them. Since therefore we have brought down our History to the times wherein the Lace∣daemonians fell by the sudden and unexpected Slaughter at Leuctra, and the like a∣gain not long after at Mantinea, whereby they lost the Sovereignty of Greece; We judge it part of our Province to keep close to the former Course and Method of Writ∣ing, (and therefore by the way in the first place to blame and reprehend the Lacedaemo∣nians who justly deserve it: For who cannot but judge them worthy of Censure, and that justly, who having a well-settled Empire and Government descended to them from their Ancestors, and by their Valour supported and defended for the space of above Five hun∣dred Years, should now in a Moment ruine it by their own Folly and Imprudence? For they that were before them, preserv'd the Grandeur and Glory of their Conquests, by their Lenity and Tenderness towards their Subjects, but these their Posterity by their Cruelty to their Confederates, and Pride and Ambition in making War upon the Grecians, most deservedly lost all by their Rashness and Inconsideratness. For those that hated them for the Injuries they had before suffer'd, greedily took the advantage now they were low, to revenge themselves on them as their Enemies. And they whose Forefathers were ne∣ver before Conquer'd, were so much the more despis'd, by how much they deserv'd the great∣er Contempt, who by their Vices had stain'd the Virtue and Glory of their Ancestors. The Thebans therefore (who for many Ages before were forc'd to stoop to them as their Superiors; having now (beyond all Mens expectations) conquer'd the Lacedae∣monians) were made Chief Commanders of Greece: But the Lacedaemonians, after they had once lost their hold, could never after recover their ancient Glory and Dignity. But enough of this, we shall now return to the Course of our History. The preceding Book, the Fourteenth in Order, ends with the Ruine of Rhegium by Dionysius, and the Taking of Rome by the Gauls, which happen'd the Year next before the Expedition of the Persians into Cyprus against Evagoras. We shall her begin this Book with that War, and end it with the Year next preceding the Reign of Philip the Son of Amyntas.
CHAP. I. Artaxerxes's Expedition against Evagoras in Cyprus. The Actions there at Sea and Land. The Lacedaemonians begin new Quarrels in Greece. As first with Mantinea. Dionysius gives himself to Poetry. Peace concluded with Evagoras by Orontes the Persian General. Terabazus brought to his Tryal. Judgment up∣on corrupt Judges. Terabazus acquitted. IN Athens Mystichides was Archon, and at Rome three Tribunes were invested with Con∣sular Olymp. 98. 3. Ant. Ch. 384. P. 459. Artaxerxes his Expedition into Cyprus a∣gainst Evago∣ras. Authority; Marcus Furius, Caius and Aemilius, when Artaxerxes King of Persia, began his Expedition against Evagoras King of Cyprus The King had spent much time in preparation for the War, and rais'd a great Number of Forces both for Sea and Land from all Parts. For his Land-Army consisted of Three hundred thousand Horse and Foot; and he Equipp'd a Fleet of above Three hundred Gallies Orontes was made General of the Land-Army, and Terabazus a Man highly honour'd among the Persians, Admiral of the Fleet. These headed their Armies at Phocea and Cuma, and descended to Cilicia, and from thence pass'd over to Cyprus, where they very vigorously bestirr'd themselves for the carrying on of the War. In the mean time, Evagoras entred into a League with Acoris King of Aegypt, who supply'd him with a great Number of Men, being himself then in War with the Persians. Evagoras assi∣sted by the King of Aegypt. Ant. Ch. 384. He was likewise privately furnish'd with Money by Hecatomnus, the Governor of Caria, to help him to hire Foreigners. And several other Enemies of Persia, some secretly, o∣thers openly, confederated with him in the War. He had likewise many Cities of Cyprus under his Command, with whom join'd Tyre in Phenicia and other Places. Moreover, he had a Navy of Ninety Sail, of which Twenty were from Tyre, and the rest of Cyprus. His Land-Army consisted of Six thousand of his own Subjects, but those from his Con∣federates were many more: Besides, being richly supplied by them with Monies he hir'd abundance of Mercenaries. And the King of , for . Arabia and other Princes, who were jea∣lous of the King of Persia, sent him great Forces. Being thus supported he applied him∣self to the War with great Courage and Resolution. And in the first place with his Privateers (of which he had many) he intercepted the Enemies Transport-Ships loaden with Victuals and Provision, and sunk some, disabled o∣thers, and took several besides; so that there began to be great Scarcity and Want of Corn in the Persian Camp, in regard the Merchants durst not sail to Cyprus, where that great Army and Body of Men were got together: And this occasion'd a great Mutiny its the Army, for the Mercenaries for want of Bread knock'd some of their Officers on the Head, and fill'd the Camp with Mutiny and Tumult to such a degree, that the Persian Colonels, and Admiral of the Fleet called Gaos could scarcely quell it. The Fleet there∣fore sent to Cilicia for Provision, which return'd with a great Quantity of Corn from thence, by which the Camp was ever after plentifully supply'd. But as to Evagoras, Aco∣ris sent to him out of Aegypt Money, Corn, and all other things necessary, sufficient for his Occasions. Ant. Ch. 384. Evagoras finding that his Navy was far too weak for the Enemy, furnish'd out Three∣score Ships more, and sent for Fifty besides from Acoris, so that now he had a Fleet of Two hundred Sail. And having his Navy thus bravely Furnish'd and Equipp'd ready for a Battel (after he had some time Train'd and Exercis'd his Men not without terror to his Enemies) he prepar'd for a Fight at Sea. But it happen'd, that as the King's Fleet passed by towards Citium, falling suddenly upon them in an orderly Line of Battel, he gain'd by far the Advantage, fighting in good order with Ships in Confusion and Sepa∣rated, (and with Premeditation engaging with Men surpriz'd and taken at unawares) he presently at the first onset routed them: For charging in a Body together, upon Ships dispers'd and in confusion, they sunk and took several of them. But afterwards when the Persian Admiral and other Officers gather'd up their Spirits, they bravely received the Enemies Charge, so that the Engagement grew very sharp, in which Evagoras at the be∣ginning had the better, but Gaos with great Courage bearing in upon him with his whole Evagoras rou∣ted at Sea. Fleet, the Evagrians fled with the loss of many of their Gallies.
The Persians having gain'd this Victory, muster'd both their Land and Sea-Forces at P. 460. Citium, where furnishing themselves with all things necessary, they went jointly to be∣siege Salamis, and block'd it up both by Sea and Land. But Terabazus, after the Sea-Fight put over to Cilicia, and went to the King to bring him the News of the Victory, Ant. Ch. 384. from whom he brought back Two thousand Talents for the carrying on of the War. Evagoras before the Fight at Sea had routed part of the Enemy's Army at Land, which much encourag'd him to further Attempts: But after his sad Misfortune at Sea, and that thereupon he was straightly besieg'd, his Spirits grew very low: However, conceiving it necessary to continue the War he put the Supream Power into the hands of his Son Py∣thagoras, Evagoras goes to Aegypt. and left him to defend the City, and he himself privately in the Night undis∣corn'd by the Enemy, with Ten Gallies loos'd from Salamis, and sail'd into Aegypt; where having Audience of the King, he endeavour'd to persuade him to make War upon the King of Persia with all the Power he had. While these things were on foot in Asia, the Lacedaemonians (without any regard to the League made) decreed to march with an Army against Mantinea, for the Reasons following. There was now Peace all over Greece; by the Negotiation of Antalcidas, by virtue whereof all the Cities were freed from Garisons, and govern'd according to their own Laws. But the Spartans (naturally Ambitious, and a long time contriving how to begin a War) look'd upon the Peace as a heavy Burden, and (coveting to gain their an∣cient Dominion) began to endeavour Innovations. To this end by their Tools and Creatures, they stirr'd up Seditions in the Cities, and thence took occasion to disturb the present State of Affairs. For they who were Freed and set at Liberty to govern ac∣cording to the Laws of their own Country, call'd them to an account who acted as Ma∣gistrates under the Lacedaemonians, and being somewhat severe and sharp (through the fresh Resentment of the late Injuries suffer'd) they banish'd many; upon this the Lacedaemo∣nians Ant. Ch. 384. protected those who were depress'd by the contrary Faction, and restor'd them by force of Arms, and by that means first impos'd upon the weaker Cities, and brought them into Slavery: But afterwards they gave Laws to Cities and Places of great Account, not having kept the League two years together. And now because Mantinea was near to The Lacedae∣monians begin to make War upon the Man∣tineans. them, and full of Valiant Men, and by the Peace grown very Rich, they were jealous of it, and resolved to bring down the Lordly Spirits of those Inhabitants: In the first Place therefore, they sent Ambassadors to them to require them to demolish their Walls, and to settle themselves again in those Five Villages from whence they anciently remov'd to Mantinea: But their demands being slighted, they forthwith marched thither with their Forces and besieg'd the City. Upon this, the Mantineans, sent Ambassadors to Athens for Aid, but the Athenians would by no means do any thing that might be constru'd a Breach of the Publick League, so that they valiantly Defended the Place, and oppos'd the Enemy with their own Forces. And thus Greece now began again to be embroil'd in new Wars. In Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse being steed from the War with the Carthagini∣ans, Reign'd a long time in Peace and Prosperity; and with great intention of Mind employ'd himself in writing of Verses, and sent for Poets far and near, whom he had in high Esteem, and made his Familiars, to whose Judgments and Opinions he referr'd the Cen∣sure of his Poems. Being flatter'd by these in Panegyricks of Praise for their own Interest, he grew highly conceited of himself, and was Prouder of his Poems than of his Conquests. Philoxenus, a Composer of Dithyrambicks, and one Familiar with him, a very excellent P. 461. Poet in his kind, when at a Feast some of the Foolish Verses of the Tyrant were recited, he was ask'd how he approved of them, who answering something too Freely and Plainly, Ant. Ch. 384. incurr'd the Tyrants displeasure: Who looking upon himself abus'd (through Envy) com∣manded his Guard to carry him away to work as a Slave in the Quarries. But the next Day, through the Mediation of Friends he was reconciled to him. And afterwards, at a Feast to which he had again Invited the same Persons, when he was in his Cups he highly extoll'd his own Poems, and Singing some of them (which he thought none could Excel) He ask'd what he thought of those? To which he answer'd not a Word, but call'd for Dionysius his Guards and wish'd them to carry him away to the Quarries Dionysius at that time for the Jest sake put it off with a Laughter, thereby (as he thought) taking off the Edge of the Reproof. But not long after, when both Dionysius and the rest of the Poets wish'd him to forbear that unseasonable Freedom of Censuring, Philoxenus made a Promise that seem'd to be a . Paradox, That for the future, He would both speak the Truth, and also please Dionysius himself; and he perform'd his Word: For when the Tyrant af∣terwards recited some Verses which set forth some sad and mournful Passages, He ask'd
him how he approved of them? He answer'd, Miserable! therein performing what he had promis'd by the ambiguity of the Word. For Dionysius understood it as if he meant the subject Matter of the Verses was very Sad and Miserable; and set forth very patheti∣cally, which sort of Poesie was rarely attain'd unto but by those who were of the higher form of Poets; and therefore he look'd upon himself highly applauded by him; but others interpreted what he said with more truth, that that word Miserable denoted the Badness of his Verse. Not far unlike to this, was that which happen'd to Plato the Philosopher, whom Dio∣nysius sent for, because he was a Man eminent in Philosophy, and for some time at the first he greatly honour'd him. But taking offence at something he said to him, he hated him Dionysius sells Plato. to that degree, that he order'd him to be brought into the Common Market-place, and there sold as a Slave for Five 15l. 12s. 6d. Minas: But the Philosophers (who consulted together up∣on the matter) after redeem'd him, and sent him back to Greece, with this Friendly Advice, That a Philosopher should very rarely Converse with Tyrants; and when he did; he should be of a Gaining Behaviour. However, Dionysius went on with his Study of Poetry, and sent Stage-players that could sing excellently well, to the Olympick Games, there to sing his Verses, who indeed at the first catch'd the Auditors by the Ears with the sweetness of their Voices; but when they consider'd further of the Matter and Composure of the Poems, they went away, and set up a great Laughter. When he heard how his Verses were Despis'd and Hiss'd off the Dionysius's Verses despis'd. the Stage, he fell into a great Fit of Melancholly, which growing upon him Day by Day, he rag'd at length like a Madman, and cry'd out, That every one Envy'd him, and were Plotting to take away his Life, till it came to his very intimate Friends and Relations. In this temper he arrived at last to that height of Madness and Melancholy, that he put He grows Me∣lancholy. many of his Friends to Death upon False Accusations, and Banish'd several others amongst whom were Leptines, his Brother, and Philistus, Men of Valour and undaunted Courage, who had done remarkable Service for him in the War. They fled to the Thurians in Ita∣ly, and were there in great Esteem among them: But afterwards they were restor'd to the Tyrant's favour by his own seeking, and were not only brought back to Syracuse, but regain'd his former good Opinion, and enjoy'd their Places of Power and Authority as they did before. And Leptines marry'd Dionysius his Daughter. And these were the Transactions of this Year. P. 462. When Dexitheus bore the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Titus. Evagoras re∣turns to Cy∣prus. Lucius Lucretius, and Servitius Sulpitius, were Roman Consuls, Evagoras, King of Salamis, return'd out of Olymp. 98. 4. Ant. Ch. 338. Aegypt into Cyprus, where when he found the City closely besieg'd, and all his Confede∣rates to have Deserted him, he was forc'd to send Ambassadors to seek for terms of Peace. Terabazus, who had the Sovereign Power and Command, return'd him answer, That he would make Peace with him, upon Condition he would quit all the Cities of Cyprus, and be content only with Salamis, and yield a yearly Tribute to the King, and be observant to all his Commands, as a Servant to his Master: To which terms, though they were very hard, he submitted, excepting that one, That he should be obedient in all things as a Servant to his Master. But he said he would agree to be Subject to him as one King to Terabazus ac∣cus'd by Oron∣tes. another: Which Terabazus would not consent unto; upon this, the other General, Orontes, who envy'd Terabazus, sent Letters privately to Artaxerxes to accuse him; as first, That whereas it was in his Power to take Salamis by force he wav'd it, and had treated with the Enemy, in order to bring about some . Innovations for the common Advantage of them both: That he had entred into a private League with the Lacedemonians: That he had sent Messengers to the Oracle at Delphos, to consult about making War upon the King: And as a matter of the greatest concern that he might gain all the Officers of the Army to be his Creatures; he had Brib'd them with Gifts, Preferments, and many large Promises. When the King had read these Letters (believing all to be true) he writ back to Orontes to seize upon Terabazus, and to send him forthwith to him: Whereupon he executed the Command, and when Terabazus came before the King, he desir'd he might Terabazus seiz'd. be brought to his Legal Trial; upon which he was committed into Custody: But the Trial was long deserr'd, because the King presently after was engag'd in the War against the Carducians. In the mean time, Orontes now Chief Commander of the Army in Cyprus, seeing Eva∣goras Ant. Ch. 383. courageously defend the Place, and perceiving his own Soldiers discontented with the seizing of Terabazus and to slight his Commands, and fall off from the Siege, fearing some sudden Misfortune, sent to Evagoras, and a Peace was concluded upon the same Terms he would have agreed with Teribazus. And thus Evagoras (beyond his own Expectation) Peace made with Evagoras.
freed from absolute Slavery, enter'd into a League, upon Conditions that he should pay a Yearly Tribute to the King, and be Sovereign Lord of Salamis, and Subject to the King no otherwise than as one King to another. And thus ended the Cyprian War which was spun out near Ten years, though most of that time was only spent in Preparation, and not above two Years of it in actual War. But Gaius, the Vice-Admiral of the Fleet, who had marry'd the Daughter of Terabazus, was in great pain lest he should suffer something or other out of suspicion of his being Fa∣miliar and Conversant with Terabazus: Therefore he resolv'd to be before hand with the Gaius revolts from the King of Persia. King, and to that end being well furnish'd with a brave Navy, and having the Love of the Sea-Captains and Officers, he began to advise and consider of a Defection; and forth∣with without any further stop enter'd into a League with Acoris, King of Aegypt, against the great King of Persia. He stirr'd up likewise the Lacedaemonians by his Letters, and a∣mongst P. 463. other large and glorious Promises, he engag'd he would assist them in settling their Affairs in Greece, and maintaining and supporting their Sovereignty. And in truth the Ant. Ch. 383. Spartans had sometime before been contriving how to recover the Sovereign Power over the Graecians, and at that time had given clear indications (by their disturbances) of their design to Enslave the Cities. And that which further'd the Matter was, they repented of the Peace made with Artaxerxes, because they were Charg'd and Accus'd to have be∣tray'd all the Graecians in Asia by that League with the King, therefore they were very ready to catch at an Opportunity to renew the War; and to that end very chearfully made a League with Gaius. After Artaxerxes had ended the War with the Cadusians, he brought Terabazus to his A People g between the Euxine and Caspian Seas. Judges flead a∣live. Terabazus brought to his Trial. Trial, and referr'd the Cognisance of his Cause to Three Honourable Persons. Near this time some Corrupt Judges were flead alive, and their Skins spread round the Judg∣ment-Seats, that those that sate there might always have an Example before their Eyes of the Punishment due to Injustice, to deterr them from the like. The Accusers therefore of Terabazus produced against him the Letters of Orontes, ear∣nestly pressing them as sufficient Evidence to convict him. On the other hand, Terabazus, that he might make it evidently appear that the Accusation was a meer Scandal, contriv'd between Orontes and Evagoras, produc'd the Agreement between them, whereby Evago∣ras was to obey the King as a King himself, and no otherwise; and that the Terms upon which Terabazus would have made Peace, were, That Evagoras should be observant to the King as a Servant to his Master. And as to the Oracle, he brought all those Graecians Ant. Ch. 383. that were at that time present, to testify, That the God return'd not any Answer relating to the Death of any Person. And as to the good Correspondence between him and the Lacedaemonians, he declar'd that he enter'd into a League with them not for any private Advantge of his own, but for the Profit and Advantage of the King. For by this means (he told them) the Graecians in Asia being divided from the Lacedaemonians were made bet∣ter Subjects and more Obedient; and going on with his Defence, he put the Judges in mind of his former remarkable Services to the Crown. Amongst those which clearly manifested his Faith and Loyalty to the King, and which Terabazus kill'd two Lions to save the King. deserv'd the greatest Commendation, and chiefly (as was said) wan the King's Heart, was this, That when the King was one day in his Chariot a Hunting, two Lions ran fiercely upon him, and tearing the two Chariot-Horses in pieces, they made at him, at which instant Therabazus came fortunately in, kill'd both the Lions, and so rescu'd the King. It's likewise reported of him, that he was a Person of extraordinary Valour, and of so sound and solid a Judgment in Council, that the King never miscarry'd when he follow'd his Advice. When Terabazus had ended what he had to say in his own defence, all the Judges with Terabazus acquitted. one Voice acquitted him, and pronouc'd him Innocent of all the Crimes and Offences laid to his Charge. But the King afterwards sent for the Judges to him severally, and ex∣amined every one by himself, upon what Grounds of Law they pronounc'd the Accus'd, Innocent. To whom the first answer'd, That the Matter of the Accusation was Uncer∣tain and Dubious, but his good Services were Clear, Apparent and Manifest to all. Ano∣ther said, That thô those things objected against him were true, yet that all his Faults were over-ballanced by his Deserts. The Third justify'd his Vote to discharge him, by decla∣ring, Ant. Ch. 383. That he had no regard to his Merits, because the King had rewarded them above their Deserts, but upon strict Examining the Nature of every particular Charge, it did not appear to him that the Party accus'd was guilty of any of them. Upon which the King commended the Judges, as Just and Upright Men, and advanc'd Terabazus to the highest Places of Honour. But as to Orontes, he discarded him as a False Accuser, and no∣ted P. 464. him with all the Marks of Ignominy and Disgrace. And thus stood Affairs in Asia at this time.
CHAP. II. Mantinea Besieg'd by the Lacedmonians. Dionysius aims to gain the Islands of the Adriatick Sea. The Parii built Pharos. Dionysius his Expedition into Hetruria Prepares for War against the Carthaginians. The Sicilians routed at Cronion. The quarrel between the Clazomenians and them of Cuma, about Leuce. The War between Amyntas and the Olynthians. The Lacedemonians seize the Citadel Cadmea at Thebes. Eudamidas breaks into the Olynthians Country. IN Greece the Lacedemonians press'd on the Siege of Mantinea; and the Mantineans bravely defended the place all that Summer. For they were reputed the most valiant Men of all the Arcadians, and therefore the Spartans in former times were us'd to ac∣count these their fastest and truest Friends in all Fights and Engagements. But when Winter drew on, and the River running under the Town swell'd high by the Rains, the Lacedemonians dam'd up the River with Earth and Rubbish, and turn'd the Current into the City, so that all the place round about was like to a standing Pool; by reason where∣of the Houses fell down, which amaz'd them of Mantinea, that they were forc'd to deli∣ver up the City: Which being thus taken, the Citizens suffer'd no other hardships from Mantinea ta∣ken. the Lacedemonians, save only that they were order'd to return to those Ancient Villages from whence at first they came: they were forc'd therefore to leave their Country, and Ant. Ch. 383. Dionysius de∣signs upon Aepyius. settle themselves and their Families in the Villages. About this time Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse had a design to gain the Cities lying upon the Adriatick Sea, and that which chiefly mov'd him to it, was because he cover∣ed to be Master of the Jonian Sea (as they call it) to the end he might have a free and open passage to Epirus, and to have Towns and places for his Ships ready to touch at. For he was every day making preparation to Transport great number of Forces into Epirus, and to rifle and plunder the rich Temple at Delphos. To this end he made a * Molussus a part of Epi∣rus. League with the Illyrians by the help of Alcetas the Molossian, who was then an Exile at Syracuse And the Illyrians being then engag'd in a War, he sent them Two thousand Soldiers, and Five hundred Grecian Arms: the Arms they distributed amongst the strong∣est and stoutest of their Men, and the Auxiliaries they mixt here and there in several of their own Companies and Regiments. The Illyrians having now rais'd a great Army; made an irruption into Epirus, in order to restore Alcetas to his Kingdom, and wasted and spoil'd the Country without opposition or controul. Afterwards a sharp Battle was fought between them and the Molossians, in which the Illyrians were Victors, and kill'd A great slaughter of the Molossians. above Fifteen thousand of the Molossians, which Slaughter of the Epirots being made known to the Lacedemonians, they sent them aid to curb and bridle the fierceness and cruelty of the Barbarians. During the transaction of these Affairs, the Paros, an Island of the Egean Sea near Delos. Lyssus built by Dionysius in Pharos. Parii by the encouragement of an old Prophecy, sent forth a Colony to the Adriatick Coast, where they built Pharos by the help of Dionysius, in an Island so call'd. For not many years before he had sent a Colo∣ny thither, and built the City Lyssus: by the advantage of which place (when he had little else to do) he rais'd an Arsenal for Two hundred Gallies, and Wall'd the Town in so large a Circuit, that it exceeded in compass all the Cities of Greece. He likewise built stately Schools and Colledges on the on the side of the River Or rather Anapis in Si∣cily. Olymp. 96. 1. A. M. 3588. Ant. Ch. 382. P. 465. Ant. Ch. 381. P. 465. Anapus, with Temples and other beautiful Fabricks to advance the Glory and Greatness of the City. And now ended the Year: when Diotrephes, for the next was Archon of Athens; and Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius were Roman Consuls. At Aelis was solemniz'd the Ninety ninth Olympiad, in which Dicon the Syracusian wan the Prize. At this time the Pharii (who were now seated in the Island Pharos) Wall'd in the City they had built near the Sea side, not in the least injuring the Barbarians, the Ancient Inhabitants of the Island; but allotted them a place very strong, and excellently well fortify'd. But this nestling of the Greeks was a great Eye-sore to the natural Inhabitants; therefore they sent for the Illyrians bordering upon the Continent over against them, who pass'd over to Pharos in many small Vessels, to the number of Ten thousand Men and upwards, and fell upon the Greeks and kill'd many of them. But he who was made Governor of Lyssus
by Dionysius, with a great Fleet, set upon the Shipping of the Illyrians; and took and sunk all of them, kill'd Five thousand of their Men, and took Two thousand prisoners. Dionysius being now in great want of Money, began an Expedition with Threescore Gal∣lies into Tyrthenia by the Greek, but mistaken. Hetruria, under colour to scour the Seas of Pyrats, but in truth to rob a fa∣mous Temple in those parts, which was very full . of rich Gifts and Donations. It stood in the Suburbs of Agylla, a City of Hetruria, where was the Arsenal which they call the Towers. He landed in the Night, and forcing in at break of day, accomplish'd his Design. For there being but a small Guard in the Castle, he easily over-power'd them, rifled the Temple, and took out above a Thousand Talents. And tho' they of Agylla sally'd out to repel the Enemy, yet he routed 'em, took ma∣ny Dionysius rifles a Temple at Agylla in Hetruria to get Money. prisoners, and after he had wasted and spoil'd the Country, sailed back to Syracuse, where he rais'd no less than Five hundred Talents by the sale of the Spoils. Having thus fill'd his Coffers he rais'd Soldiers from all parts, and got together a great Army, so that it was evident (to the apprehension of all) that he design'd War against the Carthagi∣nians. And these were the things done this year. Afterwards the Dignity of Archon was conferr'd upon Phanostratus at Athens. And Olymp. 99. 2. Ant. Ch. 381. the Romans made Four Military Tribunes Consuls, Lucius Lucretius, Servius Sulpitius, Caius Lucius Emilius, and Lucius Furius. At this time Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse be∣ing prepar'd for the War against Carthage, watch'd for a fair occasion to colour and countenance his Design. Discerning therefore that the Cities subject to the Carthagini∣ans were inclin'd to a Revolt, he receiv'd into his Protection as many as would come to him, and enter'd into a League with them, carrying himself with great complacency and winning behaviour. Upon this, the Carthaginians first sent Ambassadors to him, and demanded the restitution of the Cities, which being deny'd, was the occasion of a new War. The Carthaginians therefore entred into Confederacies with their Neighbours, and all Another War with the Car∣thaginians by Dionysius. Ant. Ch. 381. join'd together in the War against the Tyrant. And because they prudently foresaw the greatness of the War, they Listed Soldiers out of the choicest of the Citizens, and laid up great Sums of Money wherewith they hir'd a vast number of Foreigners: And having made Mago their General (who at that time bore the Title of King) they Transported many Thousands of Soldiers both into Italy and Sicily, for they had decreed to make War upon them both at once. Dionysius likewise himself divided his Forces, some against the Italiots and others against the Carthaginians: Whereupon many light skirmishes pass'd between Parties here and there every day, but nothing was as yet done of any moment. But there afterwards hapned Two great Battles that were especially famous and remarkable, in one of which, at a place call'd Cabala, Dionysius made himself no∣ted Dionysius routs the Car∣thaginians at Cabala in Si∣cily. for his Valour, and routed the Enemy, killing above Ten thousand of them, and taking Five thousand prisoners, forc'd the rest to fly to a Hill that was fortify'd, but altogether without Water. In this Fight Mago their General was kill'd, behaving himself with great Gallantry and Resolution. The Carthaginians terrify'd with the great∣ness of this Slaughter, sent forthwith Ambassadors to make Peace with Dionysius; but he P. 466. return'd them Answer, that there was only one way left for them to make peace with him, and that was forthwith to quit all the Cities of Sicily, and to reimburse all the charge of the War. This Answer was lookt upon as harsh and proud. Therefore they betook themselves to their old Arts of Fraud and Deceit. For they seem'd as if they allow'd of his terms, but pretended that it was not in their power to deliver up the Cities to him, therefore they desired a Truce for some few days that they might consult with the Ma∣gistrates concerning this Affair, which he agreed unto. He was much transported at the Ant. Ch. 381. Truce, having now a prospect presently (as he conceiv'd) to be Lord of all Sicily. In the mean time the Carthaginians bury'd Mago their King with great Pomp and State, putting his Son into the same place, who tho' he was very young, yet there were marks and appearances in him of more than ordinary Wisdom and Valour. This new Gene∣ral spent all the time of the Truce in Training and Disciplining of his Soldiers, so that, what with his daily Diligence, exact Directions, and frequent exercise of their Arms, he had an Army both readily subject to Command, and hardy and strong for Service. And now the time of the Cessation expir'd, and the Armies on both sides came hastily into the Field; and at Cronion was a sharp Engagement, where God gave the Carthaginians Another Battle at Cronion, where Diony∣sius was bea∣ten. the Victory to make amends for their former slaughter. For they who were grown proud, and boasting by their Victory a little before, were now as low and poor spirited. On the other hand, they who were altogether dejected, and in despair, by reason of their overthrow, had their Spirits on a sudden rais'd by their great and unexpected success.
For Leptines who commanded one of the Wings, a valiant Man, signaliz'd himself, and there sell in the Bed of Honour, after he made a great slaughter amongst his Enemies. After whose Fall, the Carthaginians pluckt up their Spirits, and at length put their Ene∣mies to flight. Dionysius with those choice Men he had with him, at the first worsted those that charg'd him; but when the death of Leptines was known, and the other Wing was discern'd to be broken and dispers'd, that part of the Army with Dionysius fled like∣wise: Upon which, the whole Body betaking themselves to their heels, the Carthagini∣ans made a hot pursuit, and gave Orders that no Quarter should be given, so that all being kill'd that came to hand, every place for a long way together was strow'd and co∣ver'd with dead Bodies. The Carthaginians in revenge of their former loss had made so Ant Ch. 301. great a slaughter, that when the slain came to be bury'd, they were found to amount to above Fourteen thousand Sicilians; and it was by the advantage of Night only, that the rest escap'd. The Carthaginians having now gain'd so great and remarkable a Vi∣ctory, return'd to Panormas: However, (as it became Men) they us'd their Prospe∣rity with great Moderation, and sent Ambassadors to Dionysius to offer him Terms of Peace, which he readily embrac'd; And all was concluded upon these conditions, That both sides should keep what they had before the War, save only that the Carthaginians should have the City and Territory of Selinuntia, and part of the Country of Agrigemum, Peace concluded by the Cartha∣ginians with Dionysius. as far as to the River Alycum, and that Dionysius should pay a Thousand Talents to the Carthaginians. And thus stood Affairs in Sicily at that time. In Asia, Gaius, Admiral of the Persian Fleet, who had rebell'd against the King, af∣ter he had engag'd the Lacedemonians and Aegyptians to his Interest, was Murther'd se∣cretly Gaius Mur∣ther'd. P. 467. Tachos Rebels against the King of Persia. Ant. Ch. 381. by some body unknown, and so fall'd of his Designs. After whose Death Tachos pursuing the same Design, got an Army together and built a City upon an high Rock joining to the Sea, call'd Leuca, where he built a Chappel to Apollo: but he dy'd like∣wise a little after; upon whose death the Clazomenians, and they of Cuma fell at strife and variance for the Town, which at first they went about to decide by force of Arms: But afterwards by the advice of some Person consulting the Oracle of Delphos, to know to which of the Cities Leuca should belong, The Prophetess Answer'd, That it should be theirs who should first sacrifice at Leuca; but that both should set forth from their Cities at the ri∣sing of the Sun, upon one and the same day, as they themselves should agree upon. According∣ly Contention be∣tween them of Cuma and them of Clazo∣menia about Leuca. the day was set, the Cumeans in the mean time lookt upon themselves to have the advantage, because their City was nearer than the other. But the Clazomenians, tho' they were more remote, yet contriv'd this project to gain their end. They sent some of their Citizens chosen by Lot to a Colony of theirs not far from Leuca, and from thence at Sun rising they began their Journey, and so finish'd their Sacrifices before them of Cuma. Having gain'd Leuca by this trick, in memory thereof they appointed a yearly Festival, which they call'd Prophthasia, from this their coming first to Leuca. These things thus done, all Rebellions in Asia were at an end; and the Lacedemonians now after the death of Gaius and Tachos would have no more to do with Asia; but set their Heads at work how to ad∣vance their power in Greece. And having persuaded some of the Cities, and forc'd others to receive their Exiles, they possess'd themselves of the Sovereighty of the whole, mani∣festly against the League amongst all the Grecians made by Antalcydas, by the help of the King of Persia. In Macedonia King Amyntas (after he was overcome by the Illyrians, in despair of being able to help himself) bestow'd a large Tract of Land upon the Olynthians, which lay near to them, as never thinking to be restor'd again to his Kingdom. The Olynthians enjoy'd this Peace for some time, but when the King recover'd strength, and was re-instated in∣to his former Dignity, he demanded restitution of the Land, which the Olynthians de∣ny'd. Upon which, Amyntas rais'd both an Army of his own, and enter'd into a League with the Lacedemonians, and prevail'd with them to send a General with a great Army Amyntas quarrels with the Olynthi∣ans. against the Olynthians. The Lacedemonians resolving to fix in those parts of Thrace, rais'd an Army out of their own Citizens and Confederates, to the number of Ten thousand Men, over which they made Phoebidas, that Spartan, General, and commanded him to join with Amyntas and make War upon the Olynthians. They sent out another Body against the Phaeuntians, whom they subdu'd, and forc'd to submit to their Government. About this time the Two Lacedemonian Kings having different Sentiments disagreed one with another. For Agesipolis was a lover of Peace, and a Just and Wise Man, and therefore Declar'd against oppressing the Greeks. For he said that Sparta would become infamous amongst all the People, if after they had been instrumental in making the Gre∣cians in Asia Slaves to the Persians, they should now enslave all the Cities of Greece to
themselves, whose Liberties they had sworn in the common League to preserve inviola∣ble. On the other hand Agesilaus being naturally Turbulent and inclin'd to War, thirst∣ed after Dominion over the Grecians. Afterwards when Menander was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and six Military Tri∣bunes, Olymp. 99. 3. An. M. 3590. Ant. Ch. 380. Quintus Sulpitius, Caius Fabius, Servius Cor∣nelius. The Citadel Cadmea seis'd by the Lacede∣monians. P. 468. Cornelius Servilius, Quintus Servilius, Sextus An∣nius, and Caius Marcius bore the Consular Dignity at Rome, the Lacedemonians seiz'd upon Cadmea, the Citadel of Thebes, for the Reasons following. They had for some time be∣fore consider'd how Boetia was full of Towns and Cities, and that the Inhabitants were Men both of stout Hearts, and strong Bodies; and especially that Thebes which conti∣nu'd to that Day in its ancient State and Grandeur, was even the Guard and Bulwark of all Beotia; therefore they were afraid lest at some fit opportunity or other, they should become Lords of Greece: For this Reason they gave private Instruction to their Com∣manders, to seize upon Cadmea as soon as they could spy out an opportunity. Phoebi∣das the Spartan General in his March against the Olynthians (remembring his Instructi∣ons) Surpriz'd Cadmea, which so enrag'd the Thebans, that they rose in Arms, but were beaten, and he Banish'd three hundred of the most eminent Citizens, and put all the rest into a great fright; and leaving there a strong Garrison, March'd away in pursuance of the business he had chiefly in hand. All the Grecians every where complain'd of the Lacedemonians for this unworthy Act. And they indeed themselves Fin'd Phaebidas for it, but could not be brought to withdraw the Garrison. And thus the Thebans were Robb'd of their Liberty, and brought under the pow'r of the Lacedemonians. But the Olynthians resolutely persisting in the War against Amyntas King of Macedon, Phaebidas was order'd to lay down his Commission, and Eu∣damidas his Brother was made General, and sent away with Three thousand heavy arm'd Men to carry on the War against the Olynthians, who breaking into the Olynthians Coun¦try, Ant. Ch. 380. joyntly with Amyntas fell upon them; but the Olynthians being good Soldiers, and overpowring the other in Number, beat them both. Upon this the Lacedemonians rais'd a great Army, and made Teleutias, King Agislaus his Brother General, who was a Man of high Esteem among the Citizens for his Valour, who as soon as he entr'd to the Borders of Olynthus, was join'd with the Forces of Eudamidas; and now being strong enough to fight the Enemy, he first Spoil'd and Wasted the Country, and Divided the Prey (which he had got together in abundance) amongst the Soldiers. Afterwards the Olynthians march'd out with their own, and the Forces of their Confederates. Upon which the Armies Engaged and at the beginning, the Battle was doubtful; but after∣wards the Fight was renew'd with that extraordinary Courage and Resolution, that Te∣leutias The Olynthi∣ans beat the Lacedemo∣nians. bravely acquitting himself, and above Twelve hundred Lacedemontans more, were there kill'd upon the Place. The Spartans being nettl'd at this Success of the Olynthians, made greater Preparations in order to repair their Loss: So on the other hand, the Olyn∣thians suspecting that the Lacedemonians would bring down greater Forces upon them, and that the War might continue long, furnish'd themselves with store of Corn and Pro∣vision, and Aids from their Confederates. Demophilus was now Archon at Athens, and Publius Cornelius, Lucius Verginius, Lucius Olymp. 99. 4. Ant Ch. 379. Papurius, Valerius. Marcus Furius, Valerius Aulius, Manlius * Lucius, and Lucius. Posthumius Quintus, Military Tribunes, were Consuls at Rome when the Lacedemonians decreed War against the Olynthians, and made their King Agesipolis General over an Army of Force sufficient † Aulus Man∣lius. for the Expedition. As soon as he entr'd the Enemies Country, he join'd with those that were Encamp'd there, and forthwith fell to Action. The Olynthians this Year fought no considerable Battle; but kept the Kings Army in play (whom they were a∣fraid † Posthumius. War with the Olynthians by the Lace∣demonians. to Encounter) with continual pickeering, and light and frequent skirmishes.
CHAP. III. Polypidas sent General by the Lacedemonians against the Olynthians. A great Plague in Carthage. The Beotian War. Cadmea retaken. A Confederacy of the Cities against the Lacedemonians. Cleombrotus attempts to Surprize the Pireum at Athens. The Athenians Seize Actea in Eubea. Agesilaus enters Beotia. The Sea-fight at Naxus. AFter the end of the Year, Pytheas was Created Chief Magistrate of Athens; and P. 469. Olymp. 100. 1. An. M. 3592. Ant. Ch. 378. six Military Tribunes bore the consular Authority at Rome, Titus Quintius, Lucius Servilius, Lucius Julius, Aquilius Lucius. Decius, Lucretius Anchius, and Servius Sulpitius. At that time was Solemnized the Hundred Olympiad at Elis; in which Dionysiodorus the Ta∣rentine bore away the Prize. In the mean time Agestpolis King of Lacedemon died in the fourteenth Year of his Reign; and his Brother Cleombrotus succeeding him, Reign'd Nine Years. But the Lacedemonians Constituted Polybidas General, and sent him forth a∣gainst Polybidas sub∣dues the Olyn∣thians. the Olynthians. He swore all his Souldiers to be true and faithful to him, and gain'd many Victories, managing the War with the Valour and Conduct that became a good General. At length improving his good Fortune and frequent Sucesses, he drove the Olynthians within their Walls, and pinning them up, so Terrifi'd them, that he forc'd them to Submit to the Lacedemonians as their Sovereign Lords. As soon as the Ant. Ch. 378. Olynthians were Enroll'd among the Confederates of the Spartans, many other Cities sought to come under the same Protection. And now the Power of the Lacedemo∣nians was in its greatest Strength, as being Lords of all Greece, both by Sea and Land; Sparta in its strength. For the Thebans were overaw'd by a Garrison; the Corinthians and Argives were tyr'd out with Wars one with another; the Athenians for their Covetousness and Cruelty exer∣cis'd among those they had Subdu'd, were despis'd by all the Grecians. On the other hand all were afraid of the Lacedemonians, because they were very Populous, expert Soldiers, and unweari'd in their Attempts: Insomuch that the greatest of the Princes in those times (I mean the King of Persia, and Dyonysius the Tyrant of Sicily) Courted the Spartans and were ambitious of their Alliance. Afterward when Nico govern'd at Athens, and Six Military Tribunes were Created Olymp. 100. 2. Ant. Ch. 377. Consuls at Rome; Lucius Papyrius, Caius Cornelius, Lucius Manlius, Caius Servilius, Valerius Aulius, and Quintius Fabius, the Carthaginians enter'd with an Army into Italy, and Re∣stor'd the Hipponiats to their City, whence they had been Expuls'd, and kindly receiv'd * Menenius. all the Exiles that came in to them from all Parts. Not long after a great Plague happen'd in Carthage, which Raging more and more, A Plague in Carthage. Ant. Ch. 377. swept away abundance of the Inhabitants; insomuch that they were in great danger to have lost their Sovereignty. For the Africans slighted and deserted them, the Inhabitant; of Sardinia (supposing they had now a fit opportunity) Revolted, and rose up in Arms against them. Moreover, a Remarkable Judgment of God fell upon Carthage The Carthagi∣nians kill one another in the Streets. at this time, for the City was all on a sudden in an uproar, fill'd with Tumult, Fear, and Horrour; and many running Arm'd out of their Houses (as if an Enemy had entr'd the Place) Fought, Wounded and Killd one another in the Streets. At length the Gods being Appeas'd by Sacrifices; and they deliver'd out of their sad Afflictions, they presently Subdu'd the Africans, and Recover'd Sardinia. After these things, when Nausinicus chief Governor of Athens, and four Military Olymp. 100. 3. An. M. 3594. Ant. Ch. 376. The Boetian War. Tribunes, Marcus Cornelius, Servilius Quinctius, Marcus Furius and Lucius Quinctius were Cloth'd with the Consular dignity at Rome, the Beotian War (so call'd) broke out, be∣tween the Beotians and the Lacedemonians upon the Accounts following. The Lacedemo∣nians against all Law and Justice forcibly detain'd the Citadel of Cadmea, and had forc'd many Persons of Quality to fly out of their own Countrey: The Exiles therefore upon a private Consult among themselves (by the help of the Athenians) return'd in the Night into their City, and in the first place kill'd all those they judg'd sided with the Lacedemo∣nians, surprizing them in their Houses, when they were asleep; then they stirr'd up all P. 470. The Thebans get in a Body to retake the Citadel. the Common People to appear for their Liberties, upon which the whole City of Thebes readily came in to their assistance; and getting into a Body, clapt about Cadmea at break of Day. In the mean time the Lacedemonian Garrison that was in the Citadel, which consisted of no fewer than Fifteen hundred Men, sent a Messenger to Sparta to inform them of the Insurrection in Thebes, and to desire Aid with all speed. However Ant. 376.
they from the Bastions in the Citadel beat off the Besiegers, killing and wounding ma∣ny. Upon this the Thebans concluding that great Forces would be brought out of Greece to the assistance of the Lacedemonians, sent Ambassadors to Athens, to put them in mind how they had been assisted by the Thebans at that time when they rescu'd their Commonwealth from the Slavery they suffer'd under the Thirty Tyrants, and therefore that they should press them that they would hasten with all the force they had to help them to Reduce Cadmea, before any Aid came from Sparta. The People of Athens, as soon as they heard what was desir'd by the Thebans, de∣creed that without delay, a Strong and Considerable Army should be sent to help them The Athenians assist the The∣bans. to regain their Liberty, both to demonstrate their Gratitude for their former Services, and likewise hoping thereby so to oblige the Thebans as that they should ever find them fast and constant Friends to assist them at all times, against the growing and boundless power of the Lacedemonians. For the Thebans were lookt upon not to be Inferior to any in Greece, for number or valour of Men. In conclusion, the Athenians made Demophoon General over Five thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse, who drew out before Day next Morning, and hasted away with a swift March, that he might be before the Lacede∣monians; however the People of Athens were ready and prepar'd to March out with all their Forces into Beotia, if the Thebans had occasion for them. Demophoon with great ex∣pedition (beyond expectation) appear'd in view of them of Thebes; and Souldiers came together with the like Zeal and Earnestness from other Cities of Beotia, so that the Thebans had now a numerous Army, consisting of no less than Twelve thousand Ant. Ch. 376. Foot, and about Two thousand Horse; and all Chearfully and Readily bestirr'd them∣selves to Besiege the Citadel. The Army divided themselves into parties, and assaulted the Place by turns, persisting without any Cessation Night and Day. In the mean time, they in the Castle (incourag'd by their Officers) bore the Brunt with great Courage; hoping to receive speedy Succours from the Lacedemonians: And indeed they Valiantly stood it out while they had any Victuals left, killing and wounding many of the Assailants, having the advantage of the strength of the Fort. But when their Provision grew low, and the Lacedemonians lingr'd in sending Relief, the Garrison began to Mutiny. For the Lacedemonians were for the standing of it out to the last Man; but the Auxilia∣ries from the Confederate Cities (who were the greater number) were for delivering it up; so the Spartans, who were but few, were forc'd to Surrender the Citadel, and being dismiss'd according to Articles, return'd to Peleponnesus. At length the Lacedemonians The Citadel is surrender'd. came with their Army to Thebes, but having lost their opportunity through the slowness of their March, all was to no purpose. But they Try'd three of the Officers of the Gar∣rison by a Council of War, and Condemn'd two of them to Die, and impos'd so great a Mulct and Fine upon the Third, as that he was never able to pay it. After∣wards the Athenians return'd into their own Country, and the Thebans spent much time in vain in the Siege of Thespis. During these affairs the Romans sent a Colony of Five P. 471. hundred Citizens into Sardinia upon Terms of being free from Tribute. Afterwards, when Callias was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and four Military Tribunes, Olymp. 100; 4. Ant. Ch. 375. Lucius Papyrius, Marcus Publiu. Publius, Cornelius. Titus Tio. Cornelius, and Luc. Quin∣ctius. Quintus Lucius were honour'd with the Consular Dignity at Rome (after the Lacedemonians had miscarried at Thebes) The Beotians took Courage, and entring into Associations, rais'd a great Army, because they foresaw that the Lacedemonians would presently enter with a strong Body into Beotia. The Athenians likewise sent Persons of the greatest Quality amongst them to persuade the Cities subject to the Lacedemonians, not to neglect the present Opportunity now of∣fer'd to recover their Liberties. For indeed the Lacedemonians were grown to that height, that they Lorded it with great Pride and Oppression over their Subjects: Therefore many of them were inclin'd to comply with the Athenians. The first that made a de∣fection were they of Chios and Byzantium, after them Rhodes and Mitylene, and some o∣ther Islands. And now the Commotions and Disturbances of the Cities of Greece more and more increasing, many of them join'd with Athens: Upon which the People of Athens encourag'd by this Confederacy, Decreed a general Diet or Senate of some cho∣sen A general As∣smbly of the Cities at A∣thens against Sparta. Ant. Ch. 375. out of every City, from among all their Allies, to Consult of the present state of af∣fairs. And it was agreed by common Consent, that the Senate should sit at Athens, and that every City, whether great or small, should send only one Representative, and every one should be govern'd by their own Laws, but under the Conduct and Administration of the Athenians.
However the Lacedemonians tho' they saw the Current and Tide so strong as that they were not able to Stem it, yet they endeavour'd all they could by fair Words; and many specious promises, to Court the Deserters to return to their Obedience; not neglecting in the mean time to prepare for the War, in as much as they discern'd, it would be Great and of long Continuance, in regard the Athenians and other Grecicans, (met toge∣ther in that publick Assembly) all joyn'd with the Thebans. Whilst these things were acting in Greece, Acoris King of Egypt, for some time before Acoris King of Egypt raises an Army a∣gainst the Per∣sians. bearing a grudge to the Persian King, rais'd a great Army of Foreigners from all parts. For giving large Pay, and being otherwise very Bountiful, he got together a great number of Grecians in a short time; who listed themselves into his Service. But wanting a skilful General, he sent for Chabrias the Athenians an excellent Commander, and one highly honour'd for his Valour, who undertook the Employment, but without the consent of the People, and so prepar'd himself with all diligence for the War against the Persians. But Pharnabazus declar'd Commander in Chief by the King, having made great preparations of Mony for the War, sent Messengers to Athens to complain Chabrias sent out of Egyyt. against Chabrias, letting them know that by his accepting of the chief Command under the King of Aegypt, he had greatly Alienated the King of Persia from the People of Athens. Then he demanded that they would send to him Iphicrates, to assist him in the Command of the Army. Upon this the Athenians (who made it their great Concern to stand right in the Kings good Opinion and to keep Pharnabazus firm to their Interest) Ant. Ch. 375. P. 475. Iphicrates sent to the Per∣sians. without delay recall'd Chabrias out of Aegypt, and commanded Iphicrates to assist the Persians. The Lacedemonians and Athenians some years before had struck up a Peace amongst themselves, which continu'd to this very time. But after that Sphodriades was made Ge∣neral Sphodriades attempts to surprize the Pireum at Athens. by the Spartans, (a Man of a proud and haughty Spirit, rash and headstrong) Cleombrotus the Lacedemonian King egg'd him on to surprize the Pireum at Athens without the assent of the Ephori. To this end being furnish'd with Ten thousand heavy Arm'd Men, he attempts to enter the Pireum in the Night; but the Treachery being detected by the Athenians, his project came to nought, and he return'd as he came: And tho' he was brought before the Senate at Sparta, for this rash and inconsiderate Action, yet being Patroniz'd by the Kings, he was against all Law and Justice discharg'd. The Athenians being incens'd with this apparent abuse, publish'd a Decree, That in as much as the Lacedemonians had openly violated the League, that War should be made upon them for the repair of the Injury. To this end therefore Timotheus, Chabrias, and Cal∣liffratus (Men of great Account in the City, who were made Generals for this Expe∣dition) were Commission'd to raise Twenty thousand Foot of Corsleteers, and five hundred Horse, and to Equip a Fleet of Two hundred Sail. The Athenians likewise brought the Thebans as Members into the publick Senate, upon the same Terms and Conditions with the rest. It was also Enacted by the suffrage of the Senate, That the Lands which had been divided by Lot, should be restor'd to the ancient Proprietors; and that no Athenian should challenge any Right to any Lands that lay out of Attica. By this fair dealing the Athenians regain'd the love of the Grecians, and again strengthen'd themselves in their Government. And this was the cause which mov'd many other Cities of Greece to side with the Athenians. The chiefest Cities of Eubea (except Actia) with great Heat and Zeal enter'd into an Association with Athens. But in regard they of Actia had receiv'd many kindnesses from the Lacedemonians, and on the other hand, had been grievously oppress'd and harrass'd by the Athenians, they bore an implacable hatred towards the one, and stuck close and firm in their Alliance to the other. In sum, there were seventy Cities that entred into this Confederacy and Associ∣ation, all which had Voices upon the same Terms and Conditions in the Senate. So that the Forces of the Athenians increasing every Day, and those of Sparta decreasing, these two Cities began now again to lie in equal Ballance. The Athenians therefore (who saw all things go forward according to their own hearts desire) transport'd Forces into Eubea both to fix their Confederates, and to suppress their Foes. In this Island one Neogenes a little before these times, with the assistance of Jason Ant. Ch. 375. Neogenes makes himself King of Eubea. of Pherus, with a Band of Men had seiz'd upon the Citadel of Actea, and declar'd himself King of those Parts, and of the City In Eubea, now Negto∣pont. Oropus. But governing proudly and Tyrannically, the Lacedemonians sent Therippidas against him, who at the first would have perswaded him by fair means to leave the Castle; but when he could not be so wrought upon, he stirr'd up the Inhabitants near adjoining to recover their Liberty, and took the Castle by storm, and restor'd the Oropians to their former freedom. For this rea∣son the Hestrieans always lov'd the Lacedemonians, and kept a firm League of Friendship
with them. But Chabrias the General, with the Forces sent from Athens, wasted and spoil'd the Country of the Hestreians, and wall'd Metropolis (as 'tis call'd) situated upon a Hill naturally fortify'd, and left there a Garison; and he himself sail'd to the Cyclade Islands, and reduc'd Peparethus and Sciathus, and others Subject to the Lacedaemonians: When the Lacedaemonians saw that they could not put a stop to the Defection of their P. 473. Confederates, they laid aside their Severity, and took other Measures to win the Cities by more gentle Methods: And by this means they gain'd upon those of their Confede∣rates that were yet left. And because they discern'd that the War was coming on apace, and that great care was requir'd for the management of their Affairs, among other Pre∣parations they diligently apply'd themselves to put their Army into a better posture, and Ant. Ch. 375. The Lacedae∣monians pre∣pare for War. more aptly to dispose of their Troops and Regiments, and to have their Forts and Gari∣sons more faithfully kept and secur'd: For they divided their Cities and Soldiers, rais'd there for the present War, into Ten parts: The first were Lacedaemonians; the second and third, Arcadians; the fourth, Eleans; the fifth, Acheans; the sixth, Corinthians and Mega∣reans; the seventh, Sicyons, Phliasians, and Acteans; the eighth, Acarnanians; the ninth, Phocians and Locrians; the last, Olinthians and Confederates of Thrace. The manner and way of their Order and Marshalling was thus: One Corsleteer, or heavy-arm'd Soldier, was accounted equal to two lightly arm'd; and one Horseman to four heavy-arm'd Foot∣men. The Army thus dispos'd, King Agesilaus was made Generalissimo; for he was fa∣mous Agesilaus the Lacedaemoni∣an General. both for his Valour and Prudence, and never had been worsted in any Encounter to that very time: For as he was highly admir'd in other Wars, so in the War by the Lace∣daemonians against the Persians, he routed Armies far greater than his own, and bore down all before him, wasting and spoiling a great part of Asia; and if the Spartans had not call'd him home (through the Urgency of Affairs in his own Country) he had not been far from ruining the whole Kingdom of Persia: For he was a Man very brisk and daring, and yet withal prudent, addicting himself to Great and Noble Actions; and therefore the Spartans (when the greatness of the War requir'd a Skilful Commander) chose him to be General above all others. Upon which, Agesilaus enter'd Boeotia with above Eighteen thousand Foot, amongst whom were five Regiments of Lacedaemonians, every Regiment consisting of Five hun∣dred. Ant. Ch. 375. The Lacedaemonian Band call'd the These were commonly 600. Scirite, join'd not with the rest of the Army; but kept their proper Post round about the King, and always were ready to succour that part that was most prest upon. And because it was made up of the best Soldiers, it was of Agesilaus en∣ters Boeotia. the greatest Esteem of any part of the Army, and most commonly instrumental to the gaining of every Victory. Besides the Foot before mention'd, Agesilaus had with him Fifteen hundred Horse. As soon as he came to Thespis (a Lacedaemonian Garison) he en∣camp'd near the City, to refresh his Army after their long March. When the Athenians heard that the Lacedaemonians had enter'd into Baectia, they forthwith sent Five thousand Foot and Two hundred Horse to the Aid of Thebes. The Thebans having muster'd and rendezvous'd their Forces, possess'd themselves of a Hill which ran out a great length, distant twenty Stages from the City, and posted themselves there for the advantage of the Ground (being difficult of access) and there waited for the Enemy: For the great Reputation of Agesilaus did so terrifie them, that they durst not engage with him upon equal Terms in the open Field. Agesilaus now advances with his Forces against the Boeotians; as soon as he came near the Enemy (to make trial whe∣ther they had a mind to fight) he sent out against them some light-arm'd Men, which were soon beaten back by the Thebans from the higher Ground: Upon which (to strike them with the more Terror) he drew out his whole Army in Battalia upon them. Whereupon Chabrias the Athenian, Commander of the Mercenaries, order'd the Sol∣diers to appear in a posture of Defiance to the Lacedaemonians; and to that end to stand in their Ranks and Orders, with their Shields laid down at their Feet, and with their Spears advanced, so to present themselves to the view of the Enemy, which they obey'd at the first Word of Command. Agesilaus admiring their excellent Order, and their P. 474. Ant. Ch. 375. Agesilaus dares the Thebans to fight in the open Field. Contempt of their Enemies, thought it not safe to attempt to force up those steep Places. and to try their Valour at such Disadvantages, having experienc'd, that by violent pres∣sing upon them, they would be necessitated to stand it out to the utmost extremity. Therefore he did all he could to provoke them to descend into the Plain; but when he could not get them to stir, he sent out a Phalanx of Foot, and a Party of light Horse, and wasted and spoiled the Country without controul, and got together abundance of Prey and Plunder. But those that were order'd to attend upon Agesilaus as his Council, and the Colonels and Captains of the Regiments wondering that he being ever accounted a va∣liant Man, and a good Soldier, and now furnish'd with an Army far stronger than the
Enemy, should notwithstanding wave an Engagement. Agesilaus gave them this Answer, That now the Lacedaemonians were Conquerors without fighting, since the Thebans durst not move out of their place to give a stop to the spoiling of their Country; and if he should force them to fight after they had willingly yielded the Victory, the uncertain For∣tune of War might be such as might on a sudden ruin the Lacedaemonians. The Man by this Conception of his seem'd modestly to foretel the Event; for that which follow'd after did clearly evince, That what he said was the Oracle of God, and not the meer Voice of a Man. For the Lacedaemonians within a short time after, when they set upon the Thebans with a numerous Army, and forc'd them to fight for their Liberties, involv'd them∣selves in unspeakable Calamities: For in the first place, when they were routed at the Battle Ant. Ch. 374. of Leuctra, a great number of their Citizens were cut off, amongst whom was their King Cleombrtus. And afterwards at the Battel of Mantinea, they were utterly ruin'd, and (beyond all Men's thoughts of any such thing) quite lost the Sove raignty of Greece: For in this Fight (especially) Fortune made it her Business to bring swift Destruction upon the Proud and Haughty, and to teach Men not to aspire beyond the Bounds of Moderation and Modesty. So that Agesilaus acted prudently in being content in his former good Success, and preserving his Army entire without loss or prejudice. Some time after, Agesilaus march'd back with his Army into Peloponnesus; but the Thebans, now deliver'd from the Danger they were in by the Conduct of Chabrias, highly admir'd his witty Stratagem; who though he had perform'd many Noble Exploits in the Wars yet he glory'd more in this than in all others before, and by the favour of the Chabrias highly honour'd by the The∣bans. People procur'd Statues to be erected in memory of the Project, representing the thing as it was done. The Thebans, after the departure of Agesilaus, set upon Thespiae, and kill'd the Guard, which consisted of Two hundred Men; but making several Assaults upon the City, tho' all in vain, they drew off, in order to their return with their Forces to Thebes. Upon which, Phebidas the Lacedaemonian, the Governour of Thespiae (who kept the Place with a strong Garison) made a Sally upon the Thebans in their retreat, and through his pres∣sing on too rashly (after many Wounds receiv'd, and signalizing his Valour) he lost his own Life, and the Lives of above Five hundred of his Fellows. Phebidas Kill'd Not long after, the Lacedaemonians march'd against Thebes with the same Army: And then again the Thebans possest themselves of some other Places that were of difficult access, by which means they did indeed hinder the wasting and spoiling the Country, but dar'd not at first to engage with the Enemy in the Plain. But upon the appearance of Age∣silaus Ant. Ch. 374. in the Van of the Army, they began to march slowly towards him, and after long time the Armies at length engag'd with great Heat and Fury. At the first Agesilaus had the advantage; but when he discern'd the whole City of Thebes to sally out upon him, he A Fight near Thebes. P. 475. The Lacedae∣monians are repuls'd. A Sea-Fight. sounded a Retreat: Whereupon the Thebans judging themselves nothing inferior to the Lacedaemonians, erected a Trophy, and never after stuck to engage with the Spartans. And this was the issue of the Fights at Land. But about the same time there was a great Fight at Sea between Naxus and Paros, up∣on this occasion: Pollis the Lacedaemonian Admiral, had intelligence of a great quanti∣ty of Corn that was passing by Sea to Athens; upon which, he made it his Business to lie in wait to surprize the Transport-Ships. The Athenians (being inform'd of the De∣sign) sent out a Fleet to guard the Ships loaden with the Provision, and brought them all into the Pireum. After this, Chabrias the Athenian Admiral sail'd with the whole Fleet to Naxus, and be∣sieg'd The Sea-Fight at Naxus. it, and battering it with his Engines, us'd his utmost endeavour to take it by storm: But while he was earnest in prosecuting his Design, Pollis the Lacedaemonian Admiral, came up with his Fleet to the Assistance of the Naxians; upon which, the Fleets engag'd charging one another in a Line of Battel. Pollis had a Navy of Sixty five Sail, and Cha∣brias Eighty three. Pollis in the Right Wing valiantly charg'd the Athenians in the Left, Commanded by Cedon the Athenian, whom he kill'd, and sunk his Vessel. He fell like∣wise upon others, and broke some of them in pieces with the Beaks of his Ships, and put the rest to flight. Which Chabrias discerning, he ordered some Ships near him to the Ant. Ch. 374. Relief of those that were overpower'd, and so rescu'd them: He himself, with the greatest part of the Fleet under his Command, with great Valour broke in pieces and took many of his Enemy's Gallies. But however, tho' he obtain'd the Victory, and put the Enemy's whole Fleet to flight, yet he would not pursue, remembring the Battel at Arginusa, where tho' the Athenians were Victorious, yet the People instead of a Reward, put the Officers to death, only because they did not bury their Parents who were kill'd in that Fight. Fearing therefore the like Fate, he wav'd the Pursuit, and took up the Citizens swimming and floating here and there, and so preserv'd those that were alive, and or∣der'd
the Dead to be bury'd. In this Battel the Athenians lost Eighteen Gallies, and the Lacedaemonians Four and twenty; and Eight were taken with all the Men. Chabrias crown'd with this glorious Victory, return'd with great and rich Spoils to the Pireum, and was receiv'd by the Citizens with great Honour and Acclamation. This was the First Victory at Sea gain'd by the Athenians since the Peloponnesian War; for at Cnidus they prevail'd not by the Strength of their own Forces, but by the Assistance of the King of Persia. While these things were acted in Greece, Marcus Manlius was put to death at Rome for aspiring to the Monarchy. CHAP. IV. The Treballians make Incursions into Thrace. Chabrias the Athenian General Assassinated. The Thebans rout the Spartans at Orchomena. Artaxerxes seeks to make Peace among the Graecians. Peace concluded. The Thebans only disa∣greed. The Commendation of Epaminondas. Seditions in several Cities of Greece. WHEN Chariander was Archon at Athens, and Servius Sulpitius, Lucius Papyrius, Olymp. 101. 1. Act. Ch. 373. Marcus Cor∣nelius, Cornelius Titus, and Titus Quintius. P. 476. Treballians make an Inroad into. Thrace. Are slaughter'd by the Abde∣rites. Marcus Quintius, Four Military Tribunes, were in Consu∣lar Authority at Rome, the Hundred and First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, and Da∣mon of Thurium bore away the Prize. At that time the Treballians in Thrace (being in great Scarcity of Corn) made an Incursion with Thirty thousand arm'd Men, into their Neighbours Territories to get Provision. To that end they enter'd the Borders of the Abderites in another part of Thrace, and wasted and spoiled the Country without any Opposition; and having loaden themselves with abundance of Plunder, they return'd so carelesly and disorderly, as that the whole City of Abderita falling upon them when they were scatter'd and dispers'd, kill'd above Two thousand of them. To revenge which, the Exasperated Barbarians made a second Inroad into the Abderites Country. But they being encourag'd by the late Victory, and strengthen'd with the assistance of their Neigh∣bour Thracians, drew up in Battalia against the Barbarians. The Armies furiously en∣gag'd, The Abderites cut off. The Abderites rescu'd by Cha∣brias when on a sudden the Thracians drew off and left the Abderites to themselves: Who were presently hemm'd in by the Barbarians, and almost every Man cut off. As soon as this grievous Slaughter of the Abderites was nois'd abroad, and they were now ready to be besieg'd, in comes Chabrias the Athenian with his Army, and not only delivers the Abderites, but drives the Barbarians out of the Country. And after he had Chabrias as∣sassinated. Ant. Ch. 373. strengthen'd the City with a strong Garison, he was basely assassinated, the Person by whom not known. Upon this, Timotheus was made Admiral of the Athenian Fleet, and sailing to Cephallenia he block'd up the City with his Navy, and wrought upon the Cities of Acarnania to side with the Athenians. Presently after he enter'd into League with Ace∣tas, The Acts of Ti∣motheus the Athenian Ge∣neral. King of the Molossians; and now having in his power all the Countries subject to the Cities in those Parts, he routed the Lacedaemonians in a Sea Fight at Leucades; and all this he did in a very short time, and with much Ease, partly by fair Words, and partly by force of Arms and his excellent Conduct: so that he not only gain'd Esteem and Repu∣tation amongst his own Fellow Citizens, but likewise amongst all the Graecians. And thus was it with Timotheus at this time. During these Transactions, the Thebans (with Five hundred the Valiantest Men of their The Thebans march against Orchomena. City) march'd against Orchomena, and perform'd an Exploit worthy of Memory. The Spartans kept this City with a strong Garison, and making a Sally upon the Thebans there was a sharp Encounter, in which they routed the Lacedaemonians though they were double in number, which never happen'd to them before in any age; but the thing might . have been born well enough if they had been few and had been conquer'd by the far greater number. Henceforth the Courage of the Thebans encreas'd, and they grew every day famous for their Valour: And now it was apparent, that they were likely to gain the So∣vereignty of all Greece. As to the Writers of this time. Hermeas of Methymna ends his Hi∣story of the Affairs of Sicily with this Year, comprehended in Ten, but as others divide them, in Twelve Books.
The Year following, when Hippodamus was Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Four Olymp. 101. 2. An. M. 3597. Ant. Ch. 372. Military Tribunes, viz. Lucius Vale∣rius Crispus, Lucius Valerius, Aulus Man∣lius, Crispus Manlius, Fabius Servius Sulpirius, Servilius, and Lu∣cius Lucreti∣us. A General Peace made by the Mediation of Artaxerxes. P. 477. The Thebans disagree to the Peace. Sulpiti∣us Lucretius were Roman Consuls. Artaxerxes used his utmost Endeavour to quiet all things in Greece, that he might raise the more Mercenaries for the Carrying on the War against the Aegyptians: For by this means he hop'd the Graecians being freed from Domestick Broils would be in a Condition to assist him abroad. To this end, he sent Ambassadors into Greece to Negotiate in this Affair amongst all the Cities. And this Embassy was very wel∣come to the Graecians, who were near tyr'd out with continual Wars; so that a General Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: That all the Cities should for the future be govern'd by their own Laws, and all the Garisons be withdrawn. And there were certain Grecians appointed as Commissioners to see the Garisons drawn out; who accordingly went to every City where there was any Soldiers, and order'd them to leave the Place. In the mean time, the Thebans only through every Town disagreed to these Terms, and exempted all Beotia as Tributary only to themselves: But the Athenians oppos'd this with all earnestness, and this Affair was banded in the Common Assembly of the Greeks, by Callistratus a Tribune of the People, on the behalf of the Athenians, and by Epami∣nondas on the behalf of the Thebans, after which, all the rest of the Grecians persisted in their resolution to stand to the League, leaving out the Thebans, who (relying upon the Wisdom and Prudence of Epaminondas) boldly oppos'd the Decree made by the General The Thebans left out. Assembly. For being that the Lacedaemonians and Athenians had been all along hitherto contesting for Ant. Ch. 372. the Sovereign Command of Greece, and at length had agreed upon these Terms, That the Lace∣daemonians should have the Command at Land, and the Athenians at Sea, they were very un∣easie to think that now a Third should carry away the Sovereignty from them both, for which reason they would not allow the Cities of Beotia to be under the Power of the Thebans. But the Thebans (who were Men of strong Bodies and stout Hearts, and had lately beaten the Laredaemonians in several Fights) bore themselves very high, and were in hopes to gain the Sovereign Command at Land. Neither were they frustrated in their design for the Reasons before mentioned, and likewise for that they had at that time many Excellent Officers and Valiant Commanders; amongst whom the most Famous were Pelopidas, Gor∣gias, Epaminondas his Commenda∣tion. and Epaminondas; which last was not only the Best and most Expert Commander of any of his own Country, but even of all the Grecians; and was likewise a Man of great Learning in the Liberal Sciences, and especially in the Pythagorean Philosophy: Being be∣sides of excellent Natural Parts, and Mother-Wit, it was no wonder if he exceeded others in performing those things that were more than ordinarily remarkable. For with a small Body of Men he Engag'd with the whole Power of the Lacedaemonians, and their Confe∣derates, and so routed those (formerly unconquerable) Warriors, that he kill'd their King Cleombrotus, and cut off almost the whole Army of the Spartans. And by the advantage of his singular Wisdom, and Virtuous and Liberal Education, such things were perform'd by him as were . Ant. Ch. 372. admirable beyond all Expectation. Of which we shall speak more fully hereafter when we come to treat particularly of those Things. But now to return to the Course of our History; It was agreed, That every City New Troubles in Greece. should govern according to their own Laws; but presently after, all the Cities were again involv'd in great Tumults and Seditions, especially those in Peloponnesus. Some few of these had been Enslav'd in the late Domineering time, and being now restor'd to their Demo∣cratical Government, they made but an all Improvement of it, for they banish'd many Honest Citizens that were falsly Accus'd, and as unjustly Condemn'd; and by the pre∣vailing Power of the Seditious, nothing was more frequent than Banishment and Confis∣cation of Goods; and those chiefly were the Sufferers that had been Magistrates in the time of the Lacedaemonian Government; for because in those time they carry'd it something imperiously towards the People, not with that regard to Justice as they ought, now that the Commonalty were restor'd to their Liberty they too much resented their former Injuries. The Exiles therefore of Phialea, were the first that Consulted and Join'd together, and seiz'd upon Herea, a strong and well-fortify'd Castle; and from thence made frequent Incursions into the Territories of Phialea. And at the time when the Feasts of Bacchus Throats cut in the Theatre at Phialea. were celebrated, (upon the sudden) they rush'd upon the People in the Theatre, and cut many of their Throats, having before persuaded a considerable Number to join with them in this wicked Confederacy, and afterwards they return'd to Sparta. Then the Ex∣iles of Corinth, who were in great numbers at Argos, determin'd to force their own return. Ant. Ch. 372. The Exiles kill'd at Co∣rinth P. 478. In order hereunto some of their Servants and Friends were receiv'd into the City; but the thing being discover'd to the Magistrates, they could not lie long conceal'd, but being just ready to be seiz'd (through fear of Punishment) they kill'd one another. But the
Corinthians, upon suspicion that many of the Citizens were concern'd in the Plot, put se∣veral to Death, and Banish'd others. In the City Megara likewise some were contriving how to overturn the Government, Plots at Mega∣ra and Sicyon. who being convict of the Treason, many were put to Death, and not a few Banish'd So at Sioyon many were Executed upon a full Conviction, for endeavouring to bring in Innovations. At length, many of the Philasian Exiles having seiz'd upon a Castle in that The Exiles of Phalasia kill many of the Townsmen. Territory, got together a great Army of Mercenaries, and fought with the Townsmen, and got the Day, having kill'd above Three hundred of the Philasians. But not long af∣ter, the Exiles were betray'd by their Guard, and routed by them of Philasia, with the loss of Six hundred Men, and the rest being forced out of the Country, fled to Argos. And such was the miserable Condition of Peloponnesus at that time. CHAP. V. The Persians send an Army into Aegypt to reduce the Revolters. Iphicrates a skil∣ful Commander. Sedition at Zacynthus. Platea raz'd by the Thebans. The Lacedaemonians seize upon the Island Corcyra, reliev'd by the Athenians under Ctesides. Evagoras murther'd in Cyprus by an Eunuch. Dreadful Earthquakes and Innundations in Peloponnesus. A great Comet seen in Greece. SOcratides the ensuing Year was Archon at Athens, and Quintus Servilius, Crassus, Servilius Cor∣nelius, Olymp. 101: 3. Ant. Ch. 371. Sporius Papyrius, and Lucius Aemi∣lius. Pharnabazus and Iphicra∣tes march int Aegypt. Fabius Albus, four Military Tribunes, executed the Office of Consuls at Rome. At that time the King of Persia march'd against the Aegyptians (who had revolted some time before) the Army was commanded by Pharnabazus, and Iphicrates the Athenian; the Barbarians by Pharnabazus, and Twenty thousand Mercenaries by Iphi∣crates, who was in so much favour with the King for his excellent Conduct, that he intrust∣ed him with that Command. Pharnabazus had spent many years in preparation for this War. Iphicrates therefore, knowing the readiness of his Tongue, and the slowness of his Acti∣ons, one Day accosted him in this manner. That he wonder'd that one who was so voluble in his Speech, should be so slow in Execution. To which Pharnabazus answer'd, That he was Master of his Words, but the King of his Actions. When the King's Forces came to Acco, or Pto∣lemais in Phae∣nicis. Aces in Syria, and were there muster'd, there were found Two hundred thousand Barbarians to be under the Conduct of Pharnabazus, and Twenty thousand Grecians under the Com∣mand of Iphicrates. The Number of the Navy was Three hundred . Gallies of three Tire of Oars on a Bank, and Two hundred of . Thirty Oars a-piece: And a vast number of Transport Ships to carry Provision, and other things necessary for the Army. About the beginning of the Spring, the Officers with all the Forces both at Sea and Land made for Aegypt: When they came near to the River Nile, they found the Aegyp∣tians ready and prepar'd for Battel; for Pharnabazus had been very tedious in this Expe∣dition, and given the Enemy time enough to prepare for their Defence. For it's the con∣stant practice of the Persian Generals (in regard they have no absolute power) upon every special occasion to send to the King to know his Pleasure, and to stay till they receive his particular direction. In the mean time, Nectanabis, the King of Aegypt, had perfect knowledge of the Strength of the Persian Forces; but he plac'd his greatest Confidence in the Strength of Ant. Ch. 371. his Country, the Entrance into Aegypt being very difficult on every side, and the Pas∣sage block'd both by Sea and Land by the seven Mouths of Nilus. For at every Mouth A Description of the Forts built upon Nile to secure the Passes into Aegypt. where Nile falls into the Sea, was a City built with large Forts or Castles on either side the River, join'd together by a Bridge of Timber, which commanded all Ships that sail'd that way, and of all these he had most strongly fortify'd Pelusium; for being the next Frontier Town towards Syria, they conceiv'd the Enemy would first attempt to enter in to the Country that way: Therefore they drew a Trench round the City, and where there was any place, whereat any Vessels might in any probability enter, there they rais'd Walls to obstruct the Passage. And where there were any Fords by which the way lay open into Aegypt by Land, he brought the Water over them; and where any Ship might pass he fill'd up those Places with Stones and Rubbish. By which means it was very diffi∣cult, P. 479. and scarce possible, either for Ships to sail, or Horse or Foot to march. Pharnaba∣zus
his Officers therefore seeing Pelusium so strongly and wonderfully Fortify'd and well Mann'd, thought it most adviseable to forbear to attempt to enter by Force, and rather to sail to some other Mouth of the River, and endeavour a Passage for the Fleet there. Ant. Ch. 371. Whereupon they put off to Sea again, and being out of Kenning, that they might not be discern'd by the Enemy they steer'd their Course for Mendesicum. Mendesium, another Mouth of Nile, where the Shore runs a great way out from the Main Land. Here they Landed Three thousand Men, and Pharnabazus and Iphicrates assaulted a Fort built upon the very Mouth of the River; but the Aegyptians came down with Three thousand Horse and Foot to the Relief of the Place; Upon which there was a sharp Engagement, in which the Aegyptians being over-power'd with Multitude, (for more came in running to them The Aegypti∣ans worsted at Mendusium. from their Ships) were hemm'd in, and a great Slaughter made amongst them, but very few being taken Prisoners; the rest were forc'd to fly into a little Town hard by. But the Soldiers of Iphicrates enter'd pell mell with them of the Garison into the Place, and having thus taken it by Force they demolish'd it, and carry'd away the Inhabitants as Captives. After this, there arose a Difference between the Generals, which brought all to nought. Quarrels be∣tween Pharna∣bazus and Iphicrates. Iphicrates learnt from the Captives, that there was a Garison call'd Memphis, which Place was of the greatest Consequence of any throughout all Aegypt; therefore he advis'd that they should sail with the Fleet thither before the rest of the Aegyptians's Army got toge∣ther; but Pharnabazus and all his Forces were for staying till all the Persian and Land For∣ces came up, and so there would be less danger in the Expedition. But Iphicrates then offer'd to undertake the Reduction of the City with those Mercenaries that were then with him, if he might have but Liberty. Upon which, Pharnabazus grew Envious at the Iphicrates un∣dertakes to take Memphis. Ant. Ch. 371. Is discouraged by Pharnaba∣zus. Ant. Ch. 371. Memphis strongly Gari∣son'd. Valour and Confidence of the Man, and began to be Jealous lest all Aegypt should be con∣quer'd only by his Arms, and therefore deny'd his request. hereupon, Iphicrates made a Solemn Protestation against them, declaring that all this Expedition would be Fruitless and Vain, through their Neglect, if they let slip the present Opportunity. But Pharna∣bazus envy'd him the more, and very undeservedly gave him opprobrious Language. In the mean while, the Aegyptians (having now gain'd more time) put a strong Gari∣son into Memphis, and march'd with all their Army to the little Town before demolished; and prevailing in sundry skirmishes against the Persians, they never let them rest, but grow∣ing still stronger and stronger, made a great Slaughter of them, and grew every day more obstinate. But the Persian Army having now staid a long time about this The Little Town. Castle, the River Nile (by force of the Etesian Winds, i. e. Yearly Winds. The Persians return into A∣sia. Etesian Winds) beginning to overflow, insomuch as all the Land was cover'd with Water (whereby Aegypt was now more inaccessable, and by that means as it were Fortify'd) the Commanders (for that Nature seem'd to Fight against them) resolv'd forthwith to leave Aegypt. As soon therefore as they return'd into Asia, Pharnabazus renew'd the Quarrel with Iphi∣crates: Upon which, Iphicrates (fearing he should be laid by the Heels as Conon formerly had been) consulted how to withdraw himself privately from the Camp. To this end, (having prepar'd a Vessel for his purpose) he went on board in the Night, and so sail'd to Athens: But Pharnabazus sent Ambassadors after him, and accus'd him as being the oc∣casion of the Miscarriage of the Design relating to the Reducing of Aegypt. To whom the Athenians answer'd, That if he were Guilty they would punish him according to his Ant. Ch. 371. Desert: But in a very short time after they made him Admiral of their whole Fleet. In this place we think it not much beside our purpose if we say something concerning what is reported of the Valour of Iphicrates. He is said to be a very Skilful Commander, and of a quick and ready Wit in contriving any useful Project and Stratagem: Having Iphicrates skilful in ma∣king of Arms. P. 480. therefore gain'd large Experience and Judgment in Martial Discipline, by his long and con∣tinual Exercise in the Wars of Persia, he found out many things of great advantage in matters of War, especially he employ'd himself in contriving the making of New sorts of Arms. It was hitherto a Custom among the Graecians to carry great and heavy Shields: But because these by their Weight much hinder'd the Soldiers in their March, he chang'd the Form of them, and order'd Targets of a moderate Size in their room: In which altera∣tion he had a respect to two things, one that their Bodies should be sufficiently defended, and by the other, that by their Lightness they might be the more easily manag'd. Ex∣perience presently approv'd the Invention, and they who from their Heavy Arms were before call'd Hopliti, Heavy arm'd Men, were from these New Targets call'd Peltasti, Targateers. He chang'd likewise the Fashion of their Spears and Swords. The Spears he caus'd to be made half as long again as they were before, and the Swords longer almost by two Parts. This Alteration was likewise presently approv'd by Use and Experience, and the Reputation of the General was highly advanc'd by the Usefulness of his Ingeni∣ous
inventions. Lastly, he altered the very Soldiers Shoes that they might both be ea∣sier to march with and sooner, and more readily cast off; and therefore they are call'd at tjos very day Iphicraticks. He invented many other things belonging to Martial Affairs, Ant. Ch. 371. which would be too tedious here to relate. But thus all that large preparation for an Ex∣pedition into Aegypt came to nothing. During these Affairs the new frame of Government throughout all Greece fill'd the Ci∣ties with Tumult and Commotions; and because of the Anarchy in most places, Sedi¦tions Seditions in the Cities of Greece. abounded. They who were for an Oligarchy, had the Lacedemonians to Patronize them; Those that appear'd for a Democracy were protected by the Athenians. For both the Cities for a while kept the League made between them inviolable. But upon their siding with the Cities (as they were inclin'd to the one or the other) without any re∣gard to the former Articles of the Peace; they presently broke out into War. At that time the Inhabitants of Now Zant. Zazynthus drives out all the Magi∣strates. Zacynthus being enrag'd against their Magistrates (encourag'd thereunto under the protection of the Lacedemonians, and provoked with the memory of their former Injuries) drave them all out of the City; who fled to Timotheus the Athenian Admiral, and were receiv'd into the Fleet, and join'd with him in the War. He patroniz'd their Cause, and transported them into the Island (where they seiz'd up∣on a strong Castle call'd Arcadia) and by the assistance of Timotheus, very much molest∣ed and damnify'd the Townsmen. They of Zacynthus desir'd aid from the Lacedemoni∣ans, Ant. Ch. 371. The Lacede∣monians assist the Zazynthi∣rns. who first (before they would begin a War) sent to the People of Athens, and by their Ambassadors accus'd Timotheus: But when they discern'd that they inclin'd to fa∣vour the Exiles, they bestirr'd themselves to Equip out a Fleet; and having Mann'd Thirty five Gallies, they sent them to the aid of the Zacynthians, under the Command of Aristocrates. Whilst these things were in doing, some in Corcyra that favour'd the Lacedemonians, A Plot in Cor∣cyra to over∣turn the De∣mocracy. appear'd against the People, and sent to Sparta to be assisted with all speed with some Shipping, promising to deliver up Corcyra into their hands. Upon which, they (know∣ing very well the importance of that Island for the recovery of the Dominion at Sea) hasten'd away to get possession. And to that end commanded Alcydas to pass over to Corcyra with Two and twenty Sail; they giving out, that this Fleet was to go for Si∣cily, but in truth with a design (under colour of being Friends to the Corcyreans) by the help of the Exiles to seize upon the City. But the Inhabitants coming to understand the Fraud and intended Cheat of the Lacedemonians, strongly fortify'd the place, and kept diligent Watch and Ward, and sent Ambassadors to Athens for assistance. Upon P. 481. The Atheni∣ans side with the Zazynthi∣ans and Cor∣cyreans Platea sends for an Athe∣nian Garrison. Ant. Ch. 371. which, the People decreed to send Succours forthwith, both to the Corcyreans and to them of Zacynthus; Upon which, Ctesecles was presently sent to Zacynthus to command the Exiles: but the Fleet to be sent to Corcyra was but then in fitting out. In the mean time they of Platea having enter'd into a League with the Athenians, and decreed to deliver up their City into their protection, sent for a Garison from Athens. At which the Boeotarchae Platea raz'd by the Boeti∣ans. Go∣vernors of Boeotia being exceedingly offended (to prevent the Athenians) forthwith led out a great Army against the Plateans, and having entred the Confines of Platea (by this sudden and unexpected Irruption) they found many of the Citizens stragling in the Fields, who were presently snapt up by the Horsemen; the rest fled into the City, and having no Confederates to assist them, were forc'd to deliver up themselves, upon such Terms and Conditions as the Enemy was pleas'd to allow 'em: For they were to leave the City, and take away with them only their Houshold Goods, and never more set foot in Baeotia. After this the . Thebans raz'd Platea, and took Thespia (that sided against them) by assault. The Plateans fled to Athens with their Wives and Children, and were there kindly receiv'd into the Franchises and Liberties of the City. And in this condi∣tion stood the Affairs of Baeotia all that time. The Lacedemonians had now sent Mnasippus Mnasippus sent to Corcy∣ra by the La∣cedemonians. The City Cor-Tyra in the Island Corcy∣cyra. with a Fleet of Sixty five Sail, and Fifteen hundred Men under his Command to Corcyra, which after he arriv'd at the Island, and had taken the Exiles on board, he sail'd in∣to the Haven, and presently possess'd himself of Four of their Gallies, and forc'd the rest upon Land, which they of . Corcyra burnt, to prevent their falling into the Enemies hands: he routed them likewise in a Land Fight, (tho' they had advantageously possessed them∣selves of a Hill,) insomuch as all the Corcyrians every where were in fear and amaze∣ment. The Athenians had some time before sent Timotheus the Son of Conon, to the aid Ant. Ch. 371. Timotheus sent by the A∣thenians to Corcyra came too late. of the Corcyreans, with a Navy of Sixty Sail; but before he came in to succour them, he sail'd into Thrace, and brought over many of the Cities there to the Athenian Interest, and enlarg'd his Fleet with Thirty Sail: But because he came too late to the assistance of them of Corcyra, the people of Athens were very angry at him, and took away his Commission; yet when he return'd to Athens with a great number of Ambassadors, that
came along with him to confirm the Leagues with the Athenians, and besides, brought in motheus disearded. the Fleet in good Order, being more than they were by Thirty Sail; the People re∣scinded the former Decree, and restor'd him to his Command. Before this they had Restor'd. likewise prepar'd Forty Gallies more, (so that their whole Fleet was Fourscore;) and had made also plentiful Provision of Corn, Arms and all other things necessary for the War: But for the present they sent Five hundred Men to the aid of them of Corcyra, under the Command of Ctesides, who enter'd privately in the Night into * Corcyra, where he found the Townsmen in bad circumstances by their Sedition, and ill management of Cresides cmes to the City Corcyra from Athens. Affairs relating to the War: But forthwith quieting all Parties, he made it his business to put all things in a posture of Defence, and by this means put Heart and Courage into the Besieg'd. In the first place he made a Sally and cut off Two hundred of the Enemy. Presently after in a sharp Engagement he kill'd Mnasippus and many of his Army: And Mnasippus kill'd. Ant. Ch. 371. P. 482. now when the War was almost at an end in Corcyra, arriv'd Timotheus and Iphicrates with the Athenian Fleet; who coming too late, did nothing worth remembring, save that they took Nine Gallies, Men and all, sent by Dionysius out of Stcily to the assistance of the La∣cedemonians, under the Command of Cissides. Cassidas and Crinippus; and by the Sale of the Cap∣tives rais'd Threescore Talents, with which they paid off the Soldiers. While these things were acting, Nicocles an Eunuch in Cyprus, treacherously murther'd Evagoras Mur∣ther'd in Cy∣prus. King Evagoras, and made himself King of Salamis. In Italy the Romans fought with the Prenestines, and routed and kill'd many of them. Afterwards when Asteius was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Six Military Tribunes, viz Olymp. 101. 4. Ant. Ch. 370. Earthquakes in Peoponne∣sus. Marcus Furius, Lucius Furius, Aulus Posthumus, Lucius Lucretius, Marcus Fabius, and Lucius Posthumus executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, there hapned such dreadful Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus (throughout all the Cities, and over all the Country.) that are incredible to relate. For never in any former Ages did the like Calamity fall upon the Grecian Cities, which were now swallow'd up together with their Inhabitants; and certainly some Divine Power contriv'd and executed this remarkable ruine and de∣struction of Mankind: Nay, the time when it was done aggravated the greatness of the calamity. For the Earthquake hapned not in the day (when the distressed might have found out some way or other to have help'd themselves) but in the night; when the Hou∣ses by the violence of the shake fell down in confused heaps; so that (by the darkness of the Night, and the suddenness of the ruine) Men were in that perplexity, that they knew not which way to turn themselves for security; insomuch as the greatest part of the Inhabitants, (buried in the rubbish of the Houses) miserably perish'd. But as soon as Ant. Ch. 370. it was Day some came running out of the Houses, and thinking they had escap'd the danger, fell into a far greater and unexpected mischief; for the Sea rag'd to that degree, and broke in with that violence, that it swallow'd up them and their Houses together. Two Cities of Achaia, one call'd Helica, and the other Bura, chiefly suffer'd by this sad accident: of which two, Helica was of the greatest account of any of the Cities of Helica and Bura swallow'd up. Achaia. There was a very hot dispute concerning the cause of this Evil. Indeed the Natural Philosophers do generally ascribe all such Events to Natural Causes, and necessary Cir∣cumstances, and not to any Divine Hand; But they who have more reverend Thoughts and Sentiments of a Deity, give a very probable account of this Matter, that this Destru∣ction was the effect of the Anger of the Gods, for the impious violation of the Rights of Re∣ligion, of which we shall give a more particular account. The Three Cities of Jonia were accustom'd to have a general Assembly of all the Jonians at Mycale, and thereabouts, where in a certain solitary place (according to Ancient Rites) they offer'd many cost∣ly Sacrifices to Neptune: which Pan Ionian A general Fe∣stival of the Ionians. Panionion Festivals, the Ionians not being able to so∣lemnize at that place, by reason of the frequent Wars and Disturbances, they remov'd those Assemblies to a more secure place not far from Ephesus. But sending to Delphos to consult there with the Oracle, they were commanded to take Images from the most An∣cient Altars of their Forefathers (meaning from Helica, a City of the Country former∣ly call'd Ionia, but now Achaia.) Upon this they declar'd in the publick Assembly of the Achaians, the occasion of their Embassy, and desir'd them to grant their Request. But Ant. Ch. 370. they of Helica had an Ancient Prophecie, That then they would he in the greatest danger, when the Ionians sacrific'd upon the Altar of Neptune; remembring therefore this, they would not suffer the Ionians to take the Images, alledging that that Temple was not common to all the Achaians, but peculiar to themselves only. The same Addresses were made to them of Bura, who were of the same Mind with them of Helica. However
the Ionians by publick Edict of the Achaians, (that the Prophecy might be fulfill'd) of∣fer'd Sacrifices upon the Altar of Neptune. Upon this they of Helica seiz'd upon all the Goods of the Ionians, and committed the Ambassadors to Prison, and so carried it very impiously towards the Deity: Therefore they say that Neptune being angry, to revenge himself upon their Impiety, (by this Earthquake and Inundation of the Sea) brought this grievous calamity upon those Cities. And that it was done by him they use this for an Argument, That it is generally believ'd that this God hath the power of Inundations and Earthquakes in his own hand; and that Peloponnesus had been ever reputed the Habitation of Neptune, and the Country Dedicated to him, and that all the Peloponnesian Cities wor∣ship'd this God above all others. Besides this, they give a further reason of this sad Ant. Ch. 370. Accident. There are (as they say) in Peloponnesus great Cavities under-ground, which by the Sea flowing here and there through the Earth, are turn'd into great Ponds and Lakes of Water. And indeed it is very certain that there are Two Rivers in that Penin∣sula, which apparently fall into the Caverns of the Earth. For the Rivers which run by A City in Acadia. Pheneum in former Ages sunk in one place into the Earth, and became invisible, being swallow'd up in these Caverns under ground. Erasinus Ri∣ver. Another was lost at a great opening of the Earth at Stymphalus; in Arcadia. Stymphius, and ran unseen under ground for the space of Two hundred Stages, and rose up again near the City Argos. To what is related is further added, That none suffer'd but only they who were guilty of the Impiety before-mention'd. And this shall suffice to be said of the Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus. After∣ward; When Alcisthenes was Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Eight Military Tribunes, viz. Olymp. 102. 1. Ant. Ch. 369. 25 Mile. Lucius Lucius Pub∣lius Valerius. Valerius, Publius Ancius, Caius Terentius, Lacius Menenius, Caius Sulpitius, Titus Papyrius, Lucius Aemilius, and Marcus Fa∣bius. A Coinet in Peloponnesus. Fabius Marcus bore the Consular Authority at Rome, the Hundred and second Olympiad was celebrated at Aelis, wherein Damon the Thurian was Victor. At that time God (by some Signs and Prodigies) foretold the Fall of the Lace∣demonian Sovereignty over Greece, after they had enjoy'd it near Five hundred Years: For a great Comet (which from its shape was call'd the Fiery Beam) was seen in the Heavens several Nights. And not long after, the Lacedemonians being overcome in a great Battle, suddenly (beyond all Mens imagination) lost their Dominion. Some Ant. Ch. 369. among the Natural Philosophers ascribe the Original of this Comet to proceed from Natural Causes, and say that these sort of Meteors at some stated times do happen of ne∣cessity. And that the Eminent Chaldeans in Babylon, and other Astrologers have certain∣ly and exactly foretold the appearance of these Comets. And that it's not to be ad∣mir'd tho' such things do happen accordingly, but that it would be a greater wonder if they should not; being that all things have their proper Courses, and turns, and at length by incessant Motions are brought into Act in fixed and stated Times and Seasons. It's related that this Comet was so very light, that it cast a shadow upon the Earth like the Moon. CHAP. VI. Artaxerxes sends again to make Peace among the Grecians. All compli'd but the The∣bans. The Spartans raise an Army against the Thebans. Epaminondas made the Theban General. The famous Battle of Leuctra. The terrible Seditions and Cruelties in Argos. Jason of Pherae stirs up the Thessalonians to gain the So∣vereignty of Greece. Pollydore Prince of Pherea in Greece poison'd by his Bro∣ther Alexander. Plot to depose Alexander. King of Macedonia Treated with, to that purpose. ABout this time Artaxerxes King of Persia hearing that Greece was fallen into new Broils, sent Ambassadors again to exhort them to live in peace one with another, according to the late Establishment. The Grecians readily compli'd with the Advice, and Peace made a∣gain by the Mediation of Artaxerxes. and all made Peace again among themselves, except the Thebans. For they were not admitted into the League because they challeng'd all Beotia to be under their own Go∣vernment. And it was Decreed that all the Cities should be bound by Oath to observe the League. Being therefore excluded (as they were before) they kept Beotia under
the sole Jurisdiction of their own City. Upon which the Lacedemonians being inrag'd, resolv'd to make War upon them as the common Enemies of Greece. For their grow∣ing Pow'r began to be suspected, lest (being Masters of all Baeotia) they should some Ant. Ch. 369. The Lacede∣monians decree War against the Thebans. P. 484. time or other catch an opportunity to deprive Sparta of the Sovereign Command. E∣specially for that they were a Warlike Nation, Inferior to none in Greece, and by their daily Exercise in the publick Schools, their Bodies became far stronger; and besides had many valiant Commanders, and especially three, Epaminondas, Gorgias,: and Pelopidas. And to this may be added, That the Thebans by reason of the Nobility of their Ancestors (who were famous in the Heroick times) were of Proud and Lordly Spirits, and ever aspiring to great matters. Upon this account the Lacedemonians this Year rais'd an Army, compos'd of their own Cities and of their Confederates, and prepar'd themselves for War. So that When Phrasichides was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and the Romans appointed Eight Military Tribunes to execute the Office of Consuls, viz. Publius Manlius, Caius Erenu∣cius, Olymp. 102. 2. Caius Sextius, Tiberius Julius, Lucius Juli∣us▪ Lucius Marcus Albinius. Labinius, Publius Fibonius, Caius Manlius, and Lucius Antistius, The Thebans excluded from the common League, were forc'd by their own strength alone, to bear the brunt of the War against the Lacedemonians; for by the Articles of the Peace (Ratifi'd and confirm'd by all) none of the Cities were to send them any Aid or Relief. Therefore the Lacedemonians (now that the Thebans were whol∣ly desert'd) decreed a War against them, and were resolv'd to subject Thebes to the La∣cedemonian State. And forasmuch as all observ'd that the Lacedemonians made extraordi∣nary preparations, and that the Thebans on the other hand had none to stand by them, every body was of opinion that they would be easily Conquer'd by the Spartans. And therefore all that wish'd them well were much troubl'd and concern'd for them, to see Ant. Ch. 368. their inevitable Ruin approaching. But their Enemies on the contrary rejoyc'd, a, if the Thebans were even already subdu'd. When the Lacedemonians had rais'd their Army, they Created Cléombrotus General. And in the first Place sent Ambassadors to Thebes to demand that all the Cities of Beotia Cleombrotus General for the Spartans. should be allow'd to Govern themselves according to their own Laws, and that Platea and Thespiae should be Rebuilt, and that those Territories should be restor'd to the Ancient Proprietors. To which the Thebans answer'd, That as they did not concern themselves with the matters of Laconia, so the Lacedemonians ought not to meddle with the Affairs of Beotia. Upon receiving of this answer, the Lacedemonians (without any further de∣lay) order'd Cleombrotus to March with the Army against Thebes. And the Lacedemonian Confederates were very ready to join in this War, hoping that the Beotians would be subdu'd , without dust. with little or no fighting, and without any great Labour or Pains. Marching on therefore, they Encomp'd at Cheronea, and there waited for their Con∣federates, who came in but slowly. In the mean time the Thebans hearing of the Ene∣mies March, sent their Wives and Children for security to Athens. Then they made Epaminondas General of the Army, and intrusted him with the management of the whole Epaminondas General of the Thebans. Ant. Ch. 368. War, joining with him six Beotians and Governors of Beotia as his Council. He listed whoever was of Age able and fit to bear Arms among the Thebans, and likewise among the other Beotians, and having now an Army not above Six thousand, with these he March'd out of Thebes; at which Instant of time some Prodigies were seen, which boded no good Success. For as they were going out at the Gates, there met them an Herald that (according to ancient Custom) led a blind Man (that had ran away) and cry'd aloud, Bring him not out of Thebes, nor put him to Death, but carry him back again and save his Life. The old Men took this Cry of the Herald for an evil sign: But the young Men held their peace, lest by their Timorousness they should seem to have a de∣sire to diswade Epaminondas from the Expedition, he had undertaken. To those that were pressing upon him first to consider well of these Presages, he answer'd in this Verse, . In Homer. It is a happy sign to fight for his Country. Such a frank resolution had no sooner dash'd and caus'd those that were Timorous to Blush, but another Prodigy more frightful happen'd. For a Secretary went before car∣rying P. 485. a Or Lance. Javelin, to which a Scroll was annex'd, to signify that the Army was to obey the Orders and Commands of their Generals. It fell out that a high Wind blew off this Scroll, and fix'd it upon a Pillar of a Tomb, in which very place some Lacedemonians and Peloponnesians, that formerly follow'd Agesilaus were bury'd, and had been there slain:
Upon which the ancient Men again with protestations dissuaded him from going any fur∣ther with the Army, seeing the Gods so evidently oppos'd the design. But the General return'd them no answer, but cheerfully March'd on preferring at that time the Hone∣sty and Justice of his Cause, before uncertain Observations and Conclusions upon Signs and Prodigies. And tho' Epaminondas who was a great Philosopher manag'd all this Affair with great Prudence and Discretion, yet in the mean time he incurr'd the Cen∣sure of many. But not long after when success of the Action evinc'd the Excellency of Ant. Ch. 368. his Military Conduct, we see him instrumental in performing many things to the great Advantage and Service of his Country. For he March'd away directly, and gain'd the Streights near Coronea, and Encamp'd there. Cleombrotus, when he heard that the Enemy had possess'd themselves of that Pass, not looking upon it Feazible to regain it, turn'd aside another way by Phocis, and March'd along by the Sea-shore, where tho' the way was very rugged and difficult, yet at length he came without any prejudice to the Confines of Beotia: But in his passage he took in some small Towns, and gain'd some Gallies. At last he arriv'd at Leuctra, and there Encamp'd, and refresh'd his Army. In the mean time the Beotians Marching forward, drew near to the Enemy; and as soon as they recover'd the Hills, and saw the greatness of the Lacedemonian Army, Co∣vering the Plains of Leuctra, they were not a little amaz'd. Hereupon the Booetarchs cal∣l'd a Council of War to Consider whether it were advisable to go on, and Fight upon The Six Go∣vernours of Be∣otia, who were Epaminon∣das's Council. such unequal Terms, or else to March Back, and Engage with the Enemy in some more commodious Place. It happen'd that upon this Consult, the Votes were equal: For there being Six of these Boeotarchs or Governors of Boeotia, Three were for going Back, and the other Three for abiding where they were, and to try their Fortune by a Battle, of which last Number Epaminondas was one. While the matter stood thus doubtful, and nothing could be determin'd, the Seventh Boeotarch at length came in, and Epaminondas Ant. Ch. 368. persuaded him to give his Vote on his side, and so he carry'd it. And thus it was deter∣min'd to lay all at Stake and try it out by a Battle. Epaminondas then perceiving that the Soldiers were still superstitiously possess'd with the former ominous Signs, and Prodi∣gies, endeavour'd by all the Art and Industry possibly he could to remove these Opinions and Suspicions of his Soldiers. To this end, upon some Persons coming newly into the Camp, from Thebe's, he caus'd a Report to be spread abroad, that all the Arms that hung up in Hercules Temple were on a sudden gone and not to be found, and that it was commonly nois'd in Thebes, That the Ancient Heroes had taken them away, and were gone out to the assistance of the Thebans. He Suborn'd likewise another to say, he lately came up out of Trophonius his Cell, and he affirm'd that the Oracle there Com∣manded This Tropho∣nius was said, to be the Son of Apollo, and had a Temple at Lebadie in Beotia, dedi∣cated to him; where was a Cave, of which strange things are related; see Steph. and others. Pausan lib. 9. c. 39. a large descripti∣on, and by his own experience, as he says. P. 486. Ant. Ch. 368. him to tell them that when they had gain'd the Victory at Leuctra, they should institute the Coronet Festivals to Jupiter. From whence arose that Custom of keeping a yearly Solemnity by the Boeotians at Lebadia. And besides this Skill and Prudence of the General, Leandras the Spartan (who was Banish'd from Lacedemon, and then in Arms with the Thebans) was not little serviceable in this Affair. For being call'd into the  . Assembly, he affirm'd that the Spartans had an ancient Prophecy, That when they were beaten by the Thebans at Leuctra, they should lose their Principality. At length some of the Inhabitants of the Country who undertook to Interpret the Oracles came to Epaminondas, and declar'd that it was decreed by the Gods, That a great slaughter should be made of the Lacedemonians at the Tombs of the Daughters of Leuctrus and Schedasus, for the Reasons herein after related. Leuotrus was he from whom the Field was so call'd. And his Daughters, and the Daughters of one Schedasus, Virgins, in the Flow'r of their Age, were Deflowr'd by the Spartan Ambassadors; the young Women not able to endure that great Dishonour and Disgrace, (with many Imprecations against that Nation who sent such wicked Ambassadors) laid violent hands on themselves. When these and other such like things were alledg'd, Epaminondas call'd the Soldiers to∣gether, and in an Oration fitted for the purpose, encourag'd them to the Battle: Upon which the Soldiers (being now freed from their Superstitious conceits) chang'd their minds, and long'd to be Engag'd with the Enemy. About this time came some Auxiliary Forces to the Thebans from Thessaly, Fifteen hun∣dred Foot, and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Jason. This Man advis'd both the Thebans and the Lacedemonians (upon consideration of the uncertainty of the Events of War) to agree upon terms of Peace; which took its effect. And now Cleom∣brotus withdrew his Forces out of Beotia, and in his March a great Army from the Lacede∣monians and their Confederates under the Command of Archidamus the Son of Agesilaus met him For the Spartans seeing the Courage and Resolution of the Beotians, and not judging it advisable to slight Men that seem'd to be resolv'd, and to run upon the Pikes at
all adventures, had sent forth his other Army (by their multitude at least) to give a check to the Insolency of the Enemy. Drawing up therefore in a Body together (and looking upon it a base and mean thing, below the Dignity of the Spartans so much as to think the Valour of the Beotians worthy of any regard,) without any respect had to the late League, they rashly and precipitately return'd to Leuctra: Where they found the Beotians (with great earnestness) expecting and desiring a Battle. Upon this, the The Battle at Leuctra. Armies on both sides were drawn up in Battalia in this manner, on the part of the La∣cedemonians, Cleombrotus and Archidamus the Son of Agesilaus (both descended from Her∣cules) Commanded the two Wings: On the other side Epaminondas Marshall'd his Ar∣my after a new and peculiar manner, by which excellent Stratagem he gain'd that glori∣ous Victory never to be forgotten. For he chose out of the whole Army the best and strongest of the Soldiers, and plac'd them in that Wing where he himself would Com∣mand. In the other he plac'd his weaker Men, with a Command not to abide the E∣nemies Charge, but by a soft and slow retreat to avoid the shock. Having therefore thus order'd an oblique Phalanx, he resolv'd to try the Fortune of the Day with the o∣ther Wing under his Command. And now the Trumpets Sounded a Charge on both sides, and on first onset the Armies set up a great shout: The Lacedemonians came on with both their Wings in fashion of an half Moon: On the other hand the Beotians Retreated with one of their Wings, and charg'd fiercely on the Enemy with the other. When they came to the swords point, both Fought very desperately, and at first the Vic∣tory was very doubtful, but at length they with Epaminondas by their Valour and close Order, broke in upon the Peleponnesians, and made a great slaughter amongst them; For Ant. Ch. 368. they were not able any longer to bear the weight of the Shock wherewith they were press'd, but some were slain downright upon the Spot, others mortally Wounded brave∣ly receiving all their wounds upon their Breasts. As long as Cleombrotus the Lacedemonian King was alive, it was uncertain whether side would carry away the Victory, because he had a strong Body of Targateers with him, who fought resolutely in his defence. But as soon as he fell down dead, (after many wounds receiv'd and much Valour shewn on his part, tho' all ineffectual) they throng'd together about his Body where they hewn down in heaps one upon another. And now this Wing being without a leader, the Epaminondians charg'd the Lacedemonians with that fierceness that they forc'd them by degrees into disorder. However the Lacedemonians fought so bravely for the Body of their King, that at length they possess'd themselves of it, tho' they were not able to gain P. 487. the Day. For those choice Bands with Epaminondas standing to it as unconquerable (en∣courag'd likewise both by the words and example of their Leader) the Lacedemonians at length (with much ado) began to give ground. And indeed at first they did not (to Ant. Ch. 368. appearance) break their Order of Battle in their Retreat; but when the slaughter in∣creas'd, and they had now no Commander to give necessary Orders, the whole Army fled outright. The Epaminondians pursu'd them close, and with the slaughter of a multi∣tude of their Enemies gain'd a glorious Victory. For by their engaging with the most famous Warriours of Greece, and becoming Victorious with an Army far short in Num∣ber of their Enemies, they highly advanc'd the reputation of their Valour. But Epa∣minondas the General was judg'd worthy of the greatest Honour and Esteem, because chiefly by his Valour and Prudence he had routed those Commanders of Greece, who were never before Conquer'd. The Lacedemonians lost in this Battle no fewer then four thousand Men: Of the Beotians were kill'd about Three hundred. Afterwards they made a Truce for the burying of the Dead, and the return of the Lacedemonians into Peloponnesus. And this was the Issue of the Battel of Leuctra. The Year following, when Dysnicetus was Praetor of Athens, and four Military Tri∣bunes, Quintus Servilius, Lucius Furius, Caius Licinnius and Publius Clelius Executed the Olymp. 102. 3. Ant. Ch. 367. Consular Dignity at Rome, the Thebans march'd with a great Army against Orchomenum, with a full purpose utterly to ruin that City. But they were advis'd by Epaminondas, in regard they sought to gain the Principality of Greece, that it was their Interest to use their Victory with Moderation. Whereupon they left off their design, and receiv'd the Orchomenians as their Consederates: Afterwards they made a League with the Phoceans and Atolians, and so return'd into Beotia. At that time Jason Prince of In Thessaly. Pherae (whose power grew every Day) invaded In Thessaly Lo∣cris with a great Army, and raz'd near Phocis and Parnassus. Heraclea in Trachinia after it was betray'd into his hands, and bestow'd their Territories on the Near Mount Oeta and Thermopile in Phthiotis. Octeans and Melieans. Thence Marching into Perrhebia, he courted some of the Cities into submission, and gain'd others by force of Arms.
The Thessalians seeing him mount up so fast, and in so short time, began to be jea∣lous In Thessaly. Ant. Ch. 367. Cruel Seditions in Argos. of the growth of his Power, and the heat of his Ambition. But in the mean time there arose such a Sedition, follow'd with such Butcheries in Ar∣gos, that the like had never been before in any of the Cities of Greece: Which new and un∣heard of Cruelty was call'd by the Grecians Knocking on the Head with Clubs. Scytalism, from the manner of the slaughter Committed. And the Cause of the Tumult was this: Argos was Govern'd by a Demo∣cracy; The . Orators, and those that affected Popularity, stirr'd up the Mob against the great Men of the City; which caus'd them for their own preservation, (and to free themselves from the false accusations that were prosecuted against them) to Plot and Contrive how to overturn the Democratical Government. And when some who were suspected were call'd in question, others fearing they should be put to the Rack, Mur∣der'd themselves. For One in the height of his Torments Confess'd, and Accus'd Thirty of the greatest Men of the City to be in the Conspiracy; upon which the People (without any further Trial,) Knockt them all on the Head, and Confiscated their Estates. P. 488. And whereas there were many others seiz'd upon suspition of the Plot (and the false Accusations manag'd against them by the Orators, with all the aggravation▪ imaginable) the People were so enrag'd, that whoever were accus'd (of whom there was a vast number, and all very Rich) were Condemn'd to Death; so that there were Executed Ant. Ch. 368. above Sixteen hundred of the greatest and most powerful Men of the City: Neither were the Orators themselves spar'd; for when they slack'd in the Prosecution of the Calumnies (because they were afraid left some sudden mischief would overtake them by reason of the extraordinary Cruelties that were Committed) the People concluded that they had deserted their Cause, which put them into such a ferment of Rage and Fury, that they kill'd all the Orators that were then in the City; which seem'd to be Executed upon them by the Hand of some revenging Deity, as a reward of their Villanies. After the Tumult was ceas'd, the People return'd to their former quiet, and paeceable disposi∣tions. About this time Lycomedes of Tegeata perswaded the Arcadians to join together in one Body of a Commonwealth and to Constitute a General Council, consisting of Ten thousand Men, who should have absolute power to Determine all matters relating both to War and Peace. But a Tumult hapning among the Arcadians, the controversie was decided by the Sword; many being kill'd, and above Fourteen hundred Banish'd, some to Sparta, others to In Arcadia. Pallantium. Those that fled to the Pallantines were by them deli∣ver'd up into the hands of their Enemies, who cut all their Throats. The other put on the Lacademonians to make an Inroad into Arcadia: Upon which, Agesilaus King of Sparta with an Army made up of the Citizens and Exiles, broke into the Territories of Tageata, because they were look't upon to be the Fomenters of all the Broils and Banish∣ments amongst the Arcadians, and wasted and spoil'd the Country, which together with a strait Siege laid to the City, greatly terrifi'd the Arcadians. While these things were acting, Jason who rul'd at Phercae (a Man excellently well Ant. Ch. 367 Jason puts on the Thessali∣ans to seck for the Sove∣reignty of Greece. vers'd in Military Affairs) who had now many of the Neighbouring Countries for his Confederates, perswaded the Thessalians to end eavour to gain the Sovereignty of Greece to themselves. For he alledg'd that whoever would Fight for it, might now gain it as a reward of their Valour. For that it was evident that the Lacedemonians were miserably Ru∣in'd at Leuctra; and the Athenians were only Masters at Sea, and the Thebans far unwor∣thy of such a Dignity; and in Conclusion, that the Argives had weaken'd themselves with their own Civil Dissentions, and bloody Broils. Upon this, the Thessalians made Jason General of all their Forces, and Committed to him the whole Management of the War, who having now receiv'd the Supream Command, March'd into some of the neighbouring Countries, and enter'd into a League with Amyntas King of Macedonia. This Year there happen'd what was very remarkable; For Three great Princes Di'd Three great Princes Die in one Year. near one and the same time, Amyntas the Son of Tharrhaleus (after he had Reign'd in Macedon Four and twenty Years) dy'd, leaving behind him three Sons, Alexander, Per∣diccas and Philip. Alexander Succeeded, but Reign'd but one Year. Then Agesipolis King of Lacedemon after one Year's Reign dy'd likewise: His Brother Cleomenes succeeded him, and sat at the Helm Four and thirty Years. At last Jason of Pherae, whom the Thessali∣ans had lately made their General (tho' he Govern'd with great Moderation and Kind∣ness towards his Subjects) was Assassinated by Seven young Men, as Ephorus says, who (in hopes of Praise and Commendation) had Conspir'd for that purpose: But others write that he was Murther'd by his Brother Polydore, who Reign'd not above one Year Jason ssassinat∣ed by his Bro∣ther Polydore. after him. Here Durius the Samian begins his History of the Affairs of Greece. And these were the things done this Year.
Afterwards, when Lysistratus Govern'd in Chief at Athens, a great Sedition arose in Olymp. 102. 4. Ant. Ch 367. P. 489. Rome, for some were for making of Consuls, others were for Creating Military Tribunes in their room: And by reason of this dissention there was an Anarchy for some time. But at length, Six Military Tribunes were chosen, which were Lucius Amilius, Caius Veturius. Polydore poy∣son'd by his Brother Alex∣ander. Verginius, Serulius Sulpitius, Lucius Quintius, Caius Cornelius, and Caius Valerius. About the same time, Polydore the Pherean Prince of Thessaly (when he was drunk) was poyson∣ed by a deadly Potion given him by his Brother Alexander, who Succeeded him, and Reign'd eleven Years. And as he got into the Throne by wickedness and injustice, so he rul'd (as he ever design'd) with Tyranny and Oppression: And whereas all those before him by their Moderation and Kindness to their Subjects, gain'd the Love and Good-will of all, he by his severe and tyrannical Government, became the Object of all Mens hatred. Therefore some of Larissa who from their high Birth were sirnam'd Alevadari, (fearing what might be the Effect of his Wickedness) Conspir'd to Dethrone him. To this end they made a Journey into Macedonia, and Treated with Alexander the King, in The Tyrant en∣deavour'd to be depos'd. order to Assist them in Deposing of the Tyrant. While they were Negociating this Af∣fair, Alexander the Pharean (having Intelligence of the preparations making against him) rais'd a considerable Army, designing to Engage with the Enemy in Macedonia; but the King of Macedon being join'd with the Deserters, brought his Forces presently to La∣rissa, Ant. Ch. 367. and so prevented him: When he came there, the Citizens open'd the Gates to him, and so he became Master of all but the Castle, which he afterwards took by Force. The The City Cranon likewise surrendr'd to him, and he promis'd to restore all the Cities to He's caus'd to Fly by assistance from the Ma∣cedonian King. the Thessalians. But afterwards (not valuing his Word or Honour) he Garrison'd them, and detain'd them all in his own hands. But Alexander the Pherean in a great Fright Fled to the City Pherea. And this was then the Condition of Thessaly. CHAP. VII. The Lacedaemonians send Polytropus into Arcadia; who is Slain, and his Party Routed by Lycomedes. An Invasion by Epaminondas and Pelopidas into Pelo∣ponnesus. Sparta Besieg'd. The Antiquity and History of Messina in Greece. Pallane taken by the Arcadians. A Wall drawn between Cenchrea and Lecheum to hinder the Thebans Inroad into Peloponnesus. Epaminondas breaks through into Peloponnesus; Assaults Corinth. IN Peloponnesus, in the mean time, the Lacedemonians sent a Thousand heavy Arm'd Men of their own Citizens, and Five hundred Deserters from Argos and Beotia, into Arcadia, under the Command of Polytropus, who when he came to Orchomenon in Arcadia, put a Garrison into it, being a City that favour'd the Spartans. But Lycomedes of Man∣tinea (then Commander in Chief of the Arcadians) with a Body of Men, to the number The Manteni∣eans March a∣gainst Orcho∣menon. of Five thousand, March'd against Orchomenon, and upon their arrival the Lacedemonians drew out their Forces, where happen'd a sharp Engagement, in which the Lacedemoni∣an General was slain, and two hundred more with him: The rest by the hot Pursuit of the Enemy were forc'd back into the City. However, tho' the Arcadians then got the Victory, yet they so far fear'd the power of Sparta, that they durst not depend upon their own strength in Contending with the Lacedemonians, and therefore taking into their Confederacy the Argives and the Eleans, they first sent Ambassadours to Athens to desire them to be their Consederates, which being deny'd, they then Address'd themselves to the Thebans for the same purpose. Upon which the Beotians (together with the Phocians and Locrians their Confederates) drew out their Forces, and March'd directly into Pelopon∣nesus, under the Command of Epaminondas and Pelopidas. For all the other Beotarchs had willingly given up the sole and absolute Command of the Army to those two, being Men eminent for Prudence and Valour. Ant. Ch. 367. When they entred into the Confines of Arcadia, they were met by all the Arcadians, Eleans, Argives, and the rest of their Confederates. And now they had an Army of a∣bove An Invasion in∣to Peloponesus P. 490. Epaminonda and Pelopidas. Fifty thousand Men, and after a Council of War had, the Generals resolv'd to March forthwith to Sparta, and to Wast and Spoil all the Country of Laconia. But the Lacedemonians having lost the Flower and strength of their young Men in the Battle at Leuctra, and many in several other Fights here and there, were thereby reduc'd to a ve∣ry
small number of Fighting Men of their own Citizens: And whereas some of their Confederates deserted, and others were brought low by the same means as those before, they knew not which way to turn themselves. So that they were forc'd to seek for Aid The Lacede∣monians seek for Aid of the Athenians. and Assistance from them, (I mean the Athenians) upon whom they had some time be∣fore Impos'd Thirty Tyrants, and whose Walls they had Demolish'd, and whose City they had decreed to Raze even to the Ground, and lay it Open and Common with the rest of the Country, for the grazing of Flocks and Herds. But necessity has no Law, and the Turns of Fortune are invincible, through which the Lacedemonians were brought into that strait, as to become Suppliants to their most Implacable Enemies for Relief. However, they were not deceiv'd in their hopes; for such was the Brave and generous Spirits of the Athenians, that they fear'd not the Power of the Thebans, but decreed to Assist the Lace∣demonians to the utmost they were able, tho' they were now ready even to be swallow'd up and made perfect Slaves. To this end they listed in one Day Twelve thousand lusty young Men, and forthwith order'd Iphicrates the General to March away to the assistance Iphicrates sent to assist the Spartans. Ant. Ch. 367. of the Spartans. Accordingly, having Men that were very forward, he hasts away with a swift March. Neither were the Lacedemonians less active or forward; but now even when the Enemy were Encamp'd in the Borders of Laconia, they March'd out of Sparta, with all the Strength they could make, which was but small, yet with the same Courage, and Valour as they had formerly done. In the mean time, Epaminondas his Army conceiving it very difficult to enter into the Enemies Country; and therefore judging it was not convenient to attempt it with the whole Army together, they resolv'd to divide their Forces into four Bodies, and so to make the Attack in several Places at once. The first March'd to the City Rather Hel∣lasia. Sellatia, and and drew off the Inhabitants of that Territory from the Lacedemonians. The Argives, who were in another Body, upon their entrance into the Borders of Tageata, Engag'd with a Guard that kept that pass, and kill'd the Chief Officer, Alexander a Spartan, and Two hundred more of his Men; amongst whom there were some Beotian Exiles. The third Body, in which were the Arcadians, and most in number, broke into the Country call'd Sciritis, where Iscolas, a Man of great Valour and Prudence, kept Guard with a considerable Body of Men. This brave and gallant Commander perform'd an heroick Action, worthy to be Recorded to all Posterity. When he foresaw that both he, The brave act of Ischolas. and all those with him, were sure every Man to be cut off by their Engaging with so great and unequal a number; in the first place he lookt upon it as a dishonour to the Spartan Name to desert the Post assign'd him, and yet judg'd it to be much for the Service and Advantage of his Country if he could preserve the Soldiers. To the admi∣ration therefore of his Valour he contriv'd a way how to answer the ends of both; wherein he bravely Imitated the gallant Spirit of King Leonidas in former times at Ther∣mopile. For he sent away to Sparta the choicest of his Soldiers that were young and Ant. Ch. 361. lusty, to the end they might be helpful to their Country in Fighting, now all lay at Stake: And he himself, with those that were Old, kept close together, and in a brave defence, slaughter'd multitudes of their Enemies, but at length being surrounded, and hem'd in by the Arcadians, they were every Man of them cut off. The fourth body of the Eleans having all places more clear and open before them, ar∣riv'd at length at Sellacia: For it was order'd that all the Forces should meet together at that place, where being all now join'd, they march'd towards Sparta, and wasted the Country all before them with Fire and Sword. And now the Lacedaemonians seeing their ancient Country Liconia (that had never known what Waste and Spoil meant for the space of Five hundred years before) to be thus cruelly harass'd and destroy'd, could no longer forbear, but were ready to run upon their Enemy as it were with open mouth. But being by some Magistrates that came from the City, commanded not to hasten away P. 491. too far out of the Bounds of their Country (lest some other should make an inroad into it in the mean time) and being likewise advis'd to recollect themselves, and think seriously of defending the City; with much ado they submitted to the Advice. In the mean time, Epaminondas having pass'd his Army over the Mountain Taygetus, and arriv'd at the River Euota (which was then very high, being Winter-time) he endea∣vour'd all he could to get over. The Lacedaemonians perceiving how his Troops were dis∣order'd and dispers'd through the difficulty of the Passage, laid hold upon this fit occasion to fall upon them. Leaving therefore their Wives, Children, and Old Men as a Guard for the City, they made out against the Enemy in good Order with all the Young and The Thebans attacks by the Spartans. Ant. Ch. 367. Strong Men of the Town, and by a sudden and hot Charge cut off a great number in their passing the River: But the Boeotians and Arcadians valiantly standing their Ground,
surrounded their Enemies. However, the Spartans, after they had kill'd a great number of the Boeotians, at length broke through, and return'd to the City, leaving behind them remarkable Instances of their Valour. Presently after, when Epaminondas came up with his whole Army (to the Terror of Epaminondas besieges Sparta. the Inhabitants) to the City, the Spartans, by the advantage of the Strength of the Places, kill'd great numbers of them. And now all hands were at work, and very earnest to gain the City, insomuch as that they seem'd to be in a fair way to take Sparta by storm. But the Assailants (through their Over-heat and Violence) being many of them kill'd and others wounded, Epaminondas caus'd a Trumpet to sound a Retreat, and so call'd them off. Presently after, the Thebans made their approach to the City, and challeng'd the Spartans to come forth and fight with them, or else to acknowledge themselves In∣ferior, and not able to contend with them. To whom they answer'd, that when they saw their opportunity they would be sure not to decline Fighting, though they laid all at Stake. The Army therefore now drew off from the Siege, and having wasted and spoil'd all Laconia, and loaden themselves with rich Prey and Plunder, return'd into Arcadia. Afterwards the Athenians (who came too late, and did nothing worth taking notice of) March'd back into Attica. In the mean while Four thousand Men came in to the Assistance of the Lacedemoni∣ans from their Consederates. To these they added a Thousand Helots newly Manumit∣ted and set Free, and Two hundred Beotian Fugitives, and many more from the neigh∣bouring Towns and Villages; so that now they were strong enough to Cope with the Enemy. And these Forces being kept together and daily Exercis'd, grew more and more daring, and fit for publick Service in the Field. Ant. Ch. 367. But Epaminondas being Naturally inclin'd to things that were Great, and ambitious to Messina Re∣built by Epami∣nondas. Eternize his own praise and Honour, perswaded the Arcadians and the other Allies to re-edi∣fie and replenish Messina with new Inhabitants (which had been destroy'd by the Lacedae∣monians, Above 280 Years. Sir. Walter Rawleighs History of the World, lib. 2. 1. part. c. 27. fol. 359. and lay Wast and Desolate many Years,) for that it was most commodiously Situated for the Invading of Sparta at any time; having procur'd their Consent, he en∣quir'd after all the ancient Inhabitants that were living in any Place: And enfranchizing many others that were willing to settle themselves there, he Repair'd Messina, and made it very Populous, and divided the Land belonging to the City by Lot amongst the new Inhabitants, and fill'd the Country about with stately Seats and beautiful Buildings, and so rais'd up a noble Grecian City out of its Ruins, to its former State and Grandeur, for which he was highly Honour'd. I conceive it will not be amiss in this place, in regard Messina has been so often taken and Ruin'd, If I say something in short of this City from its beginning. Anciently the An account of the several States of Mes∣sina. Family of Neleus and Nestor to the time of the Trojan War possess'd it: Afterwards Orestes the Son of Agamemnon and his Posterity enjoy'd it, till the Return of the Heraclidae. Then Cresphontes chose Messina for his share, and his Posterity Reign'd there for some time; but they being Ejected, it came into the power of the Lacedemonians, who be∣came * Cresphontes. Lords thereof. For after that Teleclytus King of the Lacedemonians was slain in a P. 492. The first Messi∣nian War. Olymp. 9. This War be∣gan Olymp. 9. 2. in the Reign of Ma∣nasses. Ended 14 Olymp. 1. Sir. Walter Rawleigh's Hist. World. 356. lib. 2. c. 27. Battle, the Messinians at length were subdu'd by the Spartans. This War is said to have continu'd Twenty Years; and that the Lacedemonians had taken a solemn Oath that they would never return to Sparta, till they had taken Messina. At that time were Born those call'd the Partheniae, who afterwards enjoy'd the City Tarentum. The Messinians in after-times being oppress'd by the Lacedemonians, The second Messinian War, 39 Years. Ant. Ch. 367. Aristomenes stirr'd them up to Revolt, and destroy'd many of the Spartans. At which time Tyrreus the Poet was sent by the Atheni∣ans to the Spartans to be their General. But there are others that say, that Aristomenes flourish'd in the time of the Twenty years War. The last War made upon them was after that terrible Earthquake, which almost Ruin'd Sparta, and destroy'd all its Inhabit∣ants. At that time those that remain'd of the Messinians (together with the Helots, who Revolted with them,) Inhabited Ithon, because Messina had lain Wast many Years together before that time. But being unfortunate in every Encounter, they were at length utterly Ruin'd, and driven out of their Country; and settl'd themselves in Nau∣pachus, which was given them to Inhabit, by the Athenians: And from thence some re∣mov'd to Cephalenia, and others into Sicily, where they built the City Messina, so call'd from them. And now the Thebans in the last place by the Advice of Epaminondas (who Invited the Messinians from all Places where they were) Rebuilt Messina, and restor'd to the new Inhabitants all the ancient Territories formerly belonging to the City. And thus Great and Various were the Changes and Turns of Messina.
The Thebans having dispatch'd all these things in the space of Eighty five Days, leaving a strong Garrison for the defence of Messina, return'd to their own Country. And the Lacedemonians having now unexpectedly rid themselves of the Enemy, sent some of the greatest men of their City to Athens, and upon a Treaty concerning the Principality, it was agreed that the Athenians should be Masters at Sea, and the Lacedemonians have the chief Command at Land. But afterwards both Cities executed the Sovereignty in Common. About the same time, the Arcadians Created Lycomedes General, and sent him away Pallene, taken by Sterm by the Arcadians. with five thousand strong and lusty young Men to Besiege Pallene, in Laconia; who took it by Storm, and put above Three hundred Lacedemonians there in Garrison, to the Sword: And having plunder'd the City, and wasted and spoil'd the Country, return'd home before the Lacedemonians could send them any Relief. The Beotians (likewise being desir'd by the Thessalians to Free them from the Tyran∣ny of Alexander the Pherean, then but feeble, and almost broken) sent Pelopidas with a Pelopidas sent into Thessaly. strong Army into Thessaly, with Orders to Manage affairs there to the advantage of the Beotians. When he came to Larissa, he possessed himself of the Castle then Garrison'd by Alexander; thence he March'd into Macedonia, and made a League with King Alex∣ander, and receiv'd Philip his Brother as an Hostage, and sent him to Thebes. And ha∣ving perfected whatever he thought might be for the Service of the Beotians, he return'd into his own Country. Things standing thus, the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans unanimously agreed to make Several Coun∣trys Confede∣rate against Sparta. P. 493. War upon the Lacedaemonians, and to that end, to send Ambassadors to the Beotians, to persuade them to join with them in the War. They accordingly Consented, and sent forth an Army of Seven thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Epaminondas, and the other Beotarchs. The Athenians hearing of the preparations of the Beotians against Peloponnesus, sent an Army against them, under the Command of Ant. Ch. 367. Chabrias their General, who when he arriv'd at Corinth, rais'd Men out of Megera, Pel∣lene and Corinth, and made up an Army of Ten thousand Men; who being join'd with the Lacedaemonians and other Confederates at Corinth, their whole Forces were no less than Twenty thousand. They made it first their Business to guard all the Passages, and to do all they could to prevent the Beotians from breaking into Peloponnesus: To this The narrow Pass of Pelo∣ponnesus, be∣tween two Seas, Lechaeum ly∣ing on the West and Cenchrea, on the East. end they drew a Wall with a deep Trench from * Cenchrea to * Lechaeum, to block up the entrance that Way. The thing was done with that quickness and expedition, (through multitude of Hands and diligence of those Employ'd) that the Place was Fortifi'd before the Beotians could reach thither. As soon as Epaminondas came up to the Place, upon diligent view of the Fortification, he discern'd that that part kept by the Lacedaemonians was the Weakest, and therefore did all he could to draw them out to a fair Field Battle, tho' they were almost three times his Number. But when he saw they would not stir, but kept themselves within their Epaminondas breaks again into Pelopon∣nesus. Fortifications and Trenches, he made a fierce Assault upon them, Storming them in e∣very Part: But the Action was Hottest and Sharpest on both sides, where the Lacede∣monians were Posted, for there the place was of easiest Entrance, and most difficult to be kept. But Epaminondas having with him the flower of Thebes, with much ado beat off the Lacedaemonians, and so clearing the Way, broke in with his Forces, and laid the pas∣sage plainly open into Peloponnesus, which was an Action nothing Inferior to any he had done before. Hereupon, he forthwith March'd to Trezene and Epidaurus, and Wasted Ant. Ch. 367. and Harrass'd the Country round about, but could not take the Cities, being very strong∣ly Garrison'd; but Sicyon, Phe in Elis. Pheunte, and some others submitted to him. Then he March'd with his Army against Corinth: And having routed the Townsmen in an En∣counter, he pursu'd them to the very Walls: Where some of the Beotians puffed up with their good Success, Rashly broke through the Gates into the City; upon which the Corinthians in a great Fright shut themselves up in their Houses. But Chabrias the Athenian General, both Cordially and Faithfully, made Head against the Beotians, and Drove some of them out of the City, making a great slaughter of the rest. In the heat of this Action the Beotians approach'd to Corinth with their whole Army in Battalia, to the great Terror of the Inhabitants: Upon which, Chabrias with his Athenians, forth∣with made a Sally out of the City, and having possessed himself of the Hills Adjoyn∣ing, there bore the brunt of the Enemies Charge. On the other side the Beotians encou∣rag'd, being strong of Body, and of long experience in Feats of Arms, doubted not, but to Rout the Athenians. But the Chabrians (by the advantage of the higer Ground, and continual Succours coming in to them out of the City (so defended themselves, that
they Kill'd, and grievously Gall'd their Assailants, and beat them off: So that the Beotians after the Loss of a great Number of their Men, not being able to do any thing, drew off their Forces. But Chabrias having thus Baffl'd the Enemy, for his Valour, Faithfulness, and Military Conduct, was Cry'd up, and greatly Ad∣mir'd. CHAP. VIII. Dionysius sends Gauls and Spaniards to the assistance of the Lacedemonians. Pe∣lopidas and Istmenias clapt up by Alexander, Tyrant of Pherea, The Boeotians pursu'd by the Phereans: brought off by Epaminondas then a private Soldier. The Fight between the Arcadians and Lacedemonians. Dionysius falls upon the Car∣thaginian Territories in Sicily. Dionysius dyes. The cause of his death. The cruelty of Alexander the Pherean at Scotusa. Epaminondas breaks again into Peloponnesus. Coos Peopled and Wall'd. The end of the Laconick and Beo∣tick War by the Mediation of the Persian King. ABout this time arriv'd at Corinth Two thousand Gauls and Spaniards, sent by Diony∣sius the Tyrant to the Lacedemonians from Sicily, who had Five Months Pay ad∣vance. Olymp. 102. 4. Ant. Ch. 366. The Grecians to try their Valour drew them out against the Enemy; who so far approv'd themselves stout and valiant Men, as that they routed and kill'd many of the Beotians and their Confederates. And after they had been very useful in the War, and pur∣chas'd Aids arriv'd at Corinth from Diony∣sius. to themselves Praise and Esteem both for their Courage and Service, and had been rewarded according to their Merits by the Lacedemonians, they were sent back into Sicily at the end of the Summer. After these things Philiscus Ambassador from Artaxerxes King of Persia came into Greece P. 494. Artaxerxes sends again to compose Mat∣ters in Greece, but in vain. to persuade the Grecians to be at Peace among themselves; to which all willingly com∣ply'd except the Thebans, who were so obstinate that they refus'd the Conditions, ha∣ving before brought all Beotia in subjection to their own Government. There being there∣fore no hopes of Peace, Philiscus return'd into Asia, leaving behind him Two thousand-Mercenaries, who receiv'd their Pay for the Service of the Lacedemonians. Whilst these things were doing, Euphron of Sicyon (a bold and rash Fellow, not infe∣rior Euphron gains the Sove∣reignty of Sy∣cion. to any in that kind) with the assistance of the Argives, plotted to gain the Sove∣reignty; and to that end, Fortune favour'd him so far, that forthwith he banish'd Forty of the Citizens, and confiscated their Goods and Estates, by which he rais'd a vast sum of Money, wherewith he hir'd a Guard of Foreigners, and so possess'd himself of the Command of the City. Nausigenes being Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Four Military Tribunes, viz. Lucius Papyrius, Lucius Menenius, Servius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpitius, executing the Consu∣lar Olymp. 103. 1. Ant. Ch. 366. Authority at Rome, the Hundred and Third Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, in which, Pythostratus the Athenian carry'd away the Prize, This Year Ptolemy Alorites, the Son of Amyntas, treacherously Murther'd his Brother Alexander, and Govern'd the Kingdom of Macedonia for the space of Three Years. At the same time Pelopidas in Beotia emula∣ting the Glory of Epaminondas, and perceiving what great Service he had done in Pe∣loponnesus for the Common-wealth of Beotia, made it his business to advance his own Re∣putation, by enlarging the Power and Sovereignty of the Thebans in other parts out of Peloponnesus. To that end, and joining with Ismenia (his special Friend, and a Man of great Esteem for his Valour) he took a journey into Thessaly, where, upon Discourse Pelopidas and Ismenias un∣expectedly se∣cur'd by Alex∣ander of Phe∣rea. with Alexander, Tyrant of Pherea (when he never expected any such thing) he and Ist∣menias were both seizd, and clapt up in prison. This Fact highly incens'd the Thebans, upon which they sent Eight thousand heavy Arm'd Men, and Six hundred Horse into Thessaly. At whose coming Alexander was in a great fright, and sent Ambassadors to Athens to Treat with them for their assistance. Upon this, the People of Athens forth∣with dispatch'd away Thirty Sail, and a Thousand Men under the Command of Auto∣cles: But while he sail'd round Eubea, the Thebans entred Thessaly. And tho' Alexander was well furnish'd with Foot, and exceeded the Beotians in Horse, yet the Beotians at the first concluded they should put an end to the War by one Fight, especially being enforc'd
by the Thessalians: But being deserted by them, and Alexander assisted by the Athenians The Boeotians brought into a great strait in Thessaly. and other Confederates, and Meat and Drink and all other Provision being scarce, the Baeotarchs were resolv'd to return home, and accordingly drew off; and in their march through the Plain they were fallen upon in the Rear by Alexander's Horse, who kill'd and wounded many of the Beotians. At length, not being able either to keep their Ground or go forward, they knew not which way to turn themselves, or what to do; Ant. Ch 366. Brought off by Epaminondas. and to aggravate the perplexity they were in, they were in want of Food. In this desperate condition Epaminondas (who was then but a private Soldier) was chosen Ge∣neral by the Army; who presently plac'd the best and choicest of the Light Arm'd Men, and the Horse in the Rear; with these he repuls'd the Enemy that press'd upon the backs of the Beotians, and by frequent skirmishes, (making head as occasion serv'd,) and keep∣ing his Troops in good Order, he brought off the Army safe. Thenceforth more and P. 495. more advancing his own Reputation by his Noble Actions, he wan Praise and Renown both amongst his Citizens, and all their Confederates. But The Beotarchs. Magistrates of Beotia set great Fines upon the Officers and Leaders in this late Expedition, and so rais'd a great deal of Money; But in regard the Question may be very well ask'd, How it came to pass that so great a Man was plac'd in so low a Post as a Common Soldier in that Expedition into Thessaly? It's fit a Reason should be given in justification of Epaminondas. When he had in the Fight at Corinth beaten off the Lacede∣monians, who guarded the Fortification, he might have kill'd a great number of them; but resting satisfy'd that he had gain'd the Pass, he forbore all further pursuit. Being therefore suspected that he spar'd the Lacedemonians out of a design to ingratiate himself into their Favour; those that envy'd his Glory, watch'd an opportunity to accuse him of Treason. Upon which, the People were so exasperated, that they depriv'd him of his Command, and order'd him to serve as a Common Soldier. But having by his Noble Actions wip'd off those stains of Dishonour cast upon him, he was restor'd by the People to his former Dignity. Not long after, a sharp Battel was fought between the Lacedemonians and the Arcadi∣ans, in which the former obtain'd a famous Victory; and was the first Fight since that at Fight between the Arcadi∣ans and Lace∣demonians. Note. Not one Man lost. Leuctra, wherein they had any considerable success. There were above Ten thousand of the Arcadians slain, and not one Man lost of the Lacedemonians. The Priests at Dodona had before foretold, That this War should end without any Mourning on the Lacedemo∣nians part. After this Battle the Arcadians were in that fear of the Lacedemonians, that they built the City call'd Megalopolis, in a place commodiously situated for their security, and brought into it the Menalians, and Parrhasians, out of Twenty Villages in Arcadia. And this was the state of Greece at that time. In Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant having rais'd a great Army, resolved to take advantage of Ant. Ch. 366. Dionysius in∣vades the Car∣thaginian Territory in Sicily. the present Opportunity, and to fall upon the Carthaginians, who were then but in a very ill Condition, by reason of the Plague that rag'd amongst them, and their being deserted by many of the Africans. And because he had not the least colour and ground for the War, he pretended that the Carthaginians Incroach'd and made Incursions into his Country. Having therefore an Army of Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, besides a Navy of Three hundred Sail, with these he Invades the Carthaginian Ter∣ritory, and presently wan Salinunte and Entella, and wastes and harrasses all the Country round about: Then taking Aeryx, he at length besieg'd Lilybeum: But the strength of the Garison presently forc'd him to raise his Siege Afterwards, being inform'd that the Arsenals belonging to the Carthaginians were burnt down, and therefore conceiving their whole Fleet was destroy'd he grew secure and despis'd the Enemy; so that he laid up Thirty of his best Gallies in the Haven at Eryx, and sent all the rest back to Syracuse. But the Carthaginians forth∣with Mann'd out Two hundred Sail, and entring the Port at Eryx, unexpectedly on a sud∣den Dionysius's Fleet surpriz'd in the Harbour. came up to the Ships there, and carry'd away most of them out of the Harbour: But Winter drawing on, both sides made a Truce, and return'd with their Armies to Win∣ter Quarters. And not long after, Dionysius fell Sick, and Died, having reign'd Thirty Dionysius dies. Eight years; whose Son Dionysius succeeded him, and govern'd Twelve years. Here it will not be a matter foreign to the design of our History, if we relate the Cause of his Death, and what hapned to this Prince a little before that time. When he had caus'd a Tragedy of his, call'd the Leneians, to be acted at Athens, and Ant. Ch. 396. An Account of Dionysius and the manner of his Death. P. 496. was proclaim'd Victor: one of the Singers or Musitians in the Chorus, hop'd to gain an Honourable Reward by bringing him the first News of his Victory: To that end he Sail'd to Corinth, and thence took Shipping for Sicily, and with a fair Wind arriv'd at Syracuse, and presently gives the Tyrant an account of his Victory: Upon which
he was so Transported with Joy, that he bountifully Rewarded the Man, and that he might give thanks to the Gods by costly Sacrifices, for such an happy piece of News, he made splendid Entertainments, in Feasting and Drinking. But in this sumptuous Re∣ception of his Friends, drinking to Excess, and overcharging Nature, he fell into a most violent Distemper, which kill'd him. He had been formerly forewarn'd by an Oracle, That he should then die, when he should overcome those who were better than himself. This doubtful Prophecy he appli'd to the Carthaginians, looking upon them to be more powerful than he himself. And upon that account (tho' he was often Fighting with them) it was his Custom to wave the Victory, and own himself to be overcome. However he was not able to avoid his Desteny. For tho' he was but an ill Poet, yet by the Judgment of the Athenians, he carry'd away the Victory against those that far ex∣cell'd him in that Art: So that his Victory over them, and the time of his death, very well agreed to the sense of the Oracle. Dionysius the younger, as soon as he came to the Crown, call'd a Senate, and there courted the People, and desir'd them to con∣tinue the same good will and respect to him, that they had born to his Father. After∣wards having first Solemniz'd his Fathers Funeral with great Pomp and State at the King's Gates in the Castle, he order'd the Affairs of his Kingdom so as to set himself fast in the Throne. At this time Polyzelus was Archon at Athens: and at Rome (through intestine Broils and Seditions) was nothing but an Anarchy. In Greece, Alexander Tyrant of Pherea Olymp. 103. 2. Ant. Ch. 365. The cruelty of Alexander of Pherea. bearing a grudge to them of Scotusa in Thessaly, call'd them to a Common Assembly, and when they appear'd, he encompass'd them with his Guard, and put 'em every one to the Sword, and threw their Carkasses into the Ditches over the Walls, and plundred the City. At the same time Epaminondas the Theban with all his Forces, broke into Peloponnesus, with whom join'd the Achaians, and several other Confederates, and restor'd Dymon or Dyme, a City of Achaia. Dymon, A City of A∣chaia in Lo∣cris, now cal∣l'd Lepantum. Naupachus and Calydon in Atolia about 7 Miles from the Sea. Olymp. 103. 3. Ant. Ch. 364. Calydon to their ancient Liberties, and then made another Expedition into Thessaly; in which they freed Pelopidas out of the hands of Alexander the Tyrant of Pherea. The Phliasians were about the same time besieg'd by the Argives: But Cha∣res sent from Athens in Aid of the Phliasians, rais'd the Siege, having Routed the Argives in two Battles, and so return'd to Athens. At the end of this Year Cephisodorus was Created chief Governour of Athens, and Four Military Tribunes clothed with Consular Dignity, govern'd at Rome, viz. Lucius Furius, Paulus Manlius, Servitius Sulpitius, and Servius Cornelius. At that time Themesio the Prince of Eretria took Oropus, belonging to the Athenians; but lost it again on a sud∣den. For the Athenians coming upon him with far greater Forces than he was able to Cope with, he appli'd himself to the Thebans for Assistance, and deliver'd the City into their hands (as a pledge) which they never after would Restore. While these things were Acting, they of Coos seated themselves in the Coos a City so call'd in the Island Coos, in the Aegean Sea. City they now enjoy, and put it into that State and Grandeur it now has. For it was made very Po∣pulous, and a large Wall drawn round about it, with great Costs and Expence, and furnish'd with an excellent Harbour. From this time forward, it grew more and more both in its publick Revenues, and private Wealth and Riches of its Inhabitants, in so much as it vy'd with the chiefest and most famous Cities. Ant. Ch. 364. During these Transactions, the King of Persia sent Ambassadours to perswade the Graecians to agree and lay aside their Animosities one against another. Upon which the Laconick and Baeotick War (as they call it) which from the time of the Battle at Leuctra P. 497. An end of the Laconick and Boeotick War. had continu'd above Five Years, was now at length ended. About these times Flourish'd several famous Men, worthy for their Learning to be for ever remembred. As Isocrates the Orator, and his Schollars, Aristotle the Philosopher, and Anaximenes of Lampsacus, and especially Plato the Athenian, and the last of the Pythagorean Philosophers. Besides these, Xenophon the Historian, (now very old) for he makes mention of the Death of Epaminondas, which hapned shortly after this time. Aristippus, and Antisthenes, and Echi∣nes of Sphetus (one of the Schollars of Socrates) were living at this time.
CHAP. IX. New stirs in Greece. The Battle between the Eleans and Arcadians near Lassion. The Quarrel between the Pisate and them of Elis about the Olympick Games. A Fight at the Time and Place of the Games. The Thebans prepare a Fleet in Order to gain the Dominion at Sea. Rhodes, Chios, and Byzantium brought into the Thebans by Epaminondas. The Thebans make War upon Orchomenon: The Reason. Orchomenon raz'd. The Thessalians War with Alexander the Pheraeen. Pelopidas Kill'd; his Praises. THIS Year Chion was chief Governour at Athens, and these Military Tribunes Ex∣ecuted Olymp. 103. 4. Ant. Ch. 363. the Consular Authority at Rome, viz. Quintus Servilius. New troubles in Greece. Servius, Caius Veturius, Au∣lus Cornelius, Marcus Cornelius, and Marcus Fabius. In their time, while all Greece was at Peace, on a sudden new Stirs and Preparations for War began to break out, between some of the Cities. For the Exiles of Arcadia made an Excursion out of Elis, and Seiz'd upon the strong Castle of A part of the Country of Elis Triphilia, call'd Lassion. The Archadians and Eleans, had been quarrelling a long time about Triphilia: And upon several Turns of Fortune, first one, and then the other got the Possession; which being at this time in the hands of the Arcadians, the Eleans under the Shelter and Colour of the Arcadian Fugitives dispos∣sessed the Arcadians. They, (Enrag'd at this Affront and Injury,) by their Ambassa∣dors, first demanded the Redelivery of the Place, but their demand was slighted, there∣upon they procur'd the Athenians to joyn with them in the War, and Besieg'd Lassion. A Battle near Lassion, be∣tween the Ele∣ans and Arca∣dians. But the Eleans came presently into the Assistance of the Exiles. Upon which a Battle was Fought near Lassion: In which the Eleans were Routed, being overpowr'd by num∣ber, and lost above two hundred Men. The Seeds of War being now Sown, the Con∣troversie between the Eleans and the Arcadians grew hotter every Day: For the Arcadians pufft up with the late Victory, presently March'd their Army into the Country of Elis, and took the Cities Marganus, Cronion, Cyparissia, and Coryphasion. In the mean time Ptolomaeus Alorites, in Macedonia was treacherously Murther'd by his Brother Perdiccas after he had Reign'd three Years; Perdiccas succeeded him, and enjoy'd the Kingdom five Years. At this time Timocrates was Archon at Athens, and three Military Tribunes invested Olymp. 104. 1. Ant. Ch. 362. with Consular Authority rul'd at Rome, viz. Titus Quintius, Servilius Cornelius, and Servi∣us Sulpitius. The Hundred and fourth Olympiad was now Celebrated by the Pisate and the Arcadians, where Phocides the Athenian was Victor. About this time it happn'd that the Of Pisa, in the Reign of Elis. Quarrels be∣tween the Pi∣sate and the Eleans about the Olympick Games. Pisaeans (upon the account of some old Fables and Stories they had amongst them) to regain the ancient Honour and Dignity of their Country, challeng'd it as their Right to Convene and Manage the Olympick Games. Judging it therefore now a fit time to dispute this matter, they took in the Arcadians (the Enemies of the Eleans) as their Confederates in the War: With whose Aid and Assistance they March'd against the Of the City Elis. P. 498. Eleans, who had then appointed the Games. Whereupon the Eleans with all their Forces made out against them, upon which there was a very sharp Encounter. The Grecians who were then come together to this Solem∣nity, stood as Spectators with Crowns upon their Heads (out of reach of all danger) and at every brave Action of either Party gave up great shouts. The Pisaeans at length being Conquerors manag'd the Sports; but the Eleans never accounted this Olympiad in their Annals, because they lookt upon it to be acted by Force, and against Law. During these Transactions of Affairs, Epaminondas the Theban (who was in great E∣steem among the People) made a Speech to the Citizens, in which he stirr'd them up Epaminondas stirs up the Thebans to gain the Domi∣nion at Sea. to gain the Dominion of the Sea. In this Oration (which he had premeditated long before) he shew'd them that the thing was easily done, as it was advantageous and pro∣fitable for the Commonwealth, and amongst other things he likewise told them, that being Sovereigns at Land, they might be easily Masters at Sea. For altho' the Athenions in the War against Xerxes had a Navy of Two hundred Sail well Equipp'd and Fur∣nish'd; yet they were under the Command of the Lacedemonians, who had but Ten. When he had spoken what he had to say sutable to the occasion, he brought the Thebans to a Compliance. It was therefore forthwith Decreed by the People that a Hundred Gallies, and as many Docks should be built, and that application should be made to the Rhodians, Chians,
and Bizantians for their Assistance to forward the Work. Epaminondas himself being sent away with some Forces to the aforemention'd Cities, so terrifi'd Lachetes the Athenian General (who was sent with a Strong and well Furnish'd Fleet to obstruct the Designs of Ant. Ch 362. the Thebans) that he forc'd him to Sail back, and reduc'd those Cities to the Obedience of Thebes: And no doubt but if this Man had liv'd some time longer, he had gain'd for the Thebans the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land. But not long after being kill'd at the Battle at Mantenea (where he obtain'd a famous Victory for his Country by his own fall) all the prosperity of the Thebans presently dy'd (as it were) with him. But we shall Treat of these things more particularly and distinctly shortly hereafter. About the same time likewise, the Thebans resolv'd to Invade Orchomenon, for the Rea∣sons The Thebans design to B siege Orchomenon. following. Some of the Theban Fugitives had a purpose to change the Government of Thebes into an Aristocracy, and to that purpose, join'd in Confederacy with Three hundred Horsemen of Orchomenon. These Horses were us'd to Rendezvouz at a certain Day appointed and ordered by the Thebans, and therefore they contriv'd that at that very Day (when ever it should be) they would fall upon the City. And being there were many others that were engag'd to be assisting in effecting this Design, they took a fit opportunity at length to meet together. Then some of the chief Conspirators (who began to repent of the Treason) discovered all to the Beotians, and by betraying their fellows, sav'd their own Lives: Upon this all the Horsemen by Command of the Magistrates were seiz'd, and being afterwards brought before the Senate, they were all Judg'd to be put to Death, and that the Inhabitants of Orchomenon should be sold for Slaves, and their City raz'd to the Ground. The Thebans had born an old grudge to∣wards Ant. Ch. 36. them of Orchomenon for many Generations, because that in the times of the Or demy-gods. He∣roes, they forc'd them to pay Tribute, till Hercules set them free. Having therefore now got an opportunity, and a good colour (as they conceiv'd) to revenge themselves, they Marcht with their Forces against Orchomenon. And presently making themselves Ma∣sters of the City, they put all the Men to the Sword, and sold the Women and Chil∣dren Orchomenon taken and ra∣z'd. for Slaves. At this same time, the Thessalians made War upon Alexander the Prince of Pherea, but being often beaten, and having lost many Men, they solicited the Thebans to send Aid Pelopidas sent by the Thebans against Alex∣ander of Pherea. P. 499. to them, under the Command of Pelopidas. For they knew he was a brave spirited Man, and an excellent Commander, and an inveterate Enemy of Alexander, upon the account of his late Imprisonment. The Beotians hereupon call'd a general Council, and gave Audience to the Ambassadors; and having heard their Message, they readily com∣ply'd in all things to their request, and forthwith order'd Pelopidas to their assistance, with Seven thousand Men, who presently Obey'd, and just as he was Marching out with the Army, the Sun was Ecclips'd; which prodigie perplex'd many: for there were some of the Soothsayers who declar'd, that by this Marching out of the Army, the Sun of the City should be Ecclips'd, meaning nothing else but the death of Pelopidas. However Pe∣lopidas (nothing mov'd with what was said, but led on by his inevitable destiny) March'd forward. When he came into Thessaly, he found that Alexander with above Twenty thou∣sand Men had possess'd himself of the higer Grounds: Upon this he Encamp'd in the Face of the Enemy, and being afterwards join'd with the Thessalians, he Fought the Phe∣reans. But Alexander prevailing by the advantage of the Ground, Pelopidas (desiring to Ant. Ch. 362. put an end to the dispute by his own personal Valour) Charges up to Alexander himself, who with those select Bands that were about him, valiantly stood his Ground; upon which the Battle grew very hot, in which Pelopidas acting the part both of a good Sol∣dier and skilful Commander, cover'd the Place with the Bodies of his Enemies. At length he put the Enemy to flight, and gain'd the Victory, but he himself (through many Wounds he had receiv'd) fell down Dead, and so Heroically ended his Days. And now Alexander being Conquer'd in another Battle, and thereby having all his Forces broken in pieces, he was forc'd upon Terms of Peace to restore to the Thessalians all the Towns he had before taken: And to deliver Magnetes and Phithiodis Cities of Achaia, Alexander beaten, makes Peace, and re∣stores the Cities. to the Beotians and be their Confederates, and for the future, to be content only with Pherea. However, tho' the Thebans gain'd a glorious Victory, yet they declar'd every where, that they were Conquer'd, because of the death of Pelopidas. For they lookt upon the Victory not to Compensate the loss of so brave a Man. For he had often done many great and worthy Services for the advantage of his Country, and much enlarg'd the Bounds and Territories of the Theban Commonwealth: As in freeing the City by the Exiles when they recover'd the Citadel of Cadmea, all generally ascrib'd that noble The brave Acts of Pelopidas. Action to Pelopidas; which was the chief cause of all the advantages, and happy success
that hapned to the Thebans afterwards. Then at the Fight of Tegea, Pelopidas was the only Man of the Boeotarchs that overcame the Lacedemonians, the most potent People of all the Grecians. Which was the first time the Thebans erected a Trophy (for the greatness of the Victory) over the Lacedemonians. Afterwards at the Battle at Leuctra, he was Colonel of the sacred Band, and was the first that broke in upon the Lacedemo∣nians, Ant. Ch. 364. and so became the immediate Author and Instrument of the Victory. Besides in the Expeditions against the Lacedemonians (being General of Seventy thousand Men) he erected a Trophy for his Victory over them in the very Face of Sparta, who never knew before what it meant to be Besieg'd. Being sent Ambassador to the King of Per∣sia to Negotiate the affair of the common Pacification he gain'd in that Treaty, Mes∣sena for his own Country: Which the Thebans rebuilt after it had lain desolate Three hundred Years. And now at last (in the Battle against Alexander) notwithstanding he far exceeded him in the number of his Forces) he not only obtain'd a glorious Victory, but became famous for his extraordinary Valour, tho' with the loss of his Life. And during these Wars he was in that reputation among the People, that from the return of the Exiles, to the time of his Death he was always one of the Boeotarchs: Never none before being ever thought worthy of so great an honour. In as much therefore as Pelo∣pidas P. 500. was thus highly Esteem'd, and gain'd the reputation of all, for his Courage and Conduct, its fit he should have his due Commendation from us likewise, in this our History. About the same time Clearchus of the City of Heraclea aspir'd to the Sovereignty of Pontus: and prevailing in his Enterprize, made it his whole business to imitate Dionysius the Tyrant, and govern'd the Heracleans in great Splendor, for the space of Twelve Years. During these Affairs, Timotheus the Athenian General, having with him both Sea and Land Forces, Besieg'd Torone, and Potidea, and took them by Storm, and Rais'd the Siege of Cyzicum. CHAP. X. The War between the Tegeans and Mantineans. The Beotians side with the Te∣geans. Epaminondas made General. The Battle of Mantinea, where Epami∣nondas was kill'd; but the Lacedemonians routed. The commendation of Epa∣minondas. AT the end of the Yea Chariclides was created Lord Chancelor of Athens; and Olymp. 104. 2. Ant. Ch. 361. Lucius Aemilius Mamercus, and Lucius Sextius Lateranus, Roman Consuls. At which time the Arcadians and Piseans (by compact joining together) celebrated the Olympian Games at Olympia, and possess'd themselves both of the Temple, and all the Riches that were there. And because the Mantineans carry'd away and converted to prophane uses many of the Dedicated things, these Sacrilegious Persons made it their business to pro∣mote and carry on the War against the Eleans, lest if Peace were made they should be call'd to account for their ill gotten Goods. And therefore when the rest of the Arca∣dians War between the Tegeans and Mantine∣ans. would have compromiz'd Matters, they stirr'd up Sedition against their own Countrymen. Being therefore divided into Two Factions, one headed by the Tegeans, the other by the Mantineans, the Feud grew to that height, that at last they came to de∣cide the Controversie by force of Arms; and they of Tegea sent an Ambassador to the Beotians to desire their assistance: Whereupon the Beotians, without delay, made Epa∣minondas General, and sent him with a strong Army to the aid of the Tegeans. But the Mantineans (being terrify'd with the Beotian Army, and the Great Name of Epaminon∣das) The Thebans join with the Tegeans under Epaminondas. sent their Ambassadors to the Capital Enemies of the Beotians, (the Athenians and Lacedemonians) to sollicite them to join with the Mantineans in the War. Great Forces therefore being rais'd on both sides, many great Battles were fought in Peloponnesus; And the Lacedemonians (as soon as they could) broke into Arcadia, lying next to them. About Lacedemoni∣ans join with the Mantine∣ans. the same time Epaminondas was marching forward with his Army, and being come near to Mantinea, he heard that the Lacedemonians with all their Forces were wasting and spoil∣ing the Territories of Tegea; Conceiving therefore that Sparta was left naked, he under∣took a weighty Affair, but Fortune favour'd not his Enterprize. For he march'd with his Army in the night against Sparta: But Agis King of Lacedemon (suspecting the Craft
and Subtilty of Epaminondas) prudently conjectur'd what possibly might be design'd therefore to prevent Epaminondas, he dispatch'd away some Cretian Couriers to Sparta, to acquaint them that the Boectians were just then upon their march in order to surprize the The design of Epaminon∣das to surprize Sparta, pre∣vented. City; and that he himself would make all the hast possibly he could to relieve them: and therefore charg'd them to look to the Place, and not in the least to be afraid, for he would be presently with 'em. The Cretians observ'd their Orders with all Expe∣dition by which the Lacedemonians (strangely, and on a suddain) prevented the ruine of their Country. For if the stratagem had not been discover'd, Epaminondas had cer∣tainly surprizd Sparta. So that the Policy and contrivance of both the Generals justly chal∣lenge their due praise; yet the prudent Care of a skilful Commander must here especially be attributed to the Lacedemonian. Epaminondas having now march'd all the Night long, at break of day came up to Sparta But Agesilaus who was left to guard the City, (having had P. 501. intelligence but a little before,) did what he could to put the City into a posture of De∣fence. To this end he commanded the Boys that were of any considerable bigness, and the Old Men to the roofs of the Houses, that they might be in a capacity to drive back the Enemy from thence: Then placing all the strong and lusty Men in the several difficult Passes that led into the City, and blocking up all other places, where possibly an entrance might be made, he waited for the coming of the Enemy. Epaminondas having divided his Army into Three parts, made an Assault round the Town at one and the same time, but when he discern'd in what order the Spartans were Ant. Ch. 361. Epaminondas Assaults Spar∣ta. plac'd to oppose him, he presently understood that his Design was discover'd: However, tho' he was much obstructed by the strait and narrow Passages, and forc'd to fight in small Parties with great Bodies of Men at once, and many were kill'd on both sides, yet he would not draw off till the Lacedemonian Army came up near unto Sparta. The Spartans therefore being now enforc'd with so great a strength, and Night coming on, he left off the Assault. Draws off. Then he was inform'd by some Prisoners, that the Mantineans with all the Power of the City were hastning towards him to the assistance of the Lacedemonians: Upon which he march'd away and encamp'd not far from the City. But presently commanding his Soldiers to eat their Suppers, and leaving there a Body of Horse, whom he commanded to kindle Fires all the Night, he march'd away with the rest of the Army, with a de∣sign on a sudden to cut off all them that were left in Mantinea. The next day (having march'd a long way) he unexpectedly Assaulted them of Mattinea, but fail'd in his De∣sign; and tho' he had (as a diligent Commander) provided all things that were necessary The taking of Mantinea prevented. yet Fortune now oppos'd him, and so he lost the Prize. For as soon as he came near the City, that was then naked, and without any Defence, Six thousand Athenian Auxilia∣ries entred into Mantinea at the other end of the Town under the Command of Hegelocus, a person of good Esteem among the Citizens; who having put a sufficient Garison into the City, with the rest stood in Battalia ready to engage. And presently appear'd the Armies, both of the Lacedemonians and the Mantineans. And now every one prepar'd to put all Ant. Ch. 361. to the hazard of a Battle, and therefore sent for their Allies out of all parts; The Aeleans, Lacedemonians, Athenians, and some others sided with the Mantineans: their For∣ces amounted to above Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. The most considerable persons of Arcadia for Riches and Valour, together with the Acheans, Boe∣otians, Argives, and some of the Peloponnesians, and other Confederates join'd with the Te∣geans, in the whole, to the number of above Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thou∣sand The Battle at Mantinea. Horse. And now the Armies on both sides took the Field in order to decide the Matter; and drew up in Battalia: and the Sooth-sayers from the view of the Sacrifices (offer'd here and there) Declar'd Victory to their several Parties. The Mantineans and the rest of the Arcadians (because the War was in their own Country) were in the Right Wing, sup∣ported by the Lacedemonians, drawn up next to them. Next to the Lacedemonians were plac'd the Aeleans and Achoeans, and some others of the weaker part of the Army com∣pleated that Wing. The Left Wing consisted of the Athenians: On the other side the Thebans plac'd themselves in the Left Wing, opposite to the Arcadians: And the Argives held the Right. The rest of the Army Aeubeans, Locrians, Sicyons, Messineans, Maleans P. 502. and Aeneans, and the other Confederates made up the main Battle. The Horse on each side were plac'd on both Flanks. The Armies being thus drawn up, while they stood facing one another for some time, the Trumpets at length sounded a Charge, and the Armies set up so great a shout, as if both sides were assur'd of the Victory. The Horse from the Wings first Charg'd one another, with the greatest Fury imaginable: The Athenian Horse Charged the Thebans, but were worsted, not so much by the Valour and
Hardiness of the Thebans, or their skill in Martial Affairs, (for in these the Athenians were inferior to none) as by their number, and being better Arm'd and appointed, and far exceeding the other in Order and manner of Battle. For the Athenians had very few Darters amongst them, whereas the Thebans had thrice as many, besides Slingers and Archers from the Thessalians, who were us'd to be exercis'd in that way of Fighting from their Childhood, and by that means were always very serviceable in all Encounters. The Athenians therefore, what with being Gaul'd by the Light Arm'd Men, and over-power'd by the Horse, were forc'd to fly. Yet because they fled out from the Wings, they easily repair'd the Damage they sustain'd, for they broke not into their own Foot in their flight, but falling in with some Eubeans, and some other Mercenaries, that were sent out before to take in some Hills near the place, (with whom they had a sharp En∣gagement) they put every Man of them to the Sword. For the Theban Horse did not pursue them that fled, but Charg'd in upon the Enemies Foot with a design to break through 'em: upon which, the Dispute was very hot and sharp; but at length the Athe∣nians fled outright: But the Colonel of the Aelean Horse who was in the Rear-guard of the The Manti∣nean Army. Army) succour'd them; and cuting off many of the Boetians, renew'd the Fight. And thus was the Rout in the Athenians Left Wing in a great measure repair'd by the Aelean Horsemen. In the Engagement by the Horse in the other Wing, the success was doubtful a little while. But within a short time the Mantineans were put to the Rout by the multitude and strength of the Boeotian and Thessalian Horsemen, and with great Loss were forc'd to fly for shelter to their own Battalion of Foot. And this was the issue Ant. Ch. 361. of the Engagement between the Horse. The Foot as soon as they Engag'd fought with wonderful heat and resolution. Never was there greater Armies in the Field in any Battle between Grecians and Grecians; nor more brave and excellent Commanders, or that ever approv'd themselves with more Valour and Courage. For the Boeotians and Lacedemonians who were in that Age counted the best Land Soldiers in the World, front∣ed one another, and began the Onset with that Fury as if they valu'd not their Lives in the least. They first began with their Lances, which being for the most part broken in pieces by the violence and heat of the Charge, they fell to their Swords. Then setting Foot to Foot all sorts of Wounds, curable and Mortal, slight and deadly, were given and receiv'd without remitting any thing of their first Heat or Resolution; And they conti∣nu'd in this sharp Engagement with that Valour, and so long a time (neither side gi∣ving the least ground) that Victory seem'd to hover over both (uncertain where it would fall) For every one slighted and contemn'd Danger, and (desiring nothing more P. 503. than to make himself remarkable by some Glorious piece of Service for his Country) with a brave Gallantry of Mind coveted to exchange Life for Honour. After the Battle had continu'd long, and none were able to judge who would be the Conquerors; Epaminondas (conceiving the present state of the Parties engag'd requir'd his assistance) resolv'd to decide the Matter with the hazard of his own Life. To that end taking a choice Band of the most able Men he had with him, and drawing them up in close Or∣der, he forthwith Charg'd at the head of them, and was the first that cast his Javelin and kill'd the Lacedemonian General, and then broke into the midst of his Enemies; Ant. Ch. 361. then others presently following (beating down all before him) he clave asunder the Enemies Battle. For the Fame of Epaminondas, and the strength of that Body he then had with him, struck such a Terror into the Lacedemonians, that they turn'd their backs, and began to make away: Upon which the Boeotians pursu'd close, and kill'd all that were in the Rear, so that heaps of Carkasses cover'd the Ground. At length when the Lacedemonians perceiv'd that the fierceness and heat of Epaminondas had precipitated him too far, they all in a Body made up upon him, throwing infinite number of Darts at him, of which he put by some, and receiv'd others upon his Target, and pluckt others out of his Body with his own hands, and threw them back into the face of the Enemy. At last whilst he was most Heroically bestirring himself to gain the Victory for his Coun∣try, he receiv'd a Mortal wound in his Breast by a Dart By one Anti∣ciates a Spar∣tan. Justin. Epaminondas falls. thrown with such a force, as that the Wood broke, and the Iron with the Trunchion remain'd in his Body, so that by the greatness of the wound he suddenly fell to the ground. And now the Con∣test grew very sharp and hot for the recovery of his Body, and after a great slaughter made, the Thebans being of much stronger Bodies than the Lacedemonians, at length put their Enemies to flight. The Boeotians pursu'd them a little way, but presently return'd, as looking upon it absolutely necessary to have the power of the Bodies. The Trum∣pets therefore sounding a Retreat, both Armies drew off; and each party erected a Trophy, both pretending to the Victory. For the Athenians possess'd the Bodies of all those Eubeans and Mercenaries that were slain at the Hill: On the other side the Boeoti∣ans
that had routed the Lacedemonians, and were Masters of the dead, challeng'd the Victory. And for some time neither side sent any Trumpets to Treat for burying the Ant. Ch. 361. Dead, lest they that were first should be thought to yield the day. Yet at last the La∣cedemonians first sent a Trumpet to procure Liberty to bury their Men: Whereupon all were buried that were slain on both sides. But Epaminondas (yet living) was brought back into the Camp; and when the Phy∣sitians that were sent for, told him that he would certainly Die as soon as the Dart was drawn out of his Body, he was not at all daunted: But first call'd for his Armour-bearer, and ask'd whether his Shield was safe? When he answer'd it was, and shew'd it to him; then he enquir'd whether side had got the day. The Youth making return that the Boeotians were Victors: Why then, saith he, Now is the time to die: And forthwith order'd the Dart to be drawn out. And when all his Friends round about him cry'd out, and one with great Lamentation express'd himself thus; And what, O Epaminondas, Dost thou die Childless? No, by Jupiter (said he,) But I leave behind me Two Daughters, where∣of the one is Victory at Leuctra, and the other at Mantinea. And so upon drawing out the head of the Dart, he quietly breath'd out his last, without any shew of Trouble, or Dis∣order Epaminondas dies of his und. of Mind. And because it was our usual Method to give an Honourable Testimony of Worthy and Deserving Men after their Deaths, we think we might be justly blam'd if we should The Commen∣dation of Epa∣minondas. omit so brave a Man, without a peculiar remark. For he seems to me to be not only the most skilful General, and of the most Just and Generous Disposition of any of his own time, (among whom the most famous were Pelopidas the Theban, Timotheus, Conon, Chabrias, Iphi∣crates, Athenians, and Agesilaus the Spartan (who was a little before him) but likewise P. 504. Ant. Ch. 361. of any that liv'd before him in the time of the Medes and Persians, as Solon, Themistocles, Miltiades, Cimon, Mironides, Pericles, and some other Athenians; and Gelo the Son of Di∣nomenes in Sicily, and some others, whose several Excellencies if any will compare with the Military Art, and the Glory of the Arms of Epaminondas, he shall soon find him to exceed them in many degrees. For among them some one peculiar Excellency was only remarkable in each particular Person; but in him a Constellation of Virtues were Hous'd together. For in Strength and Comliness of Body, Volubility of Tongue, Gal∣lantness of Spirit, Contempt of Wealth, and impartial Justice (and that which was far before all the rest) in Valour and Skill in Martial Affairs (absolutely necessary for a General) he far excell'd 'em all. When alive, he gain'd the Sovereign Power for his Country; but by his Death they lost it again, and their Affairs declin'd to the worse ever afterwards; and at length by the Sloth and Ignorance of their Commanders they were utterly ruin'd, and reduc'd to perfect Slavery. And this was the end of Epami∣nondas, a Man honoured, and esteemed of all. After this Battle, the Grecians being tir'd out with continual Wars, and contented now to draw stakes, put an end to the War, and entred into a general League Offen∣sive and Defensive, in which the Messineans were included. But the Lacedemonians (by Peace made. Ant. Ch. 361. reason of the implacable Hatred they bore the Messineans) would not subscribe the Articles of Peace: And therefore they of all the Grecians were the only Men that swore not to the League. As to the Writers in this year; Xenophon the Athenian con∣cludes his History of the Wars of Greece with the death of Epaminondas. Anaximenes like∣wise Xenophon's History ends. Anaximenes. of Lampsacus writ the First Part of his History of the Grecian Affairs . from the Origin of the Gods, and the First Being of Mankind to the Battle of Mantinea, and the death of Epaminondas, containing almost all the Affairs both of the Grecians and Bar∣barians in Twelve Volumes. Lastly Philistus, who writ the History of Dionysius the young∣er in Two Books, ends them here.
CHAP. XI. A Defection from the Persians in Asia. Tachos King of Aegypt declares War a∣gainst the Persians. The War between Tachos and his Son Nectabanus. The Death of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Agesilaus Routs the Aegyptians that pursu'd him; and restores Tachos to his Kingdom: Stirs again in Greece after the Battle of Mantinea, between the Megalopolitans and the Neighbouring Towns. Peparethos Besieg'd by Alexander of Pherea. He Routs Leosthenes at Sea. Charietes the Athenian Admiral, his Villanies. THIS Year, Molon was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Lucius Genucius, and Quin∣tus Olymp. 14. 3. Ant. Ch. 360. Servilius Roman Consuls. In their times the Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts of Asia, made a defection from the Persians; and some of the Governors of the Pro∣vinces, and Chief Commanders, began new Broils, and rose up in Arms against Ar∣taxerxes. Tachos likewise King of Aegypt declar'd War against the Persians, and im∣ploy'd Tachos the Aegyptian King declares War against the Persians. himself in Building of Ships, and raising of Land Forces: he brought over also the Lacedemonians to join with him, and hir'd many Soldiers out of the Cities of Greece. For the Spartans bore a grudge against Artaxerxes, because he had order'd the Messinians to be comprehended in the publick League among the Grecians. This great Conspiracy caus'd the Persian King likewise to bestir himself to raise Forces. For he was to ingage in a War with the King of Aegypt, the Grecian Cities in Asia, the Lace∣demonians and their Confederates, and the Lord Lieutenants and Chief Commanders of The Persian Lord Licute∣nants Conspire against Artax∣erxes. Ant. Ch. 360. P. 505. the Sea Coasts, all at one and the same time. Among these, Ariobarzanes Lord Lieu∣tenant of Phrygia was Chiefest; who had possess'd himself of the Kingdom of Mithridates after his Death: With him join'd Mausolus Prince of Caria, who had many considerable Towns and Castles under his Command, the Metropolis of which was Halicarnassus, wherein was a most stately Citadel, the Royal Seat or Palace of Caria; and with these were Confederated Orontes Governor of Mysia, and Autophrodates of Lydia, and of the Ionian Nation, the Lycians, Pisidians, Pamphylians and Cilicians; and besides them, the Syrians, and Phenicians, and almost all that border'd upon the Asiatick Sea: by this great defecti∣on, the King lost one half of his Revenues, and what remain'd was not sufficient to de∣fray the necessary charges of the War. They who fell off from the King, made Orontes General of the Army, who after he had receiv'd the Command, and Moneys enough to pay Twenty thousand hir'd Soldi∣ers for one whole Year, betray'd the Confederates that had so intrusted him. For Orontes be∣trays all the Confederates. being corrupted with large Bribes, and promis'd to be the only Governour of all the Provinces bordering upon the Sea, if he would deliver up the Rebels into the power of the King, he was wrought upon, and in the execution of his Treachery, he first Seiz'd upon them that brought him the Money, and sent them Prisoners to the King; and then betray'd several Cities and Companies of hir'd Soldiers, to such Lieutenants as the King had sent into those parts. The like Treachery happen'd in Capadocia; which was accom∣pany'd with something more than ordinary remarkable. Artabazus the King of Persia's General, had invaded Capadocia with a great Army, whom Datamis the Governour of that Province oppos'd with a strong Body of Horse, and Twenty thousand Foot of Mer∣cenaries. The Father in Law of Datamis, and General of his Horse (to ingratiate him∣self with the King and provide for his own safety) stole away in the Night with the Horse to Artabazus, having so agreed with him the Day before. Datamis (encourag∣ing his Mercenaries to be faithful to him, by promises to Reward them liberally) with all speed March'd after these Treacherous Rascals, and overtook them just as they were Ant. Ch. 360 The treachery of Mithrobarza∣nes against Datamis, in Cappadocia. joyning the Enemy: Upon which the Soldiers of Artabazus, likewise fell upon these Runnagate Horse, and kill'd all before them. For Artabazus (at the first being Igno∣rant, not knowing the meaning of the thing) thought that he who had betray'd Datamis, was now acting a new piece of Treason; therefore he Commanded his Soldiers to fall upon the Horse, that were advancing towards them, and not spare a Man. So that Mithrobarzanes (for that was the Traytor's Name) being got between them that took him for a Traytor, and those that pursu'd him, as one that they knew was really such; was in an inextricable Labyrinth: Being therefore in this strait (and having no time The strait he was brought into
now further to Consider) he made it his business to defend himself with all the Resoluti∣on imaginable, and so ply'd both parties, that he made a great slaughter amongst 'em. At length Ten thousand Men and upwards being kill'd, Datamis put the rest to Flight, and Cut off in the pursuit great numbers of them, and at length caus'd the Trumpet to sound a Retreat, and call'd off his Men. Some of the Horsemen that surviv'd return'd to Datamis and begg'd for pardon; the rest wander'd about, and knew not whither to turn themselves. But Datamis caus'd his Army to surround Five hundred of those Tray∣tors and to dart them to Death. And tho' he had formerly gain'd the reputation of an excellent Soldier; yet now by this instance of his Valour and prudent Conduct, his Name grew much more famous than before. Artaxerxes the King being inform'd of this Stra∣tagem, made all the haste he could to be rid of Datamis, and within a short time after, cut him off by an Ambuscade▪ Whilst these things were in acting, Rheomithres was sent by the Rebels into Aegypt, to Ant. Ch. 360 Tacho the King, and having receiv'd Five hundred Talents, and Fifty Sail of Men of War, he return'd to Leucas in Asia; and sending for many of the revolting Lords, and Of∣ficers to come to him thither, he laid hold of them, and sent them all away Prisoners to the King; and by this piece of Treachery regain'd the King's favour, who was formerly much displeas'd with him. Now Tacho King of Aegypt had prepar'd all things necessary for the War: But he P. 506. Tacho's Forces in Aegypt. Agesilaus sent to Aid the King of Ae∣gypt. Chabrias, Ta∣cho's Admi∣ral. had a Fleet of Two hundred Sail, Ten thousand Grecian Mercenaries, and Fourscore thousand Aegyptian Foot. He gave the Command of the Ten thousand Mercenaries to Agesilaus, who was sent from the Lacedemonians with a Thousand Men to the Aid of the Aegyptians; because he was counted the best Soldier of any among them, and had the repute of a most expert Commander. Chabrias was made Admiral of the Fleet, who was not sent there by publick Authority, but (upon the persuasion of Tachos,) serv'd him as a private Man, The King reserv'd to himself the Generalship of all the Army. But Agesilaus would have persuaded him to continue in Aegypt, and to manage the War by his Lieutenants; but he would not hearken to it, tho he advis'd him to the best. For when the Army was far distant from Aegypt, and now encamp'd in Phenicia, the Governour of Aegypt whom he had deputed in his absence, revolted, and sent to Nectanabus the Or rather his Brother or Si∣sters Son. Ant. Ch. 360. Tacho sub∣mits to the King of Persia. The death of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Ant. Ch. 360. King's Son to take upon him the Kingdom of Aegypt, which kindled Nectanabus. the King of Ae∣gypts Son, Rebels. the Sparks which afterward broke forth into a most cruel and bloody War. For Nectanabus being made General of the Aegyptian Forces, and before sent out of Phenicia to take in some Cities in Syria, being privy and consenting to the Treason against his Father, drew the Commanders of the Army▪ by large Gifts, and the Soldiers by as large promises, to join with him in the War. Aegypt therefore being now possessed by the Rebels, Tachos was so terrifi'd at the thing, that he fled through Arabia to the King of Persia, and beg'd his pardon for what he had done; whom, Artaxerxes not only forgave, but made him General of the Army he had rais'd against the Egyptians. Not long after the King of Persia dy'd, having Reign'd Three and fourty Years. Ochus succeeded him, and govern'd. Three and twenty Years, and took upon him the sirname of Artaxerxes. For Artaxerxes ruling the Kingdom with great Justice and Integrity, and being an earnest promoter and lover of Peace, and prosperous in all his Affairs, the Persians decreed, that all the succeeding Kings should be call'd by his Name. And now Tacho the King of Egypt return'd to Agesilaus, and presently Nectanabus led above Tacho, re∣turns to Age∣silaus. an Hundred thousand Men against his Father, and dar'd him to try his Title to the Kingdom by the Sword. When Agesilaus discern'd that the King was fearful, not da∣ring to Engage, he heartned him up all he could, and bid him be of good Courage; for it was not Number; but Valour that carry'd away the Victory. But not being able to prevail, he was forc'd to go back with him, into a certain large City, there to shelter himself; where they were presently Besieg'd by the Egyptians, who after the loss Ant. Ch. 360. Tacho and Agesilaus be∣sieg'd. of a great number of their Men in assaulting the Town; drew a Trench and a Wall round the City; which was suddenly finish'd by having many hands at Work. At length when Provision fail'd, Tacho gave up all for gone: But Agesilaus (encouraging the Sol∣diers telling 'em all would be well) in the Night broke through the Enemies Guards, and to admiration got off safe with all his Men: But the Egyptians (pursuing close at their Heels, and being in an open Champion Country) purpos'd by their great Numbers to inclose them round, and so to Cut them off every Man. But Agesilaus in the mean time having possess'd himself of a place secur'd on both sides by Water, from the River (convey'd through Sluces and Trenches made by Art) waited there for the Enemy. And having drawn up his Men in such Order as best suted with the Ground, (and being defended by the Arms of the River, so as he could not be
hem'd in) he there fought with the Egyptians: Whose numbers were of so little advan∣tage Agesilaus routs the Aegyptians P. 570. Tacho re∣stor'd. Agesilaus's death. to them in that Place, and the Grecians Valour so far before them, that Agesilaus made a great slaughter amongst 'em, and put the rest to flight. After which Tacho was easily, and with little ado restor'd to his Kingdom: And he rewarded Agesilaus, (the only Instrument of his Restauration) by many honourable Gifts, and so dismiss'd him, who in his return Homewards fell Sick in Cyrene, and there Dy'd. His Body was made up with Honey, and brought back to Sparta, where he was royally Interr'd. Hitherto things proceeded this Year in Asia. But in Peloponnesus tho' after the Battle at Ant. Ch. 360. New troubles in Peloponnesus. Mantinea a general Peace was made among the Arcadians, yet they scarce observ'd the League for one Year, but fell into new Broyls, and Wars one with another. It was one of the Articles of the League, that every one should return from the Battle into their several Countries. Therefore those neighbouring Cities, that had been Translated, and forc'd to Seat themselves in Megalopolis, (which then they bore very grievously) now of their own accord, return'd to their old Habitations: But the other Megalopolitans en∣deavour'd to force them to leave their ancient Seats again. Hence arose a great Contest; they of the old Towns crav'd the Assistance of the Mantineans, and the rest of the Arcadians, and likewise of the Eleans and other Confederates of Mantinea. On the other Hand, they of Megalopolis address'd themselves to the Athenians for their Aid and Assist∣ance; who (without delay) order'd Three thousand heavy Arm'd Men, and Three hundred Horse, under the Command of Pammenes. Whereupon he March'd to Mega∣lopolis, and afterwards (by Storming some of the Towns, and Terrifying others,) he forc'd them all at length to return to Megalopolis. And thus were these Towns reduc'd into one City, and the Tumult which came to this height, appeas'd and compos'd. Among the Historians of this time, Athenas of Syracuse, began his History of Dion with this Year, compriz'd in Twenty three Books: He continu'd likewise the History of Philistus, seven Years further in one Book; and handling matters summarily, made it one intire and perfect History. Afterwards when Nicophemus was chief Magistrate of Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Olymp. 14. 4. Ant. Ch. 359. Caius Licinius Executed the Consular Authority at Rome, Alexander Tyrant of Pherea, Mann'd forth several Privateers to the Cyclade Islands, and having taken some of them by force, carry'd away a great number of Captives. Then he landed his Soldiers in A Port of Achaia. Alexander of Pherea routs the Athenian Fleet at Pa∣normus. Leosthenes, Condemn'd to Death by the Athenians. Peparethos, and Besieg'd the One of the Cyclade Islands now Lemene, call'd Pepare∣thos. City. But the Peparethians being reliev'd by the Atheni∣ans Garison, under the Command of Leosthenes (who had been before left there) Alex∣ander set upon the Athenians themselves. It so hapned, that as they were watching, and had set a Guard upon Alexander's Fleet, which then lay at Panormus, he fell upon them on a sudden, and obtain'd an unexpected Victory: For he not only rescu'd his Men out of the Imminent dangers, wherewith they were surrounded at Panormus, but likewise took five Athenian Gallies, and one of Peparethus, and Six hundred Prisoners. The A∣thenians being enrag'd at this misfortune, Condemn'd Leosthenes to Death, and Confiscated all his Goods, and made Charetes Commander in his stead, and sent him with a considerable Fleet into those parts; who spent his time only in scaring the Enemies, and oppressing the Confederates. For Sailing to Corcyra (a Confederate City) he stirr'd up such Se∣ditions, and Tumults there, as ended in many Slaughters, Rapines, and plundering of Mens Goods and Estates, which caus'd the Athenians to be ill spoken of by all the Con∣federates, committing many other villanies, and to summ up all in a few Words; he did nothing but what tended to the disgrace and dishonour of his Country. Dionysiodorus and Anaxis, Boeotian Writers, who Compos'd an History of the Grecian Affairs, end their Relations with this Year. And now having given an Account of those Affairs, and things done before the Reign of Philip (according to our first design) P. 508. we shall put an end to this Book. In the next following, shall be Comprehended what Ant. Ch. 359. ever was done by that King, from the beginning of his Reign, to the time of his Death, with other things that happen'd in the known parts of the World.
ASIAE Veteribus Cognit Tabula
BOOK XVI. IT's the Duty of all Writers of History, whether they Treat of the Actions of Kings, PREFACE. or of particular Cities, to relate the Whole from the Beginning to the Conclusion. For we conceive that hereby the History is both better remembred, and more clearly Understood. For imperfect Relations, without Knowledge of the Issue of what is begun, gives an unpleasant Check to the Diligent Reader's eager Expectation. But where the Matter is drawn down by a continu'd Thred to the end of the Narration; such Writings make the History compleat in all its Parts, but more especially, if the Nature of things done, do lead the Writer, as it were, by the Hand: This Course is by no means to be neglected. Since therefore we are now come to the Affairs of Philip, Son of Amyntas, we accord∣ing to the former Rule shall endeavour to comprehend in this Book all the Actions of this King. For he reign'd as King of Macedon Two and Twenty Years, who making use at the first but of small means, at length advanc'd his Kingdom to be the Greatest in Europe; and made Macedon (which at the time of his coming to the Crown was under the ser∣vile Yoke of the Illyrians) Mistress of many potent Cities and Countries. And through his Valour the Grecian Cities voluntarily submitted themselves to him, and made him Ge∣neral of all Greece. And having subdued The Phocians. those that Robb'd and Spoil'd the Temple at Delphos, coming in aid of the God there, he was made a Member of the Senate of the Amphictyons; and for a Reward of his Zeal to the Gods, the Right of Voting in the The Court of the Amphicty∣ons was the great Court of Greece which sate at Delphos in Phocis, like to the States-General at the Hague. Vid. Paus. Lib. 10. Cap. 8. The Phocians had two Votes in that Assem∣bly. Senate which belonged to the Phocians (whom he had overcome) was allotted to him. After he had overcome the Illyrians, Paeones, Thracians, Scythians, and the Countries adjoyning to them, his Thoughts were wholly imploy'd how to destroy the Persian Monarchy: But after he had set free all the Grecian Cities; and was promised Forces to be raised for the Expedition into Asia, in the midst of all his preparations he was pre∣vented by Death: But he left those, and so many more Forces behind him, that his Son, Alexander, had no occasion to make use of the Assistance of his Confederates in the Over∣turning of the Persian Empire. And all those things he did not so much by the Favour of Fortune, as by the Greatness of his own Valour. For this King excell'd most in the Art of a General, Stoutness of Spirit, and Clearness of Judgment and Apprehension. But that we may not in a Preface set forth his Actions before hand, we shall proceed to the orderly Course of the History, making first some short Remarks of the Times that went before. CHAP. I. Philip, an Hostage at Thebes, makes his Escape; Beats the Athenians; After makes Peace with them: Subdues the Paeones, and routs the Illyrians and makes Peace with them. WHEN Callimedes was Archon at Athens, in the Hundred and Fifth Olym∣piad (in which Porus the Cyrenian was Victor) Cneius Genucius, and Olymp. 105. An. M. 3612. Ant. Ch. 358. Lucius Aemilius, Roman Consuls, Philip the Son of Amyntas, and Fa∣ther of Alexander, (who conquer'd the Persians) came to the Crown in the manner following. Amyntas being brought under by the Illyrians, was forced to pay Tribute to the Con∣querors; who having taken his youngest Son Philip as an Hostage, deliver'd him to be kept by the Thebans; who committed the young Youth to the Care of Polymnis was the Father of Epaminon∣das: the Father of Epaminondas, with order to look to his Charge with all Diligence, and honourably to E∣ducate and Instruct him.
A Pythagorean Philosopher was at that time Tutor to Epaminondas, with whom Philip being brought up, he improv'd more than ordinary in the Pythagorean Philosophy. And both these Scholars imploying the utmost of their Parts and Diligence in the Prosecution of their Studies, both by that means became Famous for their virtuous Qualifications. Epaminondas (it's known to all) having run through many Hazards and Difficulties, be∣yond all expectation gain'd the Sovereignty of all Greece for his Country: And Philip ha∣ving the same Advantages, shew'd himself nothing inferior to Epaminondas in glorious At∣chievements: For after the Death of Amyntas, his Eldest Son Alexander succeeded him in the Kingdom; but Ptolemy Alorites murder'd him and Usurp'd the Government; and he himself was serv'd with the same Sauce by Perdiccas; who being afterwards overcome in a great Battel by the Illyrians, and kill'd , In a Critical Conjuncture. in the very time when there was most need of a King, Philip, the Brother, made his escape and took Possession of the Kingdom now in a very shatter'd Condition: For there were above Four Thousand Macedonians kill'd in the Fight, and those that surviv'd were in such Consternation and Fear of the Illyrians, that they had no heart left for the Prosecuting of the War. Ant. Ch. 358. About the same time the Paeones, Neighbours to the Macedonians, (in contempt of them) wasted their Country; and the Illyrians rais'd again great Forces, and design'd a∣nother Expedition against the Macedonians. And to aggravate the matter, one Son of Aeo∣pus, who for∣merly had U∣surp'd the King∣dom of Mace∣don. Pausanias, of the Royal Family, by the assistance of the King of Thrace, endeavour'd to Invade the Kingdom of Macedon, The Athenians likewise (Enemies to Philip) endeavour'd to re∣store Argaeus, another Son of Aeropus. Argaeus to the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and to this purpose had sent away their General Mantias, with Three Thousand well-arm'd Men, and a most excellent well pro∣vided Navy. Hereupon the Macedonians, by reason of the late Defeat and the Storm that then threatned them, were in great Fear and Perplexity: However, notwithstanding all the Difficulties and Fear of those things that were at hand, Philip nothing discourag'd with those dreadful Clouds of Mischief that seem'd to hang over his Head, by his Speeches in the daily Assemblies, retain'd the Macedonians in their Duty; and by his Eloquence (wherein he excell'd) stirring them up to be courageous, reviv'd their drooping Spirits. Then setting upon Reforming the Military Discipline, he compleatly arm'd his Men and Train'd them every Day, teaching them how to handle their Arms, and other Postures of War. He likewise instituted the new way of Drawing up into a close Body, imitating the Heroes at Troy in locking their Shields one within another; so that he was the first that found out the Macedonian Phalange. He was very Courteous and Gaining in his Converse, and wan the Peoples Hearts both by his Bounty at present, and his generous Promises of future Rewards; very Politickly likewise (as it were by so many Engines) defending himself against the many and various Ant. Ch. 358. Mischiefs that were pressing upon him. For when he discern'd that the Athenians made it their great business to recover Amphipolis, and that Argaeus was endeavour'd to be re∣stor'd to his Kingdom for that end, he left the Amphipolis. City of his own accord, suffering them to govern themselves according to their own Laws. He sent likewise an Ambassador to the Paeones, and some of them he corrupted with Bribes; others he ensnar'd with fair and winning Promises, and for the Present made Peace with them, He prevented likewise Pausanias from being restor'd, by bribing the King that was ready to assist him for that purpose. In the mean time Manthias the Athenian Admiral being arriv'd at Methone in Macedonia. Methone, there lay; but sent Aegaeus before with a Body of Mercenaries to Aegae in Ma∣cedonia. Aegae. Coming to the City, he endeavour'd to perswade the Aegaeans to allow of his Return, and to appear the first for his Restauration to the Kingdom; but none consenting, he went back to Me∣thone. Presently after, Philip advancing with a well appointed Army, set upon them, and cut off many of the Mercenaries; the rest, who had fled to a Hill near at hand (having first delivered up to him the Fugitives) he dismiss'd by Agreement. Philip being now Conqueror in this first Battel, greatly encourag'd the Macedonians, and made them hearty and eager to undergo further Toils and Difficulties. Whilst these things were acting, the Thracians planted a Colony at Crenides, as it was heretofore call'd, which the King afterwards call'd Philippi, after his own Name, and fill'd it with Inhabitants. From this Time Theopompus of Chis begins his History of Philip, and continues it in Fifty eight Books, of which Five are controverted. Afterwards Eucharist us was Archon of Athens, and Quintus Servilius and Lucius Genucius were Consuls at Rome, when Philip sent Ambassadors to Athens with Proposals of Peace, Olymp. 105. 2. An. M. 3613. Ant. Ch. 357. and prevail'd with the People upon the account that he was content to quit all his Right in Amphipolis.
Being therefore thus freed from the War with the Athenians, and hearing that Agis King of the Paeones was dead, he judg'd that a fair Opportunity was offer'd him to in∣vade the Paeones: And to that end he enter'd their Country with a considerable Army, overcame them in Battel, and forc'd them to stoop to the Macedonian Yoke. But still the Illyrium, now Dalmatia; and the Inhabi∣tants Dalma∣tians, or Scla∣vonians. Illyrians remain'd an Eye-sore to him, whom his Heart and all his Thoughts were continually at work to bring under. To that end he call'd a General Council, and by a Speech (fitted for the Occasion) having spirited the Soldiers to the War, he led an Army into the Illyrians Country of no less than Ten thousand Foot, and Six hun∣dred Horse. Bardylis King of the Illyrians hearing of his coming, first sent Ambassadors to Philip to renew the League between them upon these Terms, That both of them should keep those Towns that they then had. To which Philip answer'd, That he was very desirous of Peace; but resolv'd not to admit of it, before that the Illyrians had quitted all the Towns belonging to the Kingdom of Macedon. The Ambassadors therefore being return'd without effecting any thing, Bardylis (con∣fiding Ant. Ch. 357 in the Valour of his Soldiers, and encourag'd by his former Victories) march'd forth against his Enemies with a strong Army, having with him Ten thousand choice Foot, and Five hundred Horse. When the Armies drew near one to another, they suddenly set up a great Shout, and so fell to it. Philip being in the Right Wing with a strong Body of Macedonians, com∣manded his Horse to wheel about, to the end to charge the Enemy in the Flank; and he himself charged the Front; upon which there was an hot Engagement. On the other side, the Illyrians drew up in a , like a Til. foursquare Body, and valiantly join'd Battel. The Valour of the Armies on both sides was such, that the issue of the Battel was doubtful a long time; many fell, but many more were wounded; and the Advantage was now here, and then there, according as the Valour and Resolution of the Comba∣tants gave Vigour and Life to the Business. At length, when the Horse charg'd both upon the Flank and the Rear, and Philip with his stoutest Soldiers fought like a Hero in the Front, the whole Body of the Illyrians were routed, and forc'd to fly outright, whom the Macedonians pursu'd a long way. After many were kill'd in the pursuit, Philip at length gave the Signal to his Men to retire, and erected a Trophy, and bury'd the Dead. Then the Illyrians sent another Embassie, and procur'd a Peace, having first quitted all the Cities belonging to Macedon. There were slain of the Illyrians in this Battel above Seven thousand Men. Having thus given an account of things done in Macedonia and Illy∣rium, we shall now relate the Affairs of other Nations. CHAP. II. The Actions of Dionysius the Tounger in Sicily, and other Parts. Dion's Flight to Corinth, and his Return to Sicily. Andromachus Peoples Tauromenum. The Civil Wars in Euboea. The Social War between the Athenians and other Nations. Philip takes Amphipolis and other Cities. His Policy to gain the Olynthians and other Places in Greece. IN Sicily, Dionysius the Younger, Tyrant of Syracuse, who came some time before to Ant. Ch. 357 the Kingdom (being of an unactive Spirit, and much inferiour to his Father) under the Veil of a peaceful and gentle Disposition, endeavour'd to cover his Sloth and Cow∣ardize; and therefore tho' the War with the Carthaginians descended upon him as well as the Kingdom, yet he made Peace with them. In a careless manner likewise he made War for some time upon the Lucanians in Italy. Lucanians; and tho' he had the Advantage in some of the last Fights, yet he was very fond of the Terms and Conditions offer'd for the putting an end to the War. He built two Cities in Apulia, the better to secure the Passage of his Shipping through the Ionian Sea: For the Barbarians dwelling on the Sea-Coasts, had a great number of Pirates roving up-and-down, whereby the Adriatick Sea was greatly infested and made troublesome to the Merchants. Afterwards giving himself up to his Ease, he wholly neglected all Warlike Exercises; and tho' he was Lord of the Greatest Kingdom in Europe, and had a Dominion bound
fast with a Diamond (as his Father was us'd to boast) yet through his effeminate Sloth and Idleness, he lost it on a sudden. How it was taken from him, and how he carry'd himself in every Particular, we shall endeavour now to declare. At this time Cephisodorus was Lord Chancellor at Athens, and Caius Licinius and Caius Sulpitius were Consuls at Rome, when Dion the Brother of Hipparinus, one of the most Olymp. 105. 3. Ant. Ch. 356. Noble Persons among the Syracusians, fled out of Sicily; and afterwards by the Braveness of his Spirit, and excellent Accomplishments, restor'd not only the Syracusians, but other Sicilians to their ancient Liberties: Which was occasion'd thus: Dionysius the Elder had Issue by both his Wives: By the second Wife, the Daughter of Hipparians (who was in great Esteem among the Syracusians) he had two Sons, Hippari∣nus and Narsaeus. Dion was the Brother of this second Wife; a Man well skill'd in Phi∣losophy, and the most expert Soldier in his Time of all the Syracusians. The Nobleness of his Birth and Greatness of his Spirit, made him suspected by the Tyrant, because upon that account he seem'd to be a fit Instrument to overturn the Tyranny. Dionysius there∣fore fearing him, determin'd to send him further off from him, and so to put him to death. Dion foreseeing what was design'd, at first discover'd it to some of his Friends: Afterwards he fled out of Sicily to Peloponnesus, taking along with him Megacles his Bro∣ther, and Cariclides the General of the Army under the Tyrant. When he arriv'd at Corinth, he solicited the Corinthians to assist him in the Recovery of the Syracusians Liberty: And presently got together a Band of Mercenaries, and employ'd himself in procuring of Arms: Upon which many Voluntiers coming in to him with all sorts of Arms, he mu∣ster'd a considerable Force of Mercenary Soldiers. Then having hind two Ships, he put his Men and Arms on board; and with these only pass'd over from Now Zant. Zacynthus (near ad∣joining to Cephalenia) to Sicily; and commanded Chariclides to follow him presently after to Syracuse, with some few Gallies, and other Ships of Burden. While these things were acting, Andromachus of Tauromenum, the Father of Timoeus the Historian, a Man eminent both for his Riches and Wisdom, brought together from all Parts all the Exiles of Naxus (which Dionysius had raz'd) and gave them the Hill call'd Ant. Ch. 356. Taurus, lying above Naxus. And because he and his Family had continu'd there a long time, he call'd it Tauromenium, from their Residence in Taurus. The Inhabitants after∣wards grew very rich, and the City became famous by its prosperous Increases in worldly Blessings. But in our Age the Tauromenians were remov'd out of their Country by Caesar, and the City receiv'd a Roman Colony. In the mean time, the Inhabitants of Euboea fell a quarrelling one with another, and one Party sought to the Boeotians for Aid, and the other to the Athenians; and so a War broke out throughout all Euboea. But tho' there were many light Skirmishes amongst them, sometimes the Thebans prevailing and at other times the Athenians; yet they never fought any great Battel. At length the Island being wasted by this Civil War, and many Men destroy'd all over the Land, with much ado (being made more wise by their own Slaughters) they came to an Agreement, and so concluded a Peace: And the Boeotians returning home, laid down their Arms. The Athenians now fell into a War call'd The Social War (which continu'd three Years) The Social War. upon the account of the Defection of the Chians, Rhodians, them of Coos, and the Byzan∣tines: To which War Chares and Chabrias were sent with an Army, as Generals: Making against Chius, of the same Name with the Island. Chius, they found the Chians assisted by the Byzantines, Rhodians, Choians, and Mausolus the petty King of Cana in Les∣ser Asia. Cana. These Generals dividing their Forces, besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. Chares commanded the Land-Forces, and assaulted the Walls, and fought with them of the Garrison in the open Field, who made Sallies upon him. But Chabrias was engag'd in a sharp Fight at Sea in the very Harbour; and his Ant. Ch. 356. Ship being pierc'd through with the Beaks of the Enemy's, he was greatly distress'd: And those who were in the other Ships, thought fit to comply with the Time, and so fairly ran away. But the Admiral chusing rather to die gloriously, than give up all dis∣honourably, in defending of his Ship receiv'd a Wound, which put an end to his Ant. Ch. 356. Life. About the same time, Philip King of Macedon, after his Victory over the Illyrians in that great Battel, having subdu'd all them that dwelt as far as to the Marishes of Lychnitides, and made with them an Honourable Peace, return'd into Macedonia. And having thus by his Valour rais'd up and supported the tottering State and Condition of the Macedo∣nians, his Name became great and famous among them. Afterwards being provok'd by the many Injuries of them of Amphipolis, he march'd against them with a great Army, and applying his Engines of Battery to the Walls, made fierce and continual Assaults,
and by the Battering Rams threw down part of the Wall, and entred into the City through the Ruins, with the slaughter of many that oppos'd him; and forthwith banish'd those that were his chiefest Enemies, and graciously spar'd all the rest. This City, by reason of its commodious Situation in Thrace, and Neighbourhood to other Places, was of great advantage to Philip: For he presently after took Pydna; but made a League with the Olynthians, and promis'd to give up to them Potidaea, which they had a long time before much coveted. For in regard the City of the Olynthians was both Rich, Potent, and Populous, and upon that account was a Place of great advantage in time of War, therefore those that were ambitious to enlarge their Dominion, strove always to gain it: So that both the Athenians and Philip earnestly contended which of them should prevail to have them for their Confederates. But however, Philip having taken Potidaea, drew out the Athenian Garrison, and us'd them with great Civility, and suffer'd them to return to Athens: For he bore a great Respect to the People of Athens, because that City was eminent and famous for its Power and Grandeur. He deliver'd up likewise Pydna in Macedonia Ant. Ch. 356. Pydna (which he had subdu'd) to the Olynthians, and gave them all the Grounds and Territories belonging to it. Thence he march'd to Crenidas in Macedonia, call'd Philippi, now Philippo. Crenidas, which he enlarg'd, and made more populous, and call'd it after his own Name Philippi. Besides, he so improv'd the Gold-Mines that were in those Parts (which before were but inconsiderable and obscure) that by building of Work-houses he advanc'd them to bring in a yearly Revenue of above a Thousand Talents. So that heaping up abundance of Riches, in a short time, by the confluence of his Wealth, he advanced the Kingdom of Macedonia to a higher Degree of Majesty and Glory, than ever it was before: For he coin'd Pieces of Gold (call'd of him Philippicks) and by the help thereof, rais'd a great Army of Mercenaries, and brib'd many of the Grecians to betray their Country. Of all which, a particular Account shall be given hereafter, in the Course of the History. And now we shall bend our Discourse to what follows. CHAP. III. Dion's March and Entry into Syracuse. Dionysius comes to the Island, part of Sy∣racuse: Assaults the Wall erected from Sea to Sea: Is beaten by Dion. Ale∣xander of Phaerea murdered by his Wife and his Two Brothers. Philip relieves the Thessalians from the two Brothers. A Gathocles was Archon at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Caius Publius, or Poetelius, were Consuls at Rome, when Dion the Son of Hipparinus landed in Sicily, to pull Olymp. 105. 4. Ant. Ch. 355. An. M. 3615. down the Tyranny of Dionysius. This Dion to admiration overturn'd the greatest Domi∣nion in Europe, with the most inconsiderable Force that ever any did before him: For who would ever believe, that a Man who landed only with Two Ships of Burden, should overcome a King who was furnish'd with Four hundred Long Ships. Gallies; had an Army of an Hundred thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse; and was provided with Arms, Money, and Provision, suitable and sufficient to supply so many and great Forces as we have rela∣ted? And who (over and besides all that we have said) was possess'd of the Greatest of all the Greek Cities; so many Ports and Arsenals, Castles so strongly fortify'd and unex∣pugnable, and such a number of potent Auxiliaries? But that which much forwarded the Successes of Dion, was his great Spirit and valorous Resolution, and the Good will and Kindness the People, whom he came to set free, bare towards him. And that which was more than all these, the Sloth and Esseminateness of the Tyrant, and the Hatred of his Subjects. All these things concentring in one Moment of Time, they produc'd incredible Effects, not to have been imagin'd: But to leave off Prefacing, we shall now come to relate Affairs more particularly. Dion therefore loosing from Zazynthus, near to Cephalenia, arriv'd at Minoa (as it's call'd) in the Territory of Agrigentum. This City was built by Minos, formerly King of Crete, at such time as he was entertain'd by Cocales, King of the Sicanians, in his seeking after Daedalus. At this time this City was in the hands of the Carthaginians, whose Governour Paralus, Dion's Friend, was chearfully receiv'd by him. Upon this Encouragement he unloaded his Ships of Five thousand Arms, and intrusted them with Paralus, desiring him to furnish him with Carriages to convey them to Syracuse: And he himself, with a thousand Mer∣cenaries Ant. Ch. 355.
that had join'd him, makes to the same Place. In his March he prevail'd with the Agrigentines, Geloans, some of the Sicanians, and the Sicilians that inhabited the midland, the Camarineans likewise and Madinaeans, to join with him in freeing the Syracusians from their Slavery; and with these he march'd forward to give a Check to the Tyrant. In his March arm'd Men flocking in to him from all Parts, in a short time he had an Army of above Twenty thousand Men. And besides these, many Grecians and Messenians were sent for out of Italy, and all with great chearfulness came readily to him. As soon as Dion came to the Borders of the Syracusian Territories, a Multitude of un∣arm'd Men, both out of the City and Country, met him: For Dionysius, out of Fear and Jealousie of the Syracusians, had disarm'd many. He was by chance at that time at the Cities he had lately built in The Coasts of the Adriatick Sea. Adria with a great Army: In the mean time, the Officers that were left to guard the City, endeavour'd, in the first place, to retain the Citizens in their Duty, and to prevent their Defection; but when they saw they could not, by all the means they could use, bridle the impetuous Rage of the People, they got together all the foreign Soldiers, and all others within the City that favour'd the Tyrant's Party; and having compleated their Regiments, resolv'd to fall upon the Rebels. Then Dion distributed the 5000 Arms among the Syracusians that were unarm'd, and the rest he furnish'd as well as he could, as Arms came to his hands. He then call'd them all together to a Publick Assembly, and told them that he was come to restore the Sicilians to their Liberty; and to that end commanded such Officers to be created, as were fittest to be made use of for that purpose, and for the utter ruin of the Tyranny. Upon which, they all cry'd out with one unanimous Voice, That Dion and his Brother Megacles should be chosen Generals, and invested with absolute Power and Command. And so without delay, from the Assembly (having first dispos'd the Army in order of Battel) he march'd streight to the City; and none appearing in the open Ant. Ch. 355. Field to oppose him, he confidently entred within the Walls, and through One of the Four Parts of Syracuse; the other are the Island; thn Tyche and Neapolis. Achradina march'd on into the Forum, and there encamp'd, none daring to oppose him: For there were no fewer with Dion in his Army than Fifty thousand Men. And all these with Co∣ronets upon their Heads entred into the City, led by Dion, Megacles, and Thirty Syracu∣sians, who alone of all the Exiles in Peloponnesus were willing to run the same common Fate with their Fellow-Citizens. At this time the whole City exchang'd Slavery for Liberty, and Fortune turn'd Sor∣row, the Companion of Tyranny, into pompous Mirth and Jollity: And every House was full of Sacrifices and rejoicing; and Men burnt Incense every one upon his own Al∣tar, thanking the Gods for what at present they enjoy'd, and putting up Prayers for an happy Issue of Affairs for the time to come. Then were heard many Shouts of Joy by the Women all over the City, for their sudden and unexpected Happiness, and the People rejoicing through all Corners of the Town. There was then neither Freeman, or Servant, or any Stranger, but all were earnest to see Dion, who for his Valour and Courage was cry'd up by all above what was fitting for a Man. Yet was it not altoge∣ther without some Reason, the Change was so great and so unexpected: For having liv'd Fifty Years as Slaves, through so long a time they had almost forgotten what Liberty meant, and now by the Valour of one Man they were on a sudden deliver'd from their Calamity. About that time Dionysius staid at Caulonia in Italy; but sent to Philistus his Admiral, who was then with the Fleet about the Adriatick Coasts, and commanded him to sail away streight for Syracuse. And both of them speeding away to the same Place, Dionysius came to Syracuse the seventh Day after the return of Dion: And now thinking to put a Trick upon the Syracusians, he sent Ambassadors to treat of Peace, by whom he made use of Ant. Ch. 355. many Devices, to persuade them that he would restore the Democracy, if he might but have some remarkable Honours conferr'd upon him by the Government. He desir'd therefore that Ambassadors might be sent to him, with whom calling together a Senate, he might put an end to the War. The Syracusians having their Expectations rais'd to so high a Pitch, sent some of the Chief of their Citizens to him as Ambassadors, who had Guards presently put upon them, and Dionysius one day after another put off their Audience. In the mean time, percei∣ving that the Syracusians in hopes of Peace neglected their Guards, and were unprepar'd for an Encounter, he opens the Gates of the A Castle in a Place call'd the Part of Syra∣cuse. Acropolis in the Island, and suddenly Sallies out with a strong well appointed Party. The Syracusians had there drawn a Wall from Sea to Sea, which the Dionysians terribly assaulted with a great Shout. And having entred it with the Slaughter of many of the Guard, they engag'd with the rest that came in to defend it. Dion therefore being thus
deluded, (against the Articles of the Truce) comes down with a stout Party to oppose the Enemy, engages them, and makes a great Slaughter within a Within a Stage. small Compass of  Ground: For although the Fight was but a small distance from the Walls within the Town, yet a vast Number of Men were got together within this little spot; so that the stoutest Men on both sides were hotly Engag'd. The large Promises egg'd on the Dionysians on one side, and hopes of Liberty stirr'd up the Syracusians with a Resolution for Victory on the other: The Obstinacy therefore on both sides being equal, the Fight was a long time doubtful: Many fell, and as many were wounded, receiving all their Wounds upon their Breasts: For those that first led on courageously, died to preserve those that follow'd; those that were next, cover'd the Heads of them that were tir'd out with their Shields, and valiantly underwent all manner of Dangers, and endur'd the Utmost that could be∣fall them, out of their Heat and Zeal to come off Conquerors. But Dion resolving to do Ant. Ch. 355. something remarkable in this Engagement, and that by his own Valour he might gain the Day, broke violently into the thickest of his Enemies; and laying about him Hero∣like hew'd down multitudes, and wholly broke in pieces the Body of the Mercenaries, and was left alone standing in the midst of his Enemies Troops; and though he was pelted with abundance of Darts receiv'd upon his Buckler and Helmet, yet by the Strength and Goodness of his Arms he avoided the Danger; but receiving a Wound upon his Right Arm (through the Greatness and Extremity of the Pain) he began to faint, and was not far from falling into the Hands of the Enemy, but that the Syracusians (highly con∣cern'd for the Preservation of their General) charg'd in a full Body upon the Dionysians, and rescuing Dion (now almost spent) put the Enemy to flight. And the Citizens pre∣vailing at another part of the Wall, the Foreign Forces of the Tyrant were forced to fly into the Castle in the Island. The Syracusians now having gain'd a glorious Victory, and confirm'd their Liberty by Conquest, set up a Trophy in defiance of the Tyrant, who being thus beaten, and now perceiving that all was lost, and an End put to his Sovereignty, fortify'd the Castle with a strong Garison; then being permitted to carry off the dead Bodies of those that were slain, to the number of Eight hundred, he buried them honourably, crowning them with Crowns of Gold, and richly clothing them in Purple Robes: By this extrarordinary Honour and Respect shewn to the Dead, he hop'd to draw in others more readily and Chearfully to venture their Lives for the support of his Principality. Then he bountifully rewarded them that had valiantly behav'd themselves in the late Engagement: And sent some to the Syracusians to Treat upon Terms of Peace. But Dion study'd excuses to de∣lay Ant. Ch. 355. the Business; And in the mean time finish'd the rest of the Wall without any inter∣ruption. Thus having deceiv'd the Enemy with an Expectation of Peace, as they had done him before, he admitted the Ambassadors to Audience; Upon which they making propo∣sals for Peace, Dion answer'd, that there was only one way left for the obtaining of a Peace; and that was for Dionysius to lay down his Government, and be contented only with some Honours to be conferr'd upon him. Which answer the Tyrant taking in disdain, as Haughty and Peremptory, he call'd a Council of War to consult with his Officers how he might be reveng'd of the Syracusians. He abounded with all things except Corn, and was likewise Master at Sea: Therefore he infested the Country with Depredations, and by Foraging for some time got Provisi∣ons, but with great difficulty; at length he sent forth Transport Ships and Money to buy Corn and other Provisions: But the Syracusians tho' they had but few Gallies, yet at fit Times and Places they surpriz'd the Merchants, and a great Part of the Corn that they imported. And thus stood the Affairs of Syracuse at this time. But in Greece, Alexander the Tyrant of Phaerea, was murder'd by his Wife, a Theban, Alexander of Phaerea mur∣der'd. and his two Brothers, Lycophrones and Tisiphonus. They were at first in great repute for killing of the Tyrant; but afterwards growing Ambitious, and having hir'd many Foreign Soldiers, they set up for themselves; and put to death many that were averse from their Designs; and having got together a strong Party, they kept the Soverejgnty by force of Arms. But the Aleuadae (as they are call'd) Persons famous for the Nobleness of their Birth, conspir'd to oppose the Tyrants: But not being able to perfect so great a Business of themselves, they procur'd the Assistance of Philip King of Macedon, who return'd into Ant. Ch. 355 Thessaly, and subdu'd the Tyrants, and restor'd the Cities to their Liberty, and carried himself with the greatest demonstrations of Kindness imaginable towards the Thessalians; so that ever after in all his Wars, not only he but his Son Alexander had them to be their constant Friends and Confederates.
Among the Writers Demophilus, the Son of Ephorus the Historian (who continu'd the Demophilus, Calisthenes, Dyillus. History of the Sacred War, left imperfect by his Father) began at the time when the Temple of Delphos was seiz'd and robb'd by Philomele the Phocian. That War continu'd Eleven Years, till such time as the Sacrilegious Robbers of that Temple were miserably destroy'd. Calisthenes likewise comprehended in ten Books the Affairs of the Graecians, bringing down his History in a continual Thred, to the Spoiling of the Temple by the Wicked∣ness of Philomele: And Dyillus the Athenian, begins his History from this Sacrilege, and gives an Account of the Affairs of Greece and Sicily in those Times, in Seventeen Books. CHAP. IV. The first Rise of the Brutii in Italy. Dionysius his Admiral invades the Leontines. A Fight at Sea between Heraclides and Philistus, Admirals; one of Dionysius, the other of Dion. A Faction in Syracuse. Dion leaves the Syracusians. Their sad Condition. Reliev'd by Dion. WHen Elpinus bore the Chief Magistracy of Athens, and Marcus Popilius Laenos, Olymp. 106. 1. Ant. Ch. 354. An. M. 3594. Isackson's Com. and Cneius Manlius Imperiosus were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome, the Hundred and Sixth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Porus of Malia was crown'd with Victory. In Italy a promiscuous Multitude got together about Lucania * from several parts of the Country, most of them Servants that had run away from their Masters. At first they The first Rise of the Brutii in Italy. employed themselves in Robbing and Stealing, presently by a common Practice of skulk∣ing in the Fields, and making Incursions, they learnt the Use and Exercise of Martial Dis∣cipline and Feats of War. And prevailing in several Encounters against the Inhabitants, they increas'd to a vast Body and Number of Men. In the first Place they took and plunder'd the City Trojana; then seizing upon Arpo∣nius and Thurium, and many other Cities, they formed themselves into a Common-wealth; and because they had many of them been Servants, they assum'd the Name of * Brutii. And thus the Nation of the* Brutii grew up in Italy. At this time in Sicily, Philistus, Dionysius his General, Sailed to Rhegium, and transpor∣ted , rather Brettians; for they were call'd Brutii by the Romans as a Brutish People. above Five hundred Horse to Syracuse: And joining to these a greater Body of Horse, and Two Thousand Foot, he invaded the Leontines, who had fallen from Dionysius.  Sur∣prizing therefore the Walls secretly in the Night, he possess'd himself of part of the City; upon which follow'd an Hot Engagement, and by the help of the Syracusians, who came into the Aid of the Leontines, Philistus over-power'd with number, was forc'd out again. In the mean time, Heraclides, Dion's Admiral, being left in Peloponnesus, and hinder'd by Storms and contrary Winds, (so that he could not arrive at Sicily time enough to be assistant to Dion in his return into his Countrey, and to be helpful in rescuing the Syra∣cusians from Slavery) arriv'd at length with Twenty Sail of , Long Ships. Ant. Ch. 354. Galleys and Fifteen hundred Soldiers: Who being a Man of Noble Birth and of great Esteem, and judg'd worthy of so great a Trust, he was declar'd Admiral by the Syracusians, and he and Dion joining Head and Hand together, manag'd the War against Dionysius. About the same time Philistus being made Lord High-Admiral by Dionysius, and having a Fleet of Sixty Sail well provided, entred the Lists in a Sea-fight with the Syracusians, who A Fight at Sea between Dion's Admiral and Dionysius his Admiral. had a Navy not fewer in number than the Dionysians. Whereupon there was a sharp Fight, in which the Valour of Philistus at the first prevail'd: But at length being sur∣rounded by the Enemy, the Syracustans from all parts making it their great business to take him alive, he to avoid the Disgrace and Miseries usually attending upon a State of Capti∣vity, kill'd himself, after he had serv'd the Tyrant to the utmost of his Power, and had signaliz'd his Faithfulness above all the rest, and chiefest of his Friends. The Syracusians being Victors drew the mangled Body of Philistus through the whole City, and at length cast it out to the open Air without Burial. Dionysius having now lost the most Valiant of all his Friends, and knowing not where to find another fit for the Place, sent Ambassadors to Dion, with an Offer at first of half the Kingdom; and presently after consented to give up the Whole. But when Dion answer'd, That it was but just he should surrender the Castle to the Syracusians, upon having only some Money, and some marks of Honour conferred upon him: The Tyrant hereupon said, He was ready to deliver up the Castle to the People, upon Condition that he and Ant. Ch. 354.
the Mercenaries, with all the Treasure they had got, might pass over to Italy. Dion's Ad∣vice was, That the Terms should be accepted: But the People being wrought over to a contrary Opinion by the importunate Orators, opposed Dion, for that they doubted not but to take the Castle by Storm. Dionysius hereupon committed the Custody of the Castle to the Stoutest of the Mercenaries; but he himself having brought aboard all his Treasures and Houshold-Goods, without being discover'd, set sail and Landed in Italy. In the mean time the Syracusians were divided into Factions, while some were for He∣raclides A Faction in Syracuse. to have the Chief Command in the Army, and likewise the Sovereign Power, be∣cause he was judg'd a Person that was not ambitious of the Tyranny: But others were for intrusting the Chief Power and Authority in the Hands of Dion. Moreover, there were great Arrears due to the Soldiers that came out of Peloponnesus to the Assistance of the Sy∣racusians: The City therefore being very low in Money, and the Soldiers defrauded of their Pay, they gather'd themselves into a Body, being Three thousand valiant Men, all old and expert Soldiers, far excelling the Syracusians in Courage: These mov'd Dion to go along with them, and leave the Syracusians, that they might be revenged of them in due time as a Common Enemy: Which he at first deny'd; but the present Exigency of Dion leaves the Syracusi∣ans. Affairs requiring it, he at length took upon him the Command of the Foreigners, and joining himself to them, marched to the Leontines: But the Syracusians getting into a Body, pursu'd the Mercenaries, and engag'd them in their march, but were forc'd to retire with the loss of a great Number of their Fellow Citizens. But Dion, thô he had obtain'd a great Victory, yet he was willing to forget the Inju∣ries offer'd him by the Syracusians. For when they sent a Trumpet to him to have Liber∣ty Ant. Ch. 354▪ to carry off the Bodies of the Dead, he not only agreed to that, but freely discharg'd many Prisoners without Ransom. For many when they were ready to be knock'd on the Head in the Pursuit, declar'd they were Favourers of Dion's Party; and by that means escaped present Death. Afterwards Dionysius sent Nypsius, a Citizen of Naples, a Valiant and expert Soldier, as his General, and with him Transport-Ships loaden with Corn and other Provision, who loosing from Locris, made straight for Syracuse. In the mean time, the Garison-Soldiers of the Tyrant in the Castle, tho' they were dri∣ven then to the utmost Extremity for want of Bread, yet endur'd Famine for some time with great Resolution. But at length Nature stooping to Necessity, and having no pro∣spect of Relief any other way, they call'd a Council of War in the Night, and resolv'd to surrender the Castle and themselves to the Syracusians the next Day. Night therefore being now ended, the Mercenaries sent Trumpets to the Townsmen to treat of Peace, which was no sooner done, but presently Nypsius at spring of day arrives with the Fleet, and anchor'd in the Port of A Fountain call'd Arethu∣sa near Syra∣cuse. Arethusa. Whereupon, on a Sudden their present Neces∣sities were turn'd into large and plentiful Supplies of all sorts of Provision. Then the General having landed his Men, call'd a Council of War, and in an Oration, fitted for the present Occasion, so spoke to 'em, that he wrought 'em to a Resolution chearfully to undergo all future Hardships to the utmost Extremity. And thus the Acropolis ready to be deliver'd into the Hands of the Syracusians, was unexpectedly preserv'd. Hereupon, Ant. Ch. 354. the Syracusians with all speed Mann'd out as many Gallies as they had at hand, and on a sudden fell upon the Enemy, while they were discharging their Vessels of their Corn and Provision: And although this Incursion was Sudden and Unexpected, and that the Ga∣rison in the Castle oppos'd the Enemies Galleys in a tumultuous and disorderly Manner, yet it came to a formal Sea-fight, in which the Syracusians got the Victory, and sunk some of the Enemy's Ships, took others, and forc'd the rest to the Shore. Being encou∣rag'd with this Success, they offer'd to the Gods abundance of Sacrifices for the Victory: But giving themselves in the mean time to Quaffing and Drinking, and likewise Slighting , Lifted up like Metors in the Air. and Despising them in the Castle as a beaten Enemy, they were careless in their Guards: So that Nypsius desirous to repair his late Loss by a new Engagement, orders a select Body of his Men in the Night, and on the sudden assaults the Wall lately built; and finding the Guard, through overmuch Confidence, and their Surfeiting and Drunkenness, fallen fast asleep, set Scaling-Ladders (made for the purpose) to the Walls: By which means some of the stoutest Fellows of the Garison mounted the Wall, kill'd the Centinels, and open'd the Gates. This sudden Assault being made upon the City, the Syracusian Commanders . not yet recover'd of their drunken Fit, endeavour'd to help their Fellows as well as they could. But through their Wine not knowing how to use their Hands, some were knock'd on the Head, others took to their Heels. And now the City being taken, and almost all the Soldiers issu'd out of the Castle and entred within the Walls, and the Citizens by rea∣son Syracuse taken by Dionysius his Soldiers in the Castle. of this sudden and unexpected Surprize, and the Confusion that was amongst them,
being even at their Wits end, all places were fill'd with Slaughter and Destruction: For the Tyrant's Soldiers being above Ten thousand Men, and in good Order and Discipline, Ant. Ch. 354. none were able to withstand them, but through Fear and Confusion, and the Disorder of an ungovernable Multitude, through want of Officers, all went to wrack. When they came into the Forum, being now Conquerors, they presently rush'd into the Houses, and Ransack'd and Plunder'd all to a vast Value of Wealth, and made Captive a great Mul∣titude of Women, Children and Servants. In the straight and narrow Passages and some other Places, the Syracusians made Resistance, and never ceas'd fighting; Multitudes being kill'd and as many wounded. And even all the Night long they kill'd one another as they fortun'd to meet in the Dark; and there was no place in the City but what was cover'd The sad Condi∣tion of the Sy∣racuse. and strew'd with Dead Carcasses. As soon as it was Day, the Light discover'd the Greatness of the Calamity and Misery. The Citizens having now no means left to be deliver'd, but by the Aid and Assistance of Dion, sent forth some Horsemen with all speed to the City of the Leontines, earnestly to intreat him, that he would not suffer the Country to be a Prey to the Enemy, but that he would pardon their former Miscarriages, and commiserate them in their present Di∣stress, and relieve and raise up their Country from that low and despicable Condition wherein they then were. Dion who was a Man of a brave Spirit, and had a Soul well principled with the Rudi∣ments of Philosophy, and so was mild and easie to be Persuaded, remember'd not the former Injuries of the Citizens, but hir'd his Soldiers to march away to the Expedition, and with these he made a swift March to Syracuse, and came to the Hexapylae. There he The Six Gates so call'd. drew up his Army, and march'd forward with all speed; and there met him above Ten thousand Women and Children, and old People, who fled out of the City; who all pro∣strated themselves at his Feet, and beseech'd him with Tears that he would rescue them Ant. Ch. 354. from their wretched and miserable Condition. The Soldiers of the Castle having now accomplish'd what they aim'd at, after they had plunder'd all the Houses about the Fo∣rum, set them on fire, and then breaking into the fest made a Prey of all they found in them, at which very nick of time in the very height of their Rapines, Dion forcing into the City in many places at once, sets upon the Enemy now eager in plundering, and kill'd Syracuse re∣liev'd by Dion. all he met as they were carrying away all sorts of Houshold-Goods bundled upon their Shoulders. For coming upon them on the sudden, as they were Scatter'd and Dispers'd here and there bringing away their Prey, they were all easily knock'd on the Head. After Four thousand and upwards were slain, some in the Houses and others in the Streets and High-ways, the rest fled into the Castle and clapt the Gates upon them, and so escap'd. Dion, when he had perform'd this Exploit (the most Glorious of any ever before) quench'd the Fire, and so preserv'd the Houses that were all on a Flame, and firmly repair'd the Wall that fronted the Castle; and so by one and the same piece of Work, he both defended the City and strengthned the Garison within the Acropolis. Then he cleans'd the Town of the Dead Bodies, erected a Trophy, and Sacrific'd to the Gods for the Deliverance of his Country. On the other hand, the People to testifie their Gratitude to Dion, call'd a General As∣sembly, and by an unanimous Vote made him Dion made Chief Magi∣strate over the Syracusians. chief Governor, with full and absolute Power, and conferr'd upon him the Honours due to a Demy-god. Afterwards, agreeable to the Glory of his other Actions, he freely pardon'd all that had maliciously injur'd him, and by his frequent Admonitions brought the People to mu∣tual Peace and Concord: For all the Citizens of all Ranks and Degrees highly honour'd and applauded him, as their great Benefactor, and as the only Saviour of their Coun∣trey.
CHAP. V. The Continuance of the Social War. Iphicrates and Timotheus join'd Admirals with Chares, by the Athenians. Iphicrates and Timotheus accus'd by Chares, and fin'd and remov'd. Chares joins with Pharnabasus, and routs the Persians. The End of the Social War. Philip subdues the Confederates. IN Greece the Social War growing on apace, wherein the Chians, Rhodians, Coons, and Byzantines join'd together against the Athenians, great Preparations were made on both sides, to make a Decision of the Quarrel by a Sea-Fight. The Athenians, tho' they had rigg'd out a Fleet of Sixty Sail, under the Command of Chares; yet they sent out others for the further strengthening of them that were employ'd before, under the Com∣mands of Two of the most Eminent of their Citizens, Iphicrates and Timotheus, who were invested in equal Power of Command with Chares, to carry on the War against their rebellious Confederates. On the other side, the Chians, Rhodians, and Byzantines, being furnish'd with an Hun∣dred Sail from their Confederates, waste and spoil the Islands Imbrus and Lemnos, belong∣ing Ant. Ch. 354. to the Athenians: Thence they made for Samos with a great Army, and harass'd the Country, and besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. Many other Islands likewise under the Government of the Athenians they wasted and spoil'd, and by that means got together a Treasure for the carrying on of the War. The Athenian Generals therefore joining their Forces, resolv'd in the first place to be∣siege Byzantium: But the Chians and their Confederates raising their Siege at Samos, and preparing to relieve Byzantium, the Fleets on both sides met in the Hellespont. And now just as they were ready to join Battel, there arose suddenly a violent Tempest which pre∣vented their Design. However, Chares was resolv'd to fight, tho' Nature herself, with the Wind and Seas, conspir'd against him; but Iphicrates and Timotheus, by reason of the Storm, refus'd. Chares (attesting the Faithfulness of the Soldiers) accus'd his Colleagues of Treason, and wrote Letters to the People of Athens, whereby he inform'd them that they wav'd fighting purposely out of Design. At which the People were so incens'd, that they condemn'd them both; and having fin'd them in many Talents, revok'd their Commissions. Chares now having the sole Command of the Fleet, designing to free the Athenians from Ant. Ch. 354. Charge and Expence, did a very rash Act: Pharnabasus had revolted from the King, and was now ready to engage with a very small Force the Persian Lord-Lieutenants, who had in their Army Seventy thousand Men: Chares joins this Man with all his Forces, so that they totally routed the King's; and Pharnabasus in Gratitude for the Service, gave him as much Money as was sufficient to pay all his Soldiers. This Act of Chares was at first very grateful and acceptable to the Athenians; but after that the King, by his Ambassadors, com∣plain'd of the Injurie done him by Chares, they altogether chang'd their Notes, and were as far the other way: For a Rumor was spread abroad, that the King had promis'd Three hundred Sail for the Aid and Assistance of the Athenians Enemies: Upon which the People were so terrify'd, that they decreed to agree Matters with the Revolters; and finding them as willing to embrace Terms of Peace as themselves, the Business was The End of the Social War. easily compos'd. And this was the end of the Social War, after it had continu'd four Years. In the mean time, in Macedonia Three Kings; that is to say, of Thrace, the Paeones, and Illyrians, confederated against Philip. These Princes, being Borderers upon the Macedo∣nians, could not brook without Envy his growing Power: And though they had had Ex∣perience that they were not his equal Match singly (being not long before conquer'd by him) yet by joining their Forces together, they confidently concluded, that they should be able to deal with him. But Philip coming suddenly upon them while they were rai∣sing their Forces, and as yet without any form'd Troops being in readiness; in this Sur∣prize he broke them in pieces, and forc'd them to stoop to the Yoak of the Macedonian Kingdom.
CHAP. VI. The Beginning of the Sacred or Phocian War. Philomelus seizes the Temple at Delphos, after he had routed the Locrians. How the Oracle at Delphos was first discover'd; and the Beginning of the Tripode. The Athenians and others join with Philomelus. AFter Callistratus was created Archon at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Caius Plotius Olymp. 106. 2. An. M. 3595. Ant. Ch. 353. The Sacred War. Consuls of Rome, the War call'd The Sacred War broke forth, which continu'd Nine Years: For Philomelus the Phocian (inferior to none in Impudence and Wickedness) ha∣ving seiz'd the Temple at Delphos, occasion'd the Sacred War, on the Account fol∣lowing. After the Lacedaemonians were routed by the Thebans at the Battel of Leuctra, the The∣bans made great Complaints against them in the Court of the Amphictyons, for their sei∣zing of Cadmea: Upon which, they were adjudg'd to pay to them a great Sum of Money. The Phocians likewise were accus'd, and condemn'd by the same Court to pay many Talents to the Use of the Oracle at Delphos, because they had intruded into a large Piece of Land, call'd Cirrhaea, belonging to the Oracle, and had till'd and plough'd it. But the Muct being neglected to be paid, the The Priests and Officers of the Temple. Hieromemones accus'd the Phocians in the Senate of the Amphictyons, and pray'd them if the Money were not paid, that the Lands of the sacrilegious Persons might be confiscated, and devoted to the Deity. They requird likewise, that the rest that were condemn'd (among whom were the Lacedaemonians) should pay what was due upon that account; and pray'd, That if they did not observe what was so order'd, that then they should be prosecuted as hateful Enemies by all the Grecians. This Decree of the Amphictyons being ratify'd and approv'd of by all the Greeks, the Country of the Phocians was upon the point of being devoted to those Sacred Uses. Phi∣lomelus, who was in greatest Esteem at that time amongst them, told the People, That Ant. Ch. 353. the Fine was so excessive, that it could not possibly be paid; and to suffer their Country to be sacrific'd, it would not only argue them to be cowardly and poor spirited, but be dangerous to that degree, that it would tend to the utter Ruin of them and their Families: And he did all he could to make it out, that the Decree of the Amphictyons was most un∣just, and highly injurious, inasmuch as for a little and inconsiderate Spot of Land, they had impos'd a Mulct far exceeding the Proportion and Merit of the Offence; and therefore advis'd them to rescind the Decree, and that there were Reasons sufficient to justifie their so doing: And among others he alledg'd, That heretofore the Oracle was under their Power and Protection; and cited the Verses of Homer, the most ancient and famous of all the Poets, as a Witness of the Truth of what he said, who speaks to this effect: , . Epistrophus and Schedius did command (Iphitus valiant Sons) the Phocian Band, Who Cypariss and Pitho till'd—Ogilb. Therefore the Contest is to be for the Custody and Patronage of the Temple, which he said belong'd to the Ancestors of the Phocians; and that if they would commit to him the absolute Power, as Chief Commander in this Affair, he promis'd to manage it with the utmost Care and Dexterity. Upon which, the Phocians (out of fear of the Mulct impos'd upon them) created Phi∣lomelus sole and absolute General. Hereupon Philomelus diligently pursu'd the Performance of his Promise; and to that end presently made a Journey to Sparta, and had private Conference concerning the Business with Archidomus, King of the Lacedaemonians, alledg∣ing, That it was as much the Interest and Concern of Archidomus, as his, to have the Decrees of the Amphictyons rescinded; for that the Amphictyons had injur'd likewise the Lacedaemonians unjustly, by giving Judgment against them. He thereupon discover'd to him his Design of seizing upon the Temple at Delphos; and that if he prevail'd inbringing the Oracle under his Care and Patronage, he would make void all the Decrees of the Am∣phictyons.
Archidomus approv'd well of what he said; but for the present would not ap∣pear openly to be aiding in the matter, but assur'd him that he would join in all things privately, in supplying him with Money and mercenary Soldiers. Philomelus then having receiv'd from him Fifteen Talents, and adding as many more to them of his own, rais'd Soldiers from all Parts: A thousand he listed from among the Phocians, whom he call'd Those that carry'd short Shields. Peltastates. And after he had got together a considerable Force, he set upon the Temple: Some of the Delphians call'd Thracidae oppos'd him; but those he slew, and gave up all they had to the Plunder of the Soldiers. He commanded the rest (whom he perceiv'd to be in no small Fright) to be of good Courage, for they should suffer no prejudice. And now the Report of seizing the Temple was spread far and near; upon which, the Locrians, who were next Borderers, march'd against Philomelus with a considerable Army, and fought him near Delphos, but were routed; and after a great Slaughter made amongst them, fled, and made back to their own Country. Ant. Ch. 353. Philomelus puff'd up with this Victory, cut the Decrees of the Amphictyons out of the Pillars, and destroy'd all the Records concerning them that were condemn'd. In the mean time, he caus'd Reports to be spread abroad in every place, that he neither design'd to rob the Temple, nor commit any other Mischief, but only to recover an ancient Right descended to them from their Ancestors; and to that end had a desire to make void the unjust Decrees of the Amphictyons, and so to defend the ancient Laws of the Phocians. But the Boeotians assembled in Council made a Decree to relieve the Temple, and forthwith rais'd an Army. Philomelus in the mean time drew a Wall round the Temple, and rais'd many Soldiers, and added to their Pay half as much more as their Due amounted unto; and making choice of the best Soldiers among the Phocians, he enroll'd them; and in a short time got together so great an Army, as amounted to no less than Five thousand Men: So that possessing himself of all the Passages to Delphos, he became formidable to his Enemies. Then marching into the Territories of the Locrians, he wasted a great part of the Coun∣try; and at length encamp'd near a River that ran close by a very strong Fort, which he besieg'd; but after some Assaults, not being able to take it, he rais'd the Siege, and engag'd with the Locrians, in which he lost Twenty of his Men; whose Bodies not being capable to recover by Force, he sent a Trumpeter to have them deliver'd. The Locrians deny'd the Bodies, and made answer, That there was a general Law a∣mong all the Grecians, that sacrilegious Persons should be cast forth, and not allow'd any Ant. Ch. 353. Burial. Highly provok'd with this Repulse, he fought again with the Locrians, and with great Valour and Resolution slaughter'd some of his Enemies, and possess'd himself of their Bodies; and so forc'd the Locrians in exchange to deliver the Dead. And now being Master of the Field, he rang'd up and down, and wasted the Country of Locris; and loading his Soldiers with Plunder, return'd to Delphos. Afterwards desiring to know from the Oracle what would be the Issue of the War, he forc'd Pythia the Prophetess to ascend the Tripode, and . To give an O∣racle. give him an Answer. Since that mention is here made of the Tripode, I conceive it not unseasonable to give an account of what has been handed down to us concerning it from ancient Times. It is reported, that this Oracle was first discover'd by some Goats; for which reason such Creatures are most commonly sacrific'd by the Delphians, when they come to enquire of the Oracle. The Discovery is related in this manner: There was an Opening or Gulf in the Earth in that How the Place of the Oracle at Delphos was first discover'd; and the begin∣ning of the Tripode. Ant. Ch. 353. Place, now call'd the Adytum of the Temple; about this the Goats straggled as they were feeding: For at that time they of Delphos had no Religious Regard to the Place. It often happen'd, that when any Goat came near the Gulf, and look'd down, it would fall a leaping and dancing in a wonderful manner, and make an unusual Noise, far different from that at other times. A Shepherd wondring at the Novelty of the thing, drew to∣wards the Place to learn what was the Cause; and looking down, he acted the same Part with the Goats: For as they were moved and acted as by some Enthusiasm, so he likewise was inspir'd with a Spirit of Prophecy. The News presently spreading abroad among the Inhabitants, how wonderfully they were affected that look'd down into the Chasm, many flock'd to the place, and out of Curiosity made Experiments; and as many as came near, were always acted with a Spirit of Divination. For these Reasons, the Place was counted the Residence of some Oracle: For some time therefore it was a pra∣ctice, that those who had a desire to know Future Events, would approach to this Denn, and there return Answers of things that were to come one to another. But whereas many through an Excess and Transport of Mind would leap into the Gulf, and so were never seen more; it was judg'd adviseable by the Inhabitants (to avoid the like danger for the future) that some one Woman should be consecrated Prophetess, and that by her the
Answer of the Oracle should be deliver'd; and that an Engine should be made for her whereon she might sit; and by that means be inspir'd without any danger, and give An∣swers to them that consulted with her concerning Future Events. This Machine had three Feet, from whence it was call'd the Tripode, whose Figure and Three Bases. Shape almost all the Tripodes of Brass made to this day do imitate. But sufficient, we con∣ceive, is said concerning the manner of finding out the Seat of the Oracle, and for what Reasons the Tripode was made, It's reported, That at the first, Virgins were assign'd to this Office, because that in their Nature they are more pure and harmless, and of the same Sex with The Sister of Apollo. Diana: And besides, for that they were judg'd fittest to keep the Secrets of the Oracle. But it's said, that of latter time, one Thessalus Echecrates coming to the Oracle, upon sight of the Virgin-Prophe∣tess, for her admirable Beauty, fell in love with her, and ravish'd her: Which wicked Fact caus'd the Delphians to make a Law, That no young Virgin, for the future, but a Ant. Ch. 353. grave Woman of fifty Years of Age (in a Virgin's Dress, to keep up the Memory of the ancient Mode in Divination) should preside, and return the Answers. These are the old fabulous Stories that are told concerning the first discovery of the Oracle. But to return to the Acts of Philomelus; who being now Lord of the Temple; com∣manded Pythia to answer him from the Tripods, according to the ancient Rite and Custom of the Country. When the Prophetess answer'd him, saying, This is the Custom of the Country; he commanded her with Threats to ascend the Tripode: Whereupon she sub∣mitting by force to the Authority of the Imposer, answer'd him, That it was lawful for him to do what he list. At which he was very jocund, and said he had receiv'd an Answer fit for his Purpose: And thereupon presently caus'd the Answer to be recorded, and ex∣pos'd to be read; that so it might be evident to all, that the God had given him liberty to do what he pleas'd. Then he call'd a General Assembly, and rehears'd to them the Divine Oracle, and bid them all to be constant and courageous; and then betook himself again to the Business of the War. Moreover, a Prodigy appear'd to him in the Temple of Apollo; for an Eagle hovering over it, and at length casting her self down to the ground, pursu'd the Pigeons (that were fed and kept in the Temple) from place to place, so that she snatch'd away some even from the Altars themselves. Those that were vers'd in inter∣preting things of this Nature, declar'd that this portended that Philomelus and the Phocians should possess themselves of all the Treasures of the Temple. Being greatly puff'd up with this Encouragement, he singles out the choicest of his Friends to send as Messengers Ant. Ch. 353. abroad, some to Athens, others to Lacedaemon, and others to Thebes, and other most re∣markable Cities of Greece, with this Apology: That he had seiz'd upon Delphos, not with any design to commit any Sacrilege, but to regain the Patronage of the Temple for his Country; and declar'd that he was ready to give an exact account to all the Greeks of the Money, and all the dedicated Gifts there, both for weight and number, whoever should require the same. At length he desir'd, that if any, out of Envy or Malice, should make War upon the Phocians, that they would rather join with him against such, or at least stand Neuters. The Ambassadors quitting themselves with all diligence in this matter, the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and some others, entred into the Confederacy, and pro∣mis'd them assistance: But the Boeotians, with the Locrians, and some others, were of a contrary Mind, who took up Arms in defence of the Oracle against the Phocians. These were the things done in the Course of this Year. CHAP. VII. The Battel at Phaedra between Philomelus and the Locrians. The Parties engag'd in the Phocian War. The Battel between the Boeotians and Phocians. Philomelus kill'd. Onomarchus made General: His Dreams, Successes and Death. NOW Diotinus executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and Cneius Manlius, and Caius Martius of Consuls at Rome; when Philomelus having a prospect of the Storm Olymp. 106. 3. Ant. Ch. 352. An. M. 3596. of War that was rushing in upon him, hir'd a great number of Soldiers, with whom he join'd the most expert and choicest of the Phocians. But tho' he was in want of Money, yet he still forbore to meddle with the Sacred Treasures; but got sufficient to pay the Mercenaries out of the Estates of the greatest men among the Delphians. When he had rais'd a considerable Army, he march'd into the Field, that all might take notice that he was
ready to fight with any Enemy that appear'd against the Phocians. Upon this the Locrians The Battel at the Rocks of Phaedra. See the Story in Ovid. Epist. Phaedra to Hippolytus. made out against him, and fought with him at a Place call'd, The Rocks of Phaedra, whom he routed; and kill'd multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners, and forc'd some of them to cast themselves down headlong from the Top of the Rock. After this Battle, the Phocians grew very high crested upon the account of their pro∣sperous Success. The Misfortune on the other hand, greatly discourag'd the Locrians; they sent therefore an Ambassador to Thebes, to desire them to afford their assistance both to them and the Oracle. The Baeotians both out of their Piety towards the Gods, and for Confirmation of the Decrees of the Amphictyons (wherein they were greatly concern'd) solicited by their Ambassadors, the Thessalians, and others of the Amphictyons to join with them in the War against the Phocians. Upon which (after that the Amphictyons had de∣creed War to be made upon the Phocians) there arose great Uproars and Factions through∣out all Greece. Some were for assisting the Oracle, and for prosecuting the Phocians with Revenge as Sacrilegers; others were for defending them. And while both the Cities and Countries were thus distracted in their Councils, the Baeotians, Locrians, Thessalians, Per∣rhabeans, The Parties in the Phocian War. the Doreans, Delopians, Athamanes, Achaians, Phthiots, Magnesians, Aenianeans, and some others, resolv'd to assist the God. The Athenians and Lacedemonians, and some other of the Peloponnesians, join'd as Confederates with the Phocians. The Lacedemonians, with some others, readily join'd for these Reasons, viz. When the Thebans had overcome them in the Battel at Leuctra, they prosecuted the Spartans in the high Court of the Am∣phictyons, because Phaebidas the Spartan had seiz'd upon Cadmea, and demanded Five hun∣dred Ant. Ch. 352. Talents in compensation of the Injury; but the Lacedemonians being fin'd so much, and not paying the Mulct impos'd, at the time limited by the Law, the Thebans exhibited a new Complaint against them for the double Injury. The Lacedemonians therefore being condemn'd by the Amphictyons in a Thousand Ta∣lents, and being much indebted and behind-hand, made use of the same Pretence the Phocians did before, (that is) That the Amphictyons had pronounc'd an unjust Sentence against them. And therefore (though it was for the Publick Good) yet they forbore to undertake the War of themselves upon the Quarrel of the Condemnation; but judg'd that it might carry a better Face, if they could avoid the Decree of the Amphictyons, under the Covert of the Phocians. For these Reasons they were very forward to Patronize their Cause; and in the mean time contriv'd to gain the Tutelary Right of the Temple to them∣selves. And now upon certain Information, that the Thebans had prepar'd a very great Army against the Phocians, Philomelus resolv'd to strengthen his Forces with more Mercenaries: But in regard more Money was requisite for carrying on of the War, he was necessitated to make use of the , Gifts Consecra∣ted. Sacred Treasures, and therefore rifl'd the Temple. And because he promis'd half as much more as their ordinary Pay to the Mercenaries, a vast Number of Men flock'd in to him, and for the sake of the Largeness of the Pay, multitudes listed themselves: But no moderate and sober Man gave up his Name to be inroll'd in the Lists of the Army, out of a Pious and Religious respect to the Oracle. In the mean time e∣very base Fellow, that for the sake of Gain valu'd not the Gods a pin, but flock'd eager∣ly to Philomelus: And so in a short time he got together a strong Body of Men, greedy to share in the Sacred Treasures of the Temple. And thus abundance of Wealth was the Means whereby Philomelus presently form'd a compleat Army; and without delay march'd into the Country of Locris, with above Ten thousand Horse and Foot. The Locrians be∣ing A Battel be∣tween the Lo∣crians and Phocians, with Horse only. join'd with the Baeotians, met him; whereupon there hapned a Fight with the Horse on both sides, in which the Phocians were Conquerors. Not long after, the Thessalians, with the Assistance of them that border'd upon them, to the Number of Six thousand, march'd into Locris, and engag'd with the Phocians at an Hill call'd Argola, and were worsted. Afterwards the Baeotians coming in to their assistance with Thirteen thousand Men, and the Actaeans out of Peloponnesus, in assistance of the Phocians with Fifteen hundred, both Armies near unto one and the same place, Encamp'd one over against the other. It then happen'd that a great number of the Mercenaries as they were foraging, fell into the Hands of the Baeotians, and all of them being brought before the Walls of the City, they commanded a Proclamation to be made, that those Men who had join'd in Arms with the Sacrilegers, were adjudg'd by the Amphictyons to be put to Death, and it was no sooner said but the thing was executed, and all were run through with Spears and Darts. This so exasperated the Mercenaries of the Phocians, The Phocians darted to Death by the Bti∣ans. that they earnestly press'd Philomelus that the Enemy might be dealt with in the same kind, and would not suffer him by their restless Importunities to be quiet, and presently they took many of the Enemy, as they were dispers'd in the Fields, and brought them
alive to the General, who deliver'd them up all to the Soldiers to be Darted to Death. The like done by the Phocians to the Baeoti∣ans. By this Retaliation it came to pass, that the Enemy left off this Insulting and Cruel kind of Execution. Afterwards, both the Armies moving into another part of the Country, and in their march passing through Woods and rough Places, on a sudden, and unexpectedly, the Forelorn-Hopes of both met one another, upon which they at first Skirmish'd, and at length it came to a fierce and bloody Battel, in which the Baeotians over-powing the Phocians in number, totally routed them; and multitudes both of the Phocians and Merce∣naries were slain in the pursuit, by reason of the rough and difficult Passes out of the Woods. Philomelus, in these Streights and Exigencies, behav'd himself with great Cou∣rage and Resolution, and after many Wounds receiv'd, was forc'd to an high Precipice; and seeing no possible way and means how to escape, and fearing the Punishment and Torments Prisoners used to undergo, cast himself down headlong from the Rock; and The Death of Philomelus. thus (meeting with the due Reward of his Sacrilege) he ended his days: But his Collegue, Onomarcus, taking upon him the Command of the Army, marched back with those that had escap'd the Slaughter, and receiv'd those that fled as they came stragling in to him. In the mean time, while these things were doing, Philip of Macedon took Methone, pil∣lag'd it, and laid it equal with the Ground; and forc'd all the Villages and Countries to Philip raises Methone. submit to the Macedonian Yoke. In Pontus, Leucon, King of Bosphorus, dy'd after he had Reign'd forty years: And Spartacus his Son succeeded him, and Reign'd five years. And in the mean time, the War began between the Romans and the Falisci, in which there was nothing done worth taking notice of, but only harrassing the Country of the Falisci by Incursions. In Sicily, Dion, the General of the Army, was Murder'd by the Mercenaries of Zacyn∣thus; and Callippus, who instigated them to the Fact, was made Chief Commander in his Dion slain. Ant. Ch. 352. place, and enjoy'd it for the space of Thirteen Months. When Eudemus executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans intrusted the Consular Dignity with Marcus Fabius and Marcus Popilius, the Baeotians, after the Victory Olymp. 106. 4. Ant. Ch. 351. An. M. 3597. gained over the Phocians, return'd with their Forces into their own Country, supposing that Philomelus, the Author and Ring-leader of the Sacrilege (being justly punish'd both by the Gods and Men) by his remarkable End, would deter others from the like piece of Wickedness. But the Phocians having at present some respite from War, went again to Delphos, and calling together a General Council of all their Confederates, they con∣sulted concerning the Renewing of the War. Those that were Lovers of Justice were for Peace; but the Prophane and Impious, and such as minded only their Gain and Ad∣vantage were for War, and us'd their utmost Endeavours to find out some or other that would Patronize their wicked Designs. Onomarchus therefore, in a premeditated Speech (the chief End of which was to advise them to stick to what they had before resolv'd) stirr'd up the People to renew the War; not so much for the Advancement of the Publick Good, as to promote his own private Advantage. For he had many Mulcts as well as others, impos'd upon him by the Am∣phictyons; which not being able to pay, and therefore judging that War was more desira∣ble than Peace as to his Circumstances, by a plausible Speech he incited the Phocians to persist in what Philomelus had begun. Upon which, being then created General, he in∣forc'd himself with many Foreign Soldiers, and recruited his broken Troops; and ha∣ving Onomarchus made General of the Phoci∣ans. Vid. Ju∣stin. Lib. 8. Ant. Ch. 351. augmented his Army with a Multitude of Foreign Mercenaries, he made great pre∣paration to strengthen himself with Confederates, and other things necessary for the car∣rying on the War. And he was the more encourag'd in his Design by a Dream which he had, which did presage (as he thought) his future Greatness and Advancement: In his sleep it appear'd to him as if the Brazen Colossus, Dedicated by the Amphictyons, and standing in the Temple of Apollo, had by his own Hands been , Been made a∣new. made Higher and much Onomarchus his Dream. Bigger than it was before. Hence he fancy'd, that the Gods portended that he was to become famous in the World for his Martial Exploits. But it fell out quite otherwise, for on the contrary it signify'd, That the Mulct impos'd by the Amphictyons upon the Phoci∣ans, for their Sacrilege and Violating the Treasures of the Temple, would be much En∣larg'd and Advanc'd to a greater Sum by the Hands of Onomarchus; which at length came to pass. Onomarchus therefore, after he was created General, caus'd a great Number of Arms, both of Iron and Brass to be made; and Coin'd Money both of Gold and Silver, which he sent abroad here and there to the Consederate Cities; especially he sought to gain the Magistrates by these Baits and Largesses.
Moreover he corrupted many of the Enemy, drawing some into the Confederacy, and working upon others to sit still in the mean time. And all this he easily effected, through the Covetousness of those he wrought upon. For by his Bribes he prevailed with the Thessalians, the most considerable of the Confederates on the other side, to stand Neuter. Those among the Phocians that opposed him, he clapt up in Prison, and put them to Death, and expos'd their Goods to publick Sale; He then march'd into the Enemies Country, and took Thronius by Assault, and sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves. The Amphissenians Ant. Ch. 351. likewise being greatly terrified, he forced to a Submission, and possessed himself also of the Cities of the Doreans, and wasted and spoiled the Country. Thence, he marched into Boeotia, and took Orchomenus, and when he was even ready to sit down before Chaero∣nea, he was worsted by the Thebans, and so returned into his own Country. About this time Artabazus, who had rebelled against the King, still continued his War The Boeotians help Artaba∣zus, and beat the King of Persia's Forces. with those Lord Lieutenants of the Provinces that were ordered out against him. At the first, while Chares the Athenian General assisted him, he vallantly stood it out against the Enemy. But when he left him, wanting aid, he made his Application to the Thebans for Relief; who thereupon sent Pammenim General with Five thousand Men over into Asia; who joining with Artabazus, routed the Royalists in two great Fights, and there∣by advanced both his own Reputation, and the Glory and Honour of his Country. For it was the Admiration of all Men, That the Boeotians, at the very time when they were deserted by the Thessalians, and in eminent Danger by the Phocian War, which then threaten'd them, should transport Forces into Asia, and be Conquerors in all their Engagements. In the mean time a War broke out between the Argives and the Lacedemonians, who War between the Argives and Lacede∣monians. Chares takes Sestos, and puts many to the Sword. Ant. Ch. 351. beat the other at Orneas, and took the Town, and then returned to Sparta. Chares likewise, the Athenian General, with his Fleet entred the Hellespont, and took Sestos, the most considerable Town upon that Coast, and put all the young Men that were able to bear Arms, to the Sword, and carried away, the rest as Slaves. About the same time, Cersobleptes the Brother of Cotys, Enemy to Philip, but in League with the Athenians, delivered up all the Cities in Chersonesus, (except Cardia) to the Athe∣nians, who sent Colonies thither to inhabit the Towns, which were to be divided amongst them by Lot. Philip therefore discerning that the In Thrace. Methon in Thrace raz'd by Philip. Methoneans designed to deliver up their City, (which was of great moment in the War) to his Enemy, laid close Siege to it, which the Citizens defended for some time; but being too weak to cope with him, they were forced to surrender it upon these Conditions, That all the Citizens should depart out of Methon with all their Clothes. Being possess'd of the Place, he raz'd the City to the Ground, and divided the Terri∣tory among the Macedonians. During this Siege, Philip lost one of his Eyes by the stroke of a Dart. Afterwards being sent unto by the Thessalians, he marched with his Army into Thessaly. And in the first place, in Aid of the Thessalians, he fought with Lycophron, Tyrant of Pheraea. Lycophron then made Application to the Phocians for Assistance, who thereupon sent to Lycophron Tyrant of Phe∣roea. him Phayllus, the Brother of Onomarchus, with Seven thousand Men: But Philip routed the Troops of the Phocians, and drave them out of Thessaly. Upon which, Onomarchus thinking to be Lord of all Thessaly, came to the Assistance of Lycophron with his whole Army. Philip opposed him, both with his own and the Forces of the Thessalians, but Onamar∣chus Onomarchus routs Philip in two Battels. overpowering him by Number, routed him in two several Battels, and killed many of the Macedonians; in so much as Philip was brought into very great Streights. His Soldiers were hereupon so dejected, that they were ready to desert him; but with much ado, and many Perswasions, he at length brought them over to a due Obedience, Ant. Ch. 351. and within a short time after returned into Macedonia. But Onomarchus made an Expedi∣tion into Boeotia, and fought and routed the Boeotians, and possessed himself of Co∣ronea. In the mean time Philip marches again with his Army out of Macedon into Thessaly, and incamps against Lycophron the Tyrant of Pherea, who being too weak for him, sent for Aid to the Phocians, promising to use his utmost Endeavour to order and dispose of all Things throughout Thessaly for their Advantage. Whereupon Onomarchus came to his Assi∣stance by Land with above Twenty thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse. Philip having persuaded the Thessalians to join with him, raised above Twenty thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse.
Forthwith a bloody Battel was fought, in which Philip by the Advantage and Valour Philip routs Onomarchus. of the Thessalian▪ Horse got the Day, and Onomarchus and his Men ed towards the Sea. It happened that Chares the Athenian Admiral passed by with a great Navy, at the same instant as a cruel Slaughter was made among the Phocians, and therefore those that fled cast away their Arms, and endeavoured to swim to the Galleys, amongst whom was Onomarchus. In conclusion, there were slain of the Phocians and Mercenaries above Six thousand, amongst whom was the General himself; and there were taken Prisoners no less than Three thousand. Philip Crucified, p. 75. hanged Onomarchus, and the rest as Sacrilegers he caused to be thrown into The Death of Onomarchus. the Sea. Onomarchus thus coming to his End, Phayllus his Brother was created General of the Phocians: And he, to repair the Damage sustained, raised great Numbers of Foreign Mercenaries, doubling the former and usual Pay, and further strengthened himself with Addition of his Confederates; he made likewise a great Number of Arms, and coined both Gold and Silver. About the same time Mausolus, a Petty King of Caria, died, after he had reigned Mausolus dies, after he had reigned Four and twenty Years. Clearchus as∣sassinated. Four and twenty Years. To whom succeeded Artemesia, (who was both his Sister and Wife,) for the space of Two Years. At that time likewise Clearchus, Tyrant of Heraclea, when he was going to the Feasts of Bacchus, was Assassinated, in the Twelfth Year of his Reign. Timotheus, his Son, suc∣ceeded him, and reigned Fifteen Years. In the mean time the Thuscans, at War with the Romans, harrass'd and wasted a great part of their Enemies Territory, making Incursions as far as to the River Tiber, and then returned to their own Country. The Friends of Dion raised a Sedition at Syracuse against Callippus, but being dispersed and worsted, they fled to the Leontines. Not long after, Hipparinus the Brother of Dio∣nysius arrived with a Navy at Syracuse, and fought with Callipppus and beat him; upon which he was driven out of the City, and Hipparinus recovered his Father's Kingdom, and enjoyed it Two Years. CHAP. VIII. Phayllus continues the Phocian War. Aryca raz'd. Phayllus dies of a Con∣sumption. War between the Lacedaemonians and Megapolitans. Chaeronea taken by Phalaecus. War between the Persians, Aegyptians, and Phaenicians. Salamis in Cyprus besieged. The Cruelty of Artaxerxes Ochus towards the Sido∣nians. The Calamity of Sidon. WHEN Aristodamus was Archon at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius bore the Consul∣ship at Rome, the Hundred and seventh Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Smi∣crinus Olym. 107. 1. Phayllus, Ge∣neral of the Phocians. the Tarrentine was Victor. Then Phayllus the Phocian General, after the Death of his Brother, began to repair the Affairs of the Phocians, now almost at the  last Gasp, through the late Rout and Slaughter of the Soldiers. For being possessed of a vast Trea∣sure, he raised a great Army of Mercenaries, and wrought over many to join with him in the War: And being very free of his Purse, he not only brought over private Men to his Party, but prevailed with famous Cities to be his Confederates: For the Lacedaemo∣nians sent him a Thousand Soldiers, the Acheans Two thousand; but the Athenians Five thousand Foot, and Four hundred Horse, under the Command of Naustcles. Lycophron and Pitholaus, Tyrants of Pherea, after the Death of Onomarchus, being de∣stitute of Succours, delivered up Phera into the Hands of Philip; and though they were discharged, upon their Oaths to be quiet, yet they got together Two thousand Merce∣naries, and went over to Phayllus to assist the Phocians: And not a few of the smaller Cities assisted them by their bountiful Contributions of their Money towards the Soldiers Pay. For Gold feeding and enkindling Mens Covetousness, from a Prospect of Gain push'd them forward to grasp at their own Advantage. Upon these Encouragements, Phayllus marches with his Army into Boeotia, but is overcome at Orchomenon, and lost many of his Men.
Afterwards there was another Battel at the River Cephisus, wherein the Boeotians had the better, and killed Four hundred, and took Five hundred Prisoners. A few Days after a third Fight was at Coronea, where the Boeotians had again the Advantage, and killed Fifty of the Phocians, and took an Hundred and thirty Prisoners. But having done at present with the Affairs of the Boeotians and Phocians, we return to Philip, who when he had overcome Onomarchus in so signal a Battel, freed the Pheraeans from the Yoke of Tyranny, and restored the City to its Liberty. And having settled all other Matters in Thessaly, he marched towards Pylas, to fight with the Phocians: But being Ant. Ch. 350. denied Passage by the Athenians, he returned into Macedonia, which Kingdom he had en∣larged both by the help of his Sword, and likewise by his Piety towards the Gods. In the mean time Phayllus marched with his Army against the Locrians, called Epine∣midii, and assaulted and took by force some Cities; but one called Aryca he gained in the Night by Treachery, but was presently repulsed and beaten out, with the Loss of Two hundred of his Men. Afterwards encamping at a Town called Abas, the Boeotians sur∣prized the Phocians in the Night, and killed a great Number of them▪ Upon which Suc∣cess they were so incouraged, that they made Incursions into the Phocians Territories, and harrassing and spoiling the Country round about, heaped together abundance of Plunder. But in their return, coming to relieve Aryca, (which was then besieged,) Phayllus sell sud∣denly Aryca raz'd by Phayllus. and unexpectedly upon them, and routed them; and then taking the City by Storm, plunder'd it, and raz'd it to the Ground. But at length he fell into a A Consump∣tion. Some say, he was burnt in the Temple at Abas. Phayllus died. lingering Distemper, and continued a long time, and after great Torments in his Body, (as he justly deserved,) he died, leaving Phalecus the Son of Onomarchus (Incendiary of the Sacred War) to be General of the Phocians, who being as yet but a very raw Youth, he ap∣pointed Mnaseas, one of his Friends, to be his Tutor and Governor. Some time after the Boeotians attack'd the Phocians in the Night, and killed Mnaseas the General, and Two hundred of his Soldiers. Not long after, in an Engagement between a Party of Horse at Chaeronea, Phalecus being worsted, lost many of his Men. During these Transactions, there were great Commotions in Peloponnesus upon these Oc∣casions. War between the Lacede∣monians and the Megalo∣politans. Ant. Ch. 350. The Lacedaemonians fell out with them of Megalopolis; and therefore Archadamus their General made Incursions into their Borders: With which, the Megalopolitans being highly incensed, and not being able to contend by their own Strength, sought for Relief from their Confederates. Upon which, the Argives, Sicyons, and Messenians, assisted them with all the Force they could make. After them, the Thebans came in to their Assistance with Four thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Cephisiones. Being thus strengthened, the Megalopolitans made an Expedition, and encamped at the Fountains of Aphaeus. On the other side, the Lacedaemonians were joined with Three thou∣sand Foot from the Phocians, and with an Hundred and fifty Horse from Lycophron and Pitholaus, who were lately deposed from their Government over the Pheraeans. And ha∣ving got together a considerable Army, they encamped at Mantinea. But marching hence to Orneas, a City belonging to the Argives, they took it before the Enemy could come up to them; for this Place was in League with the Megalopolitans: And though the Argives broke forth upon them, yet they were overcome in the Engagement, and lost above Two hundred Men. Then the Thebans, double to the Lacedaemonians in Number, but much inferior to them in their Order of Discipline, came upon them; upon which there was a sharp Engage∣ment, and even while the Victory was doubtful, the Argives flag'd, and made away with all their Confederates to their Cities. But the Lacedaemonians entred into Arcadia, and took Elisunta by Storm, and after they had plunder'd the Town, returned to Sparta. Not long after, the Thebans with their Confederates routed the Enemy at Telphusa, and with the Slaughter of many of them, took Anaxandrus the General, and several others, to the Number of Sixty, Prisoners. Presently after they became Conquerors likewise in two other Battels, and cut off many of their Enemies. At length, after a remarkable Victory gained by the Lacedaemonians, the Armies on both Sides returned to their several Cities; and the Lacedaemonians and Megalopolitans entring into a Truce, the Thebans returned into Boeotia. In the mean time Phalaecus continuing still in Boeotia, took Charonaea; but upon the Chaoraea ta∣ken by Phalae∣cus. Thebans coming into its Relief, he was forced to quit it again. Afterwards the Boeotians entred Phocis with a great Army, and wasted and spoiled a great part of it, and harrass'd all the Country round about, and plunder'd and destroyed every thing that was in their way. They took also some little Towns, and loading themselves with abundance of Plun∣der, returned into Boeotia.
When Thessalus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Titus Quintius Olymp. 107. 2. Ant. Ch. 349. An. M. 3598. executed the Consulship at Rome, the Thebans wearied out with the Toils of the Phocian War, and brought very low in their Treasure, sent Ambassadors to the King of Persia to sollicit that King to supply them with a Sum of Money; to which Artaxerxes readily con∣sented, and without delay furnished them with Three hundred Talents. However there was little or nothing done this Year worth taking notice of between the Boeotians and Phocians, save some Skirmishes, and harrassing one anothers Countries. In Asia, the Persian King having invaded Aegypt some Years before with a numerous Army; but miscarrying in his Design, at this time renewed the War against the Aegyptians, and after many worthy Actions performed by his Valour and Diligence, he recovered Aegypt, Phaenicia, and Cyprus. But that the History may be made more plain and evident, we shall first declare the Causes and Grounds of the War, looking back a little to the Times proper for the Occasion. The Aegyptians having heretofore rebelled against the Persians; Artaxerxes, Sirnamed The War of Artaxerxes Ochus with the Aegypti∣ans and Phe∣nicians. Ochus, notwithstanding sate still and quiet, being no ways addicted to Arms. And though Armies under the Command of several Captains were set forth, yet through the Treachery and Unskilfulness of the Generals, many times he was Unfortunate and Unsuccessful. Upon which Account, though he was greatly contemned by the Aegyp∣tians, yet his Love to his Ease and Pleasure had that Ascendent over him, as to inforce him patiently to bear the Disgrace. But now when the Phaenicians and Kings of Cyprus, Ant. Ch. 349. in imitation of this Disloyalty of the Aegyptians, and in Contempt of him, were all running into Rebellion, the King was at length rouz'd, and determin'd to make War upon them. But he judged it not Advisable or Prudent to manage the War by his Deputies and Generals, but resolved to go himself, and try his own Fortune and Conduct in the Defence and Preservation of his Kingdom. To that end he made great Prepara∣tion of Arms, Darts, Provision and Forces; and raised Three hundred thousand Foot, and Thirty thousand Horse; and rigg'd out a Fleet of Three hundred Galleys, besides Six hundred Ships of Burden, and other Transport Ships for all sorts of Provision. The War in Phaenicia first broke out upon these Occasions. In Phaenicia there is a famous City called Tripolis, its Name agreeing with the Nature of the Place; for three Cities are contained within its Bounds, a Furlong distant one from each other, one called the City of the Aradii, a People of Phae∣nicia. Aradians, the other of the Sidonians, and the third of the Tyrians. It's the most eminent of all the Cities of Phaenicia, being that where the General Senate of all the Phaenicians do usually meet and consult about the weighty Affairs of the Nation. The Kings, Lords Lieutenants and Generals then in Sidon, carrying themselves by their severe Edicts rigorously and haughtily towards the Si∣donians, the Citizens being so abused, and not being able longer to brook it, studied how to revolt from the Persians. Upon which, the rest of the Phaenicians being wrought upon by the other to vindicate their Liberty, sent Messengers to Nectanetus the King of Aegypt, then at War with the Persians, to receive them as Confederates, and so the whole Nation prepared for War. And being that Sidon then exceeded all the rest in Wealth, and even private Men by the advantage of Trade were grown very Rich, they built a great Number of Ships, and raised a potent Army of Mercenaries; and both Arms, Darts and Provision, and all other Things necessary for War, were prepared. Ant. Ch. 349. And that they might appear first in the War, they spoil'd and ruin'd the  The King's Pa∣radise, Garden, or Orchard. Kings Garden, cutting down all the Trees where the Persian Kings used to Recreate and Divert them∣selves. Then they burnt all the Hay which the Lord Lieutenants had laid up for the use of the Horses, At last they seized upon the Persians, who had so insulted over them, and haled them to Punishment. And in this manner began the War of the Persians with the Phaenicians. For the King being informed what the Rebels had so impudently acted, threatned to Revenge it upon all the Inhabitants of Phaenicia, especially upon the Sido∣nians. To this end he Rendevous'd all his Army, both Horse and Foot, at Babylon, and presently march'd away against the Phaenicians. In the mean time, while the King was upon his March, the Governor of Syria, and Mazaeus Lord Lieutenant of Caelicia, joined together against the Phaenicans: On the other side, Tennes King of Sidon procured for their assistance Four thousand Greek Mercenaries from the Aegyptians, under the Com∣mand of Mentor the Rhodian; with these, and a Body of the Citizens, he engaged with the Lord Lieutenants, and got the Day, and expelled them out of Phaenicia. While these Things were acted in Phaenicia, the War in Cyprus began at the same time, the one depending much upon the other. There were Nine great Cities in this Island, under whose Jurisdiction were all the other smaller Towns. Every one had its several King, who managed all publick Affairs; yet subject to the King of Persia.
These all enter'd into a Confederacy, and, after the Example of the Phaenicians, shook off the Yoak; and having made all necessary Preparations for the War, took upon them the Absolute Power and Soveraignty in their own several Dominions. Ant. Ch. 349. Artaxerxes being enrag'd at this Insolence, writ to Or Garieus. Idrieus Prince of Caria (then lately come to the Throne, a Friend and Confederate of the Persians, as all his Ancestors were before him) to raise him both Land and Sea-Forces, for his Assistance against the Kings of Cyprus. Upon which, he forthwith rigg'd out a Fleet of Forty Sail, and sent on board Eight thousand Mercenaries for Cyprus, under the Command of Phocion the Athenian, and Evagoras, who had been for some Years before King of the Island. As soon as they lan∣der in Cyprus, they march'd then streight to Salamina, the greatest of the Cities, where they cast up a Trench, and fortify'd themselves, and so straitly besieg'd the City both Salamina in Cyprus be∣sieg'd, or Sala∣mis. by Sea and Land. The Island had continu'd a long time in peace and quietness, and therefore was grown very Rich; so that the Soldiers who had now the Power to range over the Country, had got together great Booties: Which Plenty and Confluence being nois'd abroad, many sn the opposite Continent, in hope of Gain, came slocking out of Syria and Silisia to the Persian Camp. The Army of Phocion and Evagoras being increas'd to double the number, the Petty Kings were brought into great Straits, and much ter∣rify'd: And in this Condition was Cyprus at that time. About this time the King of Persia march'd with his Army from Babylon, and made to∣wards Phaenicia: But Mentor, General of the Sidonians, when he heard how great an Army was approaching, and considering how unequal in number the Rebels were, he privately consulted his own Safety: To that end he secretly dispatch'd away from Sidon a faithful Servant of his own, call'd Thessalion, to Artaxerxes, promising to betray Sidon to him; and that he would effectually assist him in subduing of Egypt; he being in that respect more especially able to serve him, for that he was well acquainted with all the Places in Egypt, and knew exactly the most convenient places over the River Nile. The King was wonderfully pleas'd when he heard what Thessalion said, and promis'd he would not only Ant. Ch. 349. pardon Mentor for what he had done, but would bountifully reward him, if he perform'd what he had promis'd. But Thessalion further added, that Mentor would expect that the King should confirm his Word by giving out his Right Hand. Upon which the King was so incens'd (as being distrusted) that he gave up Thessalion into the hands of the Offi∣cers, with Command to cut off his Head. When he was led to Execution, he only said thus: Thou, O King, dost what thou pleasest; but Mentor, who is able to accomplish all I have said, will perform nothing that is promis'd, because thou refusest to give him Assurance on thy part. Upon hearing of which, the King alter'd his Mind, and commanded the Officers to discharge the Man; and so he put forth his His Hand to ki. Right Hand to the Thessalion, which is a most sure and certain Earnest among the Persians of performance of what is promis'd. Then he return'd to Sidon, and secretly imparted to Mentor what he had done. In the mean time, the King counting it his greatest Happiness if he could subdue Egypt (which he had before attempted in vain) sent Ambassadors to the chiefest Cities of Greece, to solicit for some Auxiliary Forces from them. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians return'd Answer, That they would continue still Friends to the Persians; but that they could not supply them with Forces. But the Thebans commanded a thousand heavy-arm'd Men to be sent to the Assistance of the King, under the Command of Locrates. The Ar∣gives likewise furnish'd him with Three thousand Men; but sent no Captain with them, because the King had expresly by Name appointed Nicostratus to Command them, and they were unwilling to contradict him. He was a Man of great Account, both as to Councel and Execution, having both Valour and Prudence assistant one to another. And because he was of vast Strength of Body, imitating Hercules in his Arms, he carry'd both a Club and a Lion's Skin in every Battel. Neither were the Grecians, who inhabited Ant. Ch. 349. upon the Sea Coasts of Asia, wanting on their parts, but sent out Six thousand Men: So that all the Auxiliary Forces from the Grecians, amounted to Ten thousand. But before these came up, the King had pass'd through Syria, and enter'd Phaenicia, and encamp'd not far from Sidon. In the mean time, while the King spent a considerable time in making preparation, the Sidonians had been very active and diligent in furnishing themselves with Arms and Provisions; and besides, had drawn a treble deep and broad Trench, and an high Wall round the City. They had likewise a brave Body of tall, handsom and stout Men of the Citizens, well exercis'd and train'd up in martial Discipline out of the Schools: And this City went far beyond all the rest of the Cities of Phaenicia for Wealth, and all other sum∣ptuous Ornaments, both for State and Grandeur: And that which was not the least
among the rest, they were furnish'd with a hundred Gallies, of three and five Oars on a Bank. And now Here Mentor is put for Tennes in the Greek. Tennes became a Party with Mentor (who Commanded the Mercenaries out of Egypt) in the Treachery; and left Mentor to keep a certain Quarter of the City, in order to help forward the Execution of the Treason; and himself went out with Five hundred Soldiers, upon pretence to go to the Common Assembly of the Phaenicians: For he had in his Company a Hundred of the Best Quality of the Citizens to be Senators, as was pretended: But these he caus'd to be seiz'd and deliver'd up into the hands of Aria∣xerxes, as soon as they came near where the King was, who receiv'd him as his Friend, but order'd the Hundred Noblemen, as Authors of the Rebellion, to be darted to death. Presently after, when Five hundred more of the Chiefest of the Sidonians came to him Ant. Ch. 349. with all the Badges of Submission imaginable, he call'd Tennes back, and ask'd him whe∣ther he was able to deliver the City into his Hands (for he earnestly desir'd to possess him∣self of the Place upon any Terms whatsoever, rather than upon Treaty, to the end that the utter Ruin of the Citizens might be a Terror unto the rest) when Tennes assur'd him he was able to effect it, the King being still implacable, caus'd all the Five hundred (who carry'd Olive-Branches before them as Suppliants for Mercy, and as Tokens of Submis∣sion) to be shot to death with Darts. Afterwards Tennes readily perswades the Egyptian Mercenaries to receive him and the King within the Walls; and so by this treacherous Tennes the Betrayer of Si∣don put to death by the King, who made use of his Treason. Sidon taken: Its miserable Condition, ac∣cording to the Prophecy of Ezek. 28. 21. Contrivance, Sidon came again into the Hauds of the Persians. Then the King judging that Tennes could do him no further Service, caus'd his Throat to be cut likewise. In the mean time, the Sidonians had burnt all their Shipping before the King came, lest any of the Inhabitants, consulting their own particular Safety, should get away by Sea. At length, when the Sidonians saw that the Enemy was entred, and many Thousands of Men ranging here and there, and dispers'd all over the City, they shut themselves up with their Wives and Children in their Houses, and set them on fire, and so all consum'd together. It's said there were above Forty thousand (with Houshold-Servants) that pe∣rish'd in these Flames. After this Destruction of the Sidonians, by which the whole City and Inhabitants were consum'd to Ashes, the King sold the Rubbish and Relicts of the Fire for many Talents: For being the City was very Rich, there was found a vast Quantity of Gold and Silver melted down by the Flames. Thus sad was the Calamity under which the Sidonians suf∣fer'd. The rest of the Cities being terrify'd with this Destruction, Presently surrender'd themselves to the Persians. A little before this, Artemesia the Princess of Caria died, having Ant. Ch. 349. govern'd Two Years: Idreius her Brother succeeded in the Principality, and reign'd Seven Years. In Italy the Romans made a Truce with the Prenestines, and entred into a League with the Samnites; and cut off the Heads of Two hundred and sixty in the Forum, of those that sided with the Tarquins. In Sicily Leptines and Callipus the Syracusians being furnish'd with a considerable Army, besieg'd Rhegium, which was still held by a Garison of Dionysius the Younger; and ha∣ving forc'd out the Garison, they restor'd the Rhegians to their  own ancient Govern∣ment.
CHAP. IX. Evagoras beheaded in Cyprus. Artaxerxes marches against Aegypt, and gains all Aegypt by the Policy of Mentor. Lost many of his Men at the Lake of Sorbon. Mentor advanc'd Mentor's Stratagem to subdue Hemias, Prince of Aterne. Zena raz'd by Philip. The King of Aegypt Abdicates his Kingdom, and flies to Aethiopia. AFterward,, Apollodorus being Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Olymp. 107. 3. Ant. Ch. 348. An. M. 3598. Caius Sulpitius, Roman Consuls, all the Cities of Cyprus surrender'd themselves to the Persians, excepting Salamis, which was then besieg'd by Evagoras and Phocian, and which Protogoras, King of Salamis, stoutly defended. In the mean time, Evagoras endeavour'd to regain the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and contriv'd to be restor'd to his Ancient Right by the help of the Persian King. But being Ant. Ch. 348. afterwards accus'd before Artaxerxes (who thereupon reliev'd Protogoras) he laid aside all hopes of being restor'd, and having afterwards clear'd himself of all that was laid to his Charge, he was intrusted with the Government of a larger Province in Asia, which he so misgovern'd, that he was forc'd to fly again into Cyprus, where being seiz'd he had his Head struck off. But Protogoras voluntarily submitting himself to the Persian King, Evagoras be∣headed. kept the Kingdom of Salamis without any Rival for the time to come. In the mean time, the King of Persia, after the Ruine of Sidon, being join'd with the Artaxerxes marches a∣gainst Aegypt. Forces that came from Argos, Thebes, and the ancient Cities, march'd with his whole Ar∣my against Aegypt. When he came to the Sorbon is the Lake of Sor∣bon. Great Lough or Lake, through ignorance of the Places, he lost part of his Army in the Boggs there, call'd Barrathra. But in re∣gard we have before in the First Book, spoken of the Nature of this Lake, and the strange Things there happening, we shall now forbear to repeat them. Having pass'd these Gulphs he came to Pelusium, the first Mouth of the River Nile, where it enters into the Sea. Here the Graecians lay close to the City, but the Persians En∣camp'd forty Furlongs off. In the mean while, the Aegyptians (in regard the Persians had given them a long time to prepare all things necessary for the War) had made strong Defences and Fortifications at all the Mouths of Nile, especially at Pelusium, because it was the First and most con∣veniently situated; where Five thousand Men were in Garison, under the Command of Philophoron. The Thebans, above all the Graecians, had a Desire to evidence their Valour, and to that end they first of all valiantly attempted to force the Trench, which was both Straight and Deep, and carried it; but as soon as they had gain'd it, those of the Gari∣son made a Sally, upon which there was a sharp Engagement; insomuch as the Dispute was very hot on both sides, and continu'd all the Day, the Night scarcely putting an end to the Contest. The next day the King divided the Greeks into three Brigades; every one had a Greek The Persian Army divided into three Bri∣gades. Ant. Ch. 348. Commander, with whom was join'd a Persian Officer, such as was most esteem'd for Valour and Loyalty. The First Brigade was of the Baeotians, under the Command of Lacrates, a Theban, and Rosaces, a Persian. This Rosaces was descended from some of those seven Persians who depos'd the Magi, and was Governor of Ionia and Lydia; He led a great Body both of Horse and Foot, all of Barbarians. The Second Brigade was of the Argives, Commanded by Nicostratus, with whom was Aristazanes, a Persian, who was employ'd as an Envoy in all the King's special Affairs, and next to Bagoas, the Trustiest and Chiefest of his Friends: He had Five thousand Soldiers, and Fourscore Galleys under his Command. The Third Brigade was led by Mentor, he who betray'd Sidon, who formerly com∣manded the Mercenaries: His Collegue was Bagoas, a bold Fellow, and none more rea∣dy in of executing any Villany, in whom the King put great Confidence. He commanded the Greeks that were the King's Subjects, and a great Body of Barbarians, besides a con∣siderable Navy. The King kept the rest of the Army with himself, and was very care∣ful in Managing and Overseeing the whole Concern of the War. The Army of the Persians thus divided, Nectabanus the King of Aegypt, (though he Nectabanus, King of Persia. was far short in Number) neither valu'd the Multitude, nor the Division of the Persian Troops: For he had in his Army Twenty thousand Graecian Mercenaries, as many A∣fricans, and Threescore thousand Aegyptians, by them call'd Warriors; and besides these,
was furnish'd with an incredible Number of River-Boats, fitted to fight in the River Nile. Moreover, he had defended that side of the River towards Arabia, with many Castles and Garisons, exactly fortify'd with Trenches and Strong Walls; and was prepar'd with Plenty of all other things necessary for the War. But through Imprudence and want of good Advice he lost all. The chief Cause of the Miscarriage was his Ignorance how to manage Warlike Affairs, and his security, upon the account he had before beaten the Ant. Ch. 348. Persians; for at that time of his Success, having had most expert Commanders, Diaphan∣tus the Athenian, and Lanius the Spartan, who were both Valiant and Experienc'd Soldi∣ers, all things succeeded according to his Heart's desire. But being now conceited of his own Sufficiency and Ability, to Command and Order the Army, he would admit of no other Assistant; and therefore through want of Skill and Experience, nothing was manag'd to advantage, as became an Expert-Commander. Having therefore strongly Garison'd the Towns, he himself, with Thirty thousand Aegyptians, Five thousand Graecians, and half of the Lybians, kept the Passages which lay most open and easie to Invasions. Things thus ordered on both sides, Nicostratus, who Commanded the Argives (having got some Aegyptian Guides, (whose Wives and Children the Persians kept as Hostages) through a certain Cut or Ditch, pass'd over with his Fleet to a Place as far out of fight as he could, and having landed his Men there, Encamp'd. Those who kept the Neigh∣bouring Aegyptian Garisons, as soon as they came to know where the Enemy were thus Encamp'd, speedily made out against them with no less than Seven thousand Men, under A Fight be∣tween the Ae∣gyptians and the Graecians, on the Persians side. Cleinus kill'd. the Command of Cleinius of the Isle of Coos, who drew up his Men in Battalia, in order to fight them: On the other side, those lately Landed, likewise put themselves into a Posture of Defence. Whereupon was a sharp Engagement, in which the Grecians on the Persians side so gallantly behav'd themselves, that they kill'd Cleinius the General, and a∣bove Five thousand of the rest of his Army. Upon hearing of this Defeat, Nectabanus was in a terrible Fright, for that he believ'd the rest of the Persian Troops would easily pass over the River. Being therefore afraid lest the Enemy would bend all his force against Memphis the Seat-Royal, he made his chief Care and Concern to secure this Place, and thereupon march'd away with the Army he had to Memphis, to prevent the Besieging of it. Ant. Ch. 348. In the mean time, Lacrates, the Theban, the Commander of the First Brigade, pushes on the Siege of Pelusium; and having drain'd the Water out of the Trench, and turn'd it another way, he rais'd a Mount, and there plac'd his Engines of Battery against the City. And after a great Part of the Walls were batter'd down, the Pelusians rais'd up o∣thers in their stead, and speedily made high Wooden Towers. These Conflicts upon the Walls continu'd for some days, during which time the Grae∣cians that defended the Place, stoutly oppos'd the Assailants. But as soon as they heard of the King's departure to Memphis, they were so afrighted that they sent Messengers to Treat upon Terms of Surrender. Whereupon, Lacrates agreeing with them upon the Sacred Tye of an Oath, That upon delivery up of Pelusium, they should return to Greece Pelusium sur∣render'd. with whatever they brought with them out of the Town, they surrender'd the Place. Then Artaxerxes sent Bagoas with a Garison of Persians to take Possession of Pelusium, whose Soldiers as soon as they enter'd the Town, took away from the Grecians as they were go∣ing out, many of those things that they brought along with them. Being thus abus'd they took it hainously, and with great Complaints call'd upon the Gods, as Witnesses and Revengers of Perjury and Breach of Faith. Lacrates being stirr'd up to just Indignation by this base Dealing, fell upon the Barbari∣ans, and kill'd some of them, and put the rest to flight, and so protected the Greeks thus injur'd, contrary to the Agreement confirm'd by Oath. And though Bagoas, who fled amongst the rest, and return'd to the King, accus'd Lacrates, for what he had done, yet the King adjudg'd, that Bagoas his Soldiers were dealt with according to their desert, and punish'd those Persians that were Authors of the Rapine. And in this manner came Pelu∣sium into the Hands of the Persians. But Mentor, Commander of the Third Brigade, recover'd Bubastus, and many other Cities, to the Obedience of the Persian King by his own Stratagem. For whereas all these Cities were Garison'd by two sorts of People, Grecians and Aegyptians, Mentor caus'd a Ant. Ch. 348. Report to be spread abroad, That Artaxerxes would receive all those most graciously, and pardon them, that of their own accord should give up their Cities into the King's Mentor gains Bubastus and other Towns by Policy. Hands; and on the other Hand, That all those that he should take by force, should fare no better than Sidon. He commanded also, That all the Gates of the Camp. Gates should be open'd, and that all that would should be permitted to go away. So that all the Aegyptian Captives
in the Camp being gone without any Opposition, the Report was in a short time spread abroad through all the Cities of Aegypt. Whereupon all the Towns were presently fill'd with Seditions through Quarrels, and Dissentions between the Aegyptians and the Foreign Auxili∣aries. For all Parties strove who should be most Active and Forward in betraying their several Garisons, every one aiming at his own Advantage, by an Interest in the favour of the Conqueror. And the first that began was Bubastus. For as soon as Mentor and Ba∣goas Encamp'd before the City, the Aegyptians, unknown to the Graecians, promis'd to Bagoas (by one of their own Country sent to him) to Surrender the City, if they might be all Pardon'd. This being smelt out by the Greeks they pursu'd and seiz'd upon him that was sent, and by Threatning and Affrighting him got out the whole from him, as the Thing in truth was. Upon which, being highly enrag'd, they fell violently upon the Aegyptians, kill'd some, wounded others, and drove the rest into a narrow Corner of the City. They that were thus assaulted, gave intelligence to Bagoas of what was done, and in∣treated him, tha without delay he would take Possession of the City, which should be by them deliver'd up to him upon his approach. In the mean time, the Graecians sent an Herald to Mentor, who secretly advis'd them, to set upon the Barbarians as soon as Bagoas had entred the Town. Bagoas therefore be∣ing entred with his Persians, but without the Consent of the Greeks, as soon as part of the Soldiers were let in, the Graecians presently shut up the Gates, and fell on a sudden on Bagoas taken Prisoner at Bu∣bastus, and all his Men cut of who enred the City. the Barbarians, and kill'd 'em every Man, and took Bagcas himself Prisoner, who co∣ming to understand that there was no means left for his Deliverance but by Mentor, he earnestly intreated him to interpose for his Preservation, promising that for the Future he would never undertake any thing without his Advice. Mentor prevail'd with the Graecians to Discharge him, and to Surrender the City, so that the whole Success and Glory of the Action was attributed to him. Bagoas being thus freed by his means, entred into a Solemn Covenant of Friendship upon Oath with Mentor, and faithfully kept it to the Time of his Death; so that these Bagoas relea'd by Mentor's meas. two always concurring and agreeing, were able to do more with the King, than all his other Friends, or any of his Kindred. For Mentor being made Artaxerxes's Lord-Lieu∣tenant of all the Asiatick Shore, was greatly Serviceable to the King, by procuring Solde∣ers out of Greece, and by his Faithful and Diligent Administration of the Government. Bagoas commanding all as Viceroy in the higher Parts of Asia, grew to that degree of Power through his Consultation with Mentor, upon all Occasions, that he had the King∣dom at Command, neither did Artaxerxes any thing without his Consent. And after the King's Death his Power was such, That the Successors were ever Nominated and Ap∣pointed by him, and all Affairs of the Kingdom were so wholly manag'd by him, that he wanted nothing but the Name of a King. But we shall speak of these things in their pro∣per Place. After the Surrender of Bubastus, the rest of the Cities out of fear submitted and deli∣ver'd Ant. Ch. 348. up themselves upon Articles, into the Hands of the Persians. In the mean while, Nectabanus, who was now at Memphis, seeing the swift Motions of the Enemy, durst not venture a Battel in defence of his Sovereignty, but abdicating his Kingdom, pack'd up a great deal of Treasure, and fled into Aethiopia. And so Artax∣erxes possess'd himself of all Aegypt, and demolished the Walls of all the Cities, especially those that were the Greatest and of most account; and heap'd together an infinite Mass of Gold and Silver, by spoiling of the Temples: He carry'd away likewise all the Re∣cords and Writings out of the most ancient Temples; Which Bagoas a while after suffer'd the Priests to redeem for a great Sum of Money. Then he sent home the Greek Auxilia∣ries with ample Rewards to every one according to their Deserts, for their Services; and intrusting Pherendatus with the Government of Aegypt, he return'd with his Army loaden with Spoil, triumphing in the Glory of his Victory to Babylon. At the time when Callimachus was Lord-Chancellor at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Olymp. 107. 4. Ant. Ch. 347. Mentor ad∣vanc'd. Publius Valerius were Roman Consuls, Artaxerxes advanc'd Mentor for the good Services he had done him, especially in the Aegyptian War, above all his Ariends; and that he might put a Mark upon his Valour by a Reward more than ordinary, he bestow'd upon him an Hundred Talents of Silver, and rich Furniture for his House. He made him likewise Pre∣fact of all the Asiatick Shore, and General of his Army, with absolute Power to suppress all Rebellions in those Parts. Mentor being in near Alliance and Kindred with Actabazus and Memnon (who had not long before made War upon the Persians, and were now fled at of Asia to Philip in Ma∣cedonia) by his Interest with the King procur'd their Pardon, and thereupon sent for them
both to come to him, with their Families: For Artabazus had by Mentor and Memnon's Sister, Eleven Sons and Ten Daughters; with which numerous Progeny Mentor was Ant. Ch. 347. greatly delighted, and advanc'd the young Men as they grew up, to high Places of Com∣mand in the Army. The first Expedition which Mentor made was against Hennias, Prince or Tyrant of Atarne in Mysia over a∣gainst Lesbos. Atarne, who had rebell'd against Artaxerxes, and was possess'd of many strong Cities and Mentors stra∣tagem to subdue Hennias. Castles; upon promise made him to procure the King's Pardon he brought him to a Parley; and upon that occasion having surpris'd him, he clapt him up, and possessing himself of his Seal-Ring, he writ Letters in his Name to the several Cities, signifying that through Mentor he was restor'd to the King's Favour; and sent away likewise with those that carry'd the Letters, such as should take Possession for the King of all the Forts and Castles. The Governors of the Cities giving credit to the Letters, and being likewise ve∣ry desirous of Peace, deliver'd up all the Towns and Forts to the King in every place through the Country. All the Revolted Cities being gain'd by this Trick of Mentor, without any Hazard or Fatigue, the King was highly pleas'd with him, as having acted the Part of a Brave and Prudent General. And with no less success, partly by Policy, and partly by force of Arms, he reduc'd in a short time the other Captains that were in Rebellion. And thus stood Affairs in Asia at this time. In Europe, Philip, King of Macedon, made an Expedition against the * Calcidean Cities, and took Zeira, and raz'd it to the Ground, and brought other Towns (out of Fear) In Thrace. Zeira raz'd by Philip. likewise to submit. He set again likewise upon Phaeca, and threw out its Prince Pitholaus. About that time Sparticus, King of Pontus, dy'd, having reign'd Five Years. Parysades his Brother suceeded him, and govern'd Eight and Thirty years. CHAP. X. Philip takes Olynthus, and other Cities in the Hellespont. The Athenians jealous of Philip, and instigated by Demosthenes. Philip's Policies. The Value of the Riches taken out of the Temple at Delphos. Dionysius sent Presents to Delphos, which were taken by the Athenians. His Letter to the Athenians. The Temple burnt. The End of the Phocian War. The Punishments decreed by the Amphicty∣ons against the Phocians. The Miseries of the Sacrilegers. Timoleon sent to Syracuse. AFter the End of this Year, Theophilus rul'd as Archon at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Caius Quintius executed the Consular-Dignity at Rome, at which time was cele∣brated Olymp. 108. 1. Ant. Ch. 346. An. M. 3600. the Hundred and Eighth Olmypiad, in which Polycles of Cyrene bore away the Crown of Victory. At the same time Philip made an Expedition against the Cities of the Helles∣pont, of which Micaberna and Torone were betray'd into his hands. Then he made against Olynthus (the greatest City of those Parts) with a very numerous Army, and having first routed the Olynthians in two Battels, he laid Siege to the Town; upon which he made many Assaults, and lost a great number of his Men in their approaches to the Walls. At length by bribing Euthycrates and Lasthenes, the Chief Magistrates of Olynthus, he entred the City by Treachery, and Plunder'd it, and Sold all the Citizens for Slaves, and expos'd Philip takes Olynthus, and other Cities in the Hellespont to sale all the Prey and Plunder under the Spear. Whereby he furnished himself with a∣bundance of Money for the carrying on of the War, and put all the rest of the Cities into a terrible Fright. Then he bountifully rewarded such as had behav'd themselves with Courage and Va∣lour, and having exacted vast Sums of Money from the Richest of the Citizens of the Ci∣ties round about, he made use of it to corrupt many to betray their Country; so that he himself often boasted that he had enlarg'd his Dominion more by his Gold than by his Sword. In the mean time, the Athenians being jealous of the growing Greatness of Philip, ever after sent Aid to them whom he invaded by his Arms, and dispatch'd Ambassadors to all The Athenians jealous of Phi∣lip. the Cities to look to their Liberties, and to put to death such of their Citizens as should be discover'd to go about to betray them, promising withal to join with them upon all Occasions. At length they proclaim'd open War against Philip.
Demosthenes the Orator (at that time the most Eminent in Politicks and Eloquence of Demosthenes incites the A∣thenians a∣gainst Philip. all the Grecians) was the chief Instrument that incited the Athenians to take upon them the Defence of all Greece: But the City could not cure that itch of Treason that infected many of the Citizens; such a shoal of Traitors there was at that time all over Greece. And therefore it is reported, that Philip having an earnest desire to gain that once strong and eminent City, and one of the Place telling him it could never be taken by Force; he ask'd him whether it were not possible that Gold might mount the Walls; for he had learn'd by Experience, That they that could not be subdu'd by Force, were easily over∣come by Gold. To this end he had by his Bribes procur'd Traitors in every City; and Philip corrupts the Cities by Bribes. such as would receive Money, he call'd his Friends and Guests: And thus with Evil Com∣munication he corrupted Men's Manners. After the taking of Clynthus, he celebrated Olympick Games to the Gods, in Commemo∣ration of his Victory, and offer'd most splendid Sacrifices; and in regard there were a vast number of People got together, he set forth specious Sports and recreating Plays, and invited a great number of Strangers to his Feasts: And in the midst of his Cups would talk courteously and familiarly with them, and drink to many, and reach over the Cup to them with his own Hands. To many he gave rich Gifts, and made large and liberal Promises to all, to the end his Kindness and Generosity might be bruited abroad by them that had had the Experience. During the time of his Feasting, observing Satyrus the . Stage-player to look four and knit his Brows, he ask'd him, why heonly would not ac∣cept of the Fruits of his Bounty and Generosity? To which he answer'd, That he would very willingly receive a certain Gift from him; but he was afraid if he should ask it openly, he would deny him. Upon which the King fell a laughing, and bid him ask what he would, and he would freely bestow it upon him. Upon which he desir'd that two young Maids, in the flower of their Age, the Daughters of one that was his Host might be given to him from among the Captives, whose Liberties he crav'd not to make any Gain or Advantage of them himself, but really to give them Portions out of his own Estate, and procure them Husbands, and likewise to prevent their being injur'd by any unworthy Attempt. Whose Request the King so approv'd, as that he not only forth∣with order'd the Virgins to be deliver'd to Satyrus without Ransom, but bestow'd upon him likewise many other rich Gifts and Presents, as special Marks of his Favour and Bounty; so that many, excited with the Hopes of Reward, strove which should serve Philip most, and be the first that should betray their Country into his Hands. The next Year Themistocles was Archon at Athens, and Caius Cornelius and Marcus Popi∣lius Olymp. 108. Ant. Ch. 345. 2. An. M. 3601. Battelt between the Boeotians and Phocians. Roman Consuls, at which time the Boeotians over-ran the Country of the Phocians with Depredations, and beat the Enemy at Hyampolis, killing about Seventy of them. But not long after, engaging with the Phocians in another Battel, they were routed at Coroea, and lost many of their Men. And whereas the Phocians were possess'd of some small Towns in Boeotia, the Boeotians made an Inroad upon them, and shamefully spoil'd and de∣stroy'd all their standing Corn; but in their Return were beaten. While these things were acting, Phalecus the General of the Phocians, being convicted Phalecus de∣priv'd, and o∣thers chosen. of Sacrilege, in converting the Sacred Treasure of the Temple to his own use, was de∣priv'd of his Commission; and three others were created in his room, viz. Democrates, Callias, and Sophanes, who manag'd the Business and Trial concerning the Sacred Trea∣sure, at such time as the Phocians demanded an Account of them that had the disposing of it. The greatest part of the Money was found to be intrusted in the hands of Philon; who not being able to give a clear Account, was condemn'd; and being put upon the Rack, Ant. Ch. 345. by order of the Generals, he nam'd many of his Accomplices. At length, being tortur'd to the utmost extremity, he died upon the Rack, and so came to an end worthy his Im∣piety. The Robbers indeed restor'd the rest of the Monies that were left, but they themselves were put to death as Sacrilegers. The first of the former Generals, Philomelus, forbore to meddle with the Sacred Treasures; but his Brother and Successor Onomarchus, conver∣ted much of those Treasures to the use of the War. The third General Phayllus, Brother of Gaods taken out of the Temple. Onomarchus, while he executed that Command, made use of many of the consecrated Things of the Temple, for the paying off the foreign Soldiers: For he melted down and coin'd into Money the Hundred and twenty Golden Tiles, dedicated by Croesus King of Lydia. In the same manner he dealt with the 300 Golden Bowls (or Viols) every one weighing Two Minas; and likewise the Lion and Woman of Gold, all which weigh'd 30 Talents of Gold, so that all the Gold according to the value of Silver would amount to Four thousand Talents. And besides these, there were Things in Silver dedicated by Croesus, and others, carry'd away by all the Generals in their several Times, above the value of
Six thousand Talents; so that the whole Sum, both in Gold and Silver, amounted to above Ten thousand Talents. There are some Authors that say, that there was as much Treasure sacrilegiously taken away, as Alexander afterwards found in the Treasury of the Persians. Phalecus likewise, with the Officers of the Army, went about to dig up the Pavement of the Temple, because some Person told him that a vast Treasure of Gold and Silver lay under it: For confirma∣tion of the truth of it, he brought in the Testimony of that most ancient and famous Poet Homer, where he says thus: Ant. Ch. 345. . Hom. Iliad. lib. 9. fol. 453. Or all the Gold in Phoebus Marble Fane, Which Pytho's Rocky Treasuries contain. And just as the Soldiers began to dig near to the Tripode, a sudden Earthquake terrify'd the Phocians; so that the Gods seeming by such manifest Tokens to threaten Vengeance upon the Sacrilegers, they desisted. But the first Author of that Impiety, Philo (of whom we spoke before) in a short time after felt the just Vengeance of the Deity. But notwith∣standing the whole Guilt of this impious Sacrilege be imputed to the Phocians, yet both the Athenians and Lacedaemonians who assisted the Phocians, were Partners in the Offence, for they had more Money paid to them than was proportionable to the number of the Soldiers which they sent: For indeed at that very time the Athenians carry'd it but im∣piously towards the Oracle; for but a little before this Robbery at Delphos, when Iphicrates lay with the Fleet before Corcyra, and Dionysius Prince of Syracuse had sent some Statues of Gold and Ivory to Olympus and Delphos, he by chance intercepting the Vessels which trans∣ported them; and having now possession of the dedicated Goods, sent to Athens to know how he must dispose of them; the Athenians bid him never scrupulously examine or make enquiry after those things that were said to belong to the Gods, but to consider how to pro∣vide for the maintaining of the Army. In Obedience to which Decree of his Country, he expos'd the Sacred Ornaments of the Gods . to sale under the Spear. Upon which, the Dionysius. Prince being highly incens'd against the Athenians, wrote to them in this manner: Dionysius to the Senate and People of Athens. It is not fit that I should say Health to you, since ye have been so sacrilogious against the Gods both by Sea and Land; and having intercepted the Images which we had sent, in order to be The Letter of Dionysius to the Athenians. Ant. Ch. 345. devoted to the Gods, you have converted them into Money, and so have prophanely abus'd the Mightiest of the Gods, Apollo at Delphos, and Jupiter at Olympus. This Affront against the Gods, the Athenians never stuck at, who yet were us'd to boast and glory, that the God Apollo was their Ancestor. The Lacedaemonians also, though they were famous amongst all Nations for the Oracle of Delphos, and in the most weighty Af∣fairs do consult there at this very day; yet they never scrupled to join in the Sacrilege with these impious Robbers of the Temple. But now the Phocians, who had three Towns strongly fortify'd in Boeotia, made an In∣road into Boeotia; and being join'd with great numbers of Mercenaries, wasted and spoil'd the Enemy's Country; and in several Incursions and Skirmishes got the better, and so re∣turn'd. The Boeotians therefore being overpress'd with the Burden of the War, and having lost many of their Soldiers, and besides being in great want of Money, sent Ambassadors unto Philip to crave his Assistance. This was very welcome News to the King to see that they were brought low, having long desir'd to have their Leuctra Courage curb'd and tam'd: However, he sent them a great number of Men meerly upon this account, lest he should be thought to be careless in the matter concerning the spoiling of the Temple. Then the Phocians built a Castle at a Town call'd Abas, near the Temple of Apollo; at which time being attack'd by the Boeotians, some of them presently fled scatteringly into the Neighbouring Cities; others, to the number of 500, got into the Temple, and there perish'd. Many other things happen'd to the Phocians at that time, as by a Divine Hand; but that which is most remarkable was this; They that fled into the Temple, thought themselves safe under the Care and Protection of the Gods; but it fell out quite con∣trary; for Divine Providence brought condign Punishment upon the Sacrilegers: There
were many Straw-Beds round about the Temple, and it happen'd that the Fire left in The Temple of Apollo burnt near Abas. the Tents of those that fled, caught hold of some of them; upon which the Flame so mounted on a sudden, that it consum'd the Temple, with all those that fled into it: For it seems God would not spare the Sacrilegers, notwithstanding all their Supplica∣tions. Archias was then Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Marcus Aemilius and Titus Quinctius Olym. 108. 3. Ant. Ch. 344. An. M. 3602. The end of the Phocian War. were invested with the Consulship at Rome, when the Phocian War (which had continu'd Ten Years) was ended in the manner following: When both the Boeotians and Phocians were brought low with the continual Fatigues of the War, the Phocians, by their Am∣bassadors, crav'd Aid of the Lacedaemonians, who sent them a Thousand heavy-arm'd Men, under the Command of Archidamus the King of Sparta. In like manner the Boeo∣tians pray'd Assistance from Philip; who thereupon being join'd with the Thessalians, entred Locris with a great Army, where finding Phalecus (restor'd again to his Command) with a considerable Body of Mercenaries, he prepar'd to fight him. Phalecus was then at Nicea, who finding himself not able to engage with Philip, sent Ambassadors to him to treat. Thereupon a Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: That Phalecus, with all those then with him, might march away whither they thought fit. Whereupon Phalecus (after Ratification on both sides) without any further delay, departed with those Forces he had with him, to the number of Eight thousand, into Peloponnesus. And the Phocians now Ant. Ch. 344. hopeless, gave up themselves into the Power of Philip. The King having without Fighting unexpectedly put an end to the Sacred War, join'd in a Senate with the Thessalians and Boeotians; in which it was decreed, That the Great Council of the Amphictyons should be assembled, to whose Decision all Matters should be wholly referr'd. By them afterwards it was decreed, That Philip and his Posterity should be receiv'd as Philip decreed to have a double Voice among the Amphictyons. Members into the Council of the Amphictyons, and should have the Privilege of a double Voice, as the Phocians (whom he conquer'd) had before: That the Walls of Three Cities in Phocis should be demolish'd: And, That the Phocians should never after have any thing to do with the Temple, or be Members of the Court of the Amphictyons: That they should never be possess'd of Horse or Arms, until they had made Restitution to the Oracle of the Moneys they had sacrilegiously taken away. Moreover, That the Exiles of Phocis, and whoever they were that were Partners with them in the Sacrilege, should be accoun∣ted accurs'd, and driven out of every Place. Likewise, That all the Cities of the Pho∣cians should be ras'd to the Ground, and turn'd into Villages, every one of them not to contain above Fifty Houses, and not to be under one Furlong distant one from another; yet that the Phocians should keep their Lands, but should pay a Tribute to the Oracle every Year of Sixty Talents, 'till they had paid the Sum enter'd in the Registers at the time of the Sacrilege committed: That Philip, with the Boeotians and Thessalians should set forth the Phythian Games, because the Corinthians were Partners in the Impiety with the Pho∣cians: That the Amphictyons, together with Philip, should break in pieces upon the Rocks all the Arms of the Phocians and Mercenaries, and then burn the Remains: And lastly, Ant. Ch. 344. That they should deliver up all the Horse. When they had dispatch'd this, they made Laws and Orders for the restoring of the Oracle to its former state, and all other matters relating to Religion and the Publick Peace, and advancing of Amity and Concord amongst the Grecians. All these Decrees of the Amphictyons were allow'd and confirm'd by Philip, who carry'd himself towards them with great Respect in all things, and then march'd back with his Army into Macedonia; and not only purchas'd Honour by his Piety and martial Conduct, but made many Advances to∣wards the future Enlargement of his Dominions: For he had long coveted to gain the Sovereign Command of all Greece, and to make War upon the Persians, which indeed at length happen'd. But of these things we shall hereafter give a particular Account in their due time. Let us now therefore return to what properly is an Appendant, and in course annex'd to the precedent History: Yet we judge it our Duty first to relate the Judgments in∣flicted by the Gods upon the Sacrilegious Robbers of the Oracle; for Vengeance over∣took all of them in general, not only those who were the chief Ringleaders, but even them that had the least hand in the Sacrilege. Philomelus, the First and Chief Contriver of seizing the Temple, by a certain . A Strait of War. Fate of War was brought into such a strait, as that he cast himself headlong from the top a of Rock. His Brother Onomarchus having taken upon him the Command of the heartless and dis∣courag'd Army, was afterwards, with his Phocians and Mercenaries, totally routed in Thessaly, and he himself taken and crucify'd.
Phayllus, the Third, who spoil'd the Oracle of the greatest part of its Sacred Trea∣sures, that he might not altogether escape Punishment, A Consumpti∣on. consum'd away by a lingring Disease. Phalecus, the last of them, having robb'd the Temple of all that was left, wander'd up and down in great Terror, and in divers Hazards and Troubles, for a long time toge∣ther; not in any Favour to him more than the rest of his Confederates in Wickedness, Ant. Ch. 344. but that he might be longer tormented, and that the Vengeance executed might be more remarkable to all where-ever he went. After his Flight, whereby he escap'd being a Pri∣soner, at the first he remain'd with his Mercenaries about Peloponnesus, and maintain'd his Soldiers with the Money he had sacrilegiously got into his hand from the Temple. Afterwards he hir'd some great Transport-Ships at Corinth, and having Four other  Hemiolas, of two Oars upon a Bank. small Vessels of his own, he prepar'd for a Voyage into Italy and Sicily, hoping either to pos∣sess himself of some Citie in those Parts, or that he and his Men should be employ'd by some or other as Mercenaries. There was at that time a War broken out between the Lucanians and Tarrentines; he pretended to the Soldiers that went along with him, that he was sent for by the Sicilians and Italians: But when he came into the open Sea, some of the Soldiers who were on board in the largest Vessel with Phalecus, discours'd among themselves, and declar'd their Suspicions one to another, That it was but a Pretence, and that none had sent for them: For they saw no Commanders go along with him, that were sent from any that desir'd their Assistance; and they perceiv'd that the Voyage undertaken was long and tedious, and full of Hazards: And therefore concluding that Phalecus was no longer to be credited (dread∣ing the Expedition beyond-sea) they conspir'd, especially the Officers of the Mercenaries, and with their drawn Swords so threatned both Phalecus and the Pilot, that they compell'd them to tack about, and return: The like being done in the other Ships, they all came back, and arriv'd in Peloponnesus. And being rendezvous'd at Malea, a Promontory of Laconia, they there found the Gnosian Ambassadors, who accidently were come hither to Ant. Ch. 344. list some foreign Soldiers. After some Discourse had past between them and Phalecus and the other Officers, the Pay in hand was so large, that all of them sail'd away with them to Crete; and having landed at Or Cnosus, a City in Crete. Lyctus, another City in Crete. Gnosus, they presently took the City Lyctus at first Assault. But unexpected Assistance came in suddenly to the expuls'd Lyctians; for the Tarrentines being at that time engag'd in a War with the Lucanians, sent Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, from whom they were descended, to supply them with Auxiliaries; upon which the Spartans, upon the account of their Kindred, were ready to assist them; and to that end had both Naval and Land▪ Forces ready, under the Command of Archi∣damus the King of Sparta. And being now ready to set sail for Italy, at that very time came some from the Lyctians, earnestly desiring that they would help them in the first place. The Lacedaemonians agreed to it, and pass'd over to Crete, where they routed Pha∣lecus and his Mercenaries, and recover'd the Country for the Lyctians. Then Archidamus made for Italy, and there assisted the Tarrentines, and was kill'd in Fight, behaving himself with great Valour and Resolution. He was an excellent Com∣mander, and of good Reputation in other respects; but ill spoken of, by reason of his joining with the Phocians, as the principal Promoter and Author of the seizing of the Temple and City of Delphos. He was King of Lacedaemon Three and twenty Years, and his Son Agis succeeded him, and continu'd Fifteen Years. Afterwards all the Mercenaries under Archidamus, and who were concern'd in the robbing of the Oracle, were killed by the Lucanians. But Phalecus being driven out of Lyctus, besieged A City in Crete. Sidon; and while he was preparing his Engines to batter the Walls, and making his Approaches to the City, the Engines were set on fire, and consumed by a Thunderbolt from Heaven, and a great number of the Soldiers who endeavoured to save Phalecus burnt to death by a Thunder-bolt. them, were consumed by Fire from Heaven, amongst whom was Phalecus himself: Though there be some who report, That he was run through the Body by one of his own Soldiers whom he had provoked. Those Soldiers that were left, were hired by the Elean Exiles, and transported into Peloponnesus, who assisted them against their own Coun∣trymen. But the Arcadians, who assisted the Eleans, routed them, and killed a great Number of the Mercenaries, and took Four thousand Prisoners; which the Arcadians and Eleans divided amongst themselves, and the Arcadians sold those under the Spear that fell to their Share: But the Eleans put all theirs to the Sword, for their Impiety in robbing of the Oracle. And in this manner all the Sacrilegers, and those that took part with them, met with their due Punishment for their Wickedness. Likewise the most famous Cities that shared with them in their Impiety, being afterwards conquered by Antipater, lost both their Authority and Liberty at once. Moreover, the Wives of the most prin∣cipal
Men of Phocis, who had deck'd themselves with Necklaces of Gold robb'd from Delphos, met with the deserved Punishment of their Impiety. For one that wore the Chain of Helen turning Whore, stain'd all the Glory of her Beauty, by prostituting her self to every filthy Wretch. Another who adorn'd her self with the Ornaments of Eri∣phyles, in a Fury of Madness and Rage had her House set on fire by her eldest Son, and she and her Habitation consumed together. In this manner (as we said before) those that dared thus to despise and contemn the Deity, were overtaken by Divine Vengeance. On the contrary, Philip, who appeared in defence of the Oracle, ever prospering from that time, for his Piety, was at last declared Supream Governor of all Greece, and gained the largest Kingdom in Europe. And now having given an Account of the Sacred War so far forth as we judged necessary, we shall return to Things of another Nature. In Sicily the Syracusians labouring under Intestine Seditions, and inslaved under the Ty∣ranny of many that Lorded over them, sent Ambassadors to Corinth to desire a General to be dispatched to them, who might take Charge of the City, and give a Check to the Ambition of such as sought to Tyrannize. Upon which, it seemed very just and reaso∣nable to the Corinthians to help those who were originally descended from them; and therefore they Decreed to send them Timoleon the Son of Timenetus, who was accounted Timoleon sent to Syracuse. the most valiant and expert Commander among them; in short, he was a Person every way Virtuous: But there was one Thing remarkable happen'd to him, which much for∣warded his being chosen General. Timophanes his Brother, the richest and most daring Man among the Corinthians, had some time before given evident Signs of his Ambition to aspire to the Sovereignty. For about that time having armed and got together a Company of lewd Fellows, and such as were in Debt, and Needy, went up and down the Market-place, seeming not to have the least Thoughts of the Principality, but in truth acting in the mean time as an absolute Tyrant. But Timoleon, who abhorr'd Monarchy, at the first advised his Brother to for∣bear, and lay aside such Projects and Designs: But he being not only regardless of what was said to him, but rather growing every day more Audacious and Peremptory; Timo∣leon, because he could not work upon him by Words, killed him in the Market-place. Upon which a great Tumult was raised, and the Citizens upon the Commission of so Ant. Ch. 344 horrid a Fact running in and flocking together, the Matter came to a Faction and Sedi∣tion in the City. For some declared, That Timoleon, who had imbrewed his Hands in the Blood of a Citizen, should undergo the Punishment due for his Offence by the Law. But others were of a contrary Opinion, and that he deserved rather to be commended, as one that had dispatched a Tyrant out of the way. A Senate therefore was called, and the Matter brought before the Court, where his Enemies most bitterly inveigh'd against him; but those who were more moderate and favourable, consulted together to preserve him. And while the Business remained in De∣bate, not yet decided, the Ambassadors from Syracuse arrived, and imparting their Em∣bassy to the Court, they very seasonably desired a General to be sent them: Upon which, the Senate determined to send Timoleon, and that he might the better behave himself, a most strange Proposal was offered him, to chuse as he pleased: For they let him know, That if he carried himself well towards the Syracusians in his Command, then they would judge him to be one that had killed a Tyrant; but if he were Covetous and Oppressive, he should be condemned as a Murderer of his Brother. Timoleon therefore, not so much out of Fear of what was threaten'd by the Senate, as excited by the Principles of his own innate Virtue, managed Affairs in Sicily with great Honour and Reputation to himself, and Advantage to the Sicilians. For he subdued the Carthaginians, rebuilt the Grecian Cities which were destroyed by the Barbarians, and re∣stored all Sicily to its Liberty. Lastly, having gained Syracuse, and the Greek desolated Cities, he filled them all with Inhabitants, and made them very Populous. But we shall treat of these Matters in their proper Place, and come to that part which is coherent to the History.
CHAP. XI. Timoleon's Expedition into Sicily. The Carthaginians Army in Sicily. Diony∣sius returns into Syracuse, is beaten by Hicetas; Hicetas gains Syracuse. Ti∣moleon's Escape from Rhegium. Timoleon routs Hicetas, and gains Syracuse. Philip invades the Illyrians. Dionysius expell'd. Timoleon makes good Laws. Philip invades Thrace. NOW Eubulus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Serulius Sulpi∣tius were Consuls at Rome; at this time Timoleon the Corinthian, advanced by the Olymp. 108. 4. Ant. Ch. 343. An. M. 3603. Syracusians to the Sovereign Command of all their Forces, prepared for his Voyage into Sicily, and loosed from Corinth with Four Gallies, mann'd with Seven hundred Mercena∣ries, and attended with Three Skiffs. In his Passage he was joined by Three Vessels more from the Leucadians and Corcyrians, and so with Ten Sail passed over the Ionian Sea. Timoleon loo∣ses from Co∣rinth towards Syracuse. In this Voyage an unusual and remarkable Thing happened to Timoleon, the Providence of the Gods seeming to favour his Undertaking, and thereby to point out the future Fame and Glory of his Actions. For all the Night, a Light like a burning Torch in the Hea∣vens went before him, till the Fleet came to the Coasts of Italy. For he was before told at Corinth by the Priests of Ceres and Proserpina, that in the Night the Goddesses appeared to them, and told them, that they would sail along with Timoleon to the Island that was peculiarly Consecrated to them. Timoleon therefore, and all those with him, were very chearful, upon the Apprehension that the Gods favoured their Enterprize; and thereupon Ant. Ch. 343. Timoleon dedicated one of the best of his Ships to the Goddesses, and ordered that it should be call'd the Or called Ce∣res and Pro∣serpina. Sacred Ship of Ceres and Proserpina. And now when the Fleet came safe as far as Metapontum in Italy, there arrived a Galley which had the Carthaginian Am∣bassadors on board; who upon a Conference with Timoleon, charged him upon his Peril not to begin any War, or so much as set his Foot upon Sicily. But he being incouraged by them of Rhegium, who promised to join with him, loosed with all hast from Meta∣pontum, designing by his speed to prevent the Report of his Coming. For he was in a great Fear, left the Carthaginians, who were much stronger at Sea, should block up his Passage into Sicily. Therefore he made away with all speed to Rhegium. The Carthaginians having a little before received Intelligence, that a great War was likely to break out through all Sicily, carried themselves with all Civility towards the The Carthagi∣nians prepare for War in Si∣cily. Confederate Cities; and putting an end to all Quarrels, entred into Leagues of Amity and Friendship with the Princes of the Island, especially with Hicetas General of the Sy∣racusians, who was the most Potent. At length the Carthaginians having raised great number of Forces both by Sea and Land, transported them into Sicily under the Com∣mand of Hanno their General. They had with them a Hundred and fifty Sail of Long Ships, a Land Army of Fifty thousand Men, Three hundred Chariots, and Two thou∣sand The Army of Carthaginians in Sicily. Carts or Carriages drawn by two Horses apiece; and besides these, a great number of Arms of all sorts, and Engines of Battery, and an infinite Store of Corn, Provision, and all other Things necessary for War. The first City they set upon, was Entella; and having wasted and spoiled the Lands round about, they shut up the Inhabi∣tants Entella be∣sieged. by a close Siege. The Campanians possessed the City at that time, and being terri∣fied with the Multitude of their Enemies, sent for Aid to the other Cities, who hated the Carthaginians; but none of them came in to them, except them of Galeria, who sent them a Thousand Armed Men; who were intercepted by the Carthaginians, and cut off every Man. The Campanians, who inhabited Aetna, at first prepared to help them of Ant. Ch. 343. Entella, upon the account of their Consanguinity; but hearing of the Slaughter of the Galerians, they judged it more Adviseable to sit still. Dionysius at that time had regained his former Sovereignty over the Syracusians. Hicetas therefore led a great Army thither, and encamped at Olympus, fortifying himself with a Breast-work and a Trench, and drew Dionysius and Hicetas. up against Dionysius, then playing the Tyrant in the City. But he protracted the Siege for some time through want of Provision, and marched away to Leontum, from whence he first moved. But Dionysius pursued him, and fell upon his Rear, which occasioned the whole Army to ingage. For Hircetas wheeled about, fought and routed him, killing Three thousand of his Mercenaries upon the Spot, and put the rest to Flight; and pur∣suing them so hotly, that he fell pell-mell with him into the City, and so possessed him∣self Hicetas takes Syracuse. of the whole City of Syracuse, except the Island. And thus went Matters between Hicetas and Dionysius at that time.
But Timoleon arriving at Rhegium the third Day after the taking of Syracuse, lay with his Fleet in the Port next to the City. At that time came into Port Twenty Carthaginian Gallies: The Rhegians favouring Timoleon, called an Assembly, and proposed Terms of Compounding Matters; so that the Carthaginians supposing Timoleon would be persuaded Ant. Ch. 343. to return home; were not careful to place sufficient Guards, Timoleon therefore himself (not giving the least Ground to suspect his Flight) kept close to the Court, but ordered, that Nine of his Ships should set Sail, and make away with all the hast they could. In the mean time, while the Thoughts of the Carthaginians were intent upon the Speeches of the Rhegians, which were lengthen'd out of Purpose and Design, Timoleon privately Timoleon e∣scapes from Rhegium by a Wile. withdraws himself, and makes to the Ship that was left, and hoises up Sail and away he goes. The Carthaginians thus deluded, endeavoured to pursue him; but because he was got too far off, and Night approached; Timoleon with his whole Fleet arrived safe at Tauro∣menum. Andromachus the Prince of that City, (who always was a Friend to the Syracu∣sians,) courteously received the Refugees, and was greatly serviceable to them in their avoiding of the Pursuers. Hicetas afterwards with an Army of Five thousand Men came against Adriana, and encamped near the City. But Timoleon drawing some Regiments out of Tauromenum, marched from thence, having with him at the most but a Thousand Men. And going out of the Town in the Twilight, he reached Adriana the next Day; there he set up the Hicetians at the very time they happened to be at Meat, and broke in upon their Camp, and killed Three hundred, and took Six hundred Prisoners, and pos∣sessed himself of the Camp. To this Stratagem he added another, for he made straight away with all speed to Syracuse, and dispatching his March with all speed, he broke into the City on a sudden, and by the swiftness of his March came there before those that fled. And these were the Transactions of this Year. Lycisco executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Marcus Popi∣lius Olymp. 109. 1. Ant. Ch. 342. An. M. 3604. were created Roman Consuls when the Hundred and Ninth Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Aristolocus the Athenian won the Course. This was likewise the first time that the Romans entred into a League with the Carthaginians. In Caria, Idreius Prince of the Carians died, after he had reigned Seven Years, whom Ada (both his Wife and Sister) succeeded, and governed Four Years. In Sicily, Timoleon being strengthened with the Confederacy of them of Adranita and Tynderita, greatly increased his Army. In the mean time there were great Confusions in Syracuse, by reason that Dionysius had got Possession of the Island Hicetas, Achradina, and the new City, and Timoleon the rest of the City; and lastly, the Carthaginians had entred the great Harbour with a Fleet of an Hundred and fifty Sail, and lay near, encamped with an Army of Fifty thousand Men. And now Timoleon was in great Perplexity, being invironed by so many Enemies; when on a sudden the Tables were turned. First Marcus, Prince of Catana, with a great Army came in to the Assistance of Timoleon. Afterwards many of the Forts and Castles (out of love of Liberty) sided with him, and presently the Corinthians sent Ten Gallies full of Soldiers, and Pay for them, to Sy∣racuse. By these Supplies Timoleon took Heart, and the Carthaginians were so discouraged and affrighted, that very imprudently they sailed out of the Harbour, and drew off their whole Army, and marched away into their own Territories. Hicetas being thus stripp'd of all Assistance, Timoleon, now stronger than the Citizens, possessed himself of all Syra∣cuse. Presently after he received Messina (who had sided with the Carthaginians) into his Protection. And this was the State of Sicily at the time. In Macedonia, Philip, who bore an Hereditary Hatred against the Illyrians, and had Philip in∣vades the Il∣lyrians. with them an everlasting Controversy, invaded their Country with a powerful Army, and wasted and spoiled their Lands, and after the taking of many Towns, returned with rich, Booty into Macedonia. Afterwards making an Expedition into Thessaly, he cast all the Tyrants out of the Cities; and by this means gained the Hearts of the Thessalians: For by gaining them to be his Allies, he hoped easily to procure an Interest in all Greece; and by the Issue it appeared so afterwards. For the bordering Grecians presently, in imitation of the Thessalians, very readily entred into a League with Philip. Pythodorus was now Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Caius Plautius and Titus Manlius Olymp. 109. 2. Ant. Ch. 341. An. M. 3605. Dionysius ab∣dicates the Go∣vernment. executed the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time Dionysius being brought into extre∣mity of Danger, and in a terrible Fright, was wrought upon by Timoleon to surrender the Castle, and upon Condition of Abdicating the Government, had Liberty safely to depart to Peloponnesus, with all his Goods and Movables. And thus he, through Sloth and Cowardise, lost this so eminent and famous a Prin∣cipality, bound fast (as they used to term it (with an Adamant, and spent the rest of
his Days It's said, he kept a private School at Co∣rinth till he was very old. Just. lib. 21. in a poor and mean Condition. Whose change of Fortune, and course of Life, exhibit a clear Example to those, who like Fools boast in the Times of Prosperity, For he, who a little before had Four hundred Gallies at Command, not long after in a small Skiff was conveyed to Corinth, and became a Spectacle to Admiration of a won∣derful Change. Timoleon having possessed himself of the Island and Castles lately held by Dionysius, demolished all the Forts and Palaces of the Tyrants through the Island, and freed all the Towns from the Garisons. And continually employed himself in framing of Laws, and instituted such as were most proper for the Administration of the Demo∣cracy. And in his making such as related to private Contracts, he had a special Regard to Equality and mutual Recompence. Moreover he appointed a chief Magistrate to be Ant. Ch. 341. Yearly chosen, whom the Syracusians call the Servant of Jupiter O∣lympus. Amphipolus of Jupiter Olympus, and the first Amphipolus was Callimenes. From hence arose the Custom amongst the Syracusians, to note their Years with the respective Governments of these Magistrates, which continues to this very time of writing this History, and though the Frame of the Government be now chang'd. For since the Romans imparted the Laws of their City to the Sicilians, the Office of the Amphipolus has still continued, being now grown old, having been execu∣ted above Three hundred Years. And thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time. In Macedonia, Philip having persuaded all the Greek Cities in Thrace to Concord amongst themselves, made an Expedition against the Thracians. For Cersobleptes the Thracian King was continually destroying the Greek Cities in the Hellespont, and harrassing and spoiling the Country. Therefore Philip, to put a Check to the Designs and Progress of the Bar∣barians, invaded them with a great Army, and was so Victorious, that he forced them to pay a Tenth, as a Tribute to the Kingdom of Macedonia. And by building of strong Towns in convenient Places, he curb'd the Insolency of the Thracians. The Greek Ci∣ties therefore being freed from their Fears, with great Eagerness enter'd into a League of Confederacy with Philip. As to Writers, Theopompus of Chius composed an History of the Acts of Philip, in Three Books, in which are interwoven the Affairs of Sicily. For beginning with the Sovereignty of Dionysius the Elder, he comprehended an Account of the Transactions of Fifty Years, and ended with the Expulsion of Dionysius the Younger. These Three Books are from the Forty first to the Forty third Year of the Fifty Years. CHAP. XII. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Preparations of the Carthaginians against Timoleon. The remarkable Siege of Perinthus by Philip. Pexodorus expells his Brother Adam from the Principality in Caria. Byzantium beieged by Philip. WHEN the chief Magistracy of Athens was in the Hands of Sosigenes, and Mar∣cus Valerius and Marcus Publius executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, Arymbas Olymp. 109. 3. Ant. Ch. 340. An. M. 3604. King of the Molossians died, after he had reigned Ten Years, leaving his Son Aeacidas the Father of Pyrrbus: But by the Help of Philip of Macedon, Alexander the Brother of Olympias succeeded Arymbas. * Caius Peti∣lius. In Sicily, Timoleon marched against the Leontines, (to whom Hicetas had joined himself with a great Army,) and in the first place besieged the new City (as it was called). * A part of Epyrus. But the Garison being very strong, they easily repulsed the Assailants, and thereupon he raised his Siege without effecting any thing. Then he made for Engya, (at that time un∣der The Acts of Ti∣moleon in Si∣cily. the Tyranny of Leptines,) and ply'd it with continual Assaults, being very earnest and intent to set them free by the Expulsion of Leptines. While Timoleon was thus employ'd, Hicetas marches away from Leontium with all his Forces, and besieg'd Syracuse; but having lost there a great part of his Army, he hasted back to Leontium. Timoleon at length so terrifi'd Leptines, that under the Terms of safe Conduct, he was sent away to Peloponnesus, and by these Banishments Timoleon expos'd to the Graecians the Trophies of his Victory over the Tyrants. And forasmuch as the Apolloniates were likewise under the Power of Leptines, he receiv'd Apollonia into his Protection, and re∣stor'd them, as well as the Engyans, to their Liberty. But being in great want of Money, so that he knew not how to pay the Soldiers, he order'd a Thousand Arm'd Men, com∣manded by Expert Officers, to make Incursions into the Carthaginian Territories. These
harrass'd the Country far and near, and got together abundance of rich Plunder and Spoil, and brought it to Timoleon, who expos'd all to publick Sale, and rais'd a vast Sum of Money, whereby they paid the Soldiers for a long time before-hand. Presently af∣ter he possess'd himself of Entella, and put to Death Fifteen of the Citizens, who ad∣her'd to the Carthaginians, and restor'd the rest to their Liberties. Timoleon growing every Day in Reputation for his Valour and Conduct, all the Greek Cities through Sicily readily submitted to him, and he as readily set them at Liberty to govern by their own Laws. Many Cities likewise of the Sicani, Sicilians, and other Countries subject to the Carthaginians, sent presently their Ambassadors to him, in order to be receiv'd into a League, and be his Confederates. But the Senate and People of Carthage perceiving, that their Officers were sluggish and unactive in the Management of the War, determin'd to send over others with a conside∣rable Additional Force. And to that end, with all Dispatch, they rais'd out of their own City, and from among the Africans, all such as they judg'd able to bear Arms for this Expedition. And besides, they took care to be provided with a sufficient Stock of Mo∣ney, and listed Mercenaries out of Spain, Gaul, and In Italy, now the States of Genoa. Ligurla. They fitted out likewise a great Navy, both of Men of War. Olymp. 109. 4. Ant. Ch. 339. An. M. 3605. Long Ships and others, for carrying Provision, and in all other Respects were so careful and diligent, that nothing was wanting that was necessary. At the time when Nichomachus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Martius and Titus Manlius Torquatus were Roman Consuls, Phocion the Athenian subdu'd and expuls'd Clitarchus Prince of * Eretria, whom Philip had set over that City. In Caria Pizodarus. Petinthus be∣sieg'd by Phi∣lip in Thrace in Propontis., Pexodorus, the youngest Brother, expell'd Adam out of the Principality, and reign'd Five Years, to the time of Alexander's Expedition into Asia. But the Power of Philip still encreasing, he march'd with an Army against A City in Eu∣boea, now Ne∣gropont. Perinthus, which favour'd the Athenians, and much obstructed him in his Designs. He push'd on the Siege there∣fore with all Eagerness, and to that end incessantly batter'd the Walls with his Engines, from time to time relieving those that were tir'd with fresh Men: He made likewise Ap∣proaches with Towers of Fourscore Cubits high, mounting much above the Walls, where∣by he greatly annoy'd the Besieg'd, being so high above them: He so ply'd them likewise with his Battering Rams, and undermin'd the Foundations of the Walls to that degree, that a great part of them tumbled down. But the Perinthians defended themselves with that Valour, that they speedily rais'd up a new Wall, upon which there were such Disputes and . Fighting, the one to gain, and the other to defend the Wall, that it was to be admir'd. In the mean time, while they were thus eagerly contending on both Sides, Philip being well furnished with . Shot, mightily gall'd them upon the Wall. But the Perinthians, though they lost many Men every Day, were reinforc'd with Supplies of Men, Darts, and Shot, from Byzantium; so that hereby becoming of equal Force with the Enemy, they took Courage, and valiantly stood to it for the Preservation of their Country. However the King remitted nothing of his former Heat and Diligence; and dividing his Army into several Battalions, girt the City round, and relieving his Men by Turns, assaulted the Walls continually Night and Day. He had an Army of Thirty thousand Men, and a vast Multitude of Darts and Engines, both for Battery and other Purposes; so that the Besieged were very sorely press'd. The Siege having now continued long, and many of the Townsmen killed and wounded, and Provision growing scanty, the Town was upon the Point of being surrender'd; when Fortune favouring the Distress'd, handed to them an unexpected Deliverance. For the growing Power of the King being nois'd abroad throughout Asia, the King of Persia, who now began to suspect the Greatness of Philip, commanded by his Letters the Lords Lieutenants of the Sea-Coasts to assist the Pe∣rinthians with what Forces they could. Upon which, they all unanimously sent to Perin∣thus a great Number of Mercenary Soldiers, Plenty of Coin, sufficient Provision, Wea∣pons, and all other Things necessary for War. The Bizantians likewise sent thither a Commander, and the best of their Soldiers. The Forces now equal on both sides, and the War reviv'd, there was now again so sharp an Encounter, both to gain and defend the City, as that none could possibly exceed: For Philip, by the continual Batteries of the Rams, brought down part of the Wall, and by his Shot forc'd the Besieg'd from the Bu∣warks, so that he made his way with a strong Body of Men through the Ruins of the Wall, and scal'd the Bulwarks that were before clear'd of them that should have defended them. The matter being disputed hand to hand at the Swords point, Death and Wounds fol∣low'd, inasmuch as the Rewards of Victory put Life into the Valour of both Parties: For the Macedonians being assur'd they should have the Plunder of a rich City, and like∣wise be honourably rewarded by Philip, were resolv'd valiantly to undergo all Hardships whatsoever. The Besieged, on the other hand, having as it were before their Eyes the
Miseries attending a Place taken by Storm, with generous and undaunted Resolutions, shunn'd nothing of Hazard, for their own and the Preservation of their Country. The Situation of the Place contributed much all along to the Besieged for the Batteling the Enemy: For Perinthus is situated on the Sea-side, upon a rising Neck of Land, in a Penin∣sula stretch'd out a Furlong in length: The Houses are close together, and very high; for one stands above another, according to the Ascent of the Hill; and the Form of the City represents, as it were, a Theatre. And therefore though a large Breach was made in the Walls, yet they within were but little prejudic'd thereby; for the strait and narrow Passage being barricado'd, the higher Houses were instead, and as advantageous as a Wall. Philip therefore having gain'd the Wall, after much Toil and Hazard, found another far stronger made by the Situation of the Houses: And besides all these Disadvantages, he saw that every thing necessary for War was readily and in great abundance sent to them from Byzantium; therefore he divided his Army into two Bodies; the one half he left with the best of his Commanders to carry on the Siege, and with the rest he marches speedily away to Byzantium, and lays close Siege to it on a sudden. Upon whick, the Townsmen were put into great fear and perplexity, having before sent away their Soldiers, Arms, and other things necessary for War, to the Perinthians. These were the things done at Perinthus and Byzantium at that time. Here Ephorus, one of the Writers, ends his History with the Siege of Perinthus. In his Memoirs he comprehends the Affairs both of the Greeks and Barbarians, from the return of the This Return was about the time the Ark was taken by the Philistines, 80 Years after the Ruin of Troy, before Christ 1100 Years. Heraclide, for the space of almost Seven hundred and fifty Years; and divides his History into Thirty Books, to every one of which he adjoins a Preface. Diyllus the Athenian continues this History of Ephorus, treating of the Actions of the Grecians and Barbarians to the Death of Philip. CHAP. XIII. The Athenians aid Byzantium. Philip raises the Siege. The Carthaginians trans∣port Forces into Sicily. The remarkable Victory of Timoleon over the Cartha∣ginians. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Works of Hiero in Sicily. WHen Theophrastus was Lord Cancellor at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Aulus Cornelius Roman Consuls, The hundred and tenth Olympiad began, in which An∣ticles Olymp. 110. 1. Ant. Ch. 338. An. M. 3605. The Athenians aid Byzanti∣um. Philip raises his Sieges, and makes Peace. the Athenian was Victor. Philip then besieging Byzantium, the Athenians judging he had broken the Peace they had made with him, forthwith fitted out a great Fleet against him in aid of the Byzantians; whose Example they of Chius, Coos, and Rhodes, and other Gracians follow'd, and sent Auxiliaries to the same Place. Whereupon Philip being start∣led at the Forces of the Grecians, rais'd both his Sieges, and made Peace with the Athe∣nians and the rest of the Grecians that were in Arms against him. In the mean time, the Carthaginians, after their great Preparations, transport their Forces into Sicily, which with those that were before in the Island, amounted to Seventy thousand Foot; and Horse, Chariots, and Waggons, no fewer than Ten thousand. They had also a Navy of Two hundred Long Ships. Men of War; and Transport-Ships for the conveying of Horses, Arms, and Provision above a Thousand. Timoleon, though he was inform'd of this great Preparation, yet was not at all afrighted with the Barbarians, tho' his Army was but small. He was at this time engag'd still in War with Hicetas, but at length agreed the matter, and by the accession of his Forces greatly increas'd his Army. And now he judg'd it most for his advantage to transfer the War with the Carthaginians Ant. Ch. 338. into their own Territory; by this means to preserve the Country of his Confederates, and, on the other side, by Waste and Spoil to weaken the Enemy: To this end he forth∣with muster'd his Army, consisting of Syracusians, Mercenaries, and other Confederates; and in a General Assembly, by a pithy Oration, advis'd them to be Courageous, for that all now lay at stake: Which was receiv'd with general Acclamation, and all prest him without delay to be led forth against the Enemy. Whereupon he advanc'd, not having with him above Twelve thousand Men: But as soon as he came into the Confines of Agrigentum, there arose a sudden Mutiny in his Camp; for a Mercenary Soldier, call'd A Mutiny rais'd by Thra∣cius. Thracius, a bold and impudent Fellow, none exceeding him in that respect (lately a Com∣panion of those Phocians who robb'd the Temple of Delphos) committed a Fact agreeable to his former Villanies: For whereas most of them who had an hand in that Sacrilege were overtaken by Divine Vengeance (as before related) this only Fellow seem'd to have
escap'd; and at that time endeavour'd to persuade the Mercenaries to a Defection: For he bawl'd it out that Timoleon was craz'd and distracted, and that he was leading the Sol∣diers to certain and unavoidable Destruction: The Number of the Carthaginian Army (he said) was six times more than they; and so well furnish'd with all things necessary for War, that none could compare with them; and yet he assur'd them of Victory, playing away the Lives of the Soldiers, as it were, at Dice, because he was not able to pay them their Arrears, which had been advancing for a long time together: He persua∣ded them therefore to return to Syracuse, and demand their Pay, and not follow Timoleon in that desperate Expedition. This Discourse was not unpleasant to the Mercenaries; and while they were just ready to revolt, Timoleon, by Intreaties and large Promises, at length prevail'd, and put an end to the Mutiny. However, a Thousand Men follow'd Thracius, whose Punishment was de∣ferr'd Ant. Ch. 338. for the present. And in the mean time Timoleon writ to his Friends at Syracuse to re∣ceive the Deserters courteously, and pay the Mercenaries their Wages; and so by this means he altogether extinguish'd the Fire of Sedition; but excluded those obstinate Muti∣neers from the Glory of a famous Victory. In the mean time, having with fair Words reduc'd the rest to their former Obedience, he march'd towards the Enemy, which lay encamp'd not far off. Then he call'd the Army together, and encourag'd them to the Battel, by setting forth and aggravating the Sloth and Cowardize of the Carthaginians, and putting them in mind of the Successes of Gelon. And when all with one Voice cry'd out for Fighting without delay with the Bar∣barians, at that very time pass'd by some Carriage-Horses loaden with Bundles of Persley to strew in the Tents. Timoleon thereupon declar'd, that it was an Omen of Victory; for (as he said) the Crown at the Games in Ho∣nour of Nep∣tune, celebra∣ted every 5th Year, in the Istmos near Corinth. Istmian Games was made up of the same Herb. Here∣upon the Soldiers, by the Command of Timoleon, made themselves Crowns of Parsley; and with these round their Heads, with great Joy march'd against the Enemy, as if the Gods had assur'd them of certain Victory; as by the Issue it appear'd so to be: For beyond all expectation they overcame their Adversaries, not only by their own Valour, but by the special Help and Assistance of the Gods. For Timoleon, with a well-appointed Body of Men, march'd down from the Tops of certain Hills to the River; and upon a sudden, being himself in the middle of the Battel, attack'd Ten thousand of the Barbarians that were but newly pass'd over. Upon which, there was a very sharp Engagement, in which the Valour and Activity of the Greeks so far prevail'd, that a mighty Slaughter was made among Ant. Ch. 338. the Barbarians. Whilst those that first pass'd over took their Heels and fled, the whole Carthaginian Army came over the River, in order to repair their Loss. Hereupon the The Carthagi∣nians routed by Timoleon. Battel was renew'd; and while the Carthaginians were with their Multitude hemming in the Grecians round, on a sudden there arose such a violent Storm of Hail, Thunder, and Lightning, with a raging Tempest of furious Winds, which beat upon the Backs of the Grecians, but fell foul upon the Face of the Barbarians: So that Timoleon's Army with ease endur'd this tempestuous Shock; but the Carthaginians not able to bear the pressure of so many Adversaries, being at the same time hewn down by the Grecians, quit the Field and fled: And the whole Body made to the River, where both Foot, Horse, and Chariots were in that confusion mix'd one amongst another, and trodden under-foot one by another, and pierc'd through their Bodies by one another's Swords and Spears, as that a miserable Slaughterwas made without all possibility of Relief. Others be∣ing forc'd in heaps into the River by the Enemy's Horse, and pursu'd close at their backs, after receiving many Wounds, there perish'd. And many, though they were never toutch'd by the Enemy's Sword; yet through Fear, and the Throng and Dif∣ficulties of passage over the River, being press'd, in heaps one upon another, there breath'd out their last. And that which contributed no little to the common Destruction, the River was swollen to that excessive heighth, that many (especially such as attempted to swim over the Water with their Arms) were drown'd. In conclusion, Two thousand and five hundred, who made up the Sacred Brigade of the Carthaginians, and for Valour Ant. Ch. 338. and the Glory of their Arms, and greatness of their Estates, excell'd all the rest, fought valiantly, and were cut off every Man. Of the rest of the common Soldiers there were slain at least Ten thousand, and above Fifteen thousand taken Prisoners. Many of the Chariots being broken in pieces in the Fight, only Two hundred fell into the hands of the Grecians; but all the Bag and Baggage. The greatest part of the Arms were lost in the River: But a Thousand Coats of Mail. Brigandines and Ten thousand Shields were brought into the Tent of Timoleon; of which some were hung up in the Temples at Syracuse, and others distributed among the Confederates; others were sent to Corinth, and order'd to be dedi∣cated to Neptune. And although very rich Spoils were taken (for that the Carthaginians abounded in Gold and Silver, At Flaggens, Cups, &c. Plate, and other Furniture of great value, according to
the Grandeur and Riches of their Country) yet he gave all to the Soldiers, as the Reward of their Valour. The Carthaginians that escap'd, with much ado got to Lilibeum, in such Fear and Consternation, that they durst not go on board their Ships, in order to return to Africa; as if through the Anger of the Gods, they should be swallow'd up by the Libean Sea. As soon as the News of this Overthrow was brought to Carthage, their Spirits were mightily broken, and they expected that Timoleon would invade them with his Army upon the first Opportunity: Therefore they forthwith recall'd Gescon, the Brother of Hanno, from his Banishment, and being a stout Man, and an experienc'd Soldier, created him General. But looking upon it not Adviseable for the future to venture the Lives of the Citizens, they resolv'd to hire Soldiers out of other Nations, and especially from among the Graecians, not doubting but that many would List themselves, by reason of the large Pay promis'd by the rich Carthaginians. They sent likewise Ambassadors into Sicily, with Orders to strike up a Peace upon any Terms whatsoever. After the end of this Year Lysimachides was created chief Governor of Athens, and Quintus Servilius and Marcus Rutilius bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. Then Timo∣leon, Olymp. 110. 2. Ant. Ch. 337. An. M. 3606. as soon as he return'd to Syracuse, in the first place expell'd those as Traytors out of the City, who had deserted him through the Instigation of Thracius. These being transported into Italy, they seiz'd upon a Sea-Port Town of the Brutii. Brettians, and plun∣der'd it. Upon which the Brutians were so enrag'd, that they forthwith came against them with a great Army, took the Town by Storm, and put every Man of them to the Sword. And such was the miserable End of these Deserters of Timoleon, as the just Punishment of their former Villany. Afterwards he took Posthumius the Tyrant, and put him to Death, who had infested the Seas with his Piracies, and came at that time into the Port of Syracuse as a Friend. He receiv'd likewise with all Demonstrations of Kindness Five thousand Persons, whom the Corinthians had sent over to plant new Colonies. The Carthaginians now by their Am∣bassadors having earnestly su'd to him for Peace, he granted it to them upon these Terms; That all the Greek Cities should be set free; That the River Lycus should be the Bound between the Territories of both Parties; and, That the Carthaginians should not for the future assist any of the Tyrants against the Syracusians. Having afterwards subdu'd Hicetas, he order'd him an Honourable Burial; and took Aetna by Storm, and put all the Campanians to the Sword. And he so terrifi'd Nichodemus the Tyrant of the Centorippians, that he fled out of the City. Then he forc'd Apoilonides, who Lorded it over them of Agyra, to Abdicate Ant. Ch. 337. the Government, and the Inhabitants thus freed, he inroll'd them as Citizens of Syracuse. To conclude, having rooted up all the Tyrants throughout the whole Island, and freed the Cities from their Oppression, he receiv'd them all into his Protection, and they be∣came his Confederates. Then he caus'd Proclamation to be made throughout all Greece, That the Senate and People of Syracuse offer'd Houses and Lands to all who were willing to be Members of the Commonwealth of Syracuse: Upon which, many came flocking over as to the Possession of a new Inheritance. At length Forty Thousand new Planters had their Shares by Lot in those Lands that yet remained undivided within the Territo∣ries of Syracuse; and Ten thousand were allotted to Agyra, being a very large and plea∣sant Country. Not long after, he caus'd all the ancient Laws of Diocles for the Government of the Syracusians, to be review'd, and amended. Such part of them as concern'd private Com∣merce and Inheritances he alter'd not; but those that related to the Administration of the Publick Government, and the Commonwealth, he amended as he thought most expe∣dient. Cephalus a Corinthian, a Learned and Prudent Man, was chiefly concerned in this Emendation and Correction of the Laws. When this Business was finish'd, he tran∣slated the Leontines into Syracuse, and greatly enlarg'd Camarina with Multitudes of Inha∣bitants. And to sum up all, he brought Things to that pass throughout all Sicily, (now through his Care in perfect Peace and Tranquility,) as that the Cities in a very short time abounded in Wealth, and all Earthly Blessings. For through the Seditions and In∣testine Wars, (which Sicily labour'd under for a long time together,) and the many Tyrants that set up for themselves, it was brought to that miserable Condition, that the Ant. Ch. 337. Cities were depopulated, and the Lands lay wast and untill'd, and no Crops to be had for the Supply of Daily Food. But now that there were many Plantations of Colonies bless'd with a constant Peace, and the Land was every where manur'd and improv'd by the Labour of the Husbandman, it began to yield all sorts of Fruits, which being vented (with great Advantage) to the Merchants, the Inhabitants grew exceeding rich in a very short time. And this abundance of Wealth occasion'd in that Age many stately
Structures to be erected up and down in Honour of the Gods. As one among the rest near to the Island of Syracuse, called The House of Sixty Beds, built by Agathocles, for Great∣ness . and Beauty excelling all the Works in Sicily; and because (as it were in Contempt) it overtop'd all the Temples of the Gods, (as a manifest Indication of their Anger,) it was beaten down by a Thunderbolt. At the lesser Haven likewise there were Towers built of Outlandish Stone, in which were Inscriptions cut, and the Name of Agathocles, who rais'd them. Besides these, not long after were built by Hiero the King an A Temple. Olympus in the Market-place, and an Altar near the Theatre a Furlong in length, and in height and breadth proportionably. In the lesser Cities likewise, as in Agyra, (which by reason of the Richness of the Soil as aforesaid received new Colonies,) Hiero. he built a Theatre, (the most Glorious of any in Sicily next to that at Syracuse,) and erected Temples to the Gods, built a Court, a Market-place, and stately Towers, and rais'd over the Tombs and Monuments many large Pyra∣mids of admirable Workmanship. CHAP. XIV. Elatea taken by Philip. Great Consternations in Athens for fear of Philip. The Boeotians join with the Athenians through the Sollicitation of Demosthenes. Py∣thon, a famous Orator. The Battel at Cheronaea between Philip and the Athe∣nians. Lycides the Athenian General put to Death. Philip rebuk'd by Demades, made General of Greece. Timoleon dies. WHEN Charondas executed the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Lucius Olymp. 110. 3. Ant. Ch. 336. An. M. 3607. Elatea taken by Philip. Athens in great fear of Philip. Aemilius and Caius Plotius were Roman Consuls, Philip King of Macedon being in Amity with many of the Graecians, made it his chief Business to bring under the Athe∣nians, thereby with more ease to gain the Sovereignty of Greece. To that end, he pre∣sently possess'd himself of Elatea, and brought all his Forces thither, with a Design to fall upon the Athenians, hoping easily to overcome them, in regard they were not (as he conceiv'd) prepar'd for War, by reason of the Peace lately made with them; which fell out accordingly. For after the taking of Elatea, some hasted in the Night to Athens, informing them, that Elatea was taken by the Macedonians, and that Philip was designing to invade Attica with all his Forces. The Athenian Commanders surpriz'd with the Sud∣denness of the Thing, sent for all the Trumpeters, and commanded an Alarm to be sounded all Night: Upon which, the Report flew through all the Parts of the City, and Fear rouz'd up the Courage of the Citizens. As soon as Day appear'd, the People, without any Summons from the Magistrate, (as the Custom was) all flock'd to the Theatre. To which Place, as soon as the Commanders came, with the Messenger that brought the News, and had declar'd to them the Business, Fear and Silence fill'd the Theatre, and none who were us'd to influence the People, had a Heart to give any Advice. And although a Crier call'd out to such as ought to declare their Minds, what was to be done in order to their Common Security, yet none appear'd who offer'd any thing of Advice in the present Exigency. The People therefore in great Terror and Amazement cast their Eyes upon Demosthenes, who stood up and bid them be Couragious, Demosthenes. and advis'd them forthwith to send Ambassadors to Thebes, to Treat with the Boeotians to join with them in Defence of the Common Liberty; for the shortness of Time (he Ant. Ch. 336. said) would not admit of an Embassy of Aid from the other Confederates, for that the King would probably invade Attica within Two Days; and being that he must march through Boeotia, the main and only Assistance was to be expected from them. And it was not to be doubted, but that Philip, who was in League with the Boeotians, would in his March sollicit them to make War upon the Athenians. The People approv'd of his Ad∣vice, and a Decree was forthwith Recorded, that an Embassy should be dispatch'd as Demosthenes had advis'd. But then it was debated, who was the most Eloquent Person, and so most fit to undertake this Affair. Whereupon Demosthenes being pitch'd upon to be the Man, he readily comply'd; forthwith hasted away, prevails with the Boeotians, The Boeotians join with the Athenians. and returns to Athens. The Athenians therefore having now doubled their Forces by the Accession of the Boeotians, began again to be in good Heart; and presently made Charetes and Physicles Generals, with Command to march with the whole Army into Boeotia. All the Youth readily offer'd themselves to be Listed, and therefore the Army with a swift
March came suddenly to Cheronaea in Boeotia. The Boeotians wondred at the quickness of their Approach, and were thereupon as diligent themselves, and hasting to their Arms, march'd away to meet the Athenians, and being joined, they there expected the Enemy. Philip indeed had first sent Ambassadors to the Council of the Boeotians, amongst whom the most famous was Python; for he was so Eminent for Eloquence, that in the Senate he was set up to encounter Demosthenes in the Business relating to the Confederacy, excelling Ant. Ch. 336. indeed the rest by far, but judged inferior to Demosthenes. Demosthenes himself, in one of his Orations, glories (as if he had done some mighty Thing) in a Speech of his against Python, a fa∣mous Orator. this Orator, in these Words: Then I yielded not a jot to Python, strutting in his Con∣fidence, as if he would have overwhelm'd me witha Torrent of Words. However, though Philip could not prevail with the Boeotians to be his Confederates, yet he resolv'd to fight with them both. To this end, (after a stay for some time for those Forces that were to join him,) he march'd into Boeotia with an Army of at least Thirty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. Both Armies were now ready to ingage, for Cou∣rage and Valour neither giving Place to the other; but as to Number of Men, and Skill in Martial Affairs, the King was far Superior. For having fought very many Battels, and for the most part coming off a Conqueror, he had gain'd much Experience in Matters of War; on the other hand, Iphicrates, Chabrius, and Timotheus, (the Athenians best Commanders) were now dead; and Chares, the chief of them that were left, dif∣fer'd but little from a common Soldier, as to the Wisdom and Conduct of a General. About Sun-rising the Armies on both Sides drew up in Battalia. The King order'd his The Battel of Charonea be∣tween Philip and the Athe∣nians. Son Alexander (who was then newly come to Man's Estate; and had even at that time given evident Demonstrations of his Valour, and the Sprightliness of his Spirit in mana∣ging Affairs) to Command one Wing, joining with him some of the best of his Com∣manders. He himself with a choice Body of Men commanded the other Wing, and plac'd and dispos'd the Regiments and Brigades in such Posts and Stations as the present Occasion requir'd. The Athenians marshall'd their Army according to the several Na∣tions, and committed one Part to the Boeotians, and commanded the rest themselves. At length the Armies engag'd, and a fierce and bloody Battel was fought, which continu'd Ant. Ch. 336. a long time with great Slaughter on both sides, uncertain which way Victory would in∣cline, until Alexander earnest to give an Indication of his Valour to his Father, charg'd with a more than ordinary Heat and Vigour, and being assisted with many stout and brave Men, was the first that broke through the main Body of the Enemy next to him, with the slaughter of many, and bore down all before him: And when those that seconded him did the like, then the Regiments next to the Former were broke to pieces. At length, the Earth being strew'd with heaps of Dead Carkasses, those with Alexander first put the Wing oppos'd to them to flight. The King himself likewise in the Head of this Regiment, fought with no less Courage and Resolution; and that the Glory of the Victory might not be attributed to his Son, he forc'd the Enemy, oppos'd to him, to give ground, and at length put them to a total Rout, and so was the chief In∣strument of the Victory. There were above a Thousand Athenians killed in this Battel, and no fewer than Two thousand taken Prisoners. A great Number likewise of the Boeotians were slain, and many fell into the Hands of the Enemy After the Battel Philip set up a Trophy, and having given Liberty for the burying of the Dead, he Sacrific'd to the Gods for the Victory, and distributed Rewards to the Sol∣diers, who had signaliz'd their Valour according as every one had deserv'd. Some report, that Philip having appointed a Wanton and Luxurious Banquet with his Friends, in Ostentation of his Victory, in his Cups passing through the Throng of the Prisoners, most contumeliously taunted the miserable Wretches with their Misfortune. Ant. Ch. 336. Whereupon Demades the Orator, one of the Captives, spoke boldly to him, and fram'd Demades re∣bukes Philip. a Discourse in order to curb the Pride and Petulancy of the King, in Words to this effect: Since Fortune, O King, has represented thee like Agamemnon, art thou not asham'd to act a part of Thersites? With this sharp Reproof, they say, Philip was so startled, that he wholly chang'd his former Course, and not only laid aside the Coronets, and all other Badges of Pride and Wantonness that attended his Festivals, but with Admiration releas'd Philip re∣form'd. the Man that had reprehended him, and advanc'd him to Places of Honour. In con∣clusion, he became so far Complaisant, and moulded into the Civilities of Athens through his Converse with Demades, that he releas'd all the Captives without Ransom. And re∣mitting his Pride and Haughtiness, (the constant Attendant upon Victory,) he sent Am∣bassadors to Athens, and renew'd the Peace with them: And placing a Garison in Thebes, made Peace likewise with the Boeotians. After this Overthrow, the Athenians put to Death Lysides, the General of the Army, upon the Accusation of Lycurgus, who was the most
highly preferr'd of any of the Orators of that Age; he had executed the Office of Lord-Treasurer of the City, (with great Commendation) for the space of Twelve years, and all his Life long had been in great Reputation for his Virtue and Honesty: But a most bitter Accuser. The Excellency and Sharpness of whose Speech, if any desire to know, he may best judge by his words us'd against Lycides, which follow. O Lycides, thou wast the General of the Army; and tho' a Thousand Citizens are The Speech of Lycurgus. slain, two Thousand taken Prisoners, a Trophy erected to the Dishonour of this City, and all Greece inslav'd, and all this done thou being Captain and General, yet dar'st Live and view the Light of the Sun, and blushest not to shew thy Face in the Forum, thou who art born the Monument of thy Country's Shame and Dishonour. A thing very remarkable hapned at this time. For when this Battel was fought at Chero∣nea, the same Day and Hour another was fought in Italy between the Tarentines and Lyca∣nians, A Battel in Italy and at Cheronea, one and the same day. in which Archidamus the King of Lacedaemon was slain, who had reign'd Three and twenty years. Agis his Son succeeded him, and Govern'd nine years. About that time likewise dy'd Timotheus, Prince of Heraclea in Pontus, in the Fifteenth year of his Princi∣pality, whose Brother Dionysius succeeded, and reign'd Two and thirty years. Phrynichus bore the Office of chief Magistrate of Athens, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, and Olymp. 110. 4. Ant. Ch. 335. An. M. 3608. Publius Decius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome; when Philip bearing his Crest high upon the account of his Victory at Cheronea, and having struck a Terror into the most Eminent Cities of Greece, made it his great Business to be chosen Generalissimo of all Greece. It being therefore nois'd abroad, that he would make War upon the Persians, for the Advantage of the Graecians, and that he would revenge the Impiety by them com∣mitted against the Sacreds of the Gods, he presently wan the Hearts of the Graecians. He was very Liberal and Courteous likewise to all, both private Men and Communi∣ties; and publish'd to the Cities, that he had a Desire to Consult with them concerning Matters relating to the Publick Good. Whereupon, a General Council was call'd, and Ant. Ch. 335. held at Corinth, where he declar'd his Design to make War upon the Persians, and what probable grounds there were of Success, and therefore desir'd the Council to join with him, as Confederates in the War. At length he was created General of all Greece, with absolute Power, and thereupon Philip made General of Greece. he made mighty preparation for that Expedition, and having order'd what Quota of Men every City should send forth, he return'd into Macedonia. And thus stood the Affairs and Concerns of Philip. In Sicily, Timoleon, after he had settl'd all things in right and due Order in Syracuse, Timoleon dies. dy'd, having govern'd Eight years. The Syracusians who highly honour'd him for the ma∣ny great Services done to their Country, bury'd him in great State and Pomp, and when the Body was to be brought forth, great multitudes were got together, and the Syracusi∣ans publish'd a Decree, that Two hundred A Mina is 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. Mina's should be expended upon the Charge of his Funeral, and that his Memory should be honour'd yearly for ever with Musick, Horse-Coursing, and Gymnick Sports, for that he had subdu'd the Barbarians, planted Co∣lonies in the greatest Greek City in Sicily, and rescu'd the Sicilians from Slavery. About this time King of Pon∣tus. Ariorarxanes dy'd in the Twenty sixth year of his Reign, and was succeeded by Methridates, who Reign'd Five and thirty Years. At the same time, the Romans fought with the Latins and Campanians, near the City Suessa, and routed them, and confiscated part of their Lands. And Manlius the Consul, who gain'd the Day, tri∣umph'd for the Victory. CHAP. XV. Philip consults the Oracle at Delphos. Marries his Daughter Cleopatra, to the King of Epirus. Encourag'd to the Persian War by Neoptolemus his Verses. Philip's Pride. His Murther. The Cause of it, and how it was done, and by whom. WHen Pythodorus was chief Governor of Athens, and Quintus Publius and Tiberius Olymp. 111. 1. Ant. Ch. 334. An. M. 3609. Aemilius Mamercus were Roman Consuls, the Hundred and Eleventh Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Cleomentis Cletorius wan the Prize. In this Year Philip began the
War against the Persians, and forthwith sent A taus and Parmenio before into Asia to free the Greek Cities there from Slavery. He himself intending to have the Concurrence of the Gods, consulted the Oracle at Delphos, whether or no he should be victorious over Philip consults the Oracle. the King of Persia. The Answer was thus, . The Ox is crown'd when's end is near at hand, To offer him, a Man doth ready stand. This doubtful Answer, Philip constru'd to his own advantage, as if the Oracle had ex∣presly foretold, that he should lead away the Persian King as a Victim to the Sacrifice. But in truth, it fell out quite otherwise, and by the effect it appear'd, that it had a con∣trary Signification, to wit, that Philip in a Throng, at the time of a Sacred Festival was to be knock'd on the Head like a Bullock crown'd with a Garland, for Sacrifice. In the mean time, he was very jocund, as if he had conquer'd Asia already, and con∣cluded the Gods were engag'd with him in the Expedition. Without delay therefore he offer'd most costly and magnificent Sacrifices, and at the same time, solemnized the Marriage of his Daughter, Cleopatra, by Olympias: He Marry'd her to Alexander, King of Epirus, Brother of Olympias. Having therefore a desire of a considerable Appearance of Philip's pom∣pous Festivals at the Marri∣age of his Daughter Cle∣opatra. the Graecians at this Nuptial Festivity, conjoin'd with his Religious Sacrifices, he made most pompous Preparation for the Entertainment of his Friends and Guests, both with Musick, Dancing, and Feasting. To this End, he Invited those that were his special Friends and Familiars, all over Greece, and commanded his Servants and Attendants that they should invite as many Strangers from all Places as were of their own Acquaintance. And his main design in all this, was, that he might assure all the Graecians of his Kindness towards them, and testify his Gratitude by these Friendly Entertainments, for the Honours conferr'd upon him. A vast Concourse of People therefore were got together from all Places, to the Solemnity of these Nuptials, which were magnificently Solemniz'd at Or Aegeas. Aeges in Macedonia, with all sorts of Sports and Plays; so that not only Noblemen and Persons of Quality, but even many great Cities presented Philip with Crowns of Gold. Among the Cities, Athens made one; and when the Common Cryer with a loud Voice presented the Crown sent from them to Philip, he clos'd with this, That if any Plotter of Treason against Philip, should hereafter slee to Athens for shelter, he should be forthwith deliver'd up. By this acciden∣tal Publication of this Cryer, it seem'd to be intimated (as it were by some Divine Providence) that some piece of Treachery was near at hand to be executed. There were several other the like Words (as by a Divine Instigation) uttered, which portended the King's Death. There was then at the Festival, Neoptolemus the Tragedian, Neoptolemus the Poet. remarkable above all others for the Loudness of his Voice, and Famous and Eminent in other respects. He had commanded him to repeat some Verses which he was ordered to compose, especially relating to the Persian Expedition. Whereupon, he began to re∣cite a Witty Poem, proper (as he thought) to Philip's intended Passage into Asia, where∣in he set forth the Glory and Greatness of the Persian King; and though he was so Famous all the World over, yet that Fortune would some time or other bring him down. The Poem was thus, Y're Minds are Higher than the Sky o'er-grown, The greatest part of Earth you wish y're own; Houses to Houses join; Fools without end, You would y're Lives as well as Lands extend. But doleful Death, alas! Although ye do Creep towards, it will gallop unto you, Of long Hopes very shortly cut the Clue.
He added likewise other to the same Sense with these. But Philip resting wholly upon these recited, his Thoughts were altogether, full of his Conquering the King of Persia. And he much revolv'd in his Mind the Answer given him by the Oracle, which agreed in all Points with the Words of the Tragedian. After the Feast for that time was ended, and the Sports were to be renew'd the next Day, a great number of People in the Night-time flock'd into the Theatre. And where∣as twelve Images of the Gods (amongst other sumptuous Preparations) most curiously wrought and richly adorn'd, were brought forth in pompous Procession, the Image of Philip cloth'd like the Gods in every respect, made the Thirteenth, hereby arrogating to Philip's Pride; himself a Place, as if he would be inthron'd among the There were 12 chief Gods among the Greeks, they were call'd O∣lympii; their Names, Jupi∣ter, Mars, Mercury, Neptune, Vulcan, Apollo, Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus. Vid. Herodotus in Terpsicore. Gods. The Theatre being now full; he himself came forth cloathed in a white Robe, his Life-Guard following him at a great Distance, designing thereby to evidence it to all, that he judg'd himself secure in the Hearts and Affections of the Grecians, and therefore stood not in need of the Guard of his Halberteers. While he was thus with, loud and joyful Acclamations cry'd up (as it were) to the Stars, and the whole Multitude resounded his Praise, upon a sudden, and beyond all Mens expectation, he was treacherously Phi. murder'd. murther'd. But for the Clearer and more distinct Understanding of the History in this matter, we This was about our 24th of September. The manner and occasion of Philip's Mur∣ther. shall first relate the Causes and Grounds of this Assassination. There was one Pausanias, a Macedonian, of the City call'd Oristis, one of the King's Esquires of the Body, and for his Beauty dearly belov'd of him. This Man taking notice how much another young Youth of the same Name was doted on by Philip, fell upon him with very foul and opprobrious Language, telling him he was an . Hermaphradite, for that he prostituted himself to the Lust of every one that would. He resented this Dis∣grace very ill, but conceal'd it for a while. Afterwards consulting with Attalus what was to be done for the future, he determin'd presently after, in an unusual manner, to put an end to his own Life. For within a while after, in a Battel wherein Philip was engag'd against Plurias, King of the Illyrians, Pausanias in the heat of the Fight interpos'd himself between the King and the Enemy, and receiv'd all the Darts upon his own Body that were cast at him, and so dy'd upon the Spot. The manner of his Death being nois'd a∣broad, Attalus one of the Courtiers, and in great esteem with the King, invited the o∣ther Pausianas to a Feast, and after he had made him drunk, expos'd his Body, thus o∣ver-charg'd with Wine, to be By Sodomy. abus'd by the Filthy Lusts of a Company of base , Mule-tenders or Ostlers. Sordid Fellows. When he was Sober, he was highly enrag'd at the abominable Abuse, and com∣plain'd against Attalus to the King; who though he was much offended at the Wicked∣ness of the Fact, yet by reason of his Relation to him, and that he had present occasion to make use of him in his Service, he would not punish him. For he was Uncle to Cleopatra, whom the King had marry'd as his Second Wife, and was design'd General of the Army sent before into Asia, being a very stout and valiant Man. To pacify therefore Pausanias, whose Spirit was highly Exasperated for the intolerable Injury offer'd him, he bestow'd on him many rich Gifts, and advanc'd him to a more Honourable Post in his Guards. But Pausanias's Anger was implacable, and therefore determin'd not only to revenge him∣self upon the Author of this Abuse, but upon him that wav'd doing him Justice by the in∣flicting of Punishment. And Hermocrates, the Sophist, greatly confirm'd him in this his Resolution. For Pausanias conversing with him, and in Discourse asking him, by what means a Man might make himself most famous? The Philosopher answer'd, by killing him that has done the greatest things; for whenever he is nam'd, then he likewise that kill'd him will be sure to be remember'd. Pausanias making use of this Answer, as an in∣centive to his Rage, the Restlessness of his disturb'd Spirit would admit of no further de∣lay, but laid his Design in the time of the Festivals in this manner. He first plac'd Horses at the Gates of the City, then he himself return'd and stood at the Entrance into the Theatre, with a Gallick Sword hid secretly under his Coat. Philip commanded his Friends that came along with him, to go before him into the Theatre, and his Guard were at a considerable distance from him. Whereupon, the Traytor perceiving that the King was Justin. Lib. 8, 9 alone, ran him into the side through the Body, and laid him dead at his Feet, and forth∣with fled to the Horses that were prepar'd for him at the Gates. Hereupon presently some of the Life-Guard ran in to the Body, others pursu'd the Assassinate, amongst whom were Leonnatus, Perdiccas and Attalus. Pausanias made so swiftly away, and nimbly mounted his Horse, that he had certainly escap'd, but that a Branch of a Vine caught hold of the Heel of his Shoe, and so entangl'd him that down he fell: Upon which Perdiccas with his Fellows fell upon him as he was endeavouring to rise, and after many Wounds
given him, there slew him. And thus Philip, (the most Potent of all the Kings in Europe in that Age, and who for the Greatness of his Dominion associated himself for Majesty into the number of the Twelve Gods) came to his end, after he had Reign'd about Four and twenty Years. This King from very small Beginnings, gain'd the largest Dominion in Greece; and is judg'd to have enlarg'd the Bounds of his Kingdom, not so much by Arms, as by his fair Tongue, and his complaisant and courteous Demeanour towards all he had to deal with: For it is reported, That Philip himself would often boast more of his Military Art and Policy, and of the gaining of his Enemies by fair Words, than in the Strength and Valour of his Soldiers. For he was us'd to say, That the Honour of winning of Battels was common and due to the rest of the Army with himself; but the Praise and Com∣mendation due to Affability and a pleasant Converse, was peculiar to himself alone. And thus being now come to the Death of Philip, we shall end this Book, as we at first design'd. The following we shall begin with the Succession of Alexander into his Fa∣ther's Kingdom, and endeavour to comprehend all his Actions in one Book.
BOOK XVII. THE former Book being the Sixteenth of our History, began with the PREFACE. Reign of Philip the Son of Amyntas, and comprehended not only the Things done by him to the very Day of his Death, but the Actions and Affairs of other Kings, Cities, and Countries during the space of Four and twenty Years. Being now in this to declare what follow'd, we shall begin with the Reign of Alexander; and in treating of the Actions of this Prince, from the Beginning to the End, we shall take along with us the most remarkable Things done through all Parts of the World. And the Relations (we conceive) will be the better remembred, if Things be methodi∣cally digested, as it were, into distinct Heads, so as that the Beginning and End may, as by one Thread, be knit one to the other: For this King did great Things in a very short time, and excell'd all the Princes that ever were before him in his wonderful Atchieve∣ments, effected by his own Valour and Policy. For he Conquer'd a great Part of Eu∣rope, and almost all Asia, within the space of Twelve Years: So that his Fame was (deservedly) advanc'd to that degree, that in Glory he surmounted all the Heroes and Semigods. But we need not (we judge) in a Preface anticipate any of the worthy Actions of this King; for the particular Relations themselves will sufficiently evidence his Greatness, and the Fame and Glory of his Name. Alexander therefore descended from Hercules on the Father's side, and from Achilles on the Mother's, seem'd to derive his Valor as well as his Person from such Famous Ancestors. The Time thus stated for this present Relation, we return to the Course of our Hi∣story. CHAP. I. Conspiracies of the Cities against Alexander. The Athenians send Ambassadors to Alexander to beg Pardon. He's made General by the Amphictyons. Attalus kill'd by Alexander's Command. The Wickedness of Bagoas. Darius commended. Raises Forces. A Description of Mount Ida. Alexander invades the Illyrians, and others. Thebes besieg'd by Alexander, and raz'd. The Miseries of Thebes. Prodigies. Alexander demands Demosthenes and others to be deliver'd up to him by the Athenians: Their Answer. He returns into Macedonia; and Feasts his Soldiers. WHEN Evaenetus was Lord Chancellor in Athens, and Lucius Furius and Olymp. 111. 2. Ant. Ch. 333. An. M. 361. Caius Maenius. Manlius were Roman Consuls, Alexander ascended the Throne, and in the first place executed Justice upon the Murtherers of his Father: And when he had with great care celebrated his Funerals, he set in order the Concerns of the Kingdom much better than most expected: For being very young, and upon that account despis'd, he sought first to win the Common People by fair Words and courteous Addresses: Amongst others, he told them that the Name of the King was only chang'd, but that the Government should not be manag'd a jot worse than it was when his Father was alive. He courteously likewise gave Audience to the Ambassadors, and desir'd the Grecians that they would have the same Kindness for him that they had for his Father, which he so esteem'd, as that he look'd upon it as part of his Inheritance. Then he employ'd himself in the frequent Trainings of the Soldiers, and in Martial Exer∣cises, and brought the Army readily to submit to his Commands. Attalus, the Uncle of Cleopatra, Philip's other Wife, conspir'd to gain the Kingdom; and therefore he
resolv'd to take him out of the way, For Cleopatra was brought to bed of a Son a few Alexander n rives how to kill Attalus. Days before the Death of Philip, and Attalus was sent a little before as General with Par∣menio his Colleague, with an Army into Asia, where by his Bribes and fair Tongue he so gain'd the Hearts of the Soldiers, that the Army was wholly at his Devotion: There∣fore the King conceiv'd he had just cause to be jealous of him, lest if he should side with the Grecians (who he knew were his Enemies) he should by that means gain the King∣dom to himself. Therefore he made choice of Heccateus, one of his Friends, and sent him with a considerable Army into Asia, with Command to bring over Attalus alive if Ant. Ch. 333. he could; and if he could not effect that, to take the first Opportunity to kill him. When he came into Asia, he join'd his Forces with Attalus and Parmenio, and watch'd a fit Op∣portunity to execute what he was commanded. In the mean time, Alexander being inform'd that many of the Greciani were hatching some Mischief, in order to new Commotions, his Thoughts were greatly perplex'd and Conspiracies a∣mong the Gre∣cians against Alexander. disturb'd. For the Athenians (Demosthenes stirring them up against the Macedonians) re∣joyc'd at the News of Philip's Death, and resolv'd that the Macedonians should no longer domineer over Greece. To this end they sent over Ambassadors to Attalus, and privately consulted with him concerning the Management of the whole Affair, and stirr'd up many of the Cities to assert their Liberties. The Etolians made a Decree to recall the Exiles of Acarnania, whom Philip had driven out of their Country. The Ambrociots, by the Persua∣sion of Aristarchus, drave outthe Garison that was there, and restor'd the Democracy. The Thebans likewise decreed to cast out the Garison that was in the Citadel of Cadmea, and that Alexander should never with their Consent have Command in Greece. The Arcadians Ant. Ch. 333. also, as they were the only People that refus'd to give their Consent that Philip should be General of Greece, so they now rejected Alexander. The rest of the Peloponnesians, as the Argives, Eleans, Lacedaemonians, and some others were with all their might for their own Government. To conclude, many of the Nations beyond Macedonia waited for an Oppor∣tunity to rebell, and great Commotions there were among the Barbarians in those Parts. Notwithstanding all which, and the Fears that were every where in the Kingdom, and though he was but a Youth, yet in a short time (beyond all expectation) he overcame all those Difficulties, and made all plain and clear before him, reducing some to their Duty by fair and smooth Words, and others through fear and dread of Punishments; and the rest he compell'd by force to stoop to his Sovereignty. In the first place, he so far gain'd upon the Thessalians, both by Promises of large Re∣wards, and by his smooth and courteous Language (telling them how near of kin he was to them by his Descent from Hercules) that they by a Publick Decree declar'd him Ge∣neral of Greece, as that which descended to him from his Father. Having gain'd this Point, he brought over the bordering Nations to the same Good Opinion of him; Then he went to Pyle; and in the Senate of the Amphictyons he so manag'd his Matters, that by the General Consent of all, he was created Generalissimo of all Greece. He assur'd the Am∣brociots, Alexander made General of Greece. in a kind and smooth Oration made to them, That he had that Kindness for them, that he would presently restore them to that Liberty which they so lately sought to recover. But to strike the greater Terror into those that regarded not his Words, he came with a swift March with an Army of Macedonians in an hostile manner into Baeotia, and encamping near Cadmea, struck a Terror into the City of the Thebans. About the same time the Athenians hearing of the King's coming into Boeotia, slighted Ant. Ch. 333. him no longer: For the Quickness of the Youth, and his diligent dispatch of Business, greatly terrify'd the Revolters. Hereupon the Athenians order'd every thing they had in the Country to be brought into the City, and the Walls to be repair'd and guarded as well as they could; and sent Ambassadors to Alexander to beg pardon that they had no The Athenians send Ambassa∣dors to Alexan∣der. sooner own'd his Sovereignty; and order'd Demosthenes to accompany the Ambassadors: But he came not with the other to Alexander, but return'd from Citherone to Athens; either because he was afraid upon the account of the Speeches he had publickly made a∣gainst the Macedonians, or that he was not willing to displease the Persian King. For it is reported that he had receiv'd great Sums of Money from the Persians, to beat down the Interest of the Macedonians by his Orations. Which was hinted (they say) by Eschines; in one of his Speeches; wherein he upbraids Demosthenes for taking of Bribes in these Words: Now the King's Gold plentifully bears all his Charges: But this will not serve his turn long; for , a debaucht Course. Covetousness is never satisfy'd with Abundance. But to proceed; Alexander return'd a very courteous Answer to the Ambassadors, which freed the Athenians from their Fears, and he order'd all the Ambassadors and Of the Am∣phictyons. Mem∣bers of the Council to meet him at Corinth; where when those who were usually Mem∣bers
of the General Council were come, the King by a gracious Speech so prevail'd with the Grecians, that they created him General of all Greece, and decreed him Aid and Assi∣stance against the Persians, in order to revenge the many Injuries the Greeks had receiv'd Ant. Ch. 333. from them. Having gain'd the Honour he thus sought for, he march'd back with his Army into Macedonia. Having now given an Account of the Affairs of Greece, we shall relate next what things were done in Asia: For Attalus presently upon the death of Philip, began to set up for himself; and to that end made a League with the Athenians, in order by their joint Con∣currence to oppose Alexander. But afterwards he chang'd his Mind, and fent a Letter (written to him by Demosthenes) to Alexander, and in many smooth and flattering Expres∣sions, endeavour'd to clear himself of all those Crimes and Miscarriages that were laid to his charge. However, he was afterwards kill'd by Hecateus, according to the King's Command; upon which, the Macedonian Army in Asia laid aside all Thoughts of a De∣fection, for that Attalus was now gone, and Parmenio greatly lov'd Alexander. But being we are now about to write of the Kingdom of Persia, it's necessary that we begin our Relation a little higher. Lately in the Reign of Philip, Darius O∣chus. Ochus poison'd by Bagoas. Ochus rul'd over the Persians, hated by all for his Ill Na∣ture and Cruelty towards his Subjects. Bagoas therefore, a Colonel in the Army, and an Eunuch, but a wicked and beastly Fellow, poison'd the King by the help of his Physician, and plac'd the King's youngest Son Arses upon the Throne. He likewise murder'd the New King's Brothers (who were yet very young) that being thus bereft of his Relations, he might be more observant to himself. But the Young Man abhorring the Wickedness of this Wretch, and plainly by many Tokens discovering his Design to punish him, Bagoas smelling it out, murther'd Arses and Arses murder'd by Bagoas. all his Children, in the Third Year of his Reign. The Royal Family being thus extinct, and none of that Race left who could make any Title to the Crown, he advanc'd one of his Friends, call'd Darius, to the Kingdom. He Ant. Ch. 333. was the Son of Arsanus, the Brother of Artaxerxes King of Persia. But the Fate of Bagoas was very remarkable; for having habituated himself to Cruelty, he resolv'd likewise to poison Darius in a medicinal Potion: But this Treason being discover'd, the King sent Bagoas justly punish'd by Da∣rius. friendly to speak with him; and when he came deliver'd to him the Cup, and forc'd him to drink it off. And indeed Darius was judg'd worthy to enjoy the Kingdom, being look'd upon as the most Valiant Man among the Persians: For heretofore when Artaxerxes was engag'd in a Battel against the Cadusians, one of the Enemy, of a strong Body and couragious Spirit, challeng'd any of the Persians there present to a single Combat; which when none would dare to undertake, this Darius enter'd the List, and kill'd the Cadusian. For which he was highly rewarded by the King, and gain'd the chiefest Reputation for Valour among the Persians. And for this reason also he was accounted worthy of the Crown of Persia, and began to Reign about the same time that Philip dy'd, and Alexander succeeded in the Kingdom. The Valour therefore of Alexander meeting with such a Man as this for his Adversary to cope with, was the occasion so many Battels were fought for the Empire with that Reso∣lution as they were. But these Matters will appear more clear hereafter, when things come to be distinctly and particularly related: For the present we shall return to the Ant. Ch. 333. orderly course of the History. Darius Co∣domannus, conquer'd by Alexander. Darius being advanc'd to the Throne of Persia, a little before the Death of Philip, he was contriving how to avert the War threatned, and bring it over to Macedonia it self: But when he was dead, and so the King freed from that Fear, he slighted and despis'd the Youth of Alexander: But being for his Valour, and Activeness of Spirit in dispatch of Busi∣ness, at length created General of all Greece, the Fame and Valour of the Young Man was  in every Man's mouth. And Darius now began to look about him, and employ'd his chief Care to raise Forces, and fitted out a great Fleet, and made choice of the best Officers he could procure to Command his Army, which was now very great and numerous; among whom Memnon the Rhodian was one, a Brave man, both for Valour and Discipline: Him the King Com∣manded to march to Cyzicus, an Island in the Propontis, and a City there. Cyzicus with Five thousand men, and to endeavour to take in that City: Who in order thereto, march'd his Army over the Mountain Ida. Some fabulously report, that this Mountain was so call'd from Ida of Meliseus.
It is the highest Mountain of any about the Hellespont. In the middle is a Cave, as if it A Description of Mount Ida. were made of purpose to entertain the Gods, in which it is reported, That This was Pa∣ris the Son of Piam, called Alexander, who decided the Controversy between Juno, Minerva, and Venus, by giving the Golden Apple to Venus as the fairest. Paus. l. 5. c. 19. Alexander gave Judgment concerning the Goddesses. Here it's said, the The Sons of Minerva and Apollo. Idei Dactyli were born, who were the first that were taught to work in Iron Cybele. by the Mother of the Gods. A thing also very Wonderful and Remarkable is ascrib'd to this Place: For at the rising of the In August. Dog-Star there is such a Serenity and Calmness of the Air upon the Top of the Mount, as if it were there above all Storms and Winds; and then even at Midnight the Sun seems to rise, so as that its Rays appear not in a Circular Form, but casts abroad Flames of Fire here and there at a great distance, so that it seems as if Flakes of Fire in several Places overspread the Earth; which within a little while after are contracted into one Body till they come to the quantity of Three Three hundred Foot. Plethras. At length when the Day is at hand, there appears as it were the compleat Body of the Sun inlightning the Air as it uses to do at other times. But to proceed; Memnon having pass'd over this Mountain, assaults Cyzicum on a sud∣den, Ant. Ch. 333. Memnon. and was very near surprizing of it. But failing in his Design, he harrass'd the Coun∣try, and return'd loaden with a rich Booty. In the mean time, Parmenio took Grynnius by Storm, and sold all the Inhabitants for Parmenio takes Gryn∣nius. Slaves. Then he besieg'd Pitane; but Memnon approaching, the Macedonians in a Fright quitted the Siege. Afterwards Callas, with a Body of Macedonians and other Mercenaries, fought with the Persians in the Country of Troas, and being overpower'd with Number, was beaten, and forc'd to retire to Rhetium. And in this Condition was Asia at that time. Alexander having quieted all the Commotions in Greece, march'd with his Army into Thrace, which struck such Terror into those People that had caus'd Tumults and Disor∣ders there, that he forc'd them to submit to his Government. Then he invaded Peonia and Now Dalma∣tia, or Sclavo∣nia. Illyria, and the People bordering upon them, and having subdu'd those that had Revolted, he likewise brought under his Dominion the Barbarians next adjoyning. While he was engag'd in these Wars, he receiv'd Intelligence, that many of the Graecians were about to Revolt, and that a considerable Number of the Greek Cities, particularly Thebes, had al∣ready actually rejected his Sovereignty. He was hereupon in a great Rage, and return'd into Macedonia, with a Design to hasten into Greece to quiet the Tumults and Disturbances there. In the mean time, the Thebans were intent upon driving the Macedonian Garison out of Alexander be∣sieges Thebes. Cadmea, and to that end besieg'd the Citadel; and had no sooner done so, but Alexander was presently at the City Walls, and lay before it with his whole Army. The Thebans, before Alexander's Approach, had so begirt Cadmea with a deep Trench, and a strong Ant. Ch. 333. Baracado of Timber, that neither Relief nor Provision could be brought in to them. They had sent likewise to the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans, for their Assistance; and sollicited the Athenians by their Ambassadors to join with them, and had receiv'd a great Number of Arms freely given to them by Demosthenes, with which they arm'd those that had none. Among those, to whom the Thebans address'd themselves for Assistance, the Peloponne∣sians had sent Forces as far as to the Isthmus, and there order's them to make an Halt till the King came, who was then expected. The Athenians, though they had decreed Aid to the Thebans; yet they sent no Forces thither, minding first to observe how Matters were like to go. The Governor likewise of the Castle Cadmea taking Notice what great Preparation the Thebans were making for the Siege, was very diligent to strengthen and fortify the Walls, and had furnish'd the Garison with all sorts of Weapons. But after that Alexander was come unexpectedly, and on a sudden, with his whole Ar∣my out of Thrace, and that it was uncertain whether any Assistance would come in to the Thebans, the Forces of the Enemy far exceeding them of Thebes, the Officers call'd a Council of War to consult what to determine, and there it was unanimously agreed to stand it out in Defence of the Liberties of their Country: Which Resolution being ap∣prov'd of by all the Citizens, all earnestly set themselves to the carrying on of the War.
But the King forbore Force for some time, to the end they might have space to recol∣lect themselves, not thinking that one only City would engage with so great an Army. Ant. Ch. 333. For Alexander had with him above Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, all old Experienc'd Soldiers, (Conquerors almost in every Battel under Philip,) in whose Valour he so far confided, that he doubted not but by them to put an End to the Persian Monarchy. However, if the Thebans had yielded to the present Difficulty of the Time, and had sent Ambassadors to the Macedonians with Terms of Peace, he had no doubt com∣ply'd with them, and granted whatever they would have desir'd. For he wish'd greatly to have all Quiet in Greece, and to be Free and Undisturb'd in his War against the Persians. But when he saw that he was slighted by the Thebans, he resolv'd to destroy the City, and by that means to terrify all others that for the future should dare to Rebel. And now when the Army was drawn out in Battalia ready to engage, the King caus'd Procla∣mation to be made, that any of the Thebans should have Liberty to come in to him, and whosoever did, should enjoy the Common Liberty of Greece. On the other side, the Thebans, to shew themselves as forward in their Ambition as the Enemy; by the Voice of a Crier from an high Tower made another Proclamation, That whosoever had a Desire to join with the King of Per∣sia. great King and the Thebans, to defend the Liberties of the Graecians, and kill the Tyrant of Greece, should be receiv'd by them. This touch'd him to the Quick, and he was thereupon so inrag'd, that he vow'd all sorts of Death to the Thebans, and so commanded the Engines to be prepar'd in order to an Assault, and other Things to be made ready for an Engagement. In the mean time, the Greeks considering the utter Ruin that seem'd to hang over the Ant. Ch. 333. Heads of the Thebans, were greatly affected with the Miseries wherewith they were like to be overwhelm'd, yet none durst appear to Relieve the City, for that they had rashly and inconsiderately brought apparent Destruction upon themselves: However, the Thebans were very forward and resolute to venture all to the utmost Extremity, though they were a little startled with some Prophecies and Prodigies from the Gods. The most Remarkable was, that in the Temple of Ceres, a slender Spider's Web was observ'd to spread out it self as broad as a Cloak, and to represent the Rainbow in an Arch'd Circumference. Con∣cerning which, the Oracle at Delphos gave them this Answer: . The God to all by this Sign gives a Call: To the Boeotia first; and Neighbours all. And the Oracle in their own Country return'd them this other: . This Web for one works Bane, And for another Gain. This Prodigy happen'd about Three Months before the King came against Thebes. Prodigies. About the time of the King's Arrival, the Statues plac'd in the Forum seem'd to sweat to that degree, that great Drops in every part stood upon them. Moreover the Magistrates were inform'd, that in the Lake of Onchestus were heard Voices like roaring and bellow∣ing of Oxen. And that the Waters in Dirce were to the view as if they had been all turn'd into Blood. There were others from Delphos that reported, that the Roof of the Temple, built by the Thebans out of the Spoils of the Phocians, appear'd to be besmear'd over with Blood. Those who addicted themselves to the Interpretation of Prodigies, said, That the Web Ant. Ch. 333. portended the Departure of the Gods from the City; by the Colour of the Rainbow, was signify'd various Troubles and Turmoils; by the appearance of Sweat, extream Mi∣series; and by the Blood, Slaughters and Destructions in the City. Therefore they advis'd the Thebans, that insomuch as the Gods plainly pointed at the Ruin of the City, That they should not engage in Fight with the Enemy, but rather seek to agree Matters some other way, which was much more safe. But the Thebans abated nothing of their Courage, but on the contrary push'd forward by the Heat of their Spirits, encourag'd one another with the Remembrance of their famous Victory at the Battel of Leuctra, and other Successes gain'd by their former Va∣lour.
So that trusting more to the Valour of their Arms, than making use of Prudent Councils, they ran headlong to the Ruin of themselves and their Country. In the mean time, the King, within the space of Three Days, put all Things in order, both for assaulting the City, and marshalling of his Army for Battel. His Army he di∣vided into Three Parts: One Part he order'd to assault the Out wall; another to fight the Thebans Army; and the third he kept for Reserves to relieve his Men, and renew the Fight as there should be occasion. But the Thebans plac'd their Horse within the Ramparts. Their Slaves that were manumitted, the Exiles and the Strangers that were Inhabitants, were order'd to defend the Walls: And the Thebans themselves (though they were far inferiour in Number) were resolv'd to fight those Macedonians commanded by the King, that were ready to make the Assault. And now all the Women and Children ran to the Temples, to make Supplication to the Gods to deliver them from the Ruin that threaten'd them. When the Macedonians drew near, the Trumpets sounded a Charge, upon which both Armies set up a great Shout, and Ant. Ch. 333. every one charg'd that Battalion to which he was appointed. By Day-break the Darts The Battel be∣tween the The∣bans and A∣lexander. flew one at another, and those being quickly spent, they fell to it with their Swords Hand to Hand, so that the Fight presently was very sharp and bloody. For the Mace∣donians, through their Number (far exceeding the other) and the fierceness of their Charge, put the Enemy hard to it. On the other side, the Thebans heing stronger body'd Men, and us'd to Martial Discipline by their continual Exercises in the Schools, and more resolv'd than the other, resolutely went through all Difficulties whatsoever, so that many were wounded, and multitudes kill'd on both Sides. In the Heat of the Battel, a Man might have heard Shouts for Victory and Groans of Dying Men at one and the same time, and the Macedonians often calling out one to another, not to stain the Glory of their former Victories by any base Act of Cowardise in the present Engagement; and the Thebans pressing theirs not to suffer their Parents, Wives and Children, to be miserable Captives, and all their Families expos'd to the rageful Lust of the Macedonians, but that they would remember the Battels at Leuctra and Mantinea, and the noble Actions for which they were famous all the World over. So that the obstinate Resolution of both Parties occasion'd the Issue of the Battel to be very doubtful a long time. Alexander perceiving how the Love of Liberty inflam'd the Courage of the Thebans, and that the Macedonians began to faint, commanded the Reserves to relieve them that were ingag'd. Upon which, the Macedonians coming with a fierce and sudden Charge upon the Thebans, now even tir'd out, bore them down and kill'd multitudes of them. However the Thebans would not yield the Enemy the Day, but stood to it with that Ob∣stinacy, that they slighted all Misfortunes, and their Valour so strengthen'd their Resolu∣tion, that they cry'd out, That the Macedonians must own themselves worsted by the Thebans. Ant. Ch. 333. And this is to be observ'd of them, That when all others (being still press'd upon by their Enemies with fresh Supplies one after another) are wont to flag, they only are the more Couragious, even when their weary'd Enemy is reliev'd by fresh Reserves. While the Armies were thus resolutely engag'd, the King spy'd a Portal without any Alexander's Army enters Thebes. Guard, and sends away Perdiccas with some Regiments in order to possess himself of the Place, and so to break into the City. Perdiccas having presently executed the King's Command, the Macedonians through this little Gate forthwith rush'd into the City. And though the Thebans had a good while before worsted the Enemy's first Battalion, and were now ingag'd with the second, and full of Hopes of a perfect Victory, yet when they understood that the Enemy had possess'd themselves of part of the City, they forthwith retir'd within the Walls. And then both the Horse and Foot hasted back with all speed into the City, and trod many of their Fellow-Citizens under Foot, who there perish'd; and while they made into the City in this Trepidation and Confusion, many were kill'd by running upon their own Weapons in the strait and narrow Passages, and by falling into the Trenches. And in the midst of this Distraction, the Garison out of the Castle of Cadmea issu'd forth like a rapid Torrent upon the Backs of the Thebans, and fell upon them as they were in this Disorder and Confusion, and cut them down in Heaps. The City being thus taken, multitudes of all sorts of Cruelties were acted within the Walls. For the Macedonians, by reason of that Insolency of the Common Crier, were inrag'd against the Thebans beyond what the Law of Arms would allow, and with many Threats in their Mouths, flew upon the miserable People, and without all Pity or Compassion put all to the Sword that were in their way. However, among all these Calamities, the Ant. Ch. 333. Courage of the Thebans and their Love to their Liberty was such, that they were so far from minding the Preservation of their Lives, as that when they met any of their Enemies, they would provoke them of their own accord to kill them. For after the
City was taken, not a Theban ask'd any Quarter from a Macedonian, not a Man that sor∣didly The Cruelties in Thebes. bow'd down at the Feet of the Conqueror. Neither had the Enemy any Pitv, notwithstanding the Valour of the miserable People; nay, the whole Day (though it was long) was judg'd too short to satiate their most cruel Revenge. The whole City was plunder'd, poor Children, Boys and Girls, were dragg'd up and down, calling upon their Mothers by their Names with most lamentable Outcries. And to compre∣hend all in a few Words, whole Families, with all their Kindred, were hurried away, and the whole Body of the People brought under miserable Slavery. The Bodies of some of the Thebans, as they lay wounded upon the Ground, though they were upon the point of Expiring, yet clasping their Enemy in their Arms, breath'd out their Last with a sort of Joy and Content that their Enemy dy'd with them. Others, though they had but a meer Trunk of a Spear to lean upon, yet sought with whomsoever they met; and so by that last Attempt made it evident, how far they preferr'd their Liberty before their Lives. And though there was so great a Slaughter made, that every part of the City was fill'd with dead Carkasses, yet none that saw the miserable Condition of these poor Wretches pitied them. For even the Grecians, as the Thespians, Plateans, Orchomenians, and some others who hated the Thebans, (and who then bore Arms under the King,) broke in with others into the City, and amongst these dreadful Slaughters executed their Ant. Ch. 333. Malice upon them. So that many sad Spectacles of most inhumane Cruelty might be seen throughout the whole City. Graecians butchering Graecians without all Compassion, and those of the same Language, Blood, and Nation, without any Regard to any of these Obligations, knock'd on the Head one by another. At length when Night came, the Houses were pillag'd, Women young and old were dragg'd out of the Temples, (whither they had sled,) and most vilely and filthily abus'd. There were kill'd of the Thebans above Six Thousand, and Three thousand made Captives, and a vast Treasure carry'd away. Above Five hundred Macedonians were slain, whom the King took care to bury. Presently after, the King caus'd the General Senate of Greece to meet, and referr'd it to their Determination how Thebes should be dealt with. When the Matter came to be debated, some who hated the Thebans were for putting them all to the Sword; and made it appear how they had join'd with the Barbarians against the Greeks. For in the time of Xerxes, they join'd as Confederates with the Persians against Greece; and were the only Graecians that were honour'd as Friends by the Persian King, and their Ambas∣sadors plac'd and preferr'd before Kings. These, and such-like, being remember'd and inforc'd, they so incited the Senators against the Thebans, that they Decreed, That the The cruel De∣crce against the Thebans. City should be raz'd to the Ground, and the Captives sold for Slaves; That all the Fugitives of Thebes should be driven out of all Parts of Greece, and no Theban should be entertain'd by any Graecian. Hereupon the King according to the Decree raz'd the City, which struck a Terror into all the Graecians that had revolted. By the Sale of the Captives, he rais'd Four hundred and forty Talents of Silver. After this, he sent to Athens to demand Ten of the Orators to be deliver'd up to him, (amongst whom Demosthenes and Lycurgus were the chief,) because they had stirr'd up Ant. Ch. 333 the People against him. Upon which a General Assembly was call'd, and when the Ambassadors were introduc'd, and had deliver'd their Message, the People were greatly troubled and perplex'd, desiring on the one hand to preserve the Honour and Dignity of the City, and on the other hand to consult their own Safety, considering the Destru∣ction of Thebes, and that some eminent Mischief might befal themselves; and thus they were made more cautious by their Neighbours Misfortunes. At length, after many Speeches made in the Assembly upon this Account, Phocio, that good Man, who differ'd from Demosthenes in his Politicks, stood up and said, That it would very well become those who were demanded to imitate the Daughters of Leo had Three Daugh∣ters, Pasithea, Theope, and Eubule, who were willingly Sacrific'd to put an end to a Plague in Athens. Suid. Leo and the The Hyacinthides were Six Daughters of Erictheus King of Athens, who offer'd themselves to be Sacrific'd to gain a Victory for their Country against Eumolphus King of Thrace: So call'd from a Village call'd Hyacinthus, where they were Sa∣crific'd. Suid. Hyacinthides, by offering up their Lives of their own accord to prevent the Ruin of their Country. And told them, That it was Baseness and Cowardise to refuse to dye for the Preservation of the City. At this Motion the People were highly incens'd, and in a popular Tumult threw Phocio out of the Senate. Then the People (by a studied Speech made by Demosthe∣nes) being mov'd to Compassion, declar'd, That they would defend the Men to the utmost. At length Demades, wrought upon (as is reported) by the Friends of Demosthenes, for Five Talents of Silver, gave his Opinion for the securing and preserving of the Orators; and read the Decree, which was drawn by himself with great Cunning and Artifice.
In which was contain'd an Apology for the Orators, and a Promise, That if they were guilty, they themselves would punish them according to the Laws. The People approv'd and ratify'd what Demades had read, and sent him with some others to the King with Order, That he should intercede likewise on the behalf of the Theban Exiles, that the People of Athens might lawfully receive and entertain them. Demades wisely manag'd his Embassy, and by his Eloquence prevail'd with the King in every respect. For Alexander both pardon'd the Orators, and granted all other Things Ant. Ch. 333. the Athenians desir'd. Then the King march'd back with his Army into Macedonia, and call'd a General Alexander re∣turns into Ma∣cedonia. Council of his Officers and chief Friends, and when they were met together, he ask'd their Opinion, what they thought of an Expedition into Asia? When it was fit to begin the War? And how it was to be manag'd? The Counsel, indeed, of Antipater and Par∣menio was, That he should first Marry and have Issue to succeed him, and then set upon matters that were of so great Weight and Concernment. But the King, who was natu∣turally fierce, and could not endure stops and delays in Business, rejected their Advice. For he said, it was a Mean and Unworthy thing for him who was created General of all Greece, and had the Command of an Army, that never knew what it was to be con∣quer'd, to stay at home meerly to Marry and beget Children. Wherefore, after he had set before them the Advantages of the War, and had encourag'd them to undertake it, he offer'd most magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods at Dium in Macedonia, and exhibi∣ted the Sports and Plays which his Ancestor Archilaus had instituted to Jupiter and the Muses. This Solemnity continu'd Nine days, according to the Number of the Muses, a Day for every Muse. He provided likewise a Pavilion which would contain an Upon which they sate at Meat. Hun∣dred Beds, where he Feasted, and entertain'd all his Friends and Commanders of his Army, and Ambassadors of Cities. After these Sumptuous Feasts were over (in which he not only kindly entertain'd a vast number of People, but likewise distributed parts of the Sacrifices, and other things fuita∣ble to the Magnificence of the Festival amongst his Soldiers) he Rendezvous'd all his Forces from all parts. CHAP. II. Alexander lands his Army in Asia. The Battel at Granicum. The Forces of the Persians and of Alexander. Alexander kills Spithrobates; near being kill'd by Rosaces. Miletus besieg'd and taken. Ada, Queen of Caria, meets Alexander. Halicarnassus besieg'd, taken, and sack'd. The strange Act of the Marmarians. CTesides was Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Lucius Papirius, Con∣suls at Rome, when Alexander at the Hellespont pass'd over his Army out of Europe Olymp. 111. 3. Ant. Ch. 332. An. M. 3616. into Asia. Being arrived at Troas with sixty Sail of Men of War. Alexander lands in Asia. Long Ships, he was the first of the Macedonians that cast a Spear out of the Ship, which fixt in the Earth upon the Shore, and then leapt out of the Vessel, signifying, that by the help of the Gods he had taken Possession of Asia, which was conquer'd by his Spear. Then he Sacrific'd to the Ghosts of Achilles and Ajax, performing all other Rites and Ceremonies proper to the Veneration of those Heroes. When that was done, he took an exact account of the Number of those Forces he had transported, which were found to amount unto It should be Twelve thou∣sand. Thirteen thousand Macedonian Foot, Seven thousand Confederates, and Five thousand Mercenaries. Parmenio had the chief Command of all these. Besides these, there were the A People of Thrace of the City Odrisa. Alexander's Forces. Odrise, Treballians and Illyrians, to the Number of Five thousand, and a Thousand Darters, call'd Agrians; so that in the whole there were Thirty thousand Foot. For Horse there were Eighteen hundred rais'd out of Macedonia, under the Com∣mand of Philotas, the Son of Parmenio. As many out of Thrace, Commanded by Callas, the Son of Harpalus. From the rest of Greece Six hundred led by Eurygius. Besides these, there were Nine hundred Thracians and Peonians in the Van, whose Commander was Cas∣sander. The whole Body of Horse was But by the Particulars they amount to Five thousand one hundred. Four thousand five hundred. And this is the Number of them that Landed in Asia with Alexander. In the mean time, he left under the Command of Antipater, in Europe, Twelve thou∣sand Foot and The Greck is o, but the La∣tin 15 hundred Horse. Eleven thousand five hundred Horse.
When he departed from Troas, and came to the At Ilium. Temple of Minerva, the Priest, call'd Alexander, seeing the Statue of Ariobarzanes (that had been Lord-Lieutenant of Phrygia) lie prostrate upon the Ground before the Temple, and observing several other Ant. Ch. 332. good Omens, came to the King, and told him, that he would be Conqueror in a con∣siderable Horse Engagement, especially if he fought in Phrygia, and that he should kill a great Commander of the Enemy's with his own Hand. And these things, he said, were foretold him by the Gods, and especially by Minerva, who would be assistant to him in obtaining of his Victories. Alexander much taken with this Prophecy, and relying upon it, offer'd to Minerva a most Splendid Sacrifice, and dedicated his Arms to her, and took away others (that had been laid up there) in their stead, which he made use of in the first Fight afterwards, and gain'd a most glorious Victory by his own peculiar Valour. But this happen'd some few days after. In the mean time, the Persian Lord-Lieutenants and Commanders (who through their sloath were not able to put a stop to the Progress of the Macedonians) met together to consult how to manage the War against Alexander. Memnon the Rhodian, one there a∣mongst them (a very skilful General) was not for fighting, but to give a Check to the Macedonians, by destroying the Country all before them, that so they might not be able to march forward for want of Provision: And was for bringing over both Land and Sea Forces into Macedonia, by that means to make that the Seat of the War. Although this was sound Advice (as the Event made it afterwards evident) yet the rest of the Commanders would not hearken to it, looking upon it as a thing Dishonourable, and much reflecting upon the Valour of the Persians. All being therefore resolv'd upon a Battel, Forces were brought together from all parts, Ant. Ch. 332. and the Lord-Lieutenants being now much Superior in number, march'd towards the Hellespont in Phrygia, and Encamp'd close by the River Granicus, having the River for a Defence between them and the Macedonians. Alexander having intelligence of the Forces of the Barbarians, made a swift march, and came up so close to the Enemy, that the River only separated both Armies. In the mean time, the Barbarians stood in Battallia at the Foot of the Hill, judging it would do their business effectually, and that they should be sure of the Victory, by falling upon them in their Passage over the River, and by that means breaking in pieces the Ma∣cedonian Phalanx. Battallion. But Alexander prevented the Enemy, and with great Courage pass'd over his Army about break of Day, and drew up his Men in order of Battel. The Bar∣barians drew up the whole Body of their Horse against the Macedonians, for they had be∣fore resolv'd to begin the Fight with them. Memnon the Rhodian, and Arsamenes the Lord Lieutenant, with their several Regiments of Horse, were in the Left Wing, supported by Arsites, who commanded the Paphlagonian Horse; and next to him Spithrobates, Lord-Lieutenant of Ionia, with them of Hyrcania. In the Left Wing were Two thousand Me∣dian Horse, under the Conduct of Arrheomithres, and the like number from Bactria. In The Forces of the Persians. the main Body was a vast Number of Horse of other Nations, of the best and most Ex∣perienc'd Soldiers; the whole amounted to above Ten thousand Horse. The Persian Foot were at least a Hundred thousand Men, who stood drawn up behind Ant. Ch. 332. the Horse, without moving a Foot, because they concluded, that the Horse themselves would serve the turn to rout the Macedonians. And now the Horse charg'd with great Resolution on both sides, especially the Thessa∣lians The Battel at Granicum. in the Left Wing, under the Command of Parmenio, bore the brunt of a brisk Charge with undaunted Courage. Alexander with the choicest Body of Horse in the Left Wing, setting Spurs to his Horse, was the first that charg'd, and rushing into the Thickest of his Enemies, made great slaugh∣ter amongst 'em. The Barbarians fought valiantly striving to outdo the Macedonians, and Fortune at this time brought together the Persons of the greatest Quality into the Place. For Spithrobates the chief Governor of the Province of Ionia, a Persian, and Son in Law Sipthrobates fights with Alexander. to Darius, a very Valiant Man, charg'd the Macedonians with a great Body of Horse, se∣conded by Forty of his Guard, all of his Kindred, and inferior to none for Valour and Courage; with these he put the Enemy hard to it, and lays about him with great Resolu∣tion, killing some and wounding others. And when none were able to deal with him, Alexander rid up to the Barbarian, and fought with him hand to hand. Hereupon, the Persian concluding, that the Gods of their special favour to him, had given him the opportunity of an Happy Combate, (especially, if by his Valour he should free all Asia from their Fears, and by his own hands give a Check to these audacious At∣tempts of Alexander that rung so all the World over, and prevent the Dishonor of the
Persians) was the first that cast his Call'd a Sau∣nium. Javelin at Alexander, and with such Force and Vio∣lence, that it pierc'd through his Buckler and Breast-plate into his right Shoulder-blade. The King plucking out the Dart with his own Hand, threw it away, and setting Spurs to his Horse flew upon the Persian Lord-Lieutenant with that Fierceness and Violence, that he fix'd his Spear in the middle of his Breast. Upon which the Battalions of both Ar∣mies there near at hand, in admiration of such a piece of singular Valour, set up a great shout. But the Point breaking in the Breast-plate, so that the Spear pierc'd no further, Ant. Ch. 332. the Persian made at Alexander with his drawn Sword, who having got another Lance threw it directly into his Face, and pierc'd him through the Head; at which instance, Rosaces, Brother to him that was kill'd, came swiftly riding in, and reach'd the King such a Blow, Rosaces near killing of Alex∣der. that he cut through his Helmet, and gave him a slight wound upon the Head, and just as he was ready to second his stroke, Clitus, Sirnam'd Niger, posts up and cuts off the Hand of the Barbarian. The Kinsmen of the two Brothers (now both fallen) came round about them, and at the first ply'd Alexander with their Darts, and then fell to it hand to hand, and ran through all hazards, that they might kill Alexander. And though he was inviron'd with imminent Hazards and Dangers of his Life, yet the throng of his Enemies did not at all daunt him. For though he had receiv'd three strokes through his Breast plate, and one Cut upon his Helmet, and had his Buckler, which he brought from the Temple of Minerva, thrice pierc'd through, yet he stirr'd not a Foot, but stood his ground against all Hazards and Difficul∣ties with undaunted Resolution. In the mean time, other brave Commanders fell round about him, among whom the most remarkable were Artyaxes, and Pharnaces, the Brother of Darius, and Mithrobarzanes the Commander of the Cappadocians; so that many great Officers being kill'd, and all the Troops of the Persians routed and broken by the Valour of the Macedonians, the first that fell in upon Alexander were forc'd to take to their Heels. And after them all the rest. Ant. Ch. 332. In this Battel, by the Confession of all, the Valour of Alexander was cry'd up above all others; and he reputed the chief Instrument of the Victory. The Thessalian Horse ma∣nag'd their Troops with that Dexterity, and fought with that brave Resolution, that next to the King, they were most highly applauded, and gain'd exceeding Honour and Re∣putation. After the Horse was routed and fled, the Foot running one in upon another in confu∣sion fought a while, but amaz'd and dejected with the flight of their Horse, they likewise turn'd their Backs and made away. There were kill'd in the Persian Army above Ten thousand Foot, and at least Two thousand Horse, and above Twenty thousand taken Prisoners. After the Battel, the King buried those of his that were slain, with great Solemnity, by these Honours to encourage his Soldiers to fight the more readily. When he had re∣fresh'd his Army, he march'd forward through Lydia, and came to Sardis, which with the Cittadel, and all the Provision and Treasure therein, were voluntarily surrender'd to him by Or Mithre∣nes: Mithrinnes the Governor. In the mean time, those Persians that had escap'd out of the Battel, fled, together with their General, Memnon, to Miletus, before which the King afterwards came, and assaul∣ted it continually for several days together, still relieving his Men from time to time with Miletus be∣sieg'd. fresh Supplies. The Besieged at first easily defended themselves from the Walls, in re∣gard the City was full of Soldiers, and plentifully furnish'd with Weapons and all other things necessary for the enduring of a Siege. But as soon as the King began fiercely to Ant. Ch. 332. batter the Walls with his Engines, and violently to push on the Siege both by Sea and Land, and the Macedonians had forc'd their way through a Breach of the Walls, putting their Enemies to flight in that part; the Milesians forthwith prostrated themselves as suppliants at the King's Feet, and gave up themselves and the City to his Mercy. Some of the Miletus taken. Barbarians were kill'd by the Macedonians, others fled out of the City, and the rest were all taken. He dealt kindly and mercifully with the Milesians, but for others, he sold them all for Slaves. And now having no further use for his Navy, and being likewise chargeable to main∣tain, he dismiss'd his Fleet, except a few Ships which he detain'd for the Conveying of his Engines of Battery, and other Instruments useful for the Besieging of Towns. Among which were Twenty Vessels from Athens. There are some who say, that this Discharging of the Fleet was a prudent part of a Ge∣neral in Alexander. For Darius being on his march, and therefore very likely that a great Battel was to be fought, he conceiv'd that the Macedonians would fight with more Reso∣lution, when they saw there was no possibility of flight. And the very same Project he
contriv'd at the Battel of Granicum, where he so order'd the matter, that the River should be at his Soldiers back, to the end, that none might have a Thought of flying, since the River threatned certain destruction to them that attempted it. In following times Agathocles, King of Syracuse, follow'd this Example of Alexander, and so gain'd a glorious Victory. For having transported a small Army into Africa, he set all his Ships on fire, to take away all hope from his Soldiers of escaping by flight, by which means being forc'd of necessity to stand to it courageously, he overcame many thousands of the Carthaginians drawn up against him. After the taking of Miletus, both Persians and Mercenaries with their chiefest Comman∣ders, came flocking to Halicarnassus. This was then the greatest City in Caria, in which Halicarnassius was a Palace of the Kings, adorn'd with most curious, Turrets and Cittadels. About the same time, Memnon sent away his Wife and Children to Darius, as well for Ant. Ch. 332. their security, as to induce the King, having such considerable Hostages in his hands to intrust him with more confidence in the Management of the War. Which happen'd ac∣cordingly; for Darius presently sent Letters to all the Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts of Asia, to be observant in every thing to all the Commands of Memnon. Being made therefore General of the whole Army, he provided all things necessary for the Defence of Halicar∣nassus against a Siege. In the mean time the King sent away his Engines of Battery, and Corn and Provi∣sion by Sea, to Halicarnassus, and he himself with his whole Army march'd into Caria, and where ever he came he gain'd upon the Cities by his smooth Tongue, and courteous Behaviour. The Greek Cities especially tasted of his Grace and Favour, for he gave all Liberty to govern according to their own Laws, and order'd they should be free from Tri∣bute, declaring, that he had undertaken a War against the Persians for the Rights and Li∣berties of the Grecians. When he was upon his March, he was met by a Noble Woman call'd Ada, of the Li∣neage Ada meets A∣lexander. of the King of Caria, who upon discourse with him, concerning the Right of her Ancestors, intreated him to restore her to the Kingdom of her Grandfather, which he gave up to her, and bid, her take it as her own; by which bounty to the Woman, he gain'd the Hearts of the Grecians, and all the Cities sent their Ambassadors to him, pre∣senting him with Crowns of Gold, promis'd and offer'd to serve him in all things to the utmost of their Power. Alexander now Encamps near to the City, and forthwith assaults the Town in a furious Ant. Ch. 332. Halicarnassus besieg'd. and terrible Manner.: For at the very Beginning; his Soldiers by turns storm'd the Walls without any intermission, so that the Conflict continu'd whole days together. Af∣terwards he brought up all sorts of Engines to the Walls, and fill'd up the Trenches, be∣fore the City, by the help of three Machines call'd Snails, and then with his Rams bat∣ter'd down the Towers and Walls that ran along between them. Part being thus beaten down, he engag'd in the Breach with the Enemy, and endeavour'd to force his way into the City over the Rubbish. But Memnon easily repuls'd the Macedonians (who first assaul∣ted the Wall) there being many Men within the City; and in the Night, when the En∣gines were brought up he made a Sally with a great Body of Men, and fir'd them: Upon which there were many sharp Conflicts before the Walls, in which the Macedonians far ex∣cell'd the other for Valour, but the Persians them for number of Men and all Warlike Pro∣visions. But those upon the Walls were of great advantage to the Persians that were en∣gag'd in the Sally, by galling their Enemies with their Darts and Arrows, attended with Death and Wounds; shouting of Men and sounding of Trumpets, every where eccho'd in the Air, while the Soldiers on both sides with loud Acclamations, applauded the noble Actions of their several Parties. And now some endeavour'd to extinguish the mounting Flames of the Engines, and others engaging with the Enemy, made grievous slaughters among their Adversaries. Those within rais'd up other Walls much stronger, instead of them that were batter'd down. The Commanders with Memnon being in the Front, encourag'd their Men to stand to it, offering great Rewards to such as valiantly behav'd themselves. So that it was incredible with what Heat and Spirit every one was push'd on forward to win the Day. Then might be seen some carry'd out of the Army so wounded, that they were breathing out their last; others gather'd in a round about the Bodies of the Dead, and sharply en∣gag'd Ant. Ch. 332. in striving to carry off the Bodies, in order to their Burial. Others but even now tyr'd out with Wounds, and Blows, presently (through the Encouragement of the Offi∣cers) recovering their Spirits, fell to it briskly again.
Some of the Macedonians (among whom was Neoptolimus, an honourable Person) were slain, even under the City Gates. And now Towers and two Flanks were batter'd down; upon which, some Drunken Soldiers of Perdiccas rashly in the Night mounted the Walls of the Cittadel: But Memnon understanding in what plight they were in, made a Sally, and being much Superior in number repuls'd the Macedonians, and kill'd many of them, which being nois'd abroad, the Macedonians came flocking in to the aid of their Fellows; upon which there was a brisk Encounter. At length, when those with Alexander appear'd and join'd with the rest, the Persians flag'd and were beaten back into the City. Then the King sent An Herald. a Trumpeter to make a Truce, in order to carry off those Macedonians that were slain before the Walls: But Ephialtes and Thrasybulus, both Athenians, and then in Arms for the Persians, gave advice not to suffer the Dead to be bury'd. However, Memnon granted what the King desir'd. Afterwards Ephialtes in a Council of War declar'd his Opinion, That it was not ad∣visable for them to stay till the City was taken, and so all to be made Prisoners, but for all the Officers with the Mercenaries to venture their Lives for the Safety and Security of the rest, and to sally upon the Enemy out of the City. Hereupon Memnon perceiving Ephialtes to be prompted to Action by an extraordinary Impulse of Valour, and placing Ant. Ch. 332. great Confidence in him by reason of his Courage and the strength of his Body, agreed to what he had advis'd. In order to which, he appointed Two thousand Mercenaries, of the best Soldiers he could pick out, to sally with him, one half of whom were com∣manded to carry along with them light Firebrands, and the other to fall in upon the Enemy. About break of Day the Gates were suddenly flung open, and the Regiments issue out, and cast their Fire brands among the Engines, upon which a great Flame presently ap∣pear'd. He himself at the Head of others form'd into a deep Phalanx charg'd upon the Macedonians, who were hasting to preserve and defend the Engines. The King, quick in discerning what was to be done, places the chief of the Macedonians in the Front, and some of the chiefest Soldiers next, in order to support them, and to these he adds a third Battalion, for Valour excelling all the rest; The whole Body he led up himself, and fell upon the Enemy, who seem'd (through their firm and close Order) to be impenetrable; not to be broken by any Force whatsoever. In the mean time, he commands others to go to defend the Engines, and quench the Fire. Noise and Clamour fill'd the Camps, and the Trumpet giving the Alarm to Bat∣tel, they fell to it, fighting with more than ordinary Valour, ambitious to purchase Ho∣nour and Renown. The Macedonians easily quench'd the Fire, but in the Conflict, those with Ephialtes got the better. For with whomsoever he engag'd, (being of a far stronger Ephialtes, a strong and stout Man. Body than any of them,) he certainly kill'd, and those that were upon the new Wall slew many with their Darts. For upon this Wall there was a Wooden Tower erected an Hundred Cubits high, full of Engines for shooting of Darts and Arrows. Many therefore of the Macedonians being kill'd, and the rest retreating by reason of the multitude of Darts, and Memnon coming in to the Assistance of the Persians with a far greater Number, the King himself knew not well what to do. While they that issu'd Ant. Ch. 332. out of the Town thus prevail'd, on a sudden the Tables were turn'd: For the old Mace∣donians (who by reason of their Age were to this time dispens'd with, and not call'd to Fight, though formerly Victorious in many Battels under King Philip,) now at this very instant were stirr'd up to their anient Courage and Resolution. And being both Valiant and Expert Soldiers, (far beyond all the rest,) they upbraided the Cowardice of the Fresh∣water Soldiers, who turn'd their Back, with most bitter Taunts and Reproaches: These presently getting into a Body, and clapping their Bucklers one into another, fell in upon the Enemy, (now confident of an assured Victory,) and having killed Ephialtes and many others, forc'd the rest into the City; and the Macedonians being mix'd with the other in the Night-time, enter'd pell-mell with them within the Walls; but the King or∣der'd a Retreat to be sounded, and so they return'd into the Camp. After this, Mem∣non and the rest of the Commanders consulted together, and determin'd to leave the City. In execution of which Resolve, they left the best of the Soldiers to keep the Cittadel with sufficient Provision and all other Things necessary, and transported themselves with the rest of the Citizens, and all their Wealth, into Coos. Alexander about spring of Day understanding what was done, cast a Trench, and built a Rampart upon it round about the Castle; and raz'd the City it self to the Ground. Halicarnassus taken. Then he order'd part of his Army to march further up into the Country in order to force other Provinces to his Obedience; these Forces valiantly brought under the Power of Alexander all the Nations as far as to the Borders of the Greater Phrygia, and forc'd Ant. Ch. 332. them to find Provision for their Army.
Alexander himself subdu'd all the Sea Coast of Asia to Cilicia, gaining many Cities by Surrender, and taking several Forts and Castles by Storm; amongst which, there was one that was taken after a wonderful manner, which by reason of the Rarity of the Thing is not to be pass'd over. In the utmost Borders of Lycia, the Marmarensians, who inhabited upon a great Rock, and well fortifi'd, set upon the Rear of Alexander's Amy in their March thither, and slew many of the Macedonians, and carry'd away a great number of Prisoners and Carriage-Horses. At which, the King was so inrag'd, that he resolv'd to besiege the Place, and us'd his utmost Endeavour to gain it. But the Or Marma∣rians. Marmarensians trusting to their own Va∣lour and the Strength of the Place, manfully endur'd the Siege; for they were assaulted two Days together without any intermission, and were assur'd, that the King would not stir thence till he had taken the Rock. The ancient Men therefore at the first advis'd the Younger to forbear standing it out with such Violence, and to make Peace with the King upon as good Conditions as they could; which when they deny'd, and all resolv'd to part with their Lives and the Liberties of their Country together; the graver Men then advis'd them to kill all the old Men, Women, and Children, and that those that were strong and able to defend themselves should break through their Enemies Camp in the Night, and flee to the next Mountains. The young Men approv'd of the Councel, and The strange Resolution of the Marma∣rians. thereupon an Edict was made, That every one should go to his own House, and Eat and Drink plentifully with his Wife, Children and Relations, and then expect the Execu∣tion of the Decree. But some of the young Men who were more considerate than the rest, (who were about Six hundred in the whole,) judg'd it more Advisable to forbear Ant. Ch. 332. killing their own Kindred and Relations with their own Hands, but rather set the Houses on fire, and then to sally out at the Gates, and make to the Mountains for their Security. This was presently taken to, and the Thing put in execution, and so every Man's House became his Sepulchre. And the young Men themselves broke through the midst of their Enemies, and fled to the Hills near at hand. And these were the chief Things done this Year. CHAP. III. Mytelen taken by Memnon, Darius his General. His Successes. He dies. Cha∣ridemus the Athenian unjustly put to Death by Darius. Alexander falls sick, re∣cover'd by Philippus. Alexander seizes Alexander of Lyncestas, upon his Mo∣ther's Letters. Alexander takes Issus. The memorable Battel at Issus, where the Mother, Wife, Two Daughters, and Son of Darius, were taken. Alexander's no∣ble Carriage towards them. Darius's Letters and Offers to Alexander. Darius prepares another Army. BUT in the following Year, wherein Nicocrates was chief Governor of Athens, and Olymp. 3. 4. Ant. Ch. 331. An. M. 3617. Cesus Valerius and Lucius Papirius succeeded in the Consular Dignity at Rome. Da∣rius sent a great Sum of Money to Memnon, and declar'd him General of all his Forces. Hereupon he rais'd great Numbers of Men from all Parts, and fitting out a Navy of Three hundred Sail, set himself with all diligence to the prosecution of the War. To that end, he brought in Chius to join with him. Then he sail'd to Lesbos, and presently took Antissa, Mythimnus, Pyrrhus, and Erissus. But for Mitylene be∣sieg'd and ta∣ken by Mem∣non in the Island Lesbos. Mitylene, and Lesbos, a City in Les∣bos. Lesbos, because it was much larger, and strongly Garison'd and well provided, he gain'd it not without many Assaults, and the Loss of many of his Men, though he took it at length with much ado. The Fame of this Action being presently nois'd abroad, many of the Cyclade Islands sent Ambassadors to him to make Leagues with him. Then there was a Report spread abroad, that Memnon with his whole Fleet was intending to invade Eabaea, which put all the Cities into a great Consternation. And some of the Graecians being come into the Confederacy of the Persians, were hearten'd in hopes of a change of their Affairs for the better. Besides, Memnon had corrupted many of the Greeks with Money to sail in the same Bottom with the Persians. But Fortune put a stop to the Progress of this Man's Success; for he fell sick of a mortal Distemper, and dv'd; and by his Death, the Memnon dies. Affaris of Darius went backward: For the Of Persia. King hop'd to have transferr'd the whole Weight of the War out of Asia into Europe.
But when he heard of the Death of Memnon, he call'd his Friends together, and ask'd their Advice, Whether he should send a General with the Army, or go himself in Per∣son, and try his Fortune with the Macedonians. Some were of Opinion for the King to go himself, for that they said, the Persians would then with more chearfulness venture their Lives. But Charidemus the Athenian, who was in great Esteem for his Valour and Prudence as a General, (for under Philip he gain'd a great Reputation, and was his chief and principal Adviser in all his weighty Affairs,) advis'd Darius not to lay the Kingdom rashly at stake, but still to continue Lord of Asia, and keep the Government in his own Hand, and to appoint an Experienc'd General to manage the Concerns of the War. And he told him, that an Hundred thousand Men, of which Number a Third Part to be Mercenaries out of Greece, were sufficient for the Expedition, and engag'd that he would see the Thing accomplish'd. The King at the first agreed to what he said: But his Friends peremptorily rejected this Advice; suspecting that Charidemus sought for the chief Ant. Ch. 331. Command, out of design to give up all into the Power of the Macedonians. Hereupon Charidemus was in such a Rage, as that he call'd them all Cowards: With which Words, the King was much more offended than before; and whereas Anger never suffers a Man to consider wisely before hand, Darius orders him to be bound in a Belt, (which is the manner of the Persians,) and delivers him to his Guard to be put to Death: Who when he was leading to Execution, cry'd out, That the King would in a short time repent of what he had done in this Matter, and would be punish'd for that unjust Judgment against him by the loss of his Kingdom. Thus fell Charidemus from the top of all his Hopes and Ex∣pectations Charidemus unjustly put to Death by Da∣rius. through the unseasonable Liberty of his Tongue. But the King, as soon as his Anger was over, presently repented of what he had done, and accus'd himself as guilty of a most horrid Crime: But the Power of a King could not undo that which was past Remedy. Considering therefore how valiant the Macedonians were, and musing upon the Courage of Alexander, he enquir'd where he might have a fit Person to succeed Memnon in the chief Command of the Army, and when none could be found, he was forc'd to run the Hazard himself for the saving of his Kingdom. He forthwith therefore order'd all his Forces to be call'd together from all Parts, and to Rendevouz at Babylon. Then he made choice of such of his Kindred and Friends as he thought fit, and to some Ant. Ch. 331. he gave Commands in the Army according to their several Qualities, and others he ap∣pointed to attend upon his Person as his Life-Guard. As soon as the time before fix'd upon for the Expedition was come, they all Rendevouz'd at Babylon, to the Number of The Number of the Persian Army. Four hundred thousand Foot, and an Hundred thousand Horse; Hence he march'd away with this vast Number of Men towards Cilicia, nw Carmania, in the Turks Do∣minions. Cilicia, taking along with him his Mother, Wife and Children; that is to say, a Son and two Daughters. In the mean time, Alexander (while Memnon was living, hearing how Chius and the Cities of Lesbos were surrender'd into the Hands of Memnon, and that Mitylene was taken by Storm, and that he was ready to invade Macedonia with a Navy of Three hundred Sail, and that many of the Graecians were upon the Point of Revolting) was very much perplex'd and discontented. But as soon as he heard of Memnon's Death, his Mind was more at rest. But within a short time after he fell desperately sick, and growing worse and Alexander sick. worse, sent for Physicians, who coming to him, were all afraid to administer any thing, looking upon him as irrecoverable: Saving that there was one Philip of Acarnania, (whose Practice it was commonly to make use of desperate Medicines,) promis'd to cure him by a Potion; the King hereupon readily comply'd with him, especially because he heard Darius was on his march from Babylon. Then the Physician deliver'd the Potion, which through the Art and Skill of Philip, and the Advantage of the Natural Strength of the Pa∣tient, presently cur'd the King: Who being thus beyond all Hope recover'd, bounti∣fully Ant. Ch. 331. Rewarded the Physician, and receiv'd him into the Number of his most faithful Friends. About the same time Alexander receiv'd Letters from his Mother, wherein (among other Things which she thought fit to advise him of) she wish'd him to have a care of Alexander re∣ceives Letters from his Mo∣ther. Alexander of In Macedo∣nia. Lyncestas, who was a very valiant Man, and of a generous Disposition, and not inferior to any for his Faithfulness to Alexander. But many things concurring that seem'd to fortify the Accusation, he was seiz'd and committed to Custody, in order to his Legal Trial. But Alexander having Intelligence that Darius was within a few Days march, sent Parmenio before with the Army to gain the Passes and the Syriae Pilae, or the Gates of Syria. Gates, as they were call'd; who marching away with all speed, possess'd himself of them, beating off the Barbarians, who were there before him. Darius, that he might march with more ease, had left all his heavy Baggage and Rabble behind him at Damascus, a City of Syria. Hence he march'd with all the speed he could, hearing that Alexander had preposfess'd
himself of all the difficult Passes and Places, as not daring to fight in the Plain and open Field, as he suppos'd. The Inhabitants of all the Places through which Alexander came, slighting the inconsiderable Number of the Macedonians, and frighted with the ap∣proach of the vast Army of the Persians, without any regard to Alexander sided with Darius, and readily supply'd the Persians with Provisions and all other Necessaries, and by the Rule of their own Opinions adjudg'd the Victory before hand to the Barba∣rians. In the mean time Alexander had possess'd himself of Issus, now Laiazzo, un∣der the Turks. Issus, (surpriz'd with the Fear of his Army,) a considerable City of Cilicia. Cilicia; and understanding by his Spies that Darius was not distant above Betwixt 4 and 5 Miles. Thirty Furlongs, and that he was even now approaching with his Army so provided, and in that order, as to make them terrible to all, he judg'd the Gods highly favour'd him in putting such an Opportunity into his Hands, as that by the gaining of one Victory he should ruin the whole Empire of Persia. Hereupon he stirr'd up the Spirits of his Soldiers, (by a Speech for the Occasion,) encouraging them to fight Ant. Ch. 331. Manfully, now all lay at Stake. His Regiments of Foot, and Squadrons of Horse, he The great Bat∣tel at Issus. posted so, as the Place and Ground would best allow: The Horse was plac'd before the whole Body of the Foot, which were order'd behind to support and relieve the Horse. Being in the Right Wing himself, he march'd on towards the Enemy with the choicest of the Horse. The Thessalian Horse were in the Left, for Valour and Skill sar excelling all the rest. And now the Armies came within the cast of a Dart one of another, upon which there flew such a shower of Darts from the Barbarians against them with Alexan∣der, that through their Multitude they so brush'd in their flight one upon another, that their Force was much abated, and did little harm. Then presently the Trumpets on both Sides sounded a Charge, and the Macedonians were the first that set up a great Shout, which being answer'd by the Barbarians, all the Hills and Mountains there near at hand eccho'd and rang again with the Noise. But the Shout of the Barbarians far exceeded the other, being made by Five hundred thousand Men at once. Then Alexander look'd every where round about to spy out Darius, whom having found, he made at him (with those Horse that were with him) with all the speed ima∣ginable, desiring not so much to conquer the Persians, as to gain the present Victory by Ant. Ch. 331. his own Personal Valour. In the mean time the whole Body of Horse engag'd, great Slaughters being made on both Sides; but the Valour of those engag'd caus'd the Victory to hang in Suspence a long time, appearing sometimes here and sometimes there, by Changes and Turns. No Dart cast, or Stroak given by any was in vain, but did some Execution, for in such a Multitude the Mark was sure to be hit. So that great Numbers were wounded, and others fighting to their last Breath, chose rather to lose their Lives, than part with their Honour, And the Officers at the Head of their Regiment so bravely behav'd themselves, that they put Life and Courage into the Common Soldiers. There might then be seen all sorts of Wounds, and as various and sharp Contests for Victory Oxathres a Persian, and Brother of Darius, a very valiant Man, as soon as he saw Alexan∣der make so fiercely at Darius, was resolv'd to undergo the same Fortune with his Bro∣ther, and therefore charges Alexander's Body with the best of the Horse he could make choice of out of his own Troops, and knowing that his Love to his Brother would ad∣vance his Fame and Reputation above all other things among the Persians, he fought close by his Chariot, and with that Courage and Dexterity, that he laid many dead at his Feet; and inasmuch as the Macedonians were as resolute on the other Side not to move a Foot, the dead Bodies rose up in heaps of Carkasses round about the Chariot of Da∣rius. And being that every one strove to lay hold on the King, both Sides fought with great Obstinacy, without any regard of their Lives. In this Conflict many of the Per∣sian Nobility were slain, amongst whom were Antixyus and Rheomitus, and Tasiaces the Lord Lieutenant of Egypt. And many of the Macedonians likewise; and Alexander him∣self (compass'd round by the Enemy) was wounded in the Thigh. The Chariot-Horses of Darius receiving many Wounds, and frighted with the multitude of Carkasses that lay round in Heaps about them, grew so unruly, that they had hurri'd Darius into the Ant. Ch. 331. midst of his Enemies, if he had not in this Extremity catch'd hold of the Reins himself, being forc'd thus to make bold with the Laws of the Persians, in debasing the Majesty of the Persian Kings. In the mean time his Servants brought to him another Chariot, and a great hurly burly there was while he was ascending this, insomuch as Darius himself (by the Enemy pressing hard upon him) was in a great Terror and Consternation; Which when some of the Persians discern'd, they began first to fly, the Horse that were next following the Example of their Fellows, and at length all made away as fast as they could. The Places being narrow and strait, in their hast they trod down one another, and many
perish'd without a Stroke of the Enemy; for they lay on Heaps, some with their Arms, Alexander gets the Victo∣ry at Issus. others without them; some held their naked Swords as long in their Hands, as that their Fellow-Soldiers ran themselves upon them, and so were slain. But many got away into the open Plain, and by the swiftness of their Horses, escap'd to the several Cities of the Allies. During this time, the Battalion a∣bout Eight thousand Feet. Macedonian Phalanx and the Persian Foot fought a while; for the Flight of the Horse was the Preludium to the Victory. The Barbarians therefore taking to their Heels, and so many Thousands making away through the same Straits, all Places thereabouts were in a short time cover'd with dead Carcasses: But the Persians, by the ad∣vantage of the Night, got away here and there into several Places of shelter. The Macedonians therefore left off the Pursuit, and betook themselves to the rifling of The Macedo∣nians rifle the Persian's Tents. the Camp, especially the King's Pavillion, because there were the richest Booties; so that there was found and carry'd thence vast Sums of Gold and Silver, and exceeding rich Garments and Furniture; an abundance likewise of Treasure belonging to his Friends and Kindred, and the Commanders of his Army: For the Wives not only from the Ant. Ch. 331. King's Houshold, but from the Families of his Kindred and Attendants, mounted in Cha∣riots glittering with Gold (according to the Custom of the Persians) accompany'd the Camp in their march from place to place. And every one of these (through their Luxury and Delicateness, to which they had commonly inur'd themselves) carry'd with them a∣bundance of rich Furniture, and a multitude of beautiful Women. But the captive La∣dies The miserable Condition of the Persian Ladies. were then in a most miserable Condition: For they who before, by reason of their Nicety, could scarcely be plac'd in their stately Chariots so as to please them, and had their Bodies so attir'd, as that no Air might touch them, now rent their Garments in pieces, and scarce with one simple Veil to cover their Nakedness, threw themselves shrie∣king out of their Chariots, and with their Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, cast themselves down at the Feet of the Conquerors. Some with their trembling Hands pull'd off all their Jewels and Ornaments from their own Bodies, and ran up steep Rocks and craggy Places, with their Hair flying about their Ears; and thus meeting in Throngs together, some call'd for Help from those who wanted the Relief of others as much as themselves: Some were dragg'd along by the Hair of their Heads, others were stripp'd Ant. Ch. 331. naked, and then kill'd, and sometimes cudgell'd to death with the heavy end of the Sol∣diers Lances. Nay, even all manner of Disgrace and Contempt was pour'd upon the Glory of the Persians, so famous and honourable heretofore all the World over. But the more sober and moderate of the Macedonians seeing that strange Turn of Fortune, much pity'd the Condition of those miserable Creatures, who had lost every thing that was near and dear to them in this World, and were now environ'd with nothing but Strangers and Enemies, and fallen into miserable and dishonourable Captivity. But the Mother of Darius, and his Wife, and two Daughters, now Marriageable (and his little Darius his Mo∣ther, Wife, two Daughters and Son, taken. Son especially) drew Tears from the Eyes of the Beholders: For their sad change of For∣tune, and the greatness of their sudden and unexpected Calamity (presented thus to their view) could not but move them to a compassionate Resentment of their present Condi∣tion: For as yet it was not known whether Darius was alive or dead. And in the mean time The Women-Captives, Da∣rius his Wife, Children, Mo∣ther they perceiv'd his Tent pillag'd and rifled by arm'd Men, who knew no diffe∣rence of Persons, and therefore committed many indecent and unworthy Actions, and saw likewise all Asia brought under the Power of a Conquering Sword as well as them∣selves. The Wives of the Governors of the Provinces that fell at of the Queen, and Queen-Mo∣ther of Persia. their Feet to beg Pro∣tection, were so far from finding Relief, that they themselves earnestly pray'd them to rescue them out of their present Calamity. Alexander's Servants having possess'd themselves of Darius his Tents, prepar'd the Tables and Baths which were us'd by Darius himself, and lighted up many Lamps in expectation of the King, that in his return from the pursuit he might take possession of all the Furni∣ture of Darius, as an earnest of the Empire and Government of all Asia. Of the Barba∣rians there fell in this Battel above an Hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and no fewer Ant. Ch. 331. than Ten thousand Horse. Of the Macedonians, Three hunded Foot, and an Hundred and fifty Horse. And this was the Issue of the Battel at Issus. But to return to the Kings themselves: Darius with all his Army being thus routed, fled, and by changing from time to time one Horse after another the best he had, he made away with all speed to escape out of the Hands of Alexander, and to get to the Go∣vernors of the Upper Provinces. But Alexander, with the best of his Horse and chiefest of his Friends, pursu'd him close at the very Heels, earnestly longing to be . Lord of Darius. But after he had rid Two hundred Furlongs, he return'd at midnight into the
Camp; and having refresh'd his weary Body in the Baths, went to Supper, and then to his rest. In the mean time, one came to the Mother of Darius, and told her that Alexander was return'd from the pursuit of Darius, and had possess'd himself of all the rich Spoils of his Tent. Upon which, there was given up a great Shriek and Lamentation amongst the Women, and from the multitude of the Captives lamenting with the Queen at the sad News, all places were fill'd with Cries and Lamentations. The King understanding what Sorrow there was among the Women, sent Leonatus, one his of Courtiers to them, to put an end to their Fears; and to let Sisygambres, the Mother of Darius, know, that her Son was alive, and that Alexander would have respect to their former Dignity; and that to confirm the Promise of his Generosity by his Actions, he would come and discourse with them the Day following. Whereupon the Captives were so surpriz'd with the sud∣den and happy Turn of their Fortunes, that they honour'd Alexander as a God; and their Ant. Ch. 331. Fears were turn'd into Exultations of Joy. The King, as soon as it was light (with Hephestion, one of the trustiest of his Friends) Alexander's great Humani∣ty towards the Persian Cap∣tives. went to visit the Queens. When they entred, in regard they were both habited alike, Sisygambres taking Hephestion for the King (because he was the more comely and taller Man) fell prostrate at his Feet; but the Attendants, by the Nods of their Heads, and Pointing of their Fingers, directed her to Alexander; whereupon being much asham'd, and out of Countenance by reason of Mistake, she salutes Alexander in the same manner she had done before the other. Upon which, he lift her up, and said, Mother, trouble not, nor perplex your self; for that Man also is Alexander. By which courteous and obliging Title of Mother, to a grave and honourable Matron, he gave a clear Demonstration of the Re∣spects and Civilities he intended towards them all. Having therefore own'd her for a Second Mother, he presently confirm'd his Words by his Actions: For he order'd her to be cloath'd in her Royal Robes, and restor'd her to all the Honours becoming her former State and Dignity. For he gave her all her At∣tendants and Houshold Servants and Furniture allow'd her by Darius, and added also as much more of his own Bounty. He promis'd likewise to dispose of the young Ladies in Marriage far better than if their Father had provided Husbands for them; and that he would educate the King's little Son as carefully and honourably as if he were his own. Then he call'd him to him, and kiss'd him; and taking notice that he was not at all dash'd, nor seem'd to be in the least afrighted, turning to Hephestion and those about him, This Youth, but Six Years of Age (says he) carries in his Countenance Marks of a stcut and brave Spirit above his Age, and is better than his Father. He further declar'd, That he would take care of the Wife of Darius; that nothing should be wanting to her; in order to the sup∣port and maintenance of her Royal State and former Prosperity. Many other kind and gaining Expressions he us'd, insomuch as the Ladies fell a weeping in Showers of Tears, Ant. Ch. 331. out of Transports of Joy, upon account of the Greatness of their unexpected Felicity. After all, he at length put forth to them his Right Hand to kiss, upon which not only they who were immediately honour'd with those Kindnesses, set forth his Praie, but even the whole Army cry'd up his incomparable Grace and Clemency. And indeed, I conceive, that amongst the many Brave and Noble Acts of Alexander, none of them were greater than this, nor more worthy by History, to be handed down to Posterity. For storming and taking of Cities, gaining of Battels, and other Successes in War, are many times the Events of Fortune, more than the Effects of Valour and Virtue; but to be compassionate to the miserable, and those that lie at the Feet of the Conqueror, must be the Fruit only of Wisdom and Prudence. For many by Prosperity grow high-crested, and are so far swell'd with Pride, by the favourable Blasts of Fortune, that they are care∣less and forgetful of the Common Miseries of Mankind; so that 'tis common to see many to sink under the weight of their prosperous Successes, as an heavy Burden they are not able to bear. Therefore though Alexander was many Ages before us who are now living, yet the re∣membrance of his Virtue, justly challenges Honour and Praise from all those that suc∣ceed him in future Generations. As for Darius, being now got to Babylon, he musters up his broken Troops that were escap'd from the Battel of Issus; and though he had receiv'd so great an Overthrow, yet he was not at all discourag'd, but writ Letters to Alexander, whereby he advis'd him to use his Good Fortune and Success moderately, and offer'd him a great Sum of Money Ant. Ch. 33. for the Ransom of the Captives: He promis'd likewise to give up to him all that part of Asia, with the Cities which lay on that side, within the This was all Narolia. Course of the River Now Casili∣mer in Paph∣ligonia. Halys, if he were willing to be his Friend.
Whereupon Alexander call'd a Council of War, and laid before them such Letters as he judg'd most for his own Advantage, but conceal'd the true ones: By which Contrivance the Ambassadors were dismiss'd, without any effect of their Embassie. Darius therefore concluding that Things were not to be compos'd by Letters, sets him∣self wholly to make preparation for War. To which end, he arm'd those Soldiers that had loft their Arms in the late unfortunate Battel, and rais'd others, and form'd them into Re∣giments. He sent likewise for those Forces he had through Haste left behind him in the Upper Provinces, when he first began his Expedition. To conclude, he was so earnest and diligent in recruiting his Army, that they were now twice as many as they were at Issus; for they made up a Body of Eight hundred thousand Foot, and Two hundred thousand Horse, besides a vast multitude of hook'd Chariots. These considerable Acti∣ons were the Events of this Year. CHAP. IV. Alexander marches towards Egypt: Besieges Tyre. Prodigies of Tyre. The Ty∣rians bind Apollo with Golden Chains. The Inventions of the Tyrians to defend themselves. The Advancement of Ballominus, a poor Man, to be King of Tyre. The Acts of Agis and Amyntas: Amyntas kill'd, and all his Soldiers. Alexan∣der takes Gaza by Storm: Is presented by the Grecians. NIceratus was Chief Governor of Athens, and Marcus Atilius and Marcus Valerius were Consuls at Rome, when the Hundred and Twelfth Olympiad was celebrated, where∣in Olymp. 112. 1. Ant. Ch. 330. An. M. 3618. Grylus of Chalcidon was Victor. Alexander, after the Battel of Issus, caus'd both his own, and those likewise of the Ene∣mies that were of greatest Repute for Valour, to be bury'd. After he had sacrific'd and given Thanks to the Gods, he bountifully rewarded all such as had valiantly behav'd themselves, every one according to his Merit. After which, he gave liberty to his Sol∣diers for some days to recreate and refresh themselves. Thence marching with his Army towards Egypt, as he came into Phoenicia, other Cities readily submitted to him, and were receiv'd into his Protection. But Tyre was the only City that obstinately deny'd him entrance, when he desir'd it, in order to Sacrifice to Hercules Tyrius; at which Alexander Alexander de∣mands entrance into Tyre. was so enrag'd, that he threatned to storm and take it by force of Arms. But the Tyrians resolv'd to stand it out, because they thought thereby to ingratiate themselves with Darius; and that for their Faithfulness and Loyalty to him, they concluded he would bountifully reward them; who by that means gain'd him more time to recruit his Army, while Ale∣xander was detain'd in a troublesome and dangerous Siege. And besides, they plac'd their Confidence in the Strength of the Island, and their plentiful Provision of all Things neces∣sary, and in the Carthaginians, from whom they were descended. The King therefore, though he foresaw that it would be a very difficult matter to carry on the Siege by reason of the Sea, and that they were so well provided with all Things for the defence of the Walls, and had a strong Navy, and that the City was separated from the Continent; so that nothing could be effectually put in execution: Yet he judg'd Tyre but four Furlongs from the Continent. Tyre besieg'd. it more for his Honour to undergo all sorts of Hazards, than for the Macedonians to be baffled with one City, and that too not altogether so difficult to be gain'd. He forthwith therefore demolish'd Old Tyre, as it was then call'd, and by the Stones carry'd by many Thousands of Men, rais'd a Mole Two hundred Foot in breadth, which by the Help of the Inhabitants of the Neighbouring Cities (who were all call'd in for that purpose) was presently dispatch'd. The Tyrians, in the mean time, from their Ant. Ch. 330. Ships laugh'd and jeer'd at the King, and ask'd him whether he suppos'd himself stronger than Neptune. Afterwards, when they perceiv'd (beyond whatever they thought could be done) that the Mole still increas'd, and was in likelihood to be finish'd, they decreed to transport their Wives, Children, and Old People to Carthage; and those that were Young Men were kept some of them to guard the Walls, and others for Sea-Service; for they had a Fleet of Fourscore Sail. At length they sent away part of their Wives and Children, in order to sail by the Enemy for Carthage; but being prevented by the multi∣tude of them that were at work, and not in a fit posture to fight at Sea, they were all forc'd to return, and abide the Siege. And tho' they were plentifully supply'd with
Engines to shoot Arrows, Darts, and Stones, and all other Machines and Instruments, fit and necessary for the defence of the Walls against any Assault; yet they readily fur∣nish'd themselves as they had occasion with many more, for that Tyre was full of Gun∣smiths, and Artificers of all sorts. So that being supply'd by these Workmen, with many new invented Engines, every place round the Walls was fill'd with them, especially to∣wards that side where the Mole was rais'd. And now the Work was brought by the Macedonians within the Cast of a Dart, when pre∣sently a Prodigy from the Gods appear'd to them who were thus threatned; for the work∣ing Prodigy of a Whale. of the Sea cast a Whale of an incredible bigness to the side of the Mole; and there it lay without doing any Harm, but remain'd there a good while, leaning one side of its Body to the Work, which struck the Beholders with much Terror and Amazement. After it was gone, and return'd into the Sea, both Parties went to their Divinations, and each (severally concluding as they would desire to have it) made this Construction, That by this Sign was portended, that Neptune would aid and assist them. There was another Prodigy likewise happen'd, which greatly amaz'd the Common Prodigies at Tyre. People: For when the Macedonians were at Meat, the Faces of those that broke the Bread seem'd to be all over bloudy; and one of Tyre affirm'd, that he saw a Vision, by which Apollo told him that he would forsake the City. And because the Common People su∣spected that he spoke this in favour of Alexander's Party, the Young Men had ston'd him to death, but that he was rescu'd by the Magistrates, and fled into Hercules his Temple; and so through his pious Supplication he escap'd so imminent a Danger. Upon this, the Tyrians, to prevent Apollo's leaving the City, fastned his Image to the The Tyrians fasten Apollo with Chains. Pedestal with golden Chains. But the Citizens being put into a great Fright through the increase of the Mole, loaded many little Boats with Engines to shoot Arrows and Darts, and with Slingers and Archers; who setting upon them that were at work, wounded and kill'd many of them: For Showers of Arrows and Darts being discharg'd upon Throngs of naked Men, none miss'd their Mark, in regard all lay open and expos'd to every Shot without any defence; for they were not only wounded with Darts before, but (through the narrowness of the Mole) likewise gall'd at their Backs, being not possible for any one to guard both sides at once. Alexander therefore, that he might repair the sudden and unexpected Loss, with all the speed he could mann'd as many Ships as he had, and went on board as Admiral himself, and made it his Business to get into the Haven of Tyre, in order to intercept the Phoenicians in their return. Hereupon the Barbarians fearing if he gain'd the Haven he would take the City it self (those who should defend it being now out) made all the haste they could to return to the City. And indeed both sides ply'd their Oars with all their might to prevent one another. But the Macedonians just entring the Port before the other, all the Phoenicians were every Man upon the point like to be cut off; but for∣cing their way through their Enemies, they return'd into the City, with the loss of some of those Vessels that lagg'd behind. However, though the King mist of his Design, yet he eagerly set to his Work again for the finishing of the Mole, and by a considerable number of Vessels guarded the Work for the future. The Work being brought near to the City, and the Town now in a probability of be∣ing taken, on a sudden a violent Storm of Wind arose, and tore away part of the Mole; which so perplex'd Alexander, that he repented that he ever began the Siege. But how∣ever, being prick'd forward with an unquenchable Thirst after Glory, he caus'd Trees of an incredible magnitude to be cut down in the Mountains, and brought thither, and with them Booths, Branches, and Earth pil'd together, gave a check to the Violence of the Stream. Having therefore presently repair'd the Breach that was made, the Mole by the help of many Hands was brought again within the Cast of a Dart, and by Engines mounted upon it, he batter'd down the Walls, and by shot with Darts and Arrows out of Engines, beat off the Enemy from the Bulwarks: With these likewise both Archers and Slingers ply'd the Besieg'd, and grievously wounded and gall'd many of the Townsmen upon the Walls. But the Tyrians being accustom'd to the Sea, and having many Artificers and Contrivers of Engines, us'd many Arts and ingenious Contrivances to preserve themselves: For against the Shot they contriv'd Wheels with many Spoaks, which being whirl'd about with an Engine, shatter'd in pieces some of the Darts and Arrows, and turn'd off others, and broke the Force of all the rest. And to give a check to the Violence of the Stones that were shot out of the Ballasts, they prepar'd Wooll-packs and other things that were soft and pliant to receive them.
But the King not contented to assault the City only from the Mole, girt the Town round with his whole Fleet, and diligently view'd all parts of the Walls, as if he resolv'd to besiege the Place both by Sea and Land. The Tyrians not daring to engage him at Sea, he destroy'd three Ships, that were then by chance in the Mouth of the Harbour, and then return'd to his Camp. But the Tyrians, that they might make their Walls as strong again as they were before, rais'd another Wall ten Cubits broad, and five Cubits distant from the former, and fill'd the empty space between the two Walls with Earth and Stones. Alexander likewise made a Battery, by joining many of his Ships together, and planted upon them all sorts of Rams and Battering Engines, whereby he beat down an hundred Foot of the Wall, and attempted to break into the City over the Ruines: Upon which, the Tyrians discharg'd a shower of Darts and Arrows, and with much ado repuls'd the Enemy, and the Night following repair'd that part of the Wall that had been batter'd down. But after that the Passage to the City, by the joining of the Mole close to the Walls, was made, as if it had been a Peninsula, there were many and sharp Contests both to get and defend the Walls. For though they had imminent Destruction before their Eyes, and the Miseries that attend upon a Town's being taken by Storm, yet they so resolv'd to go through all Dangers, that they despis'd Death it self. For when the Macedonians ap∣proach'd with Towers of that height that they equall'd the Battlements, and cast out Planks, whereof one of the ends lay upon the Top of the Ramparts, and so by a Bridge mounted the Walls; the Tyrians by the ingenuity of the Artificers, were supply'd with many sorts of Engines and Weapons for their effectual Defence. As amongst others they had very great Tridents, the Inventions of the Tyrians. three Fork'd Hooks, which they cast close at hand, and therewith wounded them in the Towers (to which were fastned Cords, one end whereof they held them∣selves) and by these fixing in their Enemies Targets they pluck'd them out of their hands: For to this Necessity and Streight the Macedonians were brought, that they must either stand naked, and expos'd (without defensive Arms) to a multitude of Darts and Arrows, and so be wounded to Death, or else out of a point of Honour stick to their Arms, and so perish, by being pluck'd headlong out of the Towers. Others threw Fishing Nets upon them that were engag'd upon the Bridges laid to the Walls, and so intangled their Hands, that they drew them off and tumbled them headlong to the Ground. Another wonderful invention they found out against the Macedonians, whereby they grievously plagu'd the chiefest of their Enemies, which was this, they fill'd their Iron and Brazen Shields with Sand, and heated them so long in the Fire till the Sand was scorching hot, which by an Engine they threw upon them that were chiefly engag'd, whereby they were cruelly tormented; for the Sand getting within their Breast-plates and Coats of Mail, and grievously scorching their Flesh, no Remedy could be apply'd for the curing of the Malady. So that (though they made most bitter Complaints as Men upon the Rack) yet none there were who were able to help them, insomuch, as they grew mad in the Extremity of the Torture, and dy'd in the height of unexpressible Torments. In the mean time, the Phaenicians never ceas'd casting Fire-darts and Stones at their Ene∣mies, so that they were scarce able to endure, the Multitude was so excessive. More∣over, Ant. Ch. 330. with long Poles with sharp Hooks at the end, they cut the Cords of the Battering-Rams in pieces, (which forc'd them forwards) whereby the Force of the Engine was lost; and shot out of Machines for the Purpose, great massy pieces of red hot Iron into the midst of great multitudes of the Assailants, which by reason of the number of them, against whom they were discharg'd, were sure to do Execution. They pluck'd likewise Men in Armour from off the Rampiers with Iron Instruments, call'd Crows, and others shap'd like Mens Hands. And having . many Hands at work, they eluded all the Ene∣mies Engines, and kill'd multitudes of them. And although the Service was so amazing, and the Conflict so sharp, that it was scarce to be endur'd, yet the Macedonians remitted nothing of their ancient Valour, but made their way over the Bodies of those that were slain, not at all discouraged by the Misfortunes of others. In the mean time, Alexander batter'd the Walls with massy Stones shot out of his Engines, and grievously gall'd the De∣fendants with Arrows and Darts, and all sorts of shot from the Wooden Towers. To prevent which mischief, the Tyrians plac'd Marble Wheels before the Walls, which were turn'd round by certain Engines, and with these they either broke the Darts in pieces, or so threw them off that they were ineffectual. And to allay the Force of the Stones shot against the Wall, they sow'd together Hides and Skins oil'd over to receive them, which meeting with what was soft and pliant, their Force was thereby much abated.
To conclude, the Tyrians were not short in any thing, whereby their Valour might be made to appear for the Defence of the Place. And being sufficiently supported with fresh Ant. Ch. 330; aid, they were the more Couragious, and to that degree, that they left the Walls and Towers, and leap'd out upon the Bridges to oppose the Assailants, and Hand to Hand fought it out smartly in the Defence of their Country. There were some, that with Axes cut off whole Limbs at once of all that were in their way. For among the rest, there was one Admetus, a Macedonian Captain, a strong and valiant Man, in the heat of his Contest with the Tyrians, had his Head cloven in the midst with an Ax, and so Perish'd. Alexander seeing that the Tyrians had the better on't, and Night approaching, sounded a Retreat. And indeed, at first he had thoughts to raise his Siege, and to go on with his Expedition into Aegypt, But he presently chang'd his Mind, looking upon it as Base and Dishonourable to give up all the Glory to the Tyrians. And therefore set himself a∣gain to carry on the Siege, though he had only one of his Friends call'd Amyntas, the Brother of Andromenes, who approv'd of his Resolution. Having therefore encourag'd the Macedonians to stick to him, and furnish'd his Fleet with all things necessary, he besieg'd the City both by Sea and Land. And obser∣ving that part of the Wall near the Arsenal, was weaker than the rest, he brought all his Gallies, (which carry'd his best Engines) chain'd fast together, to that Place. There he attempted an Act which the Beholders scarcely believ'd, though they saw it with their Eyes. For he cast a Plank from a Wooden Tower, with one end upon the Battlements of the Walls, as a Bridge, and by this himself alone mounted the Rampire, not regarding any Danger, nor in the least affrighted with the violent Assaults of the Tyrians; but in the View of that Army which had conquer'd the Persians, he shew'd his own Personal Ant. Ch. 33. Valour, and call'd to the Macedonians to follow him, and was the first that came to handy strokes with the Enemy; and killing some with his Spear, others with his Sword, and tumbling down many with the Bosies of his Buckler, he thus allay'd the Courage of his Adversaries. In the mean time, the Rams batter'd down a great Part of the Wall in another Place. Tyre taken. And now the Macedonians enter'd through the Breach on one side, and Alexander with his Party pass'd over the Wall in another, so that the City was now taken; yet the Tyri∣ans valiantly bestirr'd themselves, and encouraging one another, Guarded and block'd up all the Narrow Passes, and fought it out to the last Man, insomuch as above Seven thou∣sand were cut in pieces upon the Place; the King made all the Women and Children Slaves, and hung up all the young Men that were left, to the number of Two thousand. And there were found so great a Number of Captives, that though the greatest Part of the Inhabitants were transported to Carthage, yet the remainder amounted to Thirteen thou∣sand. Into so great Miseries fell the Tyrians, after they had endur'd a Siege of seven Months with more Obstinacy than Prudence. Then the King took away the Golden Chains from the Image of Apollo, and caus'd this God to be call'd That is, a Lover of Alex∣der. Apollo Philaxandrus. When he had offer'd splendid Sacrifices to Hercules, and rewarded those who had signaliz'd their Valour, he honourably buried the Dead, and made one Ballonymus King of Tyre. But it would be a thing justly to be con∣demn'd to neglect to give a further and larger Account of this Man, whose Advancement and wonderful change of Condition, was so extraordinary. After Alexander had gain'd the City, Strato the former Prince, by reason of his Faith∣fulness Ballonymus his wonderful Advancement. Curtius calls him Abdolo∣nymus. Lib. 4. C. 1. Vid. Just. Lib. 11. Ant. Ch. 330, to Daris, was depriv'd of the Command; upon which the King gave Power and Liberty to Hephestion, to bestow the Kingdom of Tyre upon which of his Friends he pleas'd. Hephestion hereupon, minding to gratify one where he had been courteously entertain'd, resolv'd to Invest him with the Principality of Tyre; but he though he was very Rich and Honourable above the rest of his Fellow Citizens, yet (because he was not of the Lineage of the Kings) refus'd it. Then Hephestion wish'd him to name some one that was of the Royal Blood; He thereupon told him of one who was a very prudent and good Man, but extream Poor. Hephestion hereupon, forthwith grants the Principality to him, and the Officer assign'd for this Purpose hastens away with the Royal Robes, and finds him in an Orchard in Rags, drawing of Water for his Hire. Having inform'd him of the Change and Alteration of his Condition, he cloath'd him with the Robe and other Or∣naments becoming his State and Dignity, and then introduc'd him into the Forum, and there declar'd him King of Tyre. Which unexpected and wonderful Occurrence, was very grateful and acceptable to the People.
Thus he obtain'd the Kingdom, and was ever after a most faithful Friend to Alexander, and an Example to all that are unacquainted with the sudden and various Turns of Fortune in this World. Having now related the Acts of Alexander, we shall turn to affairs elsewhere. In Europe, Agis King of Lacedaemon, having listed Eight thousand Mercenaries, who The As of Agis. escap'd from the Battel at Issus, began some new disturbances in favour of Darius. For having receiv'd from him a great Sum of Money and a Fleet, he sail'd into Creet, and re∣ducing many Towns there, he forc'd them to side with the Persians. Amyntas likewise, an Exile of Macedonia, who had fled to Darius, and sided with the Persians in Cilicia, escaping with Four thousand Mercenaries out of the Battel of Issus, pass'd over to Tripolis The Acts of Amyntas. Ant. Ch. 330. in Phenicia before Alexander's arrival; and there made choice only of so many of the Navy as would transport his Soldiers, and burnt the rest. With these he sail'd to Cyprus, and from thence, being well furnish'd with Soldiers and Shipping, he pass'd over to Pelusium, and having entred the City, he pretended that Darius sent him to be their General, be∣cause the late Governor of Aegypt was kill'd in the Battel in Cilicia. Thence he sail'd to Memphis, and routed the Inhabitants in a Field-fight near to the City; who not long af∣ter set upon the Soldiers, stragling out of the Town, and plundering the Country, as they were in that disorder, carrying away what they could get, cut off Amyntas and every Man with him. Amyntas kill'd In this manner, Amyntas, as he was projecting great Matters, was suddenly disappoin∣ted, and lost his Life. So likewise, other Officers and Captains of the Army that surviv'd the Battel of Issus, still cleav'd to the Persian Interest. For some secur'd convenient Cities and Garisons for Darius, and others procur'd several Provinces to raise Soldiers for him, and provide other things necessary, as the present Exigency of affairs required. In the mean time, the General Senate of Greece made a Decree, to send Fifteen Am∣bassadors Alexander presented by the Graecians with a Golden Crown to present a Golden Crown to Alexander, in Congratulation of his Victory at Issus, who was at that time besieging Gaza, a Garison of the Persians, which he took by Assault, after a two Months siege. CHAP. V. Alexander makes a Journey to the Temple of Jupiter-Hammon. He's presented by the Cyreneans. The Description of the Place about the Temple. The wonderful Pro∣perties of the Fountain Solis. The Building of Alexandria. Alexander's An∣swer to Darius his Ambassadors. Alexander passes over the River Tygris with great hazard. The Preparations on both sides for Battel. The Persians routed at that Famous Battel at Arbela. ARistophanes was now chief Governor of Athens, and Spurius Posthumius, and Titus Olymp. 112. 2. Ant. Ch. 329. An. M. 3619. Viturius, were invested with the Dignity of Consuls at Rome, when Alexander, after the taking of Gaza, sent Amyntas with Ten Sail into Macedonia, with Orders to List the Stoutest of the young Men for Soldiers. And in the mean time, he himself march'd for∣ward with the whole Army towards Aegypt, and coming there, all the Cities submitted to him without fighting. For because the Persians had wickedly violated their Holy Rites, and domineer'd imperiously over them, they most willingly receiv'd the Macedonians. Having setled his Affairs in Aegypt, he undertook a Journey to the Temple of Hammon, to consult with the Oracle there. When he was in the midst of his Journey, he was met He journeys to Jupiter Ham∣mon. Alexander presented. by the Ambassadors of Cyrene, presenting him with a Crown and other rich Gifts, among which were Three hundred War-Horses, and Five of the best Chariots, drawn with four Horses a piece. These he accepted, and made a League of Peace and Amity with them; and then with those that attended him went on forward in his Journey to the Temple. When they came to the parch'd and dry Deserts, (for they had taken Water along with them) they passed through a Region which was nothing but heaps of Sand. After the fourth Day their Water was spent, so that they were in extremity of Distress; while they were in this great perplexity, and knew not what to resolve, a sudden and unexpected shower of Rain then falling, supply'd all their present Necessities; which unexpected Pre∣servation Ant. Ch. 329. they imputed to the Kindness and Providence of the Gods. Having furnish'd themselves out of a Valley with so much Water as was sufficient for four days; in that time they pass'd over this Dire and scorching Desart; But in regard there was no visible Path, by reason of the great Heaps of Sand, those who led the way,
told the King, that there were Crows, which by their Croking at the Right Hand, directed them the way to the Temple; which the King taking as an happy Omen, and thereupon concluded, that his coming was grateful and acceptable to the Gods, he went forward on his Journey with more chearfulness. The next Place he came to, was call'd the Bitter Or Lake. Pond; Having travell'd thence a About 15 Miles. Hundred Furlongs, he pass'd by the Cities of Ham∣mon, and in one days Journey more came to the Grove of the God. The Site of the Temple is surrounded with a vast Dry and Sandy Desart, Wast and Untill'd; but it self is Six Miles and something more. Fifty furlongs Broad, and as many Long, full of pleasant Foun∣tains, and watered with running Streams, richly planted with all sorts of Trees, most of them bearing Fruit. The Temperature of the Air is a constant Spring. And though all the Places round it are Dry and Scorching, yet to all that live there, the Heavens afford a most healthful Cli∣mate. It's reported, that this Temple was built by Danaus the Aegyptian. Towards the East and West part of this Sacred Ground the Aethiopians inhabit; to∣wards The Description of the Places. the North the Numinidians, a People of Africa; and towards the South the Nasome∣neans. The Hammonians, the Inhabitants of the Sacred Grove, live in Villages. In the middle of the Grove is a Castle fortify'd with a Treble Wall; within the first stands the Ant. Ch. 329. Palace of the ancient Kings; within the other was the Gynecaeum, where were the A∣partments for the Wives, Children, and Kindred of the Prince, and stood as a common Fortress and Guard to the whole Place; and lastly, the Temple it self, and the Sacred Laver, wherein they wash'd the Sacrifices. Within the Third, were the Lodgings of the Archers and Darters, and Guard-houses of those who attend as Guards upon the Prince when he walks abroad. Not far from the Castle, out of the Walls, stands another Temple of Hammon, shaded round with many Fruit Trees, next to which is a Fountain, call'd Solis, from the Natural Effects of it. For the Water differs in its temper, accor∣ding The Fountain Solis. to the several Hours of the Day. For about Sun rising it's Lukewarm; afterwards as the Day comes on, it grows colder and colder, every Hour till Noon, at which time it's at the Coldest. And thenceforward till Evening the Cold abates by degrees; and when Night approaches it waxes hot again, and encreases by little and little till Midnight, at which time it boils through intensiveness of Heat. From that time it cools by degrees, till Sun-rising, and then is Lukewarm again, as it was before. The Image of the Idol. God is adorn'd in every part with Emeralds and other precious Stones, and delivers his Oracles in a singular and unusual Way: For he's carry'd about in a Golden Ship by fourscore Priests, who make to that Place, whither the God with a Nod of his Head directs them. There follows a great Multitude of Matrons and young Virgins, singing Paeans all the way as they go, and setting forth the Praises of the Idol, in Songs compos'd after the Custom of their own Country. When Alexander was introduc'd by the Priests into the Temple, and saw the God, Ant. Ch. 329: one of the Old Prophets address'd himself to him, and said, God save thee my Son, and this Title take along with thee from the God himself. To whom he made Answer, I accept it, my Father, and if you'll make me Lord of the whole World, your Son I'll ever be call'd. Upon which, the Priest approach'd near the Altar; and when the Men (who according to Custom lift up the Image) at the uttering some Words as Signs for that Purpose, mov'd forward, the Priest answer'd, That the God would certainly bestow upon him what he had desir'd. This was very acceptable to Alexander. But then he further said, I intreat thee, O God, that thou wouldst let me know what I have yet to enquire, and that is, Whether I have executed Justice upon all my Father's Mur∣derers? Or whether any have escap'd? At which the Oracle cry'd out, Express thy self better, for no Mortal can kill thy Father, but all the Murderers of Philip have suffer'd just Punishment. He added further, That his wonderful Successes and Prosperous Atchievements, were Eviden∣ces of his Divine Birth: For as he was never yet overcome by any, so he should be ever Victori∣ous for the time to come. Alexander being greatly pleas'd with these Answers, after he had bestow'd many rich Alexandria built. Ant. Ch. 329. and stately Gifts upon the Oracle, return'd back on his way for Egypt, where he intended to build a great City. In order whereunto, when he came there, he directed the Over∣seers of this Work to build it between the Marishes and the Sea, and measur'd out the Ground himself, and mark'd out the Streets, and call'd it Alexandria, after his own Name. It had a very commodious Situation, being near unto the Haven of An Island near Aegypt, now joyn'd to Alexandria by a Bridge, tho formerly a days sail, as o∣mer says. Pharos. He order'd and contriv'd the Streets with that Prudence, as that the Etesean Winds should, with their comfortable Gales, refresh all parts of the City: For these so cool the Air by their
Breezes from the The Medi er∣ranean. Great Sea, as that the Inhabitants, by so welcome and delightful Tem∣perature of the Heat, are very healthful. He likewise drew a large and wonderful strong Wall round the City; and inasmuch as it lay between a large Pond on the one side, and the Sea on the other, there were but two narrow Ways and Passes by Land to it; so that it was easie to be defended by a small Guard. The City was in form like unto a Soldier's Coat, one large and beautifully built Street running almost through the middle of the Town; in length from Gate to Gate Five Miles. forty Furlongs, in breadth an hundred Foot, adorn'd with most stately Structures, both of Temples and private Houses. Ale∣xander likewise built a large and stately Palace of most admirable Workmanship: And not only Alexander, but all the succeeding Kings of Egypt from time to time, to our present Age, have enlarg'd this Palace with most costly and sumptuous Buildings. The City like∣wise it self has been enlarg'd in after-times; so that by many it is reputed to be one of the Greatest and most Noble Cities in the World; for Beauty, rich Revenues, and plen∣tiful Provision of all things for the comfortable Support of Man's Life, far excelling all others; and far more populous than any other: For when I was in Egypt, I was inform'd Ant. Ch. 329. by them that kept the Rolls of the Inhabitants, That there were above Three hundred thou∣sand Freemen that inhabited there, and that the King receiv'd above Six thousand Ta∣lents out of the yearly Revenues of Egypt. But when the King had appointed some of his Friends to oversee and take care of the Building of Alexandria, and had setled all the Af∣fairs of Egypt, he return'd with his Army into Syria. As soon as Darius had intelligence of his coming, he got all his Forces together, and pre∣par'd all things necessary in order to fight him: For he order'd the Swords and Lances Darius his Preparations. to be made much longer, thinking by that advantage Alexander gain'd the Victory in Cilicia. He provided likewise two hundred hook'd Chariots, drawn with four Horses a piece, so contriv'd as to strike Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies. For in every one of them on both sides, the Horses which drew the Chariot by Iron Chains, were fix'd in the Yoak-Darts of three Spans long, with their Points full in the Faces of the Enemy. Upon the lower Parts of the Axle-trees, were two others fastned directly as those before, poin∣ting into the Enemies Faces, but longer and broader; and at the top of them were fix'd sharp Hooks. Having compleatly furnish'd and set forth his Army with glittering Arms and stout Commanders, he march'd from Babylon with Eight hundred thousand Foot, and no less than Two hundred thousand Horse. In his march, Tygris was on his right, and Euphrates on his left Hand; where he past through a very rich Country, abounding in Forage for his Horse, and supplying sufficient Provision of all Things for his Sol∣diers. Ant. Ch. 329. He made all the haste he could to reach Niniveh, there to fight the Enemy, because it was a large and Champain Country, convenient for the drawing up of so great an Army. When he came to a Village call'd Arbela, he there encamp'd, and every day drew up his Army in Battalia, and train'd and exercis'd them; for he was much afraid lest amongst so many Nations differing in Language one from another, there should be nothing but Tu∣mult and Confusion in the heat of the Fight. He had indeed but lately before sent Am∣bassadors to Alexander to treat upon Terms of Peace, and had offer'd to him all the Countries lying within the Liver Halys, and Two thousand Talents of Silver; and now sent others to him, much commending him for his generous and honourable Usage of his Mother and the rest of the Captives, and desir'd to make Peace with him, and offer'd all the Lands lying within the River Euphrates, with Three thousand Talents of Silver, and one of his Daughters in Marriage: And further promis'd, That if he would be con∣tent to be his Son-in-Law, he should be joint Partner with him in the Kingdom. Alexander imparted all these Proposals, offer'd to him by Darius, to his Friends, whom he call'd together for that purpose, and wish'd them freely to deliver their Opinions in this matter. When none durst speak their Minds in a Business of so high a Concernment, Parmenio stood up and said, If I were Alexander, I would accept of the Terms offer'd, and make Peace. To whom Alexander reply'd, And if I were Parmenio, I would do the same. And so uttering several other Words manifesting a Greatness and Nobleness of Mind, he Ant. Ch. 329. rejected the Conditions offer'd by the Persians; and preferring Honour before Profit or other Advantage, he spoke to the Ambassadors in this manner: As two Suns in the Hea∣ven would disorder the Course of the Universe, so two Kings Reigning together upon Earth, would turn all into Tumult and Confusion. Therefore he commanded them to tell Alexander's Answer to Da∣rius's Ambas∣s. Darius, That if he affected the Superiority, then to come and try it out with him for the whole Empire by the Sword; but if he preferr'd Wealth and Ease before Honour, that then he should submit to Alexander, and so he might Reign over others as a King; but yet receive his Kingdom at the hands of Alexander as a Fruit of his Bounty.
Having said this, he presently after broke up the Assembly, and march'd with his Army towards the Enemy's Camp. In the mean time, the Wife of Darius dy'd, and Alexander bury'd her honourably according to her Quality. When Darius receiv'd Ale∣xander's Answer, he was out of all hopes of putting an end to the War by Letters and Messages, and therefore he train'd his Soldiers every day, thereby making them more ready and willing to observe all Words of Command whenever they should engage. In the mean while he sent Mazeus, one of his Faithfull Friends, with a Battalion of stout Men to guard the Passage over the River Tygris, and secure the Ford. Others he com∣manded to burn up all the Country through which the Enemy was to pass: For he re∣resolv'd to make use of the River as a Defence and Bulwark against the Enemy's ap∣proach. But Mazeus observing that the River was not passable, both by reason of its depth, and Ant. Ch. 329. swiftness of its Stream, wav'd the guarding of it, and employ'd himself in wasting and destroying of the Country; concluding, that when that was done, the Enemy could not pass that way through want of Provision. Alexander, when he came to the River Tygris (being inform'd by the Inhabitants where Alexander passes over Ty∣gris. the Ford lay) pass'd his Army over, but with very great Toil and extream Hazard; for the Water came up above their Breasts, and several were taken off their Feet, and hur∣ry'd away by the violence of the Stream; many others likewise were born away, and pe∣rish'd through the rapid Course of the Water, involving it self within their Arms. Ale∣xander, to withstand the Violence of the Water, order'd his Men to stand close in a Body together, like a Rampire against the Stream: By this means they got safe over; and after so much danger and difficulty, he permitted them to refresh themselves for one day. The next day he march'd in Battalia against the Enemy, and at length encamp'd near to them. But while he revolv'd in his Mind the vast number of the Persian Army, and what great Difficulties he was to cope with, and that now all lay at stake, he spent all that Night in anxious Thoughts concerning the Event. But he fell into so deep a Sleep about the Morning-Watch, that though the Sun was now up, yet he could not be awak'd. His Friends at the first were very glad of it, as judging the longer he rested the more lively he would be, and so more able to bear the Fatigues of the Day. But Time drawing far on, and the King still fast asleep, Parmenio, the Oldest of the Commanders, gave Com∣mand through the Army to prepare for an Engagement. The King sleeping still, some Ant. Ch. 329. of his Friends stept in to him, and had much ado to awake him. While all wonder'd at a thing so unusual, and expected to hear the Cause from himself, Now, says Alexander, I am free from all Fear and Care as concerning Darius, who has brought his whole Strength to∣gether into one Place; for by one Day's Battel for the Trial of all, I shall be quit and discharg'd of all my Hazards and Toils for the time to come. Upon which, without any delay he made a Speech to encourage his Officers to pluck up their Spirits, and with Courageous Hearts to▪  all the Dangers that were before them. Upon which he march'd in Battalia against the Barbarians, with the Horse in the Front of his Army. The Right Wing was Commanded by Clitus, surnam'd Niger, wherein were other special Friends under the Command of Philotas the Son of Parmenio, supported by seven other Regiments of Horse under the same Commander. After them were plac'd the Battalion of Foot call'd Silver Shields. Argy∣raspides, glittering in their Arms (most excellent Soldiers) led by Nicanor the Son of Par∣menio; to support them, he plac'd next the Squadrons of Elimia, a City of Mace∣donia. Elimia, whose Leader was Cenus. In the next Squadron stood the Oresteans and Lyncestians, whose Captain was Per∣diccas; next to these was Meleager with his Squadron; and after him Polysphercon comman∣ded the Stympheans; and next to him Philip the Son of Balacrus commanded another Squadron; and after him Craterus. To the Squadrons of Horse before-mention'd were oin'd, as Auxiliaries, those from Peloponnesus and Achaia, together with the Phthiots, Ma∣lieans, Locrians, and Phocians, commanded by Erigyrus of Mitylene. After these were plac'd Ant. Ch. 329. the Thessalians (for Valour and Horsemanship far beyond all the rest) whose Commander was Philip. Next to these he drew up the Archers from Crete, and the Mercenaries from Achaia. Both Wings were drawn up into the Form of an half-moon, that the Macedonians might not be hemm'd in by the multitude of the Persians. The King provided a∣gainst the hook'd Chariots, that they might not break in upon them, by this Contri∣vance: he commanded the Foot, that when the Chariots advanc'd near in their Career, they should strike with their Javelins upon their Shields lock'd one into another, that the horses, frighted with the noise, might start back; but that if they still press'd forward, in order to force their way, that then they should open, that so they might shun them without any pre∣judice.
He himself took upon him the Command of the Right Wing, and drawing up in an oblique Line, resolv'd to venture himself wherever there was any Danger. Darius drew up his Army according to the distinction of the several Nations, and ad∣vanc'd against the Enemy in that Wing opposite to Alexander. And now both Armies The Battel at A. drew near one to another, and the Trumpets on both Sides gave the Signal to Battel, and the Soldiers made at one another with a great shout, and forthwith the hook'd Cha∣riots rushing forward with a mighty force, greatly amaz'd and terrifi'd the Macedonians. For Mazeus the General of the Horse charging with a great Body close after the Cha∣riots, caus'd them to be more terrible. In the midst of the Action, a mighty Crash and dreadful Noise was made on a sudden by the Foot's striking with their Javlins upon their Ant. Ch. 329. Bucklers, as the King had commanded; upon which many of the Chariots (through the fright of the Horses) were turn'd aside, and the Horses being altogether ungovern∣able, made away back again into the Persian Army; Most of the rest of the Chariots breaking in among the Foot, by opening to make way, were either quite destroy'd by Darts and Arrows, or diverted. Some indeed forc'd their way with that Violence, that with their Hooks they bore down all before them, and many perish'd by several sorts of deadly Wounds. For such was the Force and Violence, together with the Sharpness of the   an B De∣struction. hook'd Sithes contriv'd for Destruction, that many had their Arms with their Shields in their Hands cut off; and not a few had their Heads so suddenly shear'd off, that they tumbled to the Ground with their Eyes open, and their Countenance in the same Posture as they were when alive. Some were so mortally gash'd, and cut through their Sides, that they forthwith fell down dead. When the Armies came closer together, and all their Darts and Arrows both from their Bows and Slings, and those cast by the Hand, were spent, they fell to it hand to hand. The first Charge was by the Horse, the Macedonians being in the Right Wing opposite to Darius, who commanded the Left of the Persians, in which were his Kindred and near Relations. For there was a Regiment of a Thousand Horse, compos'd only of such as were in greatest Reputation and Account for their Valour and special Love to the King. These having him a Spectator of their Valour, readily and chearfully receiv'd all the Darts that were cast at the King. They were seconded by the Melephorians, who were numerous and stout Men, and with them were join'd the Mardians and Cisseans, Men admir'd for their Courage, and the Bulk of their Bodies. Besides these, there were Ant. Ch. 329. those of the King's Houshold, and some of the stoutest of the Indians. All these made a fierce Charge with a great Shout upon the Macedonians, who were put very hard to it by reason of their Multitude. Mazeus. Mazeus likewise in the Right Wing, with a brave Body of Horse charg'd with that briskness, that he laid many at his Feet at the first onset. Then he order'd Two thousand Cadusian Horse, and a Thousand more of the Scythians, to take a compass round the Enemies Wings, and to break in upon the Trenches that defended their Carriages; who presently thereupon put in execution what they were commanded. Thus having forc'd into the Macedonians Camp, some of the Prisoners catch'd up Arms and join'd with the Scythians, and rifled the Carriages. Upon which, through the sudden∣ness of the Surprize, a great Noise and Clamour arose throughout the whole Camp. Then other Prisoners ran in to the Barbarians. But Sisygambris the Mother of Darius would not stir, though she was mov'd to it, but with a kind of an affectionate Regard to her Condition, continu'd in the same place, not trusting to the uncertain Turns of Fortune, nor judging it fit and honourable to manifest so much Ingratitude towards Alexander. The Scythians having at length rifled most of the Carriages, return'd to Mazeus, and gave him an Account of the happy Success. With the like good Fortune that Body of Horse with Darius put the Macedonians (overpower'd with Number) to flight. While Ant. Ch. 329. the Victory seem'd thus to incline to the Persians by this second Success, Alexander making it his only Business with all the speed possible to rally his broken Forces, and to repair his Losses, charg'd Darius with his own Brigade, and some others of the bravest Horse in the Army; The Persian King receiv'd the Enemy's Charge with great Resolution, and fighting mounted upon his Chariot, dispatch'd many with Darts that assaulted him; neither were they few that defended him. And while both Kings were eager to destroy one another, Alex∣ander in throwing a Dart at Darius miss'd him, but kill'd his Chariot-driver. Upon which, those about the King that were at some distance set up a great Cry, believing that the King was kill'd; and forthwith betook themselves to their Heels, and then the next to them fol∣low'd. Presently the Troops next to Darius himself gave ground by degrees, till such time as he was left naked on one side; and then he himself in a great Consternation made away with all speed. The Persians being thus dispers'd, the Horse in their flight rais'd so great a Cloud of Dust, that Alexander and his Men, who pursu'd close at the
Heels of the Enemy, could not see which way Darius fled: Nothing was heard but the Groans of dying Men, the trampling of Horses, and continual Noise and Lashing of Whips. In the mean time, Mazeus in the Right Wing having the bravest and stoutest Horse of any of the Persians, press'd grievously upon those Troops with whom he was Ant. Ch. 319. engag'd. So that though Parmenio with the Thessalian Horse, and others join'd with them, were greatly distress'd, yet he bore the Brunt for some time, and at first through his own Valour, and the Bravery of the Thessalian Horse, worsted the Persians; but the Horse with Mazeus by their Number bearing down the other, that Wing of the Macedonians was quite routed, so that a great Slaughter was made, and there was now no standing before the Barbarians. Parmenio therefore sent Horsemen after Alexander to intreat his Assistance with all speed, who hasted away to execute the Orders and Command given: But when they heard that a great part of the Army was fled, they return'd without going further. However Parmenio bestirring himself, and rallying his Troops as well as he could, with the help of the Thessalian Horse hew'd down many of his Enemies, and at length with The Persians routed at Ar∣bela. much ado put the Barbarians to flight, who were in Amaze and Consternation upon hearing that Darius was fled. Darius in the mean time being an expert General, and help'd by the thick Cloud of Dust, took not his Course strait forward like the rest, but turn'd a different way; and so being not discern'd, (by reason the Dust rose so high,) escap'd clear away, and brought all those that went along with him safe into the Towns and Villages that lay at the Backs of the Macedonians. At length all the Barbarians taking to their Heels, and the Macedonians killing all that Ant. Ch. 329 were in the Rear, in a short time all that large Plain was cover'd over with dead Car∣kasses. There were kill'd in this Battel, of the Barbarians, Horse and Foot, above Nine∣ty thousand; of the Macedonians, Five hundred only, but great Multitudes wounded. Amongst whom, Hephestion, one of the bravest of Alexander's Commanders, and Cap∣tain of his Guard, was shot through the Arm with a Dart. Perdiccas, Cenas, Menidas, and some others likewise were wounded. And this was the Issue of the Battel at Arbela. CHAP. VI. The Graecians conspire to Revolt. Memnon rebells in Thrace. Antipater marches against him. The Lacedaemonians raise an Army; are routed by Antipater, and Agis their King kill'd. ARistophon was at that time Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Cneius Domitius and Aulus Olymp. 112. 3. Ant. Ch. 328. An. M. 3620. Cornelius were created Roman Consuls, when many of the Cities of Greece, upon the News of the Victory at Arbela, began to bestir themselves to defend their ancient Liberties, whilst the Persians had any Power left to assist them; and therefore resolv'd to assist Darius with Monies to raise Foreign Soldiers from all Parts. For they concluded, that Alexander durst not divide his Army lest he should disturb them; but if they should suffer the Persians to be destroy'd, they were not able of themselves to defend their Liberties. And an In∣surrection in Thrace encourag'd them the more to Revolt: For Memnon being sent Ge∣neral into Thrace, having both Courage and Force sufficient, at the Instigation of the Barbarians rebell'd, and with a great Army now appear'd in open War. Upon which, Antipater gather'd all his Forces together, and march'd through Macedonia into Thrace against Memnon. Things thus falling out, the Lacedaemonians judging that now a fair Op∣portunity was offer'd them to prepare for War, sollicited the Graecians to Confede∣rate together for their remaining Liberties. But the Athenians, in regard they had receiv'd many Kindnesses and Marks of Honour from Alexander beyond all the rest of the Cities, continu'd quiet and firm in their Duty. But many of the Peloponnesians, and some others, entred into the League, and inroll'd their Names as Soldiers for the Army; so as accord∣ing as every City was able, they sent forth the choicest of their Youth, and rais'd an Army of Twenty thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse. The Management of the whole War was left to the Lacedaemonians, who were resolv'd to lay all at Stake, and made Agis General. Antipater hearing of the Defection of the Greeks, compos'd all Matters relating to the War in Thrace as well as he could, and march'd with all his Forces into Greece, having no less than Forty thousand Greek Auxiliaries as Confederates. Hereupon
a great Battel was fought, wherein Agis (though he behav'd himself with great Valour and Resolution) was kill'd, and at length the Lacedaemonians (having stood to it stoutly for a long time) upon their Confederates giving Ground, likewise retreated towards Sparta. There fell of the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates in this Battel above Five thou∣sand and Three hundred: Of those with Antipater, Three thousand and Five hun∣dred. There was one Thing very Remarkable concerning the Death of Agis. Having fought with great Gallantry and Resolution, and receiv'd many Wounds, he was carry'd off by the Soldiers in order to be brought back to his own Country, but being sur∣rounded by the Enemy, and finding no likelihood to escape, he charg'd his Soldiers forthwith to be gone, and preserve themselves for the further Service of their Country. He himself remain'd, and with his Sword in his Hand fought it out upon his Knees, and kill'd several of the Assailants, till at length being shot through the Body with a Dart, he there dy'd, after he had reign'd Nine Years. Thus far for Europe, we shall now return again to the Affairs of Asia. CHAP. VII. Alexander comes to Babylon. The Wealth found there. Views his Troops at Sita∣cana. The Riches there. Thence goes into the Country of the Uxians. Marches towards Persepolis. A Company of maim'd Greeks met Alexander: His Bounty to them. He takes Persepolis; gives it up to the Plunder of the Soldiers. The Riches of the Cittadel of Persepolis. Alexander's Feast at Persepolis. Persepolis burnt at the Instigation of Thais. Darius murder'd. DArius being routed at Arabela, fled towards the higher Provinces, to the end that he might both by the distance of the Place recruit himself, and likewise have more time to raise a new Army. He came first to Ecbatane, where he stay'd for some time, and there receiv'd his broken Troops that came in to him, and arm'd again such as had lost their Arms. He sent likewise for the Militia out of the Neighbouring Provin∣ces, and dispatch'd Messengers to the Lord-Lieutenants and Commanders in Bactria and the upper Praefectures, wishing them to abide firm to him in their Faith and Loyalty. Ant. Ch. 328. In the mean time, Alexander (after he had buri'd those that were kill'd in the Battel) enter'd Arbela, where he found abundance of rich Furniture of the Kings, and vast Treasures of the Barbarians, amounting to Three thousand Talents of Silver. But be∣cause he judg'd that the Air thereabouts must needs be infected through the Stench of the Bodies that lay there slain, he presently remov'd his Camp, and came with all his Alexander comes to Ba∣bylon. Forces to Babylon, where he was chearfully receiv'd by the Inhabitants, and splendid Entertainment afforded to the Macedonians. And there his Army was refresh'd after the many Toils and Difficulties they had undergone. And thus in the Confluence of all Things desirable, and free and noble Entertainment of the Citizens, he continu'd in the City above Thirty Days. Then he made Agatho of Pydna Governor of the Castle, with a Garison of Seven Hundred Macedonians. To Apollodorus of Amphipolis, and Menetes of Pelea, he gave the Government of Babylon, and of all the Prefectures as far as to Cilicia, and order'd them to raise what Forces they could; and gave them a Thousand Talents for that purpose. He made Mithrinas, who betray'd the Castle of Sardis, Lord Lieu∣tenant of Armenia. Of the Monies that he found in Babylon, he gave to every Horseman About 19 l. Six Minas; to every Auxiliary, Five; to each of the Macedonian Phalanx, Two; and to every Foreign Mercenary, Two Months Pay. The King removing from Babylon, as he was in his March there came to him Recruits from Antipater, Five hundred Macedonian Horse, and Six thousand Foot; Six hundred Recruits come to him. Thracian Horse, and Three thousand Five hundred Trallians: From Peloponnesus Four thou∣sand Ant. Ch. 328. Foot, and almost a Thousand Horse. Among these were sent Fifty of the Sons of the King's special Friends from Macedonia, design'd by their Fathers to be of the King's Life-Guard. Having receiv'd these, he march'd forward, and came, after Six Decamp∣ments, into the Province of Sitacina. And here he stay'd several Days, in regard the Country abounded in all Things necessary for the Life of Man, and for that he had a mind his Soldiers should refresh themselves after their tedious March. And had a Pur∣pose
likewise to take a more exact View and Account of his Troops, and to inlarge the Commands and Governments of his Captains and Commanders, and so to strengthen his Army, both by the Number of Soldiers, and Valour of their Officers. All which he forthwith put in Execution; and making choice of the most Deserving with the utmost Care possible, he advanc'd many from very considerable Places of Trust and Authority to much higher Preferments, by which means he both promoted his Officers, and gain'd their Hearts and Affections at the same time. He took care also for the better Govern∣ment of the Common Soldiers, and by many new Inventions put every thing into a better Order and Posture than they were before. To conclude, when he had so manag'd every thing as that he had gain'd the Love of the whole Army, and made them in all Points observant to his Commands, and was assur'd for Valour they would give Ground to none, he march'd forward, in order to finish by fighting what further remain'd. When he came to the Province of Susiana, he presently without any difficulty gain'd the Possession Ant. Ch. 328. of Susa, the Royal City, the most beautiful Palace of the Universe, which was volunta∣rily surrender'd to him by Abuletes the Lord Lieutenant of the Province. But some Wri∣ters Enters Susa. have said, That this was done by order from Darius himself, to them that otherwise would have been both Loyal and Faithful to his Interest; and that this was done by the Persian King for this end, that Alexander being taken up with Matters of such great Mo∣ment, as taking Possession of famous and noble Cities, and loading himself with vast Treasures, Darius might gain more time for the raising of fresh Forces for the carrying on of the War. Alexander therefore having possess'd himself of the City and the King's Treasures, found there above Forty thousand Talents of uncoin'd Gold and Silver. The Kings had pre∣serv'd this Treasure untouch'd for many Ages, that it might be ready to resort to in case of some sudden and unexpected Turn of Fortune. Besides this, there was likewise Nine thousand Talents in coin'd Money call'd Daricks. While Alexander was taking an Account of this Wealth, there happen'd something that was very Remarkable. The Throne whereon he sate being too high for him, so that his Feet could not touch the Footstool, one of the King's Boys observing it, brought Darius his Table and plac'd it under his Feet, with which the King was very well pleas'd, and commended his Care. But one of the Eunuchs standing at the side of the Throne, much concern'd and griev'd at such a change of Fortune, burst out into Tears: Which Alexander perceiving; What Ill dost thou see (says he) that thou weepest so? To whom he answer'd, I was once Darius his Servant, Ant. Ch. 328. now I am yours; but because I cannot but love my natural Lord and Master, I am not able with∣out extream Sorrow to see that Table put to so base and mean a Use, which by him was so lately grao'd and honour'd. The King, upon this Answer, reflecting upon the strange Change of the Persian Monarchy, began to consider that he had acted the part of a Proud and Insulting Enemy, not becoming that Humanity and Clemency which ought to be shewn towards Captives; and therefore he commanded him who plac'd the Table there, to take it away: But Philotas standing near to him, said, It is not Pride or Insolency, O King! being done without your Command, but it falls out to be so through the Providence and Pleasure of some good Genius. Upon which, the King order'd the Table to remain where it was, looking upon it as some happy Omen. After this, he order'd some Masters to attend upon Darius his Mother, his Daughters and Son, to instruct them in the Greek Tongue, and left them at Susa. And he himself march'd away with the whole Army, and after four Decampments came to the River Tigris, which rising out of the Uxian Mountains, runs first through a rough and craggy Country, full of large and wide Channels for the space of a Thousand Furlongs; thence it passes through a Champion Country with a more gentle Current, and having made its way for the space of Six hundred Furlongs, it empties it self into the Persian Sea. Alexander having pass'd the River, march'd towards the most fruitful Country of the Uxians: For being water'd in every part, it plentifully produces Fruits of all sorts and kinds; of which, being in their proper Season dri'd in the Time of Autumn, they make Ant. Ch. 328. all sorts of Sweetmeats, Sauces, and other Compositions, both for necessary Use and Plea∣sure, and the Merchants convey them down the River Tygris to Babylon. He found all the Passes strongly guarded by Madates, who was near related in Kindred to Darius, and had with him a strong and well-disciplin'd Army. Whilst Alexander was viewing the Strength of the Places, and could find out no Passage through those steep Rocks; an Inhabitant of the Country, who was well acquainted with those Ways, promis'd Alexan∣der, that he would lead his Soldiers through such a strait and difficult Path-way, as that they should stand at length over the Heads of their Enemies: Hereupon the King order'd a small Party to go along with him. He himself in the mean time us'd his utmost En∣deavour
to force his Way, and for that purpose set upon the Guards, and while they were hotly engag'd. (fresh Men still supplying the Room of them that were weary,) and the Barbarians disorderd, and running here annothere in the Engagement, on a sudden the Sol∣diers that were sent away appear'd over the Heads of the Guards that kept the Passages; upon which they were so amaz'd, that they forthwith fled, and so the King gain'd the Pass; and presently all the Cities throughout all Uxiana were brought into Subjection. Thence he decamp'd and march'd towards Persia, and the Fifth Day came to a Place call'd: he Susian Rcks, which were before possess'd by Ariobarzanes, with Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three hundred Horse. The King concluding, that he must gain the Pass by force, led his Troops through some of the strait and craggy Places without any Resistance; the Barbarians never offer'd to disturb him till he came the mid-way, and then on a sudden they bestirr'd themselves, and threw down great Numbers of massy Stones upon the Heads of the Macedonians, and destroy'd Multitudes of them. Many cast their Darts from the Rocks above upon them, which fail'd not to do Execution, falling among Ant. Ch. 328. such a Throng of Men together: Others with Hand-stones repuls'd the Macedonians that were forcing to break in upon them; so that by reason of the Difficulty of the Places, the Barbarians so far prevail'd, as to kill Multitudes, and wound as many. Alexander not being able to prevent this sad and miserable Slaughter, and perceiving that not one of the Enemy fell, or was so much as hurt, and that many of his own Men were slain, and almost all that led the Van were wounded, he sounded a Retreat; and march'd back Three hun∣dred Furlongs, and then encamp'd. Then he enquir'd of the Inhabitants, whether there was any other Way to pass, who all answer'd, That there was none, but that he must go round many Days Journey. But the King looking upon it as a Dishonourable Thing to leave the Bodies of them that were slain unbury'd; and as disgraceful, and even owning himself to be conquer'd by treating for Liberty to bury the Dead, he commanded the Captives, as many as were there at hand, to be brought to him. Among these, there was one that un∣derstood both the Persian and Greek Tongue, who declar'd, that he was a Lycian and some∣time ago made a B the Per∣sians. Prisoner at War, and that for several Years last past he had exercis'd the calling of a Shepherd in those Neighbouring Mountains, and by that means had per∣fect knowledge of the Country, and told the King, that he could lead the Army through the Woods, and bring them directly upon the Backs of them that guarded the Passes; Hearing this, the King promis'd the Man a large Reward, who thereupon so conducted him, that in the Night with great Labour and Toil he got to the top of the Mountains, for he drail'd through abundance of Snow, and past through a Country full of steep Rocks, deep Gulphs, and many Vallies. Having march'd through this Tract, as soon as he came in sight of the Guards, he presently kill'd the first, and took those Prisoners that were plac'd in the next Pass. The third Guard presently fled, and so he gain'd all into his own Power, and cut off the greatest part of Ariobarzanes his Army. Thence he march'd towards Persepolis, and in his way receiv'd Letters from Teridates Governor of the City, whereby he signify'd to him, That if he hasted away, and prevented those that were coming to relieve Persepolis, he would deliver the City into his Hand. Upon which he made a swift March, and pass'd his Army over the River Araxis, by a Bridge then laid for that purpose. As the King was on his March, a most sad Spectacle presented it self, which stirr'd up just Hatred against the Author, Pity and Compassion for the irreparable Loss of those that suffer'd; and Grief and Sorrow in all the Beholders. For there met him certain Greeks, whom the former Kings of Persia had made Captives and Slaves, and fell down at his Feet; they were near Eight hundred, most of them then old Men, and all A Company of Greeks in a sad Condition mt Alexan∣der. maim'd, some having their Hands, others their Hands, others their Feet, some their Ears, and others their Noses, cut off. If any were expert in any Art, and had made a considerable Progress therein, all his outward Members were cut off, but such only as were necessary for the Management of his Art. So that all that beheld their Venerable old Age, and the sad mangling of their Bodies, greatly pity'd the miserable Condition of these poor Creatures: Especially Alexander so piti'd their sad Condition, that he could not rerain from Weep∣ing. These all with one Voice cry'd out, and intreated him, That he would Succour and Relieve them in these their Calamities. Upon which, the King call'd the chiefest of them to him, and told them, that he would take special Care of him, and promis'd he would see them sent honourably to their own Country, as became the Dignity of his Person. Upon which they consulted together, and at length concluded, That it was better for them to remain where they were, than to return into their own Country: For when they were return'd, they should be scatter'd here and there, and all the Days of their Lives be Mock'd and Despis'd by reason of their sad Misfortunes. But if they con∣tinu'd together as Fellows in their Misery, the Calamity of their Fellow-Sufferers would
be an Allay, and some Comfort to every one of them in their own Adversities. Upon this, they made a second Address to the King, and declar'd to him what they had resolv'd upon, and desir'd him he would afford such Relief to them as was most agreable to their present Circumstances. The King consented to what they had determin'd, and order'd to each of them Three thousand Nar 100 l. Drachmas, Five Suits of Rayment to every Man, and as many to each Woman; and to every one of them Two Yoke of Oxen, Fifty Sheep, and as many Every Me∣dimna by some conta Eigh∣teen  Fifty Bushls. Medimnas of Wheat. And commanded they should be free from all Taxes and Tribute, and gave strict Charge to the Officers employ'd, that none should offer them any Injury. And thus Alexander, according to his natural Goodness and innate Ge∣nerosity, comforted these poor miserable People. He then call'd the Macedonians together, and told them, That Persepolis, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Persia, of all the Ci∣ties of Asia had done most Mischief to the Graecians, and therefore he gave it up to the Plunder and Spoil of the Soldiers, except the King's Palace. This was the richest City of any under the Sun, and for many Ages all the private Houses were full of all sorts of Wealth, and what ever was desirable. The Macedonians therefore forcing into the City, put all the Men to the Sword, and rifl'd and carry'd away every Man's Goods and Estate, amongst which was abundance of rich and costly Furniture and Ornaments of all sorts. In this Place was hurri'd away here and there vast Quantities of Silver, and no less of Gold, great Numbers of rich Gar∣ments, some of Purple, others embroider'd with Gold, all which became a plentiful Prey to the ravenous Soldiers: And thus the great Seat Royal of the Persians, once famous all the World over, was now expos'd to Scorn and Contempt, and rifl'd from top to bot∣tom. For though every Place was full of rich Spoil, yet the Covetousness of the Macedo∣nians was insatiable, still thirsting after more. And they were so eager in Plundering, that they fought one with another with drawn Swords, and many who were conceiv'd to have got a greater Share than the rest, were kill'd in the Quarrel. Some Things that were of extraordinary Value they divided with their Swords, and each took a Share; Others in Rage cut off the Hands of such as laid hold upon a Thing that was in Dispute. They first ravish'd the Women as they were in their Jewels and rich Attire, and then sold them for Slaves. So that by how much Persepolis excell'd all the other Cities in Glory and Worldly Felicity, by so much more was the Measure of their Misery and Calamity. Then Alexander seiz'd upon all the Treasures in the Cittadel, which was a vast Quantity of The Treasures of Persepolis Ant. Ch. 328. Gold and Silver of the Publick Revenues that had been heaping up, and laid there, from the time of Cyrus the first King of Persia, to that Day. For there was there found an Hundred and twenty thousand Talents, reckoning the Gold after the Rate of the Curtius, l. 5. c. 13. Silver. Part of this Treasure he took for the Use of the War, and order'd another Part of it to be treasur'd up at Susa. To this purpose, he order'd that a multitude of Mules both for Draught and Carriage, and Three thousand Camels with Pack-saddles, should be brought out of Babylon, Mesopotamia, and Susa; and with these he convey'd all the Trea∣sure to the several Places he had appointed. For because he extreamly hated the Inhabi∣tants, he was resolv'd not to trust them with any Thing, but utterly to ruin and destroy Persepolis: Of whose Palace, in regard of its stately Structure, we conceive it will not be impertinent if we say something. This stately Fabrick, or Cittadel, was surrounded with The Dscription of Persepolis a treble Wall: The first was Sixteen Cubits high, adorn'd with many sumptuous Buildings and aspiring Turrets. The second was like to the first, but as high again as the other. The third was drawn like a Quadrant foursquare, Sixty Cubits high, all of the hardest Marble, and so cemented, as to continue for ever. On the four Sides are brazen Gates, near to which are Gallowes's of Brass twenty Cubits high, these rais'd to terrify the Be∣holders,  Or Crosses of Brass. Ant. Ch. 328. and the other for the better strengthening and fortifying of the Place. On the East-side of the Cittadel, about Four hundred Foot distant, stood a Mount call'd the Royal Mount, for here are all the Sepulchres of the Kings, many Apartments and little Cells, being cut into the midst of the Rock; into which Cells there's made no direct Passage, but the Coffins with the dead Bodies are by Instruments hoist up, and so let down into these Vaults. In this Citadel were many stately Lodgings, both for the King and his Soldiers, of excellent Workmanship, and Treasury Chambers most commodiously con∣triv'd for the laying up of Money. Here Alexander made a sumptuous Feast for the Entertainment of his Friends in Com∣memoration Alexander Feasts at Per∣sepolis. of his Victory, and offer'd magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods. At this Feast were entertain'd Whores, who prostituted their Bodies for Hire, where the Cups went so high, and the Reins so let loose to Drunkenness and Debauchery, that many were both drunk and mad. Among the rest, at that time there was a Curtesan call'd Thais, an
Athenian, that said, Alexander would perform the most glorious Act of any that ever he did, if while he was Feasting with them, he would burn the Palace, and so the Glory and Renown of Persia might be said to be brought to nothing in a moment, by the Hands of Women. This spreading abroad and coming to the Ears of the young Men (who commonly make little use of Reason when Drink is in their Heads) presently one crys Ant. Ch. 328. out, Come on, bring us Fire-brands, and so incites the rest to Fire the Citadel to revenge that Impiety the Persians had committed, in destroying the Temples of the Grecians. At this, others with joy set up a shout, but said, That so brave an Exploit belong'd only to Alexander to perform. The King stirr'd up at these Words, embrac'd the Motion, upon which, as many as were present left their Cups and leap'd from the Table, and said, That they would now celebrate a victorious Festival to Bacchus. Hereupon, multitudes of Firebrands were pre∣sently got together, and all the Women that play'd on Musical Instruments, which were at the Feast, were call'd for, and then the King, with Songs, Pipes, and Flutes bravely led the way to this noble Expedition, contriv'd and manag'd by this Whore, Thais, who next after the King, threw the first Firebrand into the Palace. This President was pre∣sently follow'd by the rest, so that in a very short time, the whole Fabrick by the Violence of the Fire, was consum'd to Ashes. Persepolis burnt. It's very observable, and not without just admiration, that the Sacrilege and Impiety of Xerxes, King of Persia, (exercised in his destroying the Citadel of Athens) should so many years after be reveng'd in the same kind, by one Curtesan only of that City that was so injur'd. After these things thus done, Alexander marches against the rest of the Persian Cities, and having taken in some by Force, and others surrender'd upon the Fame and Report of his Lnity and Moderation, he made after Darius, who had begun to raise Forces out Ant. Ch. 328. of Bactria, and other Provinces; but being prevented by the March of the Enemy, he made away with all speed out of Bactria with Thirty thousand Persians and Mercenary Greeks, and in his return was treacherously Murther'd by Bessus, the Lord-Lieutenant of Bactria. He was scarce dead, when Alexander with a Party of Light Horse, came up to Darius mur∣der'd. the Place where he lay, and there finding him, caus'd him to be honourably interr'd. But some do report, that Alexander finding him yet alive, Darius complain'd of his sad Misfortune, and desir'd him that he would see his Death reveng'd, which Alexander faith∣fully promis'd. He forthwith indeed, pursu'd Bessus, but he being a long way before him, escap'd into Bactria, so that considering it was not possible to overtake him he march'd back. This was the State of Affairs in Asia. In Europe, the Lacedaemonians being routed in a great Battel by Antipater, were forc'd to send Ambassadors to him; who put them off till the meeting of the General Assembly of Greece; which afterwards met at Corinth, where, after many things were Banded and Disputed on both sides, the Matter was at length left to the Decision of Alexander. Here∣upon, Antipater receiv'd the chiefest of the Nobility of Sparta as Hostages; and the Lace∣daemonians sent Ambassadors into Asia, to beg Pardon for their late Revolt. CHAP. VIII. Bessus stirs up the Bactrians. Alexander discharges the Greek Auxiliaries with Re∣wards. The River Stiboetes. He enters Hircania; Its Richness. Enters the Mardis Country. Loses his brave Horse, but is restor'd. Thalestris the Ama∣zon Queen meets him. He falls into the Effeminacy of the Persians. Enters Drangina. A Plot against Alexander. Philotas and others put to Death. Marches against the Arimispi. Subdues Arachosia. WHen this Year ended, Cephisophon executed the Office of Chief Magistrate at Olymp p. 112. 4. Ant. Ch. 327. An. M. 3621. Athens, and Caius Valerius, and Marcus Claudius were created Roman Consuls. At that time, Bessus, with Naarzanes and Barxaentes, and many others, after the Death of Darius, having escap'd the hands of Alexander, came into Bactria. And in regard he was appointed Lord-Lieutenant of this Country by Darius, and upon that account was Bessus stirs up the Bactrians,  is own'd as King well known by the Inhabitants, he persuaded the People to stand up for their Liberty, and told them, That the Situation and Condition of their Country was such, being full of
difficult Passes, and very Populous, that they had an extraordinary advantage to succeed in the Attempt, and promised that he himself would take upon him the whole Manage∣ment of the War. Hereupon, he so far prevail'd, that he got a considerable Number to join with him, and to own him for King. Then he Listed Men, prepar'd Arms, and procur'd whatever was necessary for the present State of his Affairs. In the mean time, Alexander perceiving that the Macedonians had a design to end the War with the Death of Darius, and to return to their own Country, he call'd them to∣gether; and so courted them by an Oration fitted for the purpose, that he prevail'd with them readily to go on with the Expeditions that then yet remain'd. Then he call'd together all the Greek Auxiliaries, and having highly commended them for their Valour, bestow'd upon every Horseman as a Reward a Talent, and every Footman Ten Ten Minas, 31 l. 5 s. Alexander discharges the Greek Auxili∣aries, and re∣wards them. Ant. Ch. 327. Minas, and discharg'd them from further Service in the Army. And over and besides he paid to every one of them what was due to them for their common Pay, and gave them likewise sufficient Provision to carry them into their own Country; and to every one that was willing still to continue in the Army, he gave Three Talents. He gave indeed large Rewards to the Soldiers, being naturally of a generous Disposition, and besides, in pursuing Darius had possess'd himself of a vast Treasure: For he had receiv'd Eight thousand Talents out of the Treasures; and besides what he gave to the Soldiers, he rais'd Thirteen thousand Talents by sale of the Cups, Flaggons, and Furniture. And it was believ'd, that what was stollen and taken away by force was much more. Having done this, he march'd with his Army towards Hircania, and the third day came near the City From its 100 Gates. Hecatompylon, and there encamp'd. Here he continu'd some Days to refresh his Army, because the Country was exceeding Rich, and abounded with every thing for Man's Use. Thence he mov'd forward an Hundred and fifty Furlongs, and encamp'd near a very high Rock, at the foot of which is a Cave not unbecoming the Gods, from whence (as the Spring-head) issues the great River Stiboetes. Thence it runs with a fierce and violent Stream for the space of Three Furlongs, 'till it dash it self upon a great Rock in shape like a Woman's Pap, under which is a vast Gulph, or opening of the Earth, into which, being now divided into two Channels, it falls down with a mighty Noise, turn'd all into Froth and Spume, and there runs under-ground About 43 Miles. Three hundred Furlongs; and then appears again, as if that we e its Spring-head. Having en∣tred Hircania with his Army, he gain'd all the Town, and Cities as far as the Caspian Sea, which some call likewise the Hircanian Sea. It's reported, that in that Sea are many Serpents of Ant. Ch. 327. an extraordinary Bigness, and Fish of all sorts, much differing in Colour from those in our Parts. When he entred further into Hircania, he came to Towns call'd the Fortunate Towns, The Fertility of Hircania. which are so in Deed, as well as in Name For this Country excels all the rest in fertility of Soil; for every Vine, they say, affords a , about 49 Quarts. Metrete of Wine: And that some Fig-trees are so very fruitful, that they'll bear Ten Every Me∣dimna is about 18 Gallons. Medimnas of dried Figs; and that what are left upon the Tree after Harvest, fall upon the Ground, and spring up again of themselves, and bring forth abundance of Fruit to perfection. There's a Tree in that Country much like to an Oak, which distills Honey from its Leaves; and this the Inhabitants gather in great plenty for their own use. There's likewise a little Insect in this Tract call'd an An∣thredon, less than a Bee, but very remarkable; it gets its living in the Mountains, sucking the Flowers that grow here and there in those places. It works its Combs within hollow Rocks, or Trees shatter'd or made hollow by the Thunder-bolts, and there makes a Li∣quor not inferiour to any for sweetness. In the mean time, Alexander, while he was on his March through Hircania, and the bordering Countries, gain'd great Reputation, and was highly honour'd for his Cle∣mency, in carrying himself with so much Humanity towards all those Commanders who fled away with Darius, and afterwards submitted themselves to him: So that Fifteen hun∣dred brave and valiant Grecians (who sided with Darius) forthwith came unto him, and laid themselves at his Feet, whom he readily pardon'd, and plac'd them in several of his Ant. Ch. 327. Regiments, and allow'd them the same Pay with the rest. Having run through the Sea-Coasts of Hircania, he entred the Country of the Mardi; who being a Warlike Nation, slighted the growing Power of the King, and shew'd him not the least Respect, either by sending Ambassadors, or otherwise; but having possess'd themselves of the strait Passes of the Mountains with Eight thousand Men, stood there, waiting for the coming of the Macedonians. Hereupon the King sets upon them, kills many, and drives the rest within the Straits. But while he was burning up the Country all before him, it fell out that (some of the King's Boys who led his Horses, being at some distance from the rest of the Army) his best Horse, by a sudden Incursion of the Alexander's Horse.
Barbarians, was carry'd away. This Horse was given him by Damarotus the Corinthian, and the King had made use of him in all his Battels in Asia. When he was bare-back'd, he would admit only his Tender to mount him; but when he had the King's War-Saddle, and the rest of his brave Trappings upon him, he would not suffer his former Rider to get upon his Back, nor any other Person but Alexander; and to him he would down up∣on his Knees for the King to get into the Saddle. Because of these excellent Properties of the Horse, the King was the more griev'd and troubled; and therefore he order'd all the Trees in all parts of the Country as he went to be hewn down, and caus'd a Pro∣clamation to be made in their own natural Tongue, That unless his Horse were restor'd, he would waste and destroy all before him with Fire and Sword; which he began pre∣sently to put in execution. Upon which, the Barbarians were so terrify'd, that they Ant. Ch. 327. not only restor'd the Horse, but brought along with them many rich Presents for the King, and by Fifty Ambassadors begg'd his Pardon. Upon which, the King accepted some of the most Honourable among them for Hostages. When he came back into Hircania, Thalestris Queen of the Amazons met him, whose Dominions lay between Phasis and Taermodon; of an admirable Beauty, and strong Body, Thalestis. greatly honour'd in her own Country for here Brave and Manly Spirit. She presented herself to the King, with Three hundred Amazons in their Warlike Habit, having left the rest of her Forces on the Borders of Hircania. The King being struck with admira∣tion at the sudden and unexpected approach of the Queen, and the graceful appearance of the Women, ask'd Thalestris, what was the Reason of her Journey thither? Who answer'd him, That she came there to have Issue by him; for she look'd upon him to transcend all other Men for Great and Noble Actions; and she her self to exceed all other Women both in Body and Mind, as to the Strength of the one, and Courage of the other: And therefore there was good ground to hope that the Issue of such Parents, would excell all other Men in Valour. The King was greatly pleas'd with what she said, and gratisy'd her Request; and after he had convers'd with her for the space of Thirteen Days, he presented her with honourable Gifts, and suffer'd her to return to her own Kingdom. Alexander conceiving that he had now effected all that he design'd, and that there was no Competitor with him for the Empire, began to indulge the soft and effeminate Man∣ners Alexander i∣ the Persians. of the Persians, and to imitate the Luxury of the Asian Kings: And therefore in the first place he order'd all the The Lictors, who carry'd Rods before the Magistrates. Officers of the Court to be Asiaticks, and the Nobility of Asia to be * 'Squires of the Body, amongst whom Oxathres, the Brother of Darius, was one. He put likewise the Persian Diadem upon his Head, and wore the White Cassock and Belt, after the manner of the Persian Kings, and all the rest, except the Persian Hose † , such carry'd Lances. Ant. Ch. 327. and Vestment, call'd the Candys. He bestow'd likewise Purple Gowns upon his Friends, and cloath'd all his Horsemen in the Persian Habit. He began likewise to carry his Concu∣bines along with him from place to place as Darius us'd to do, who had almost as many as the Days in the Year, and were the greatest Beauties that could be found throughout all Asia. These stood round the King's Bed every Night, that he might take his choice of whom he pleas'd to lie with him. However, for the most part he follow'd the ancient Customs of his Ancestors, and us'd the other but seldom, lest he should offend the Macedonians; and when some notwithstanding complain'd of the King, he stopp'd their Mouths with Gifts and Bribes. About this time, Intelligence was brought him that Satibarzanes, one of Darius his Lord Lieutenants, had kill'd all the Soldiers he had committed to his Charge, and was join'd in Conspiracy with Bessus to make War upon the Macedonians; whereupon he march'd out against him. Satibarzanes had got all his Forces together into Chrotacana, a most Noble City in those Parts, and naturally fortify'd; but as soon as the King came in sight, being terrify'd with the Greatness of the King's Army, and the Valour of the Macedonians, (which was now cry'd up all the World over) he hasted away with Two thousand Horse to Bessus, to procure help from him with all speed. The rest of his Forces he ordered to make to a Ant. Ch. 327. Mountain near at hand, which was full of straight Passes; and where they might lye close and secure when they durst not Engage with the Enemy in the open Field. Upon this, the King was so intent and diligent (as he always was) that though they had shel∣ter'd themselves in a large Rock, and naturally strong, yet he reduc'd the Besieg'd to those streights, as that he forc'd them to Surrender themselves. Afterwards, having reduc'd all the Cities in this Province, in the space of Thirty days, he left Hircania, and came to the Royal City of * Drangina, where he Encamp'd and re∣fresh'd In the Province of Drangiana n Persia. his Army.
About tis time a most wicked Plot was laid against Alexander, very unworthy the A Plot against Alexander. Goodness of his Disposition. For one of the King's Friends, call'd Dimnus, blaming the King for something he had done, and thereupon become Enrag'd at him, contriv'd to Assassinate him. This Man had a Catamite, call'd Nicomachus, whom he dearly lov'd; him he went about to persuade to join with him in this Wicked Design: But being a very young Youth, he discover'd the whole Business to his Brother Cebalinus, who (fearing lest some other should be before him in the Discovery) resolv'd to make the first Discovery to the King. Thereupon he goes to the Court, and first meets Philotas, and acquaints him with what he had heard, and intreats him to inform the King what was hatching out of hand. Philocas, whether through Covetousness, or that he was one of the Conspirators, (it's not certain) minded not to make the Discovery of what had been imparted to him: For though he went in to the King, and had a long Discourse with him of divers matters, Ant. Ch 327. yet he told him nothing of what Cebalinus had related to him. But when he came out, told Cebalinus, that he had not had as yet a fit Opportunity for opening of the Matter to the King; but that the next Day he would take him aside by himself, and discover all that Cebalinus had made known to him. Philotas neglecting the Business the next Day also; Cebalinus was afraid, lest if it should be discover'd by some other Person, and so he himself should be in great danger; Therefore he wav'd Philotas, and goes to one of the King's Pages, and tells him the whole Plot, wishing him forthwith to acquaint the King; and then withdraws himself into the Armory, and there lay private. The Page took the Opportunity when the King was in the Bath, and related to him the whole Matter told him by Cebalinus, and that he then lay hid and secret in the Armory. At this the King was greatly statled, and forthwith order'd Dimnus to be seiz'd; and now fully in∣form'd of the Conspiracy, sent for Cebalinus and Philotas. When every thing after strict Examination was fully discover'd, Dimnus stabb'd himself. Philotas confess'd his Neglect in not making the Discovery, but utterly deny'd that he had any hand in the Conspiracy. The King hereupon committed the Examination of the Business to the Judgment of the Macedonians, who after many Arguments and Debates, Pro and Con, condemn'd Philotas and the rest of the Conspirators to die, amongst whom was Parmenio; who was ever thought to have been one of the King's most faithful Friends. And though he was not Ant. Ch. 327. then present himself, yet it was suspected that he manag'd the Business by his Son Philotas. Philotas therefore being put upon the Rack, confess'd the whole Plot; and so he and the other Conspirators were put to Death, according to the manner of their Philotas put to Death. own Country. Alexander Lyncestes also (who was before accus'd of a Conspiracy against the King) suffer'd in the same manner. He had been now three years in custody, but his Trial was deferr'd to that time for the sake of Antigonus, who had a great kindness for him, and between whom there was a particular Friendship and Familiarity. But being then brought before the Macedonian Senate, and having nothing by way of Plea to say for himself, he was Executed with the rest. Then Alexander dispatch'd some away upon Dromadary Camels, to prevent the Report of Philotas his Punishment, and by that means caus'd Parmenio, the Father of Philotas, to be seiz'd unawares, and put to Death; he was then Governor of Media, and was intrusted with the King's Treasures in Ecbatana, which amounted to an Hundred and Fourscore thousand Talents. About the same time he sever'd from the rest of his Army all such as had given out harsh Expressions against him, and grumbl'd at the Death of Parmenio, and all those who had written false and scandalous Letters to their Friends in Macedonia, re∣lating to the King's Affairs: All these he cast into one Company or Regiment which he call'd the . Unruly Company, lest by their unseasonable Jangling and Prating, they should corrupt the rest of the Macedonians. After these things thus done, and that he had settl'd his Affairs in Drangina, he march'd against the Arimaspi, (as they were anciently call'd) but now Benefactors. Evergetae, which Name was given them upon the following account; Cyrus (who was the first that translated the Empire from the Medes to the Persians) in a certain Expedition he had undertaken, being brought into great Extremity in a barren Country for want of Provision, insomuch as the Ant Ch. 327. Soldiers to satisfy their Hunger, were forc'd to eat the Flesh one of another; the Ari∣mispi at that time brought to his Army Thirty thousand Carts and Wagons, loaden with Provision. And therefore the King being thus unexpectedly Reliev'd and Preserv'd, not only quitted the People from paying of Tribute for the future; but bestow'd upon them many other Privileges and bountiful Rewards, and chang'd their old Name into Everget.
And now when Alexander came into their Country, they receiv'd him with all the Demonstrations of Love and Kindness, and he rewarded them with marks of his Grace and Favour, suitable to his State and Dignity. And return'd the like Favour to the Ge∣drosians their Neighbours, who had entertain'd him likewise with the same Respect: And over these two Nations he made Teridates Governor. In the mean time while he staid in these Parts, some brought him Intelligence that Sa∣tibarzmes with a great Body of Horse out of Bactria, had enter'd the Country of the Arians, and had withdrawn the Inhabitants from their Allegiance. Upon which the King sent him part of the Army, under the Command of Erigyus and Stasanor. He himself in the mean time, in a few days subdu'd Arachosia, and caus'd them to submit to his Government. CHAP. IX. Alexander marches against the Paromisades. His troublesome March. Comes to Mount Caucasus. A Battel in Area by Alexander's Officers against Satibarzanes, who is kill'd in a single Combat by Erigius. Bessus brought to Alexander; His Punishment. Alexander kills some Barbarians unexpectedly, after they had surren∣der'd their City. He marches to the River Indus. Mophis his remarkable deli∣very up of himself and his Army. AT the End of this Year Euthycritus was created Chief Governor of Athens, Lucius Olymp. 113. 1. Ant. Ch. 326. An. M. 3622. The Cold Coun∣try of the Pa∣ropamisades. Plotius, and Lucius Papyrius executing the Office of Roman Consuls; At this time was celebrated the Hundred and thirteenth Olympiad. Then Alexander led his Army a∣gainst the Paropamisades. This Country lies very far North, and is covered over with Snow, and by reason of the Sharpness of the Cold, People cannot endure to come into their Country. The greatest Part of it is open and plain, without any Trees, and has in it many Towns scatter'd here and there. The Roofs of their Houses are cover'd with Tyles, running up in shape like a Spire, in the Middle is a Hole to let in Light, and to evaporate the Smoke: And the Walls of their Houses are so close jointed and cemented, that the Inhabitants are sufficiently guarded against the Cold. By reason of the great The Descript. of the Paropami∣sades Country. Driffs of Snow, they keep within their Houses most part of the Year, where they have every thing necessary for their Provision laid up in store. They cover their Vines and Fruit-Trees all the Winter with Earth, and uncover them again when the Spring ap∣proaches. The Nature of all this Tract is such, that nothing that is Green or Pleasant is seen in any Part of it. But Snow glittering with Ice covers all Places. No sorts of Fowl or Birds breed here; no Wild Beasts feed in the Woods or Forests; Insomuch, as that there's neither Entertainment for any Stranger, nor Hospitality one with another throughout the whole Country. Notwithstanding all these Difficulties, yet the King, encourag'd by Ant. Ch. 326. the Hardness of the Macedonians, and put on forward by his own daring Resolution, o∣vercame all the Disadvantages of the Place. But yet some of the Soldiers, and others that straggl'd and kept not up to the rest, were so tyr'd, that they were left behind. Others by the Brightness and Sharpness of the Snow, and reflection thereof upon their Eyes, were destroy'd. Nothing could be seen at a distance, save only the smoke that discover'd the Villages; which was a sign to the Macedonians that there were Inhabitants not far off. The Towns being thus discover'd and gain'd, the Soldiers after their great hardships, re∣fresh'd themselves with the Plentiful store of Provision they found in the Houses, and in a short time all the Inhabitants submitted. After this, he march'd forward, and came near to Caucasus, where he Encamp'd. That Caucasus. Mountain by some is call'd Paropamisus: Having pass'd over the Breadth of the Mountain in sixteen days march, he built a City, call'd Alexandria, near the Foot of the Mount, at a Pass which opens a Way into Media. In the middle of Caucasus is a Rock ten Furlongs in Compass, and four in Height, wherein the Inhabitants pretend to shew. * Promotheus See this Story in Ovid', Me∣sam. Lib. 1. and other P∣ts. his Cave, the Fabulous Vulture's Nest, and the Chains and Fetters. He built likewise o∣ther Cities, each distant a days Journey from Alexandria. In these he planted Seven thou∣sand of the Barbarians, Three thousand of those that follow'd the Camp, and as many of the Mercenary Soldiers as would.
Hence he march'd into Bactria; for he heard that Bessus had Usurp'd the Crown, and Ant. Ch. 326. had rais'd a Numerous Army These were the things then done by Alexander. In the mean time, the Commanders that were sent into Area, there found the Ring-leaders of the Rebellion, with a strong Army under the Command of Satibarzanes, an Experienc'd and Valiant General. The Armies Encamp'd near to one another, and sometimes would engage in considerable Bodies, and at others in light Skirmishes, by a few on either side. At length it came to a General Battel, and in the midst of the Fight, (wherein the Valour of the Barbarians was such, that the Issue was very doubtful) Sati∣barzanes himself (to discover who he was) pluck'd off his Helmet with his own Hand, and challenges any of his Enemies Commanders, to fight with him Hand to Hand. Upon Satibarzanes kill'd by Erigy∣us in a single Combat in A∣rea. which, Erigyus makes up to him, and a stout Combat there was, in which Erigyus was the Victor. The Barbarians upon the Death of their General were so disheartned, that upon Quarter, they gave up themselves to the King. In the mean while, Bessus had taken upon him the Name of King, and having Sacri∣fic'd to the Gods, invited his Friends to Feast with him. In the midst of his Cups, he began to Quarrel with one of his Companions, call'd Bagodoras, and the Contest growing higher, he fell at length into such a Rage, as that he resolv'd to kill him, but chang'd his Mind through the Persuasion of his Friends. Bagodoras thus narrowly escaping with his Life, fled in the Night to Alexander. The Chief of the Commanders (mov'd by the Consideration of his Escape, and stirr'd up by hopes of Rewards) conspir'd together and Ant. Ch. 326. Bessus brought to Alexander. seiz'd upon Bessus, and brought him to Alexander, for which the King bountifully rewarded them. As for Bessus, he gave him up into the Hands of Darius his Brother, and the rest of his Kindred, to punish him in such manner as they thought fit, who after they had put him to all manner of Torments, and us'd him with all the Despite and Disgrace ima∣ginable, they cut his Body into small pieces, and hurl'd every part here and there away out of their Slings.— [Here the History is broken off and lost, viz. 1. Alexander's March through a dry Country. 2. The De∣fection of the Sogdians, Bactrians. 3. The Hunting in Bahastis. Peace being made upon these Conditions, and ratify'd by mutual Oaths, the Queen of Massaca in India. Queen mightily admir'd the Brave and Noble Spirit of Alexander, and sent to him most rich Presents, promising to do whatever he was pleas'd to Command.— [Here the History is likewise lost. 4. The Impiety against Bacchus. 5. The Death of Clitus and Calisthenes. 6. Wars with the Nauticae. 7. His Marriage with Roxana. 8. of Nysia. These are wanting may be supply'd out of Archian. Lib. 4. and Q. Curtius, Lib. 7, 8. Then the Mercenaries, as they had agreed, forthwith left the City, and having march'd Eight hundred Furlongs Encamp'd without any Disturbance, not in the least suspecting any thing of that which afterwards happen'd: For Alexander hating them implacably pursu'd them with a considerable Body of Men, and fell upon the Barbarians on the sud∣den, Barbarians kill'd after sur∣render of their City. and cut off Multitudes of them. Upon which the Mercenaries first cry'd out, that he had violated his Oath, in falling upon them in that Hostile manner, and call'd upon the Gods to revenge that Impious Cruelty executed upon them. But the King, with a loud Voice answer'd, That he indeed did agree, that they should quit the City, but not Ant. Ch. 326. that they should ever be accounted as Friends to the Macedonians. Hereupon, the Bar∣barians not at all terrify'd with the desperate Condition they were in, These Merce∣naries were the Massasenians. Their stout De∣fence. drew up in a Body in a round Ring; placing their Wives, Children, and Women in the middle, that they might receive the Enemy on every side with less Hazard and Prejudice. Being therefore Desperate and of daring Spirits, encourag'd by their Successes in former Conflicts, they bravely receiv'd the Enemy. The Macedonians on the other hand resolving to be in nothing inferior to them, the Engagement was very sharp and terrible. For fighting close hand to Hand, Man to Man, various kinds of Death and Wounds appear'd every where: For the Macedonians by their Sarissa, a Macedonian Spear or Lan. Sarissas pierc'd through the short Shields of the Barbarians with that violence, that the Points ran into their very Bodies The Mercenaries likewise on their part threw their Lances amongst the Thickest of their Enemies, upon whom (be∣ing so near) they were sure not to fail in doing Execution. When a great Number of them were wounded and as many kill'd, the Women took up the Arms of those that were slain, and join'd with the Men in the Engagement. For the Desperateness of their Con∣dition, and the Greatness of the Work in hand, forc'd them to the most resolute Resistance for the Defence of themselves. Some of them therefore getting Arms, defended their Hus∣bands
with Shields; others that had no Arms rush'd in upon the Enemy, and caught hold of their Bucklers, so as they could scarce do any thing. At length all the Men, toge∣ther Ant. Ch. 326. with their Wives (who valiantly fought to the last) being overpower'd by Multi∣tude, died upon the place, preferring an honourable Death, before a Life with Slavery and Disgrace. The useless and unarm'd Rabble, together with the Women that were left, he gave to his Horsemen. He took likewise several other Cities, putting them to the Sword that oppos'd him. Here it falls in with the In∣dex plac'd be∣fore the 17th Book, in the Greek Edition of Rhodoma∣nus. Alexander at the Rock Ao∣non. Hence he mov'd forward to the Rock call'd Aornon; for here those Inhabitants that surviv'd shelter'd themselves, being a very strong Place. It is reported, that the ancient Hercules attempted the taking this Place, but was forc'd to quit the Siege, by reason of terrible Earthquakes, and other Prodigies of the Gods, that happen'd there at that time; which coming to the Ears of Alexander, it made him far more eager to assault the Place, as if he glory'd to be the Gods Corival both in Might and Power. The Rock was an hundred Furlongs round, and sixteen high, and seem'd to be even and steep, and every where round. At the foot of the Rock towards the South runs Indus, the greatest River of India; other Parts are inviron'd with unaccessible Rocks and dreadful Precipices. Alexander upon view of the Place, concluding that it was not possible for him to take it by force; at that instant there came to him an Old Man with his two Sons, who had a long time liv'd in those Places, in a very poor and low Condition: He had there a little Cell cut into the Rock, wherein were three Beds: He and his Sons lodging toge∣ther in this place, he was very well acquainted with all the Avenues and Passages round about. When he came therefore to the King, he told him his Condition, and promis'd to lead the King through the Straits and craggy By-ways, to such a Post where he might assault the Barbarians upon the Rock. Hereupon Alexander promis'd him a large Re∣ward, made use of his Conduct, and in the first place possess'd himself of the only Pas∣sage Ant. Ch. 326. that led up to the top of the Rock: And because there was no other way to pass, he so block'd up the Besieg'd, that there was no Relief to be expected. Then by the help of many hands, he rais'd up a Mount from the bottom and foot of the Rock; and ad∣vanc'd so close up to the Enemy, that by that means he made a very sharp and vigorous Assault, which continu'd without any interruption Night and Day, for the space of seven Days and Nights. At the beginning the Barbarians, by advantage of the heighth of the Fort, prevail'd, and cut off many that too rashly forc'd in upon them: But when the Battery was rais'd up to its due heighth, and the Engines for shooting of Darts and other Warlike Instruments were brought up, and that the Resolution of the King not to leave the Assault was discern'd, the Besieg'd were in a great Consternation. But Alexander wisely foreseeing what would be the Issue, commanded the Guard that he had left at the Passage to withdraw, that so the Enemy might have free liberty to be gone, if they had a mind to it. Upon which, the Barbarians, affrighted by the Valour of the Macedonians, and the King's brave Resolution, in the Night left the Fort. The Indians being thus frighted with a Scarecrow, the King gain'd the Rock without any considerable loss: And then having rewarded his Guide, march'd away with his Forces to other places. About that time there was one Aphrices, an Indian, that lay in those parts with an Army Aphrices an Indian his Head brought to Alexander. of Twenty thousand Men, and Fifteen Elephants: Him the Indians kill'd, and brought his Head to Alexander, and by that means gain'd his Favour. He possess'd himself like∣wise of all the Elephants in that Tract, and receiv'd the Indians into his Protection. Thence he mov'd to the River Indus, where being furnish'd with some Ships of Thirty Oars a piece, with them he made a Bridge over the River, and continu'd in that place Ant. Ch. 326. for thirty days space to refresh his Army, and there offer'd magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods. After he had pass'd over his Forces, there hapned something unusual and remarkable: One Taxilis, who formerly reign'd in that Country, being lately dead, his Son Mophis succeeded him; this Mophis some time before had sent an Ambassador to Alexander, when he was in Sogdiana, to offer him his Assistance against the Indians that were then pre∣paring to oppose him; and likewise promis'd to deliver up his Kingdom into the King's hands. When the King was Thirty Furlongs distant, Mophis and his Friends march'd towards him with a well-appointed Army, and Elephants adorn'd and fitted for Battel. When Alexander saw so numerous an Army advance, he believ'd the Indian had made a Cloak of his Promises to cover his Fraud, by that means to surprize the Macedonians at unawares; therefore he commanded the Trumpets to give the Sign of Battel, and drew up his Army in Battalia, and advanc'd towards the Indians. But Mophis being inform'd of the sudden Commotion that was amongst the Macedonians, easily judging what was the
occasion, commanded his Army to make an halt, and he himself with a few in his Com∣pany, posts away, and presently undeceives the Macedonians, by delivering up himself and his Army (which was the Strength of the Kingdom) into the Power of the King; who was so well pleas'd with what the Barbarian had done, that he restor'd him to his Kingdom, and ever after found Taxiles (for so he was call'd) his constant and faithful Friend and Associate. And these were the Transactions of this Year. CHAP. X. Alexander overcomes Porus. How Apes are taken, Strange Serpents for Venem. Large Trees. Marches against the Andrastians, Catheri, and against Sophithes. The Custom of them under Sophithes. Indian Dogs. Entertain'd by Phigeus. The Macedonians refuse to march against the Gandarides. Alexander leaves Monuments behind him at the River Hyphasis. Nicea built, and Bucephalis. The Ibori present Alexander. Routs the Agalassians. In danger in the River In∣das by Whirlpools. Marches against the Oxidracans and Mallians. The King leaps off the Wall into the Town. A Duel between Coragus and Dioxippus. The Sambestae submit to Alexander; and the Sodrans and Massanians. Subdues Musicanus, Porticanus, and Sambus. Poison'd Weapons. The King's Dream. Comes into the main Ocean. Comes into Gedrosia. The Savageness of the People. His Army near perishing in Gedrosia. Comes into Carmania. Punishes the Borm∣cial Goremours, Nearchus returns. Islands cover'd at high Tides. The strange Death of Calanus. Alexander marrieth Statira. Harpalus his Luxury. He seizes with his own Hand them that mutiny'd. AT the time when Chremes was Lord Chancellor at Athens, and Publius Cornelius and Olymp. 113. 2. Ant. Ch. 325. An. M. 3623. Aulus Posthumius executed the Consulship at Rome; Alexander, after he had re∣fresh'd his Army in the Province of Taxilis, march'd against Porus Prince of the Neigh∣bouring Indians, who had in his Army above Fifty thousand Foot, Three thousand Horse, above a Thousand Chariots, and an Hundred and thirty Elephants, and was confedera∣ted with another Neighbouring King, call'd Embisarus, not inferior in Power to Porus. Alexander's Battel with Porus. Alexander understanding that he was not above 400 Furlongs distant from Porus, ad∣vanc'd with a Resolution to fight him, before the other join'd him. Porus perceiving him to approach, drew up his Horse in two Wings: His Elephants, so accountred as to ter∣rifie his Enemies, he plac'd at equal distances one from another in the Front, and lin'd them with his arm'd Men, who were commanded to guard and defend them from Darts and Arrows in the Flank. The whole Army drawn up thus in Battalia, seem'd like a City: For the Elephants stood like so many Towers, and the Soldiers plac'd among them resembled the Walls. Alexander, on the other hand (observing how his Enemies were drawn up) so dispos'd and order'd his own Men, as the present Circumstances of his Af∣fairs then requir'd. The Horse engag'd in the first place, and thereupon almost all the Indians Chariots were presently broken in pieces: Afterwards the Elephants being made use of (by the mighty Bulk of their Bodies and their great Strength) bore down and trod underfoot Ant. Ch. 325. many of the Macedonians; others were catch'd up in their Trunks, and toss'd into the Air, and then fell down again with great violence upon the Earth, and so miserably pe∣rish'd: Many likewise were so rent and torn by their Teeth, that they died forthwith. However, the Macedonians with invincible Courage indur'd all the Hardships wherewith they were press'd, and with their The Macedo∣nian Pikes. Sarissas kill'd the Soldiers that guarded the Elephants: So that now they fought upon equal Terms; and not long after, the Beasts being ply'd with Darts on every side, and not being able longer to endure the many Wounds they receiv'd, their Riders were not able to rule them, insomuch as they furiously rush'd back∣wards, and broke in upon their own Regiments, and trode many of them underfoot, which caus'd great disturbance and consusion. Upon which, Porus mounted upon the Bravest Elephant (seeing how things were like to be) commanded Forty of those that were not as yet startled and affrighted, to be plac'd round about him. And with these
he made so desperate and sierce a Charge, that he made a sad Slaughter amongst the Macedonians; especially being a Man of the strongest Body of all those that were with him; for he was five Cubits high, and in bulk proportionable; so that his Breast-plate was twice as big as any of the rest of the most strongest Men amongst them; and he threw a Dart with as great force as if it had been shot out of an Engine. But this extraor∣dinary Strength of Porus did not at all terrifie the Macedonians, that were plac'd in the front against him: Alexander therefore commanded the Archers and light-arm'd Men, with all their Darts and Arrows to make at Porus himself; who did as they were commanded. So that such a multitude of Archers were got in one Body together, and such Showers of Darts and Arrows pour'd out upon him, that they could not possibly miss their Mark. Porus over∣come. Porus at length (having fought with great Valour and Resolution) by multitude of Wounds lost so much Blood, as that his Spirits fail'd him, and he fell down from his Beast to the Ground. Upon which it being presently spread abroad that the King was dead, the rest of the Indians fled, and thereupon a great Slaughter was made amongst 'em. Thus Alexander having gain'd this glorious Victory, at length commanded his Trum∣pets Ant. Ch. 325. to sound a Retreat. But there were kill'd in this Battel above Twelve thousand In∣dians; amongst whom were Two Sons of Porus, the Generals of his Army, and the Chiefest of his Commanders. There were taken above Nine thousand Prisoners, and Fourscore Elephants. As for Porus, he was not yet quite dead, and therefore Alexander recommen∣ded him to the Care of the Indians themselves for the dressing of his Wounds. There fell of the Macedonians, Two hundred and fourscore Horse, and above Seven hundred Foot, whom the King took care to be decently bury'd, and rewarded those that surviv'd who had merited by their Valour. He sacrific'd likewise to the Sun, through whose Favour and Assistance he had conquer'd the East. The neighbouring Mountains being cloth'd with great Numbers of Firr-Trees, Cedars, and the Pitch-Tree, the Place affords plenti∣ful Materials for the Building of Ships; and therefore he built as many here as he had occasion for. For he design'd when he came to the utmost Bounds of India, after he had subdu'd those Nations that lay in his way, to pass along through the River into the Ocean. In the mean time, he built Two Cities in those Parts, one upon the further side of the River Hy∣daspis. River where he pass'd over; the other where he overcame Porus; and both were pre∣sently Ant. Ch. 325. perfected, having many hands at work. Porus being recover'd, he restor'd him to the Possession of his Kingdom; and being there was plenty of all sorts of Provision, he suffer'd his Army to lie still and refresh them∣selves Porus restor'd. for the space of thirty Days. There are some things very remarkable, and worth observing, in the Mountains near where they encamp'd: For besides the Materials for Shipping, this Tract abounds with Serpents of a vast Bigness, 16 Cubits in length, and breeds a sort of Apes, to be admir'd both for their number and greatness of their Bodies. The nature of the Beast has in∣structed the Hunter how to take her; for she's apt to imitate every Action she sees; but because of her Strength and natural Sagacity, it's very difficult to take her by force. There∣fore some of the Hunters anoint their Eyes with Honey, and others put on Shoes in the sight of the Apes; and some there are that clap upon their Heads Glasses made hallow like Caps. Looking-glasses: Then they leave some Shoes behind them, with Bands fixt to them, and instead of Honey lay Birdlime, and within the Glasses are Ropes to run on Nooses: When they are gone, the poor Beasts begin presently to imitate what they saw done, and so are deluded; for their Eye-lids are glew'd together, their Feet are fast bound, and their whole Bodies held by the Snares; and so they become an easie Prey to the Hunter. Afterwards Alexander forces Embisarus (who had been so slow in assisting Porus, and now in a Consternation) to a Submission; and then passes the River with his Forces, and makes his way through a most fruitful Country: For here are strange sorts of Trees Ant. Ch. 325. seventy Cubits high, and of that thickness that four Men can scarcely fathom 'em, and cast Trees. a Shade 300 foot distance. There are likewise in this Tract multitudes of Serpents of small Bodies; but for their various Colour most remarkable: For some lie like Rods yellow as Brass; others have very  rough and hairy Breasts, and whoever is bitten by them, falls down dead immediately. If any be stung by them, he's most horridly tormented, and a bloody Sweat issues out at all the Pores of his Body. The Macedonians, to secure themselves from these Mischiefs, hung up their Beds on the Limbs of these Trees, watching the greatest part of the Night: But at length, by some of the Inhabitants, they were directed to a Root, which was an Antidote against the Poison.
After the King had mov'd from thence, he was inform'd that Porus, a neighbouring Prince, Nephew of Porus lately vanquish'd, was fled out of his Kingdom, and run to the Gangarides. At which Alexander was not a little troubled, and thereupon sent Hephestion with a considerable Body of Men into his Dominion, and order'd him to reduce it into the nature of a Province, and to deliver it into the hands of his Friend Porus. He him∣self march'd into the Country of the Andrastians, and gain'd some of their Cities by assault, Marches a∣gainst the An∣drastians. Catheri. and others by surrender. Thence he came into the Country of the Catheri, where by the Law the living Wives are burnt together with their dead Husbands; and the Wickedness and Treachery of one Woman, who poison'd her Husband, was the occasion of this Law. There the King burnt down to the Ground the greatest and strongest Town of all others in those Parts after he had with great difficulty and hazard taken it by assault. The Inhabitants of another Ant. Ch. . Town, which he was ready to assault, came forth, and humbly submitted themselves to him, upon which he spar'd them. Thence he led his Army to the Cities belonging to Sophithes, which were govern'd by most excellent Laws; amongst the rest they strictly observe this, To value their Beauty and The Custom of Sophithes his Cities. and comely Proportion above all other Things; and therefore they carefully examine every part of the Child when it is in the Cradle, and such as are sound and perfect in every Limb and Member, and likely to be strong and comely, they nurse and bring up; but such as are lame and deficient, and of a weak Habit of Body, they kill, as not worth the rearing. They have the same regard to their Marriages; for without any respect to Portion, or any other Advantages, they only mind the Beauty of the Person, and the Health and Strength of their Bodies. Hence it is, that those who live in those Cities, are for the most part more Beautiful and Comely than others. But Sophithes the King surpass'd all the rest of his Subjects for admirable Beauty and stately Proportion; for he was above four Cubits high: He came forth of his Royal City, and gave up himself and Kingdom into the hands of Alexander; and from the Bounty of the Victor forthwith receiv'd it back again; and there∣upon he nobly feasted Alexander and all his Army for several Days together. And after many rich Presents made to him, he presented him with an hundred and fifty Dogs of a wonderful Strength and Bigness, and of other most remarkable Properties. It was said Indian Dogs. they were brought forth by Tygars, who had coupled with Dogs. Alexander minding by an Experiment to try their Strength and Courage, caus'd an exceeding great Lion to be brought into the Circus, and then loos'd at him two of the weakest of the Dogs; which Ant. Ch. 325. proving too weak, he let go other two. The Lion being now surrounded by four, and over-power'd, Sophithes sent one with a Sword, who began to cut off the right Thigh of one of the Dogs: Upon which, the King call'd out, and thereupon the Squires of his Body ran to the Indian, and held his Hand: But Sophithes wish'd 'em to let him alone, and promis'd to give three for that one. The Huntsman theresore laid hold again on the Dog's Thigh, and cut it off by little and little; and all that while the Dog neither how'd nor made the least noise; but held fast his Hold till he fell down dead upon the Lion. In the mean time Hephestion From his fol∣lowing Porus the Nephew of Porus. return'd with those Troops before sent along with him, having subdu'd a great part of India where-ever he came, and was hereupon honour'd by the King with all deserv'd Praises. Next Alexander march'd into the Kingdom of Phigeus, where all the Macedonians were welcom'd by the Inhabitants, and Phigeus himself meeting him with Gifts and Presents, Phigeus. willing to receive from him his Kingdom as a Gift of his Bounty; which Alexander accor∣dingly restor'd to him: And both he and his Army being entertain'd by Phigeus for two days, he then mov'd forward to the River Hyphasis, which is seven Furlongs over, and six Hyphasis Ri∣ver. Ant. Ch. 325. Fathoms deep, of a very fierce Stream, and difficult to pass. He had learn'd from Phigeus, that beyond Indus there was a vast Desart of twelve Days Journey; and at the farthest Borders thereof ran the Ganges Two and twenty Furlongs broad, and the deepest of all the Rivers in India: And that beyond this River, there dwelt the Tabresians, the Ganda∣rides, Xandrames his Force, King of the Ganda∣rides. whose King's Name was Xandrames, who had an Army of Twenty thousand Horse, and Two hundred thousand Foot, Two thousand Chariots, and Foursand Elephants. The King could not believe this to be true, and therefore sent for Porus, and enquir'd of him whether it were so or not. He told him all was certainly true; but that the present King of the Gandarides was but of a mean and obscure Extract, accounted to be a Bar∣ber's Son. For his Father being a very beautiful and handsome Man, the Queen fell in love with him, and then murther'd her Husband; and so the Kingdom devolv'd upon the present King.
Alexander however, though he perceiv'd that the Expedition against the Gandarides would be very difficult; yet through a desire he still had to gain further Glory, would not wave it; but confiding in the Valour of the Macedonians, and the Answers he had receiv'd from the Oracles, hop'd to conquer all the Barbarians where-ever he went: For he re∣membred that at Delphos he was call'd by the Oracle Invincible, and that the Empire of the whole World was promis'd to him by Jupiter Hammon. But discerning that his Soldiers were even tired out with continual Marches (for they had now toil'd themselves with ex∣tream Hazards for Eight Years together) he judg'd it necessary to make a Speech to his Army, to perswade them to undertake with him this Expedition against the Gandarides. For now he had lost many Soldiers, and no hopes or prospect remain'd of ending the War: Nay, their very Horse-Hoofs were worn away by their continual Marches, and many of their Arms wasted and become useless. And besides, all their Grecian Habits and Ant. Ch. 325. Clothes were worn out, and they were forc'd to make use of the Barbarians Stuff, and cut the Indian Plads in pieces to make themselves Clothes. And it happen'd likewise a∣bout that time, that there pour'd down from Heaven fearful Storms The Rains call d the Mes∣soones in In∣dia. of Rain, with ter∣rible Thunder and Lightning, which continu'd for seventy Days together. All which, though they happen'd cross to his Designs, as he conceiv'd, yet he judg'd there was one way still left for him to accomplish what he so much desir'd, and that was by Bounty and Liberality to gain the Hearts of his Soldiers. To that end he gave free liberty to the Soldiers to ravage and plunder all over the Enemies Country, which was rich and aboun∣ding in all good Things. While the Army was thus employ'd in spoiling and plundering, he call'd together the Soldiers Wives and all their Children; and among the Wives he order'd Corn to be distributed every Month; and commanded so much Money to be paid to the Children, as their Fathers Pay amounted unto. When the Soldiers return'd to the Camp, loaded with abundance of rich Prey, he call'd them all together, and there made a handsom study'd Speech to them, to persuade them to march along with him against the Ganda∣rides; but being not able upon any Terms to prevail with the Macedonians, he left off that Design. And now determining there to put an end to all his Expeditions, in the first The Macedo∣nians refuse to march against the Gandari∣des. place he erected Twelve Altars to the Twelve Gods, every one fifty Cubits high. Then he drew a Trench round his Camp thrice as large as the former, and made it fifty Foot broad, and forty deep; and by the Earth out of the Trench, cast up a strong Mud-wall on the inner side. He commanded likewise every Foot-Soldier to provide two Beds in his Tent of five Cubits high; and every Horse-man (besides two Beds of the same quantity) to make Mangers twice as big as any other; and that every thing they left behind them should be enlarg'd to the same proportion. And this he did partly to leave behind him Monuments of his Heroick Actions, and partly to make the World believe, that those with him were Men of mighty Stature, and stronger than any other. When this was done, he march'd back with all the Army the same way he came to the River Acisines, where he found some Ships in building, which he order'd to be perfected, and River Acisi∣nes. built several others. About that time came to him Supplies out of Greece, both of Auxiliaries and Mercenaries, to the number of about Thirty thousand Foot, and almost Six thousand Horse. There were likewise brought to him at the same time Arms for Five and twenty thousand Men most curiously wrought, and an hundred Talents weight of all sorts of Medicines and Physical Preparations; and all these he distributed amongst the Soldiers. His Ships now with all their Tackle and Furniture were compleatly Rigg'd, of which there were Ant. Ch. 325. Two hundred open Vessels, and Eight hundred Transport-Ships for all manner of Ser∣vice. The two Cities he had built near the River, the one he call'd Nicea, from a Victory The Cities built at the River Ascisines, Nicea, Bucephalis. there gain'd, and the other Bucephalis, from his Horse that was there kill'd in the Battel against Porus. Then he, together with his Friends, went aboard, and sail'd down the River, with an intent to fall down to the Southern Ocean; but a great part of the Army march'd along the River's Bank, under the Command of Craterus and Hephestion. He came now to that Hydaspes and Acisines Ri∣vers meet. Ibori. place where the River Hydaspes and Ascisines meet together. Here he landed his Sol∣diers, and march'd to the Borders of the Ibori; these are said to be descended from them who besieg'd the Rock Aornon with Hercules; and after that they were defeated in that Design, were planted in this Country by that Hero. Here he encamp'd near an emi∣nent City of greatest Command in those parts: The Citizens went out to the King, and were admitted to converse with him; and there they renew'd the Memory of their an∣cient Kindred, and promis'd to perform all Offices of Respect and Kindness, as became so near Relations; and seal'd and confirm'd what they said with extraordinary rich Pre∣sents.
The King receiv'd them very graciously, and in return freed all their Cities to govern according to their own Laws. Thence he mov'd towards the bordering Nations, amongst whom he found the Aga∣lassians had rais'd an Army of Forty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse: Alexan∣der  Aga∣lassians. fought 'em, and routed 'em; many were kill'd upon the spot, and the rest fled into Holes and Dens, and the neighbouring Towns and Villages; which being afterwards taken, they were all sold for Slaves. There were 20000 of the rest of the Inhabitants that got together for shelter into a great City, which he took by Storm; though the Indians blocking up all the strait Passages, fought resolutely from the Tops of their Houses, and kill'd multitudes of the Macedonians, which put him into such a Rage, as that he set the Town on fire, and burnt most of them in it; so that only Three thousand remain'd, who Ant. Ch. 325. fled into the Castle, and su'd for Pardon, and had it. Then he with his Friends went on board again, and sail'd down the River to the place where the two Hydaspes and Acisines. Rivers (as was said before) and likewise Indus, now met together. But these great Rivers rushing in one upon another in one and the same place, there were most terrible Whirlpools, where the Ships that fell into them were so whirl'd about, that there they perish'd. And the Stream was so fierce and violent, that no Pilot could govern their Ships; so that two long Ships were sunk, and many of the rest driven upon the Shoar. The King's Ship was likewise catch'd in a Whirlpool, and he himself now Alexander in danger by Whirlpools. in the utmost Extremity and Danger of losing his Life; which he perceiving, stript him∣self naked, and prepar'd for the last Remedy. Whereupon his Friends came round the Ship, endeavouring with all their Might to take in the King, in case his Ship pérish'd. A great Hurry and Confusion there was, while the Men strove with the Violence of the Waves, but the River overmatch'd both their Strength and Skill. Yet the King with great difficulty by the help of the Ships was at length brought to land. Being thus unex∣pectedly preserv'd, he sacrific'd to the Gods for his Deliverance, and that he had, like another Achilles, conquer'd the River it self. Thence he march'd against the Oxydracons and Mallians. Syracusians in the Greek, mistaken for Oxydracans. Ant. Ch. 325. Oxydra∣cans and Mallians, populous and warlike Nations of India, whom he found ready prepar'd with an Army of above Fourscore thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse, and Seven hundred Chariots. These People were at War amongst themselves, before the King came amongst them; but being terrify'd at his approach, they were forc'd to agree and confederate against him. And in Confirmation of their League, they mutually dispos'd of Ten thousand Virgins in Marriage, and thereby entred into Affinity one with ano∣ther. However, they came not against him with their Armies into the Field, but after∣wards fell at variance one with another concerning the Chief Command, and slipt away here and there into the Neighbouring Cities. Alexander approaching to the Capital Of the Oxy∣dracans. Vid. Appian. lib. 2. Bell. Civil. latter end: And Cur∣tius,  9 sect. 5 City, design'd without any further delay to assault it: But one Demophoon a Soothsayer, dis∣swaded the King from his Purpose, alledging, That by certain Signs and Prodigies (by him observ'd) were portended, that the King would be in extream danger by a Wound receiv'd in this Siege; and therefore intreated him that he would wave this Town, and apply himself to some other Affair. Upon this, the King was very angry, because he dis∣courag'd the Soldiers; therefore preparing all things necessary for an Assault, he himself led up his Men to the Walls, with an undaunted Spirit, eager to gain the Place by force. His Men being slow in fixing the Engines (as he thought) he was the first that broke through the Gate into the City, upon which many were hewn down, and the rest fled, whom he pursu'd to the very Castle. And because the Macedonians came not on so roundly to make the Assault as he expected, he took a Scaling-Ladder himself, and set it to the Castle-Wall, and holding his Buckler over his Head, mounted the Ladder; and was so quick, that before they within could force him back, he had gain'd the Top of the Ant. Ch. 325. Wall. None of the Indians durst engage him hand to hand; but they so ply'd him with Darts and Arrows at a distance that he was overprest. In the mean time, the Macedonians had apply'd two Scaling-Ladders; but two many thronging up at once, the Ladders broke, and down they all fell to the Ground. The King being then left without all hope of Relief, was so desperate, as that he did that which is worth special remark, and almost incredible: For looking upon it as a diminu∣tion of his Glory to make back down amongst his own Soldiers, he leapt off the Wall with his Arms in his hand into the Castle-Yard rather. The King leaps into a  himself. Town. Then the Indians came rushing upon him in droves, and he receiv'd their Assault with great Resolution: For having a Tree which grew near to the Wall on his right hand, and the Wall on his left, he more easily defen∣ded himself, standing his ground with that Courage and Resolution as became a King that had perform'd such Noble Acts, coveting to end his Days by a glorious and honou∣rable Death. Having now receiv'd many Cuts upon his Helmet, and as many on his
Sheld: At length he receiv'd so grievous a Wound under one of his Paps, that it brought him down upon his Knees. Upon which, the Indian that wounded him ran (heedlesly) upon him to give him another Blow; but the King thrust his Sword through his Body, and there he fell down dead. Then raising himself up by the help of a Bough of the Tree, he challeng'd any of the Indians that had a mind to fight with him. And now came in to his relief Peucestes, one of his Guard, being one of the first that by other Ladders had scal'd the Wall, and after him came several others; so Ant. Ch. 325. that the Barbarians being now in a fright, Alexander was at length preserv'd and re∣scu'd. The City being thus taken, the Macedonians (being enrag'd upon the account of the King) put all the Men they sound to the Sword, and fill'd every place with dead Car∣casses. In the mean time, while the King lay ill of his Wound, the Grecians that were distri∣buted into several Colonies throughout Bactria and Sogdiana (having for a considerable Grecians in Bactria rebell. time before grudg'd their Plantations amongst the Barbarians, and now encourag'd upon the Report that Alexander was dead of his Wound) rebell'd against the Macedonians, and got together to the number of about Three thousand, and endeavour'd with all their Might to return into their own Country; but were every Man cut off, after the Death of Alexander. The King, after he was recover'd of his Wound, appointed a solemn Sacrifice to the Gods, in order to give Thanks for his Recovery, and sumptuously feasted all his Friends. In his Feasting and Drinking there happen'd a Passage very remarkable, and fit to be taken notice of: Amongst other Friends, there was one Coragus a Macedonian invited, a strong body'd Man, and one that had often behav'd himself with great Gallantry in se∣veral Encounters. This Man in his Cups challeng'd one Dioxippus an Athenian to fight a Duel between Coragus and Dioxippus. See Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 35. c. 11. Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 10. c. 22. l. 12. c. 58. Ant. Ch. 325. Duel; who was a Champion, and had won many Noble Prizes and Victories. The matter was push'd on forward by the Guests, as is usual at such times. Dioxippus accepted the Challenge, and the King appointed the Day. As soon as it was day, many thousands of People slock'd together to see the Combat. The King, with his Macedonians, favour'd Coragus; the Grecians. wish'd well to Dioxippus. The Macedonian came into the List neatly accoutred, glittering in his Arms. The Athe∣nian presented himself stark naked all over anointed with Oil, with a Cap upon his Head. Their Persons were both so admirable for Strength of Body, and Presence of Mind, that it seem'd as if two of the Gods were to fight a Duel: For the Macedonian for his Stature and Brightness of his Arms, look'd like Mars. Dioxippus (besides his being the stronger Man) in his carrying of a great Club, and Activity in Feats of Arms, resembled Hercules. And now both advanc'd one towards another: The Macedonian, when he came near, cast his Javelin at Dioxippus, which he declin'd by a little motion of his Body. Then Coragus presently made at him with his Macedonian Pike. Sarissa, which the other (advancing forward) broke in pieces with his Truncheon. The Macedonian thus twice defeated, betook to his Sword; but while he was drawing it, his Adversary made a Sally up to him, and prevented him; catching hold on his Arm with his left hand, and gave him such a Blow with the other, as that he laid him at his feet. When he had him upon the Ground, he set his Foot upon his Neck, and lifting up himself, he turn'd about to the Spectators: Upon which, all the People set up a great Shout, in admiration of what was done, and at the Strength and Valour of the Man. But the King order'd him that was foil'd to be let go, and then Broke up the Assembly; and departed, not very well pleas'd at the Misfortune of his Country-man. But Doxippus having now discharg'd his Adversary, went off the Ground, and for his famous and remarkable Victory, his Country-men set a Coronet upon his Head, as One that had advanc'd the Honour and Reputation of the Grecians. But Fortune suffer'd not the Man to rejoice long in his Victory; for the King ever after bore a Grudge to him, and the King's Friends and all the Courtiers envy'd him: Therefore they persuaded one that waited at the Table, to put a golden Cup under his Cushion; and in the middle of the Feast a Complaint was made that the Cup was stollen; whereupon search was made, and the Cup pretended to be found with Dioxippus: By which he was greatly disgrac'd, and put out of Countenance: And seeing the Macedonians came locking about him, he Ant. Ch. 325. arose from the Table, and left the place, and went to his Lodging. But shortly after, he wrote a Letter to Alexander, complaining of the foul Contrivances of his Enemies against him; and after he had deliver'd it to his Servants, to be handed carefully to the King, he Dioxippus murthers him∣self. murder'd himself.
It was certainly an imprudent Act in him to fight with a Macedonian, but far more Folly in him to destroy himself: Therefore many who blam'd him for this piece of Madness, added this to his further Disgrace: That a great Body and a great Wit seldom meet together. When the King read the Letter, he was exceedingly troubled at his Death, and would often commend him for his Valour: And he who undervalu'd him when he was alive, now in vain wish'd for him when he was dead; and came perfectly to understand the Ho∣nesty of the Man, by the Knavery of his Accusers and Slanderers. And now the King order'd his Army to march along the Bank of the Indus. River, over a∣gainst his Fleet, and began again to sail down into the Ocean, and in his Passage arriv'd at the Country of the Sambestans. These People for Number and Courage are nothing Sambestan. Curtius, lib. 9. c. 15. inferior to any of the Indians, and their Cities are Democratical in their Government. Having intelligence of the approach of the Macedonians, they brought into the Field Threescore thousand Foot, Six thousand Horse, and Five hundred Chariots. But when the Fleet drew near, they were so terrify'd with the strangeness of the Sight, and the Fame and Glory of the Macedonians which was nois'd abroad in all Places, that the Old Ant. Ch. 325. Men among them dissuaded them from vent'ring a Battel; whereupon they sent Fifty of the best Quaity, as Ambassadors to Alexander to pray his Favour. The King (upon the Address made to him) granted them Peace as they desir'd, and receiv'd large and ho∣nourable Presents (becoming a Demy-god) from the Inhabitants. Then he receiv'd the Submission of the Sodrans and Massanians, who border'd on both sides the River. Here Sodians, Mas∣sanians. Alexander built another City call'd Alexandria, near the On the Bank of the River Indus. River, and furnish'd it with a Thousand Inhabitants. Afterwards he arriv'd at the Kingdom of Musicanus Strabo lib. 15. p. 694. 701. says he submit∣ted, where see much more, but after revolted and Crucify'd. Musicanus, whom he took and kill'd, and subdu'd his Country. Then he came to the This Territo∣ry belongs to the Bastans. See Strabo, b. Sambus. Territory of Portica∣nus, and took two Cities upon the first Assault, and gave the Spoil of them to his Soldiers, and then burnt them. Porticanus who had fled for shelter into the Castle, was kill'd fight∣ing in his own Defence. Then he took all the Cities within his Dominion by Assault; and raz'd them to the Ground, which struck a great Terror into the Neighbouring In∣habitants. Next he wasted the The Country of the Brach∣mans who had revolted after Submission. Se Curtius, Lib. 9 Territories of Sambus, razing many of the Cities, and selling the Citizens for Slaves, and put to the Sword above Fourscore thousand Barbarians. These were the Plagues the Brachmans suffer'd. All the rest who submitted (except such as were the Authors and Ring-leaders of the Defection) he Pardon'd. In the mean time, King Sambus got away with Thirty Elephants, into the furthest Parts beyond the River Indus, and so escap'd. Amongst the Brachmans the last City attempted was Harmatelia. See Strabo. Lib. 15. p. 723. Ant. Ch. 325. Harmatelia, which greatly con∣fided in the Valour of its Inhabitants, and the Strength of its Situation. Here the King commanded some few of his Party to go up near to the Place, and provoke the Citizens to fall upon them, and then to make as if they fled; thereupon Five hundred approach'd to the very Walls, who for their inconsiderable Number were contemn'd by the Enemy: Three thousand therefore made a Sally out of the Town upon them; whhreupon they took to their Heels as if they had been in a great Fright. But the King with some few of his Troops, fell upon the Backs of the Pursuers, upon which there was a smart Engage∣ment, and many of the Barbarians were kill'd and taken. But a great number of those that were kill'd and wounded on the King's side, were in a desperate Condition; for the Barbarians had poyson'd the Heads of their Weapons with a deadly Poyson, which made Poyson'd Wea∣pons. them more Courageous and forward to Engage with the King. This strong Poyson is made of certain Serpents taken by Hunting, which after they are kill'd, they lay out and expose to the Heat of the Sun; where the Heat does so fry their Flesh as if it were melt∣ing away, from which distills a sweaty Moisture, wherein the Poyson of the Beast is con∣vey'd, and may be discern'd. The Working of this Poyson is such, that a Benumm'dness and Stupidity presently seizes upon the Body of him that is wounded; and in a short time after follows most tormenting Pains, Convulsions and Trembling, wrecking every Member of the Body. The Skin grows excessive Cold and Black, and the Party vo∣mits black Choler: Moreover, a black frothy Matter flows from the Wound, which causes Putrefaction, and presently spreads all over the principal Parts of the Body, and so the Party dies in a most Miserable manner. And hence it was, that he that was never so Ant. Ch 32. slightly touch'd, was as much tormented, as he that had the greatest Wounds. After all that were thus wounded were dead, the King griev'd for none so much, as he did for the Misfortune of Ptolemy (who Reign'd afterwards) and whom at that time he dearly lov'd. There happen'd at this time something extraordinary remarkable in reference to Ptolemy, which some ascribe to the special Providence of God. He was a Man that was belov'd of all, both for his Valour and his wonderful obliging Carriage to every one, and therefore met with a Cureworthy . his kind and gracious Disposition. The King dreamt
that he saw a Serpent with an Herb in his Mouth, which told him the Nature and Efficacy The King's Dream. of the Plant, and where it grew: When he awoke, he presently search'd for the Herb and found it, and when he had bruis'd it made a Pultice of it, and apply'd it to Ptolemy's Body, and gave him a Potion of the Juice of the Plant, and so restor'd him to perfect Health. Others also, when they came to know the Sovereign Use of the Herb, were cur'd by the same means. But when Alexander now began to apply himself to the Siege of Harmotelia, a strong and well fenc'd City, the Inhabitants came all forth to him and begg'd his Pardon, and deliver'd up themselves and their City into his Hands, and so escap'd Punishment. Then sailing with his familiar Friends into the Main Ocean, he found two Islands, where he offer'd most magnificent Sacrifices, and threw many Golden Cups of a great Value, together with the Drink-Offerings into the Sea. At length, having rear'd up Al∣tars to the Honour of Tethys and Oceanus, (supposing now he had finish'd the Voyage he intended) he return'd with the Fleet up his Indus. River, and arriv'd at the famous City City Hyala, at the Mouth of the River In∣dus. Ant. Ch. 325. Hyala. This City is under the same form of Government with that of Lacedaemon: For there were two Kings of two several Families, succeeding in a time, who had the Management and Administration of their Wars. But the chief Authority in Civil Affairs resided in the Senate. Here Alexander burnt all the Ships that were Leaky and Defective, and deliver'd the rest of his Fleet into the Hands of This Naviga∣tion describ'd by Arrian, lib. 6 p. 143. and Pliny Nat. Hist. lib. 6 c 23 They set forth from the Island Pa∣talene, and Ci∣ty Xunilopo∣lis, as by Ar∣rian. Lib. 6. cap. 23. Vid. Ush. Ann. 266. and 269. Nearchus and some other of his Friends, with a Command to sail all along the Sea-coast, and diligently observe every Place, till they came to the Entrance into the River Euphrates. He himself rais'd his Camp, and march'd a long way into the Country, subduing all that oppos'd him, and using them kindly that submitted to him: For the Inhabitants of Abitra and Gedrosia he brought to Submission, without any Hazard or Difficulty. Afterwards, marching through many Tracts of Land destitute of Water, and as many Desarts, he came to the Borders of Neoridis. There he divided his Army into three Bri∣gades; the one he gave to Ptolemy, the other to Leonatus; the former he comanded to harrass the Sea Coasts, and the other the Midland and Champian part of the Country. He himself wasted and spoiled the Hill Country and Mountanous Parts, and the Places thereunto adjoyning: So that many Countries being Invaded all at one and the same time all Places were fill'd with Rapine, Fire, and Sword; whence the Soldiers were loaded with rich Booty, and many Thousands perish'd by the Sword. The bordering Nations being terrify'd by this Destruction of People, all deliver'd themselves up into the Power of the King In Rambacia.. Here the King having a desire to build a City near to the Sea, and having found a safe Harbour, and a convenient Place near to it, built one accordingly, and call'd it Alexandria. Then he entred through ways made Alexandria in India built. by his Pioneers, into the Country of the Oritans. Neoritans, and presently forc'd them all to submit. These People are like all the rest of the Indians, both for Laws and Manners, except in one thing, which is almost Incredible: For the Kindred and Relations of those that Ant. Ch. 325. are Dead (all stark Naked with their Lances in their Hands) carry forth the Dead Bo∣dies Burials of the Neoritans. into some Wood or other belonging to the Country, and there strip the Dead of all his burying Clothes and other Ornaments, and leave the Body to be Food for the Wild Beasts: Then they divide his Garments, and Sacrifice to the Subterraneous Heroes, and Feast all their Friends. Alexander afterwards marched into Gedrosia, all along the Sea Coast, and came at length among a most rude and savage People. From their very Birth to their old Age they ne∣ver Marches into Gedrosia. cut their Nails, but suffer them still to grow; and the Hair of their Heads all grow in Locks, never comb'd out. They're of a swarthy Complexion, (through the parching Heat of the Sun) and cloath themselves with the Skins of Wild Beasts. They feed upon the Flesh of Whales cast up by the Sea. In building of their Houses and Cottages, they raise up their Walls as is usual, but the Roofs are laid with the Rib-bones of Whales, of which they have Summers and Beams eighteen Cubits in length, and for Tiles they use the Whales Scales. When Alexander with great Toil had march'd through this Country, he came into a Alexander's Army near Pe∣rishing in Ge∣drosia. desolate Wilderness, where nothing at all was to be had for the support of Man's Life. So that many dying for want of Food, the whole Army was not only altogether discourag'd, but the King himself was then over-whelm'd with unusual Sorrow and Anxiety of Mind: For he look'd upon it as a most Miserable thing that those who by the Valour of their Arms, had conquer'd all where ever they came, should now ingloriously Perish for want Ant. Ch. 325. of Bread in a Barren Wilderness. Therefore he sent away the swiftest Courriers he could find into Parthia, Drangina, Aria, and other bordering Countries, with order, that with all
speed they should meet him upon the Border of Carmania, with Dromedary Camels, and other Beasts of Burden, loaden with Bread, and all other necessary Provisions; who hasted away as they were commanded, and procur'd the Governors of the Provinces to dispatch abundance of Provision to the Place appointed. By this extream Scarcity Alexander lost many of his Men, and this was the first Mischief he met with in this Expedition. After∣wards, as they were marching, some of the Mountaineers fell upon Leonatus his Squadron and cut off many of them, and then made back to their Countrymen, and this was ano∣ther Loss. When they had at length, with very great Difficulties and Hardships past through this Desart, they came into a Rich and Populous Country In Carmania Vid. Curtius, Lib. 9. ad fi∣nm.; Here he randezvous'd his whole Army, and after they had refresh'd themselves celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, and dress'd up to make a shew like a Pageant, he led the Darice before his Army (who march'd like∣wise in great Pomp and State) for the space of Seven days together, spending all that time in Revelling and Drunkenness all along the way as he went. When this was over, hearing that many of his Officers and Governors of Provinces had The King pu∣nishes the Go∣vernors of Pro∣vinces. Ant. Ch. 325. abus'd their Power, to the Oppression and Injury of many, he punish'd them according to their Demerits. Which Severity of the King's being spread abroad, many who were conscious of being guilty of the same Crimes, began to fear the same Punishment, and therefore some who commanded the Mercenaries, made a Defection; others pick'd up what Moneys they could, and fled: Of which the King receiving intelligence, he writ to all the Governors and Lord-Lieutenants of Asia, that as soon as they had read his Let∣ters they should without further delay disband all the Mercenaries. About the same time, while the King was at Salmuntes in Harmozia, now Ormus in the Gulf of Persia. Nearchus re∣turns. Salmuntes, a Sea port Town, busie in making Stage Plays: Those who were sent to examine all the Sea Coasts, arriv'd with the Fleet, who forthwith went into the Theatre and address'd themselves to the King; and after they had made their Obeysance, they acquainted him with what they had done. The Macedonians so rejoic'd at their Return, that as a Testimony of their joy they set up a great Acclamation, and fill'd the whole Theatre with Exultations. Those that return'd from the Voyage, told him, There were wonderful Tides of Ebbing and Flowing in the Ocean, and that at low Water in the furthest Parts of the Sea Coasts there appear'd very Islands over-flow'd. many great Islands, which at the return of the Tide are all again laid under Water, while a most Fierce and violent Wind comes off from them to the Continent, and causes the Water to be all over on a Foam: And as the greatest Wonder of all, they declar'd they met with Whales of an incredible Magnitude; which at the first so terrify'd them, that Whales. they look'd upon themselves as lost, and that they and all their Ships must in a Moment pe∣rish together: But all of them at once setting up a great shout, and making a Noise by striking upon their Arms, and sounding of Trumpets, the monstrous Creatures were so terrify'd with a thing so unusual, that they made to the Bottom of the Deep. After the King had heard the Relation, he order'd the Sea Officers to sail with the Ant. Ch. 325. Fleet to Euphrates, And he himself in the mean time, marching through many Coun∣tries with his Army, came at last to the Borders of Susiana. At which time Calanus, an Indian, a great Philosopher, and much honour'd by the King, ended his days in a won∣derful manner. Having now liv'd to be Seventy three years old; and during all that The strange Death of Cala∣nus. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 5. c. 6. Plut. in Alexander. time never knew what Sickness or the least Distemper meant, he purpos'd to put an end to his own Life; supposing that now both Nature and Fortune had brought him to the utmost Bounds of his Felicity and well-being in the World. Being seiz'd upon therefore with Sickness, which grew upon him more and more every day, he desir'd the King that he would order a great Funeral Pile to be made, and that when he had plac'd himself upon it, some of his Servants should set it on fire. The King at first endeavour'd to dis∣suade him from this Purpose; but when he saw he would not be mov'd, he promis'd it should be done as he had desir'd. The thing presently spread abroad, and when the Pile was finish'd, multitudes of Peo∣ple flock'd to see this strange Sight: And there Calanus (according to the Rules and Di∣ctates of his own Opinion) with great Courage ascended the Pile, and both he and it were consum'd together. Some that were present judg'd this Act to be an effect of Madness, others nothing else but a piece of Vain-glory: Though some there were that admir'd his Noble Spirit, and Contempt of Death; And the King caus'd him to be honourably bury'd. When Alexander came to Susa, he marry'd Statira, Darius his Eldest Daughter. Dry∣petis, the Younger, he marry'd to Hephestion: He gave also Wives to the Chiefest of his Friends, and marry'd them to the Noblest Ladies of Persia.
About this time Thirty thousand Persians (very Proper and handsom young Men, and Thirty thousand Persians brought to A∣lexander. of strong Bodies) came to Susa. These, according to the King's Command, had for some considerable time been getting together, and had been train'd up by their Tutors and Governors in Martial Discipline; and all of them compleatly furnish'd with Macedo∣nian Arms encamp'd before the City; where they Train'd and Exercis'd before the King, and approv'd themselves so expert in the Management and Handling of their Arms, that they were honour'd by him with large and rich Gifts. For because the Macedonians re∣fus'd to pass over the River Ganges, and in the common Assembly would many times with a great Bawling and Noise oppose the King, and mock at his Descent from Ham∣mon, he got this Body of Persians (who were all about the same Age) to be as a Curb upon the Macedonian Phalanx. Brigade. And these were the things wherein Alexander employ'd himself at that time. During this Indian Expedition, Harpalus, who was made by Alexander Lord High-Trea∣surer of Babylon, almost as soon as the King, had begun his march (hoping he would ne∣ver return) gave up himself to all manner of Luxury and Excess: For he was Governor Harpalus his Luxury. of a very large Province. In the first place, he follow'd a lewd Course of Forcing and Ravishing of Women, and committing all sorts of abominable Acts of Uncleanness with the Barbarians, by which Luxurious pranks of Wickedness he wasted the Treasure com∣mitted to his Charge. He order'd great multitudes of Fish to be brought to him from far Countries, as far as from the * Red Sea: And was so profuse in his daily Provisions for his The Red Sea. Table, that all cry'd shame of him, and none gave him a good Word. He sent like∣wise for a famous Strumpet from Athens, call'd Pythonices, to whom he gave most Princely Gifts whilst she liv'd, and buried her with as much state when she was dead, and built for her a most magnificent Monument in Athens. After her death he sent for another Curtesan out of Attica, call'd Glycera, with whom he liv'd at such a height of Voluptuousness and Expence, as exceeded all bounds: But that he might have a Refuge to fly unto, in case of the cross and destructive Blasts of For∣tune, he made it his business chiefly to oblige the Athenians. And therefore when Alex∣ander return'd from his Indian Expedition, and had cut off the Heads of many of the Pro∣vincial Governors for their Male-administrations; Harpalus fearing the same Punishment, bagg'd up Five thousand Talents of Silver, and rais'd Six thousand Mercenary Soldiers, and so left Asia and sail'd for Attica. But when he perceiv'd none were forward to come in to him, he left his Soldiers at Tenarus in Laconia, and taking part of the Money with him fled to the Athenians for Protection: But being demanded to be be deliver'd up by Letters from Antipater and Olympias, (having first distributed large Rewards amongst the Orators that had pleaded for him, and manag'd his concern with the Athenians) he with∣drew himself and fled to his Soldiers at Tenarus. Thence he sail'd to Creet, and there was Murther'd by Thimbro, one of his Friends. The Athenians likewise (examining the matter concerning the Money given by Har∣palus) condemn'd Demosthenes, and several other Orators, for being corrupted by him with Bribes. About this time, Alexander, at the Celebration of the Olympick Games, caus'd pub∣lick Proclamation to be made by an Herald, That all Exiles (except Robbers of Temples and Murderers) should return to their several Countries: And he himself pick'd out Ten thousand of the Oldest Soldiers in his Army, and discharg'd them from further Service; and being inform'd that many of them were in debt, he paid the whole in one Day, to the value of no less then Ten thousand Talents. The rest of the Macedonians carrying themselves with great Malepartness towards him, and in a General Assembly with Bawl∣ing and Noise contradicting him, he was so enrag'd and sharp in his returns upon them, that they were all put into a great Fright; and in that Rage was so daring, that he leap'd down from the Tribunal, and seiz'd upon some of the Ring leaders of the Mutiny with his own hands, and deliver'd them to the Our Sheriffs. Lictors to be Executed. At length, when he saw that the Disorders and Mutiny still encreas'd, he made such of the Persians Officers as he thought fit, and preferr'd them to the chiefest Commands. Upon which, the Macedoni∣ans recollected themselves, and had much ado to regain Alexander's favour, though they address'd themselves to him both with Petitions and Tears.
CHAP. XI. Alexander mixes Twenty thousand Persian Darters with his Army. Marches from Susa. Bagistames breeds abundance of Horses. Hephestion dies at Ecbatane. The Lamian War. He invades the Cosseans. Marches towards Babylon. The Caldean Astrologers dissuade him from coming thither. He enters Babylon. AFterwards when Anticles was chief Magistrate of Athens, and Lucius Cornelius and Olym. 113. 3. Ant. Ch. 324. An. M. 3624 Quintius Publius were Consuls at Rome, Alexander supply'd the Room of those he had discharg'd with Persians, and chose a Thousand of them to be Squires of the Body, conceiving he might altogether as safely trust them as the Macedonians. About this time Peucestes came with Twenty thousand Persian Darters and Slingers, these Alexander intermix'd amongst his other Soldiers, by which means the whole Army was brought into that due Constitution, as that they were readily obedient to his Command. There were some of the Macedonians that had Sons by the Captives, whom upon diligent Enquiry he found to be Ten thousand, and appointed them Masters to instruct them in all sorts of Learning, and allow'd sufficient Stipends for their Liberal Education. Then he Rendevouz'd his Army, and march'd away from Susa, and passing the River Marches from Susa. Tigris, came to the Villages call'd Carrae, and there encamp'd. Thence in Four Days March he pass'd through Sitta, and came to Sambea. Here he rested Seven Days, and refresh'd his Army. Thence in Three Days he march'd to the Towns call'd Celonae: In which Place the Posterity of the Boeotians settl'd themselves in the time of Xerxes his Expedition, and there remain unto this Day, having not altogether forgot the Laws of their Country: For they use a double Language, one learnt from the Natural Inhabitants, and in the other they preserve much of the Greek Tongue; and observe some of their Laws and Customs. Thence, when it grew towards Evening, he decamp'd, and turn'd aside and march'd to Bagistames to view the Country. This Country abounds in all Ant. Ch. 324. manner of Fruit-Trees, and whatever else conduces either to the Profit or Pleasure of Mankind; so as that it seems to be a Place of Delight both for Gods and Men. After∣wards he came into a Country that breeds and pastures an innumerable Company of Horses; for they say, That there had been here an Hundred and sixty thousand Horses that ran at Pasture up and down in the Country; but at the coming of Alexander there were only Sixty thousand. He encamp'd herefor the space of Thirty Days: Thence in seven Encampments he came to Echatana in Media. This City is About 30 Mile. Hephestion dies. Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 7. c. 8. Two hundred and Ecbatana. fifty Furlongs in compass, and is the Metropolis of all Media, where abundance of Trea∣sure was laid up. Here he staid some time, and refresh'd his Army, and spent his time in Feasting, Drinking, and Stage-Plays; at which time Hephestion (one that he lov'd above all others) fell sick of a Surfeit, and died: Whose death the King bore very grie∣vously, and committed his Body to Perdiccas to be carry'd to Babylon, because he inten∣ded to bury him with great Pomp and State. While these things were acting in Asia, Greece was full of Tumults and Seditions, whence broke out the War call'd the Lamian War, upon this occasion: After the King's Order The Lamian War. to the Lords Lieutenants of the Provinces to disband all Mercenary Soldiers, and the exe∣cution of those Commands, many Foreiguers that were cashier'd, went stragling over all Asia, and for want of Subsistence, robb'd and spoil'd the Country till they all came in∣to one Body, at Tenarus in Laconia: So likewise all the Governors and Commanders of the Persians that were left, got together what Men and Money they could, and came all to Tenarus, and there join'd their Forces together: There they created Leostenes an Athe∣nian Ant. Ch. 324. (a brave Spirited Man) General of the Army; who then call'd a Council of War; and after Consultation had concerning the Management of the War, dispos'd of Fifty Talents to pay the Mercenaries, and provided Arms sufficient for the present occasion. He sent likewise Ambassadors to the Aetolians (who were disaffected to the King) to join with them in Arms. And thus Leostenes was altogether taken up in necessary Prepara∣tions for a War, of the greatness of which, he had then a clear and evident Pro∣spect. Alexander now march'd against the Cosseans, who refus'd to submit to his Government. This People are a very Warlike Nation, and inhabit the hilly and mountainous Parts of The Cosseans invaded. Media; and therefore confiding in their own Valour, and the Fastnesses of their Coun-Country, never would be brought of admit to any foreign Prince to reign over them;
and were never subdu'd, during all the time of the Persian Empire. And at that time they were so very high, that they slighted the Valour of the Macedonians. The King first gain'd the Passes, and then wasted a great part of the Country of Cosea; and getting the better in every Engagement, kill'd many of the Barbarians, and took many more Prisoners. At length, the Cosseans being worsted and beaten in every place, and greatly concern'd at the multitude of the Captives, were forc'd to redeem their Country by the loss of their own Liberty; and so giving up themselves to the Will of the Conqueror, they obtain'd Peace, upon condition they should be Loyal and Obedient for the time to come. Thus Alexander conquer'd this Nation in the space of forty Days; and after he hadbuilt some Cities atthe most difficult Passes in the Country, he march'd away. Socicles was now Archon at Athens, and Cornelius Lentulus and Quintus Publius. Popilius Roman Consuls, when Alexander, after the Conquest of the Cosseans, march'd thence towards Ba∣bylon: Olymp. 113. 4. Ant. Ch. 233. An. M. 3625. He always rested a while between every Decampment; and to ease his Army, mov'd very slowly. When he was about Three hundred Furlongs from Babylon, the Caldean Priests. Marches to∣wards Baby∣lon. Caldean Astro∣logers. Caldeans (as they are call'd) who were famous for Astrology, and us'd to prognosti∣cate future Events by the Observation of the Stars (and by that means knew that the King would die presently after he enter'd into Babylon) pick'd out some of the most ancient and expert of those of their Profession, and order'd them to signifie the Danger to the King, and with all the Arguments they could use to dissuade him from entring into the City; and to let him know that he might avoid the Danger, if he would rebuild the Se∣pulchre of Belus, which the Persians had destroy'd, and alter his Purpose, and pass by the City. Belephentes was the leading Man of the Caldeans that were sent away; but he was afraid to address himself to the King, and therefore privately imparted all to Nearchus (one of the King's familiar Friends) and desir'd him that with all speed he would acquaint the King with the whole Business. Alexander was much concern'd when Nearchus told him what the Caldeans had prognosticated; and more and more considering and pondering in his Thoughts the Skill and Reputation of the Man, was in no small Consternation. At length he sent away many of his Friends to the City, but he himself turn'd aside another way, and pass'd by Babylon; and encamping Two hundred Furlongs distant from the place, he there rested. At this all were in admiration; whereupon many Philosophers came to him, Ant. Ch. 323 as well those that were Followers of Anaxagoras as other Grecians. When they came to understand the cause of his Fear, they earnestly oppos'd what was said, with many Phi∣losophical Arguments; by which he was so convinc'd and chang'd, that he contemn'd all sorts of Divination whatsoever, and especially that of the Caldeans, that was every where so famous. Therefore now, as if his Spirit before wounded had been cur'd by the Argu∣ments of Philosophers, he entred Babylon with his Army, where (as before) the Soldiers were kindly entertain'd by the Citizens; and the Plenty of Provision was such, that all Enters Baby∣lon. gave up themselves to Ease and Voluptuousness. And these were the things acted this Year. CHAP. XII. Ambassadors come to Alexander from all Parts. He buries Hephestion with great State. The Prodigies before Alexander's Death. His Death. Darius's Mother starves her self. AGesias was now Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Caius Poetelius and Lucius Papirius Olymp. 114. 1. Ant. Ch. 322. An. M. 3625. Ambassadors com to Ale∣xander from all parts. Th African ar at far as Cadi. Consuls at Rome, when the Hundred and fourteenth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Micinas of Rhodes was Victor. At this time Ambassadors came to Alexander almost from all Parts of the World; some to congratulate his Victories; others to tender him Crowns; others to make Leagues and Alliances with him; and many brought him very Rich and Noble Presents. And some there were that came to clear themselves from false Accusations: For besides those sent from the Cities, States, and Princes of Asia, many Ambassadors addrest themselves to the King from Europe and Africa. Out of Africa the Carthaginians and the Phoenicians of Lybia, and all bordering upon the Sea Coasts as far as
Hercules-Pillars. Out of Europe, the Grecian Cities: The Macedonians: The Illyrians; many inhabiting Adria: The Thracians; and the Galatians, a People that then first began to be known to the Grecians. These all sent their Ambassadors; of whom the King having a Catalogue in writing, he appointed in what Order they should be severally admitted to their Audience. And in the first place those were introduc'd that came about Matters of Religion; then those who brought Presents; next, they that were at variance with the People bordering upon them: Then those were admitted, in the fourth place, who came to treat upon Concerns relating to their own Country: And lastly, those whose Instru∣ctions were to oppose the Restauration of the Exiles. And among the Religious, he first The Banditti, or Oat-Laws. heard them of Elis; after them the Hammonians, Delphians, and Corinthians; the Epidau∣rians likewise, and others; giving to them the Preheminence out of Reverence and Ve∣neration to the Temples. He made it his great Business to return such grateful Answers to all the Ambassadors, as that he might gain the Good-will and Affection of every one of them. When all this was over, he apply'd himself to the celebrating the Funerals of Hephestion; Alexander prepares to bury Hephestion. and contriv'd (all that possibly he could) so far to grace it with Funeral Pomp, as that it should not only exceed all that were before it, but likewise that it should never be exceeded by any that was to come: For he most dearly lov'd him (as much as the dearest Friends that we have heard of ever lov'd one another) when he was alive, and honour'd him be∣yond compare when he was dead. He honour'd him more than any of his Friends Ant. Ch. 322. while he liv'd, altho' Craterus seem'd to vie with him for Alexander's Affection: For when one of the Servants said, that Craterus lov'd Alexander as well as Hephestion did; Alexander answer'd, That Craterus was the Or, the King was lov'd by Craterus, and Alexander by Hephestion. King's Friend, and Hephestion Alexander's. And at that time, when the Mother of Darius (through a mistake upon the first view of the King) prostrated her self at the Feet of Hephestion, and coming to discern her Errour, was much out of Countenance: Be not troubled, Mother (says Alexander) for even he is another Alexander. To conclude, Hephestion had such Interest in Alexander, and such free access and liberty of Converse, that when Olympias (who envy'd him) accus'd him and threatned him by her Letters, he writ to her back again with severe Checks; and added these Expressions: Forbear your Slanders against me, and bridle your Anger, and sur∣cease your Threats: But if you will not, I value them not of a pin; for you are not ignorant that Alexander must be Judge of all. The King therefore taken up with the Preparations for the Funeral, commanded the Hephestion's Funeral. Athenaeus, lib 10. c. 11. neighbouring Cities to assist as much as possibly they could towards its Pomp and Splen∣dor; and commanded all the People of Asia, that the Fire which the Persians call the Holy Fire should be put out, till the Exequies of this Funeral were fully finish'd, as was us'd to be done in the Funerals of the King's of Persia; which was taken to be an ill Omen to the King himself, and that the Gods did thereby portend his Death. There were like∣wise Ant. Ch. 322. other Prodigies happen'd that did clearly point out that Alexander's Life was near at an end; which we shall presently give an account of, when we have finish'd our Rela∣tion of the Funeral. In order to this Funeral, all his Chief Commanders and Noble∣men (in compliance to the King's Pleasure) made Medals of Hephestion graven in Ivory, and cast in Gold and other rich Metals. Alexander himself call'd together a great num∣ber of the most exquisit Workmen that could be had, and brake down the Wall of Babylon ten Furlongs in length, and took away the Brick of it; and then levelling the place where the Funeral Pile was to be rais'd, built thereon a Foursquare Pile, each Square taking a Furlong in length: The Platform he divided into Thirty Apartments, and cover'd the Rooss with the Trunks of Palm-Trees. The whole Structure represented a Quadrangle: Afterwards he beautify'd it round with curious Adornments: The lower part was fill'd up with Two hundred and forty Prowes of Gallies of five Tire of Oars burnish'd with Gold; upon whose Rafters stood two Darters, one on each side the Beaks, of four Cubits high, kneeling upon one Knee; and Statues of Men in Arms five Cubits high: All the Divisions and open Parts were vail'd with Hangings of Purple. That part next above this was set with Torches, of fifteen Cubits high, in the middle part of every one of which (where they were us'd to be held) were plac'd Crowns of Gold; at the top whence the Flame ascended, were fix'd Eagles with their Wings display'd, and their Heads stoop∣ing downwards. At the bottom of the Torches were Serpents, facing and looking up at the Eagles. In the third Range were expos'd all sorts of wild Beasts hunted: In the fourth Centaurs all in Gold combating one with another: The fifth presented alternately to the view Lions and Bulls in massie Gold. In that part above these were plac'd the Arms both of the Macedonians and Barbarians; the one signifying the Victories over the Con∣quer'd Nations, and the other the Valour of the Conqueror. In the highest and last part
of all, stood Sirenes, contriv'd hollow, wherein secretly were plac'd those who sang the Mourning Song to the Dead. The heighth of the whole Structure mounted up above a hundred and thirty Cubits. To conclude, both Commanders and Common Soldiers; Ambassadors and the natural Inhabitants, so strove to outvy one another in contributing to this stately Funeral, that the Charge and Cost amounted to above Twelve thousand Talents. And to grace it more, and make it more splendid, he conerr'd several other Honours upon these Exequies. At length he commanded all to sacrifice to him as a Tutelar God: For it hapned that Philip, one of his Nobility, at that time return'd from the Temple of Haminon, and brought word from the Oracle there, That Hephestion might be sacrific'd unto as a Demi-God: Whereat Alexander was wonderfully glad, hearing that the Oracle it self was an Approver of his Opinion; and thereupon he himself was the first that offer'd, sacrificing Ten thousand Beasts of all kinds, and making a magnificent Feast Ant. Ch. 322. for all the Multitude. When all the Solemnity was over, Alexander gave up himself to Ease and a Revelling Course of Life: And now when he seem'd to be at the Heighth of Worldly Greatness and Prosperity; that Time and Space of Life which he might have run through by the Course of Nature, was cut short by the Determination of Fate; and God himself, by many Signs and Prodigies shewn in several Places, foreshew'd his Death. For when he Prodigies efore Alexander's Death. was anointing himself, and his Royal Robes and Crown that while laid upon the Throne, the Fetters of one of the Natural Inhabitants, that was then in Chains, fell off, and un∣loos'd of their own accord, and the Person not being discern'd by any of the Watch, pass'd through the Court-Gates without any Opposition, and made streight to the Throne, and put on the Royal Robes and Crown upon his Head, and sate upon the Throne without any disturbance. Which Fact being nois'd abroad, the King was amaz'd at the strangeness of the Thing, and went to the place, and without any Rebuke, calmly ask'd the Man, Who he was, and who advis'd him to do so? Who plainly and simply answer'd, He knew nothing at all. This strange Accident was referr'd to the Con∣sideration of the Augurs; by whose Advice the poor Wretch was put to death, that the Evil portended (if any were) might fall upon his own Head. The King having now got his Robes again, sacrific'd to the Gods his Protectors: But however he continu'd much disturb'd and perplex'd in his Mind; and then began to re∣flect upon what the Caldeans had foretold; and fretted against those Philosophers that persuaded him to enter into Babylon; but admir'd the Art and profound Wisdom of the Ant. Ch. 322. Caldeans. To conclude, he curst those, who by subtil Arguments, had disputed against the Necessity of Fate. Not long after, God shew'd another Prodigy concerning the Change of the Kingdom: The King had a desire to see the This he had newly made. Haven at Babylon; and being come there, they went on board with some of his Nobles that attended him; and while they were sailing, the King's Ship was separated from the rest, and tossed to and fro for several Days together, so as that he wholly despair'd of his Life; and being at length carry'd through a narrow Creek, where Bushes and Trees grew thick upon both sides, his Turbant or Diadem, by one of the Boughs was pluck'd off from his Head, and hurl'd into the Water; which one of the Mariners spying, swam to it; and for the better securing of it, clapt it upon his own Head, and swam back to the Ship. After he had wander'd up and down three Days and three Nights, he return'd at length safe with his Diadem to his Friends, and again con∣sulted the Soothsayers concerning this Prodigy; who advis'd him immediately, with all diligence, to offer splendid Sacrifices to the Gods. But at the time of these Sacrifices, he was invited by one Medius a Thessalian, one of his Friends, to a Banquet; where when he was in his Cups, and even drunk with Wine, he quaft off the Great Bowl call'd Hercules his Cup: Whereupon, as if he had been struck with a Thunder-bolt, he fetch'd a deep Sigh, and was then presently led out by his Ant. Ch. 322. Nobles, and so left the place. Those who had him in their Charge forthwith laid him upon his Bed, and there diligently attended him. His Distemper increasing, his Physi∣cians were call'd in; but they were not able to administer any thing for his Relief. At length, his Sickness was so violent, and his Pains so great, that he himself despair'd of Life, and in that Condition drew off his Ring from his Finger, and deliver'd it to Perdiccas. His Commanders then ask'd him, To whom, Sir, do you leave the Kingdom? He answer'd, To the most Deserving. And when he utter'd his last Words, he told them, That the Chiefest of his Friends and Commanders would solemnize his Funeral, when he was gone, with Blood and Contention. And thus died Alexander, when he had reign'd Twelve Years and Seven Months, having perform'd such Mighty Acts, as no King ever did before him, Alexander's Death. nor any since to this day.
But because some Writers differ as to the Cause and Manner of his Death, affirming that he was poison'd by a deadly Potion given him; it's necessary to relate what they have re∣ported concerning this matter. They say that Antipater, whom Alexander had made his Viceroy in Europe, fell out with Olympias the King's Mother, of which at first no great matter was made, because the King would not hear any of the Accusations against him. But afterwards the Quarrels and Heart-burnings growing higher and higher, the King, out of his Piety and Awe to the Gods, conceiv'd it his Duty to gratifie his Mother; where∣upon he gave many apparent Signs and Tokens of the Alienation of his Affections from Antipater. And as further Fuel to the Flame, the putting to death Parmenio and Phi∣lotas, Ant. Ch. 322. did not a little terrifie and afright the Nobility. And therefore it's said he order'd his Son, who was Alexander's Cupbearer, to put Poison into his Wine: But because he was a Man of great Power in Europe after the Death of Alexander, and that Cassander his Son succeeded him in the Kingdom, many Historians durst not say any thing in their Writings of Poison. However, it's very apparent that Cassander was a great Enemy to the Concerns of Alexander: For he suffer'd the Body of Olympias, after she was murder'd, to lie with Disdain unbury'd; and he made it his great Business to re-edifie Thebes, which Alexander had raz'd to the Ground. When the King was dead, Sisigambris, the Mother of Darius, with abundance of Tears bewail'd the Death of Alexander, and her own desolate Condition upon that ac∣count; insomuch, as to the last Minute, she would neither eat, nor see the Light; and so the Fifth Day after died of Hunger in extream Sorrow, but with as much Glory and Reputation. Having now brought down our History to the Death of Alexander, as we design'd in the Beginning of this, we shall proceed to give an Account of the Acts of his Successors in the following Books.
BOOK XVIII. PYthagoras the Samian, and some others of the ancient Natural Philosophers, PREFACE. held that the Souls of Men were immortal; and that to foretell future Events at the very point of Death, when the Soul is even parting with the Body, is the Effect and Consequent of this Truth. To which Homer witnesses, when he brings in Hector, when he was even breathing his last, telling Achilles that he should die within a very short time afterwards. The same is attested of many others of later Times, and confirm'd especially by the Death of Alexander the Macedonian, who dying at Babylon, and being ask'd by his Commanders and those about him, at the time he was giving up his last Breath, Who should succeed him? he answer'd The most Worthy Or, The Best.; For I foresee, says he, that great and grievous Quarrels amongst my Friends, will be the Sacrifices to me after my Funeral. Which hapend accordingly; for the Chiefest of his Commanders fell together by the Ears about the Principality; and great Wars, after the Death of Alexander, broke forth amongst them: Whose Actions are contain'd in this Book; which will clearly evidence, to the studious Reader, the Truth of what is now said: The former comprehended all the things done by Alexander, to the time of his Death. This present Book, relating the Actions of those who succeeded, ends with the Year next before the Reign of Agathocles, which makes an History of Seven Years. CHAP. I. Quarrels about a Successor to Alexander. Arideus made King. The Provinces divi∣ded amongst the Chief Commanders. Matters contain'd in Alexander's Note-Books. Meleager executed by Perdiccas. The Grecians revolt. A Description of Asia. Pithon sent against the revolting Grecians, who were all cut off. The Lamian War; The cause of it. Alexander's Epistle to the Exiles. Leosthenes the Athenian Ge∣neral. Lamia besieg'd. Leosthenes kill'd: Antiphilus plac'd in his room. WHen Cephisodorus was Chief Magistrate of Athens, the Romans created Olymp. 114. 2. Ant. Ch. 321. Lucius Furius and Decius Jovius Consuls: About which time, Alexander being now dead without Issue, and so the Government without a Head, there arose great Dissentions and Differences about the Empire. For the The Macedo∣nian Phalanx. Foot were for setting up of Arideus the Son of Philip, by one Philima of Larissa a Strumpet. Justin. l. 13. c. 2. Plut. Arideus the Son of Philip, a weak-spirited Man, labouring under many natural Infirmities: But the Chiefest of the Nobility and Esquires of the Body met together in Council; and being join'd with the Squadron of Horse call'd the Social, they resolv'd to try it out with the Macedonian Phalanx. Therefore they sent the most eminent Commanders (among whom Meleager was the Chief, to the Foot, to require them to observe Commands. But Meleager (who was the most Eminent Man of the Phalanx) as soon as he came to the Battalion which was of the greatest Account and Esteem in the Army, he said nothing at all of the Business for which they were sent; but, on the contrary, highly commended them for their Choice, and stirr'd them up against the Opposers. Whereupon the Macedonians created Meleager their Captain, and with their Arms made out against the contrary Party. Ant. Ch. 321. Those of the King's Life-guard and Esquires of the Body, march'd likewise out of Ba∣bylon in order to fight; but the most Interested and Popular Men amongst them, endea∣vour'd all they could to make Peace on both sides. Upon which it was presently agreed, Arideus made King. that Arideus the Son of Philip should be made King, and call'd Philip, and that Perdiccas, to whom the late King, when he was upon the point of death, deliver'd his Ring, should be invested with the Lord Prote∣cter. Executive Power of the Kingdom; and order'd that the Esquires of the Body and the Chief Commanders should govern the Provinces, and all be observant to the Commands of the King and Perdiccas.
Arideus being thus made King, he call'd together a General Council of the chief Com∣manders; The Provinces divided. and to Ptolomeus Lagus he committed the Government of Aegypt; to Laomedon of Mitylene, Syria; to Philotas, Cilicia; to Python, Media; to Eumenes, Cappadocia and Pa∣phlagonia, and the bordering Countries which were never entred by Alexander all the time of his Wars with Darius, through want of convenient Opportunity. To Antigonus he as∣sign'd the Command of Lycia, and the greater Phrygia; to Cassander, Caria; to Meleager for Menander, Ush. Ann 290 Arrian. lib. 3. p. 56. Meleager, Lydia; to Leonatus, Phrygia all along the Coast of the Hellespont: And in this manner were the Provinces divided. In Europe, Thrace, with the Nations bordering upon the Sea of Pontus, were committed to Lysimachus; and Macedonia with those bordering upon it to Antipater: As for the rest of the Asian Provinces, it was thought most adviseable not to alter but to leave them under the Government of the former Lord Lieutenants. The Province next adjoining was intrusted with Taxilis, and the Kings bordering upon him: But the Province adjoining to Mount Caucasus (call'd Parapamisus) was assign'd to Oxier∣tes, Ant. Ch. 321. King of the Bactrians, whose Daughter Rhoxana, Alexander had marry'd. Arachesia and Gedrosia to Sybirtius: Ariana and Drangina to Stasanoris of Solos: Bactriana and Sardiana for Sogdiana. Sar∣diana were allotted to Philip; Parthia and Hyrcania to Phrataphernes; Persia to Peucestes; Carmania to Tlepolemus; Media to Atrapas. The Province of Babylon to Archon; and Me∣sopotamia to Arcesilaus. Seleucus he created General of the brave Brigade of the Social Horse. Hephestion was the first Commander of that Brigade, then Perdiccas, and the third was this Seleucus. He order'd that Taxiles and Porus should enjoy the absolute Authority within their own Kingdoms, as Alexander himself had before appointed. The care of the The laying of the Body to sleep at rest. Fu∣neral, and of preparing a Chariot to convey the King's Body to Hammon, was commit∣ted to Arideus. But as for Craterus, the most Noble of Alexander's Captains, he was some time before sent by Alexander with Ten thousand of the old Soldiers that were discharg'd from further Service in the Persian War, into Cilicia, to put in Execution some Instructions in writing given him by the King; which after the King's Death, his Successors determin'd should be no further proceeded in: For Perdiccas finding in the King's Commentaries not only the vast Sums of Money intended to be expended in the Funeral of Hephestion, but likewise many other things of extraordinary Cost and Charge design'd by the King, he judg'd it far more advisable to let them alone: But lest he should seem to take too much upon him, Ant. Ch. 321. and by his private Judgment to detract from Alexander's Wisdom and Discretion, he re∣ferr'd all these Matters to the determination of a General Council of the Macedonians. The Chief and the most considerable Heads of the King's purposes contain'd in his Commenta∣ries. Books of Remembrance were these, That a Thousand long Ships, larger than those of three Tire of Oars, should be built in Phaenicia, Syria, Cilicia, and Cyprus, in order to an Invasion Things set down in Alexander's Commentaries. upon the Carthaginians, and others inhabiting the Sea Coasts of Africa and Spain, with all Islands adjoyning as far as Sicily. 2. That a Plain and Easie way should be made straight along through the Sea Coasts of Africa to Hercules his Pillars. 3. That Six magnificent Temples should be built, and that Fifteen hundred Talents should be expended in the Cost of each of them. 4. That Arsenals and Ports should be made in Places convenient and fit for the Reception of so great a Navy. 5. That the new Cities should be planted with Colonies, and that People should be transplanted out of Asia into Europe, and others out of Europe into Asia, to the end, that by Intermarriages and mutual Affinities he might establish Peace and Concord between the two main Continents of the World. Some of the Temples before-mention'd were to be built in Delos, Delphos, and Dodona; Some in Macedonia, as the Temple of Jupiter in Dio; Diana's Temple in Amphipolis; ano∣ther to Minerva in Corsica. Ant. Ch. 321. Cyrnus: To which Goddess he design'd likewise to build a Temple in Ilium, inferior to none, for Splendor and Magnificence. Lastly, To adorn his Father Philip's Sepulchre, he design'd to erect a Monument equal to the biggest Pyramid in Aegypt, seven of which were by some accounted the most stately and greatest Works in the World. These things being laid before them, the Macedonians, though they highly commended and approved of Alexander's designs, yet because they seem'd things beyond all measure impracticable, they decreed all to be laid aside. Then Perdiccas caus'd those Soldiers that were Turbulent, and exceeding Inveterate against him, to the number of Thirty, to be put to Death: Afterwards, out of a private Grudge he executed Meleager, (who betray'd Meleager exe∣cuted. his Embassy, and carry'd on the Mutiny) as one that sought to undermine him. About this time the Grecians in the upper Provinces revolted, and got together a great The Grecians revolt. Army: Against whom he sent Pithon one of the chiefest Commanders. But we con∣ceive it much conducing to the better Understanding of the History of things that were afterwards done, if in the first Place we declare the Cause of the Revolt, and the Situation
of Asia, and the Nature and Extent of the Provinces: For by this means laying before the Eyes of the Readers a Map of the Countries, and the Distances of Places one from ano∣ther, the Relation will be more Plain and Easie. From Taurus therefore in Cilicia, to Caucasus and the Eastern Ocean, a ridge of Moun∣tains A Description of Asia. stretch forth in a straight and continued Line throughout all Asia: As distinguished by several Peaks and Risings of the Hills from them; Mount Taurus has gain'd particular Names. By this means, Asia being divided into two parts, one rises towards the North, Ant. Ch. 321. the other descends towards the South; and according to these several Climates the Rivers run contrary ways; some take their Course into the Caspian Sea, others into the Euxine, and some into the Northern Ocean. These Rivers lying thus opposite one to another, part empty themselves into the Indian Sea, and another Part into the Ocean adjoyning to this Continent; some likewise fall into the Red Sea. In this manner likewise are the Provinces divided. For some lye towards the North, and others bend to the South. The first towards the North borders upon the River Tanais, that is to say, Sogdiana with Ba∣ctria, Caspian Sea. and next to them Area and Parthea. This Province surrounds the Or rather ad∣joins to the Hyrcanian Sea. Hyrcanian Sea, Not running into other Seas. which lies within its Limits and Bounds. The next is Media, call'd by many Names from the Places included in it, and is the greatest of all the Provinces. Then follows Armenia, Lycaonia, and Cappadocia, all of a very sharp and cold Air. Bordering upon these in a direct Line are Phrygia, both the Greater, and that lying to the Hellespont: In an oblique Line lie Lydia and Caria. Pisidia stretches sorth it self in length; and in a Par∣rallel Line equal with Phrygia on the right Hand; and to the side of Pisidia lies Lycia. The Greek Cities are situated upon the Sea Coasts of these Provinces; whose Names it is Ant. Ch. 321. not necessary for our purpose here to recite. Thus situated (as we have related) are the Northern Provinces. As to the Southern, the first is India, under Mount Caucosus, a very large and . populous Kingdom; for it's inhabited by many Indian Nations; the greatest of which is that of the Gandarides, against whom Alexander made no attempt by reason of the Multitude of their Elephants. This Territory is divided from the further India, by the greatest River in those parts, being About four Miles. thirty Furlongs broad. The rest of India (conquer'd by Alexander) a rich and fruitful Country, and watered with many Rivers, borders upon this of the Gandarides: Within this Part, besides many other Kingdoms, were the Dominions of Porus and Taxilis. The River Indus (from which the Country takes its Name) runs through it. Separated from the Province of India next to it was Arachosia, Gedrosia, and Carmania, and with these was join'd Persia, wherein are situated the Provinces of Susiana and Sittacina. Next fol∣lows the Province of Babylon, extending it self as far as to Arabia the Desart. On the o∣ther side, where begins the At the Foot of Mount Tau∣rus Southward. Descent, you have Mesopota∣mia signifies in the Greek Tongue a Place between two Rivers. Mesopotamia lying between two Rivers, Euphrates and Tigris, from whence it had its Name. The higher Syria, and the Countries upon the The Mediter∣ranean Sea. Sea Coasts adjoyning to it, as Cilicia, Pamphilia, Or Caelo Syria. Ant. Ch. 321. Syria Cava, within which is Phaenicia, lie close to the Province of Babylon. Upon the Borders of Syria Cava, and the Desart next adjoining to it, (through which runs the River Nile, and so divides between Syria and Aegypt) appears Aegypt it self, the Best and Richest of all the Provinces. All these Countries are scorching hot; for the Sou∣thern Climate is contrary in its nature to the Northern. These Provinces (conquer'd by Alexander) which we have thus describ'd, were divided amongst the Chiefest of his Com∣manders. But the Grecians that inhabited the Upper Provinces, who (through fear while Alexan∣der was alive) endur'd their being cast forth into the utmost Corner of the Kingdom; Grecians re∣volt. now when he was dead, being touch'd with a Desire to return into their own Country, Revolted, and to that end unanimously chose Philo, an Enean born, to be their Captain, and had got together a considerable Army of above Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, all old expert Soldiers, and Brave and Valiant Men. Intelligence being brought of this Revolt, Perdiccas chose by lot out of the Macedonian Squadrons, Three thousand Foot and Eight hundred Horse. Pitho, one of the Squires of the Body to Alexander, a Man of a high Spirit, and a skiiful Commander, was chose Ge∣neral by the Army, and to him Perdiccas deliver'd the Soldiers chosen, as is before de∣clar'd, and Letters likewise to the Lord-Lieutenants, whereby they were order'd to fur∣nish him with Ten thousand Foot and Eight thousand Horse, against the Rebels. Pitho being a Man of am ambitious Spirit, was very ready to undertake this Expedition: For he purpos'd to gain by all fair means possible these revolting Greeks, and by joining their Forces to his own to set up for himself, and reduce all those upper Provinces under his Ant. Ch. 321. own Subjection. But Perdiccas smelling out his Design, gave him express Order, That having overcome those Rebels he should put them all to the Sword, and divide the Spoil
amongst the Soldiers. Pithon therefore march'd away with these Men thus deliver'd, and when he had receiv'd those that were to join him from the Lord Lieutenants, he made towards the Rebels with the whole Army. And having by a certain Enean corrupted Li∣podorus, who commanded a Brigade of Three thousand Men among the Rebels, he routed them all. For in the height of the Engagement when the Victory was doubtful, the Traytor withdrew from the rest of his fellow Soldiers, and with his Three thousand Men march'd up to the top of a rising Ground, whereupon the rest (thinking that he had fled) broke all their Ranks, and took to their Heels. Pithon being thus Victor, sent a Trum∣pet to the Rebels, ordering them to lay down their Arms, and upon Capitulation licensed them to repair every Man to his own home. It was no small joy to Pithon to see things brought to such a pass as suited directly to his designs; for he had now all confirm'd by Oath, and the Grecians intermixt among the Macedonians. But the Macedonians remem∣bring the Orders Perdiccas had given, making nothing of their Oaths, broke Faith with the Grecians. For on a sudden, they fell unexpectedly upon them, and put every Man of The Revolters all cut off. them to the Sword, and seiz'd upon all they had: And so Pithon being defeated in his de∣sign, return'd with the Macedonians to Perdiccas. And this was the state of Affairs in Asia at that time. In the mean time, in Europe the Rhodians cast out the Garison of the Macedonians, and freed their City. And the Athenians began a War against Antipater, which was call'd the The Lamian War. Ant. Ch. 321. Lamian War. It's in the first place necessary to declare the Causes of this War, that the Progress of it may be the better understood. Alexander, a little before his Death, had order'd all the Exiles and Out-law'd Persons of the Greek Cities to be recall'd, as well to advance his own Honour and Esteem, as to gain the Hearts of many in every City by his Clemency, who might stand up for his In∣terest against the Innovations and Defections of the Grecians. At the approach therefore of the time of Celebrating the Olympiads, he sent away Nicanor, a Native of the City Stagira, with a Letter concerning the Restitution of the Bandities of Greece, and commanded it to be proclaim'd by the Common Cryer, who declar'd him that was Victor, who executed the Command, and read the Letter in these Words,— King Alexander to the Banditties of the Grecian Cities. WE were not the Cause of your Banishment, but will be of the Return of you all Alexander's Epistle. into your own Country, excepting such as are Banish'd for outrageous Crimes: of which things we have written to Antipater, requiring him to proceed by Force, against all such as shall oppose your Restitution. When these Orders were proclaim'd, the People set up a great Shout, testifying their approbation: For those of them that were present at the Solemnity, readily laid hold on the King's Mercy, and return'd their Thanks with Expressions of their Joy, and ap∣plauses of his Grace and Favour: For all the Banish'd Men were then got together at the Olympiads, above the Number of Twenty thousand. Many there were who approv'd Ant. Ch. 321. of their Restitution as a prudent Act; but the Aeolians and Athenians were much offen∣ded at it, for the Aeolians expected that the Oenians who were banish'd out from among them, should have undergone due punishment for their Crimes. For the King had made a great Noise with his Threats, that he would not only punish the Children of the Oeni∣ans, but that he himself would execute Justice upon the Authors themselves. Whereup∣on, the Athenians would not yield by any means to part with Samos, which they had divided by lot. But because they were not at present able to cope with Alexander, they judg'd it more adviseable to sit still, and watch till they found a convenient Opportunity, which Fortune presently offer'd them: For Alexander dying in a short time afterwards, and leaving no Children to succeed him, they grew confident that they should be able not only to regain their Liberty, but likewise the Sovereignty of all Greece. The vast Treasure left by Harpalus, (of which we have particularly spoken in the pre∣ceding Book) and the Soldiers that were disbanded by the Lord-Lieutenants of Asia, were great Supports and Encouragements for the carrying on of this War; for there were Eight thousand of them then about Tenarus in Peloponensus: They sent therefore privately to Le∣osthenes. Ant. Ch. 321. the Athenian, wishing him that without taking notice of any Order by them, of his own accord so to dispose of matters, as to have those Soldiers in readiness when occa∣sion serv'd. Antipater likewise so contemn'd Leosthenes, that he was Careless and Negligent in preparing for the War, and so gave time to the Athenians to provide all things neces∣sary for that Affair.
Hereupon, Leosthenes very privately Listed these Soldiers, and (beyond all expectation) had ready a brave Army: For having been a long time in the Wars in Asia, and often engag'd in many great Battles, they were become very expert Soldiers. These things were contriv'd when the Death of Alexander was not generally known: But when a Messenger came from Babylon, who was an Eye witness of his Death, the People of Athens declar'd open War, and sent part of the Money left by Harpalus, with a great number of Arms to Leosthenes, charging him no longer to conceal or palliate the Matrer, but to do what was most conducible to the Service of the Common-wealth. Whereupon, having distributed the Money among the Soldiers as he was commanded, and arm'd those that wanted, he went into Aetolia, in order to carry on the War with the joint Assistance of both Nations. The Aetolians join'd very readily, and deliver'd to him for the service Seven thousand Soldiers. Then he stirr'd up his Messengers, the Locrians and Phoci∣ans, and other neighbouring Nations, to stand up for their Liberties, and to free Greece from the Macedonian Yoke. But in the mean time, the Wealthy Men among the Athe∣nians Ant. Ch. 321. dissuaded them from the War, but the Rabble were for carrying it on with all the Vigour imaginable: Whence it came to pass, that they who were for War, and had no∣thing to live upon but their Pay, were far the greater Number: To which sort of Men Philip was us'd to say, War was as Peace, and Peace as War. Forthwith therefore, the O∣rators (who were in a Body together, and clos'd with the Humours of the People) wrote down the Decree, That the Athenians should take upon them the Care and Defence of the Common Liberty of Greece, and should free all the Greek Cities from their several Garisons; and that they should rig out a Fleet of Forty Gallies of Three Tire of Oars, and Two hundred of Four Tire of Oars; and that all Athenians under Forty years of Age should take up Arms; That Three of the Tribes should keep Watch and Ward in Athens, and the other Seven should be always ready to march abroad: Moreover, Ambassadors were sent to all the Cities of Greece to inform them, That the People of Athens in the first place look'd upon all Greece to be the common Country of every Grecian, and that they had heretofore repuls'd the Barbarians at Sea, who invaded them with a Design to Inslave Greece, and that now they had determin'd to oppose the Macedonians for the common Good, with their Navies, Lives and Fortunes. The Wiser sort of the Grecians judg'd the Athenians more forward than prudent in pas∣sing this Decree, and what they had design'd seem'd to carry an honourable Aspect, but Ant. Ch. 321. nothing of Profit and Advantage to the State: For that they made a stir and bustle un∣seasonably, and began a War against mighty and victorious Armies when there was no ne∣cessity for it; and though they had the repute of a prudent People, yet they consider'd not the notorious Ruine and Destruction of Thebes. However, notwithstanding the Ambassadors came to the Cities, and by their usual florid way of address had heated and egg'd them on to the War, yet many confederated in the League; some in the Names of their several Cities; and others in the Names of whole Countries. As for the rest of the Grecians, some sided with the Macedonians, and others stood Neuter. But all the Aetolians generally (as is before said) enter'd into the Confederacy; and after them all the Thessalians, except them of Pellena. Likewise the Oetaeans, except the Heracleans. The Phthiotians amongst the Acheans, except the Thebans. The Elians, except the Maleans. Then generally all the Doreans, Locrians, and Phocians join'd in the League: Also the Enians, Clyzeans, and Dolopeans. To these join'd likewise the Athamanes, Leucadians, and Molossians, under the Command of Arypteus: But this Man play'd the Impostor in the Confederacy, and afterwards underhand treacherously aided the Macedonians. A small Part likewise of the Illyrians and Thracians (out of hatred to the Macedonians) came into the League together, with the Carystines out of Euboea; and at length out of Ant. Ch. 321. Peloponnesus the Argives, Sicyonians, Eleans, Messenians, and those that Inhabited The Sea Coasts Acta. All these before nam'd, confederated with the Grecians. The People of Athens also sent Auxiliaries to Leosthenes, out of the Cities Five thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and Two thousand Mercenaries; who were oppos'd by the Boetians in their march through Boetia, for the Reasons following. Alexander, when he raz'd Thebes, granted the Territories of the City to the neigh∣bouring Boetians; who divided the Lands of those miserable People amongst themselves by Lot, and thereby gain'd large Possessions; who understanding that the Athenians (if they prevail'd) design'd to restore the Country and Lands to the Thebans, sided with the Macedonians; and while the Boetians were Encamp'd at Platea, Leosthenes came with part of his Forces into Boetia, and drawing up the Athenians into Battalia, fell upon the Inha∣bitants, routed them, and set up a Trophy, and then return'd to Pylas. Here (after he
had block'd up all the Passages) he Encamp'd for some time, expecting the Macedonian Army. But Antipater, who was left Viceroy of Europe by Alexander, as soon as he heard of his Death at Babylon, and of the Divisions of the Provinces sent to Craterus in Cilicia, to come to him with all the Force he had for his Assistance. For he being sent away some time before into Cilicia, had ready Thirty thousand Macedonians, who were dismiss'd from the Service in Asia, with which he was returning into Macedonia. He likewise solicited Philo∣tas Ant. Ch. 321. (who had the Province of Phrygia near the Hellespont under his Command) to assist him, and promis'd to him one of his Daughters in Marriage. For as soon as he heard of the Insurrection of the Grecians against him, he left Sippas with a considerable Body of Men, General in Macedonia, with Orders to raise many more; and he himself march'd out of Macedonia into Thessaly with Thirteen thousand Foot and Six hundred Horse: (For at that time there was great scarcity of Soldiers in Macedonia, by reason of the Recruits sent into Asia;) With these Forces sail'd along the whole Fleet near at hand, which Alexander had sent into Macedonia with a vast Treasure out of the King's Trea∣suries. The Navy consisted of an Hundred and ten Gallies of three Tire of Oars. The Thes∣salians indeed at the beginning joining with Antipater, had sent to him many brave Horses; but afterwards, being brought over by the Athenians into the contrary Interest, they turn'd off with their Horse to Leosthenes, and join'd with the Athenians for the recovery of the Liberty of Greece. The Athenians therefore growing very strong by many flocking thus in to them, the Greci∣ans Antipater routed. Ant. Ch. 321. Lamia, a City in Thessaly. over power'd the Macedonians and overcame them in a Battel. Antipater being routed, not daring to abide in the Field, nor judging it safe to return into Macedonia, fled to La∣mia, where he drew in his Army into the City, repair'd the Walls, furnish'd himself with Arms Offensive and Defensive, and with Corn and Provision, waiting for supplies out of Asia. Leosthenes with all his Forces coming up close to Lamia, fortify'd his Camp with a Lamia besieg'd. deep Trench and Rampire: And first he drew up his Army in the face of the City, to provoke the Macedonians to fight; But they not daring to Engage, he daily assaulted the Walls with fresh Men succeeding one another. But the Macedonians made a stout Defence, and many of the Grecians through their Rashness and Imprudence were cut off: For ha∣ving a strong Body of Men in the City, and well furnish'd with all sorts of Weapons, and the Walls of the City with great Expence being strong and well built, the Besieg'd easily repuls'd the Enemy. Leosthenes therefore perceiving he could not gain the Town by force of Arms, block'd it up, to hinder all supplies of Provision, supposing the Besieg'd would be presently sub∣du'd by Famine, and want of Bread. To this end he rais'd a Wall, and drew a deep Trench round about it, and so penn'd them up. Afterwards, the Aetolians (being call'd away upon the occasion of some Publick concerns) got leave of Leosthenes to return home, and so all of them march'd back into Aetolia. But while Antipater with his Army was in these desperate Straights, and the City near Ant. Ch. 321. lost for want of Provision, Fortune on a sudden turn'd the Scale to the Advantage of the Macedonians. For Antipater made a Sally upon them that were busy'd in opening the Trenches; where Leosthenes coming in to their Relief, receiv'd a Blow upon the Head with a Stone, which fell'd him to the Ground, and so was carry'd off half dead into the Camp, and died the Third day after; and was honourably Bury'd upon the account of Leosthenes kill'd. the Noble Service he had perform'd in the War. The Athenians commanded Hyperides to set forth his Praise in a Funeral Oration, who was esteem'd the Chiefest of the Orators at that time, both for his Eloquence, and particular hatred of the Macedonians: For De∣mosthenes the most famous Orator was then fled, being condemn'd as if he had receiv'd Bribes from Harpalus. Antiphilus, a Prudent and Valiant Commander, was created Ge∣neral Antiphilus made the Athe∣nian General. in the room of Leosthenes. And this was the State of Europe at that time.
CHAP. II. Ptolemy gains Aegypt. Leagues with Antipater. Lysimachus enters Thrace. Leonatus comes to relieve Antipater, and is routed. The Grecians beaten at Sea. Perdiccas conquers Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia; Crucifies him; Delivers the Province to Eumenes. The Grecians quite routed by Craterus and Antipa∣ter The Athenians at length submit after all the rest but the Aetolians. The End of the Lamian War. The War in Cyrene by Thimbro. Ophellas routs Thimbro. Cyrene gain'd by Ptolemy. Larinda Sack'd. The Destruction of the Isaurians by themselves. Perdiccas affects the Kingdom of Macedon; is oppos'd by Antigonus. The Aetolians block'd up by Craterus and Antipater. Antigonus discovers Perdiccas his Design. Peace made with the Aetolians. Per∣diccas marches against Ptolemy into Aegypt. IN Asia, Ptolemy, one of them that had a share in the Division of the Provinces, with∣out Olymp. 114. 2. Ant. Ch. 321. Ptolemy gains Aegypt. any difficulty possess'd himself of Aegypt, and carry'd himself with great Mildness and winning Behaviour towards the People; and having a Treasure of Eight thousand Talents, rais'd an Army of Mercenaries: And many out of love flock'd to him upon the account of the Goodness of his Disposition. He enter'd into League with Antipater, when he was assur'd that Perdiccas design'd to dispossess him of Aegypt. At that time Lysmachus broke into some parts of Thrace, and found Seuthas, the King, Lysimachus fights with Seu∣tha in Thrace. Encamp'd with Twenty thousand Foot, and Eight thousand Horse. But Lysimachus (though he had not above Four thousand Foot, and only Two thousand Horse) was not affrighted with the Multitude of the Enemy: And though he was so much inferior in number, yet his Valour was such, that he enter'd into a hot and sharp Engagement, and af∣ter the loss of a great number of his Men (but many more of the Enemy's) he return'd to his Camp almost Victorious. Upon which, both Armies drew off the Field, and each made greater Preparations, in order to decide the Controversie by the Sword. As for Leonatus, he promis'd speedy Aid to Antipater and the Macedonians, being solli∣cited by Hecateus, who was sent to him for that purpose. Landing therefore in Europe, as soon as he came into Macedonia, he rais'd a great number of Soldiers there, and ha∣ving got together an Army of above Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand and Five hundred Horse, he march'd through Thessaly against the Enemy. Hereupon, the Grecians drew off from the Of Lamia. Siege and burnt their Tents, and sent a∣way all their sick Men and heavy Baggage to Melitea, a City in Phtho∣tes. Ant. Ch. 321. Melitea: And with the rest of the Ar∣my (ready and prepar'd for Battel) march'd straight away, and met Leonatus his forces before Antipater had join'd him, and their two Armies were come up together. The Grecians in the whole were Two and twenty thousand Foot, (for the Aeolians were re∣turn'd home some time before, and many other of the Grecians were gone into their own Country) and as to their Horse (which were above Three thousand Five hundred) they fought together in one Body; amongst whom were Two thousand Thessalians, (Brave and Valiant Men) upon whom they most rely'd for the obtaining of the Victory. The Horse on both sides fought stoutly a long time, where the Thessalians by their extraordi∣nary Leonatus rout∣ed by the Gre∣cians. Valour at length prevailing, Leonatus, (though he fought with great Courage and Re∣solution) was driven and penn'd up within a Morass, and over-loaden with his Arms (after he had receiv'd many wounds) was there slain, and carry'd off dead by his own Men to the Carriages. The Greeks having now gain'd so famous a Victory (in which Menon the Thessalian commanded the Horse) the Macedonian Phalanx to avoid the Horse, withdrew out of the plain and open Field, and betook themselves to the steep and rocky Hills, and by the strength of the Places there, defended themselves. However, the Thessalian Horse attempted to break in upon them, but through the Dis∣advantage of the Places, were not able to do any thing. The Grecians therefore being Masters of the Field, set up a Trophy, and left off all further pursuit. The next day, as Ant. Ch. 321. soon as Antipater came up with his Troops, he join'd himself to the broken Army, and so all the Macedonians making one Camp, he took upon him the Management of the whole.
But perceiving that the Thessalians were too strong for him in Horse, he judg'd it most advisable to be quiet for the present, hot daring to attempt to force his Way by the Sword. And therefore he march'd off over Hills, and other craggy Places, not easie to be pursu'd. Antiphilus the Graecian General (who gain'd this glorious Victory over the Macedonians) continu'd with his Army in Thessaly, observing the Motions of the Enemy: And this was the happy Success at that time of the Graecians. But because the Macedonians were Masters at Sea, the Athenians built so many Ships The Graecians beatan at Sea at the Echi∣nade Islands. more as to make up their Fleet an Hundred and seventy Sail: But the Macedonian Fleet consisted of Two hundred and forty, under the Command of Clitus their Admiral, who engag'd in two Sea Fights at the Echinade Islands with Eeton the Athenian Admiral, and beat him in both, sinking many of his Enemies Ships. About this time Perdiccas (having with him King Philip and the King's Army) un∣dertook Perdiccas en∣ters Cappado∣cia. an Expedition against Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia, who though he submitted not to the Empire of the Macedonians, yet Alexander being busi'd in his Wars with Darius, pass'd him by, so that he enjoy'd the Principality of Cappadocia a long time without any Disturbance; and in the mean time he laid up a vast Sum of Money out of the Publick Revenues, and rais'd an Army both from Foreigners, and from among his own People: And claiming the Kingdom as his own just Right, he prepar'd to try it out with Perdiccas, Ant. Ch. 321. having an Army of Thirty thousand Foot, and Fifteen thousand Horse: At length it came to a Battel, in which Perdiccas was Victor, who kill'd Four thousand upon the spot, Ariarathes routed, scourg'd and crucifi'd. and took Six thousand Prisoners, amongst whom was Ariarathes himself, whom together with all his Kindred he first scourg'd, and then crucifi'd. Then he pardon'd all the rest, and after he had settl'd Affairs in Cappadocia, deliver'd up the Province to Eumenes of Car∣dia, to be govern'd by him as his Share, according to the Allotment in the first Agree∣ment. Cappadocia given to Eu∣menes. About the same time Craterus arriv'd in Macedonia out of Cilicia in order to assist Anti∣pater, Craterus as∣sists Antipa∣ter. and to repair the Losses of the Macedonians. He brought along with him Six thou∣sand Foot which Alexander had taken over with him at first into Asia, and Four thousand of those that he had listed in the way as he march'd, besides a Thousand Persian Darters and Slingers, and Fifteen hundred Horse. As soon as he came into Thessaly, he join'd his Forces at the River Peneius to Antipater's, yielding the chief Command of the Army to him. The whole Army, together with those that came with Leonnatus, amounted to above Forty thousand Foot, Three thousand Darters and Slingers, and Five thousand Horse. The Graecians at that time encamp'd over-against them, being much inferior in Number to the Enemy: For many, by reason of the late Victory, slighted the Macedo∣nians, Ant. Ch. 321. and were return'd to their several Countries to look after their own private Affairs. For which cause, there were many left in the Camp that observ'd no due Order or Disci∣pline: They were in the whole Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand five hundred Horse, in whom they plac'd great Confidence of Victory, by reason of the Valour of the Men, and the plain Champain Country that lay before them. At length Antipater drew out his Forces every day into the Field to provoke the Graecians to fight; who after they had waited some considerable time for the return of their Soldiers out of the Cities through the urgency of their present Circumstances, were forc'd to venture all and ingage the Enemy. Drawing up therefore into Battalia, and designing to decide the Matter by the Horse, they plac'd them in the Van before the Foot; whereupon the Horse on both Sides pre∣sently fell to it: And while they were thus hotly engag'd, (and the Thessalian Horse had the better of the Day,) Antipater broke in with his Battalion upon the Foot, and made a great Slaughter among them; so that the Graecians not being able to stand the Enemy's Shock, (who bore them down with their Multitudes pouring in upon them,) they re∣treated in all hast (but in good order) to the Fastnesses and difficult Passes near at hand. And so having gain'd the higher Ground by that Advantage they easily repuls'd the Mace∣donians. In the mean time the Graecian Horse (though they had the better) yet percei∣ving that their Foot was gone, forthwith made after them. And by this means the Horse (leaving off the Fight) were so broken and dispers'd, that the Macedonians got the Day. The Graecians routed. There were slain of the Graecians in this Battel above Five hundred, of the Macedonians an Hundred and thirty. The next day Memnon and Antiphalus call'd a Council of War, where it was debated, Ant. Ch. 321. whether they should expect Aid from the Cities, and wait to see if soldiers sufficient could be rais'd, and so try it out to the last; or yielding to the Time, and bearing their pre∣sent Disasters, they should send away Agents to treat upon Terms of Peace. At length they concluded to send , Cryers. Heralds to treat accordingly; who executing their Orders,
Or rather those about Antipater. Antipater answer'd them, That he expected that every City should treat severally by its own Ambassadors; and that he would not upon any Terms make a General Peace. But the Graecians would not admit of any Treaty with the several Cities apart, therefore Antipater and Craterus besieg'd the Cities of Thessaly, and took them by Storm, the Grae∣cians not being able to relieve them. This so terrifi'd all the rest, that they transacted the Affairs of their several Cities by their own Ambassadors; towards whom he carry'd him∣self with all Demonstrations of Courtesy and gaining Behaviour, and made Peace with every one of them. Every City therefore being desirous to provide for its own safety, all The Cities make Peace, except the Ae∣tolians and Athenians. of them by that means obtain'd Peace. But the Aetolians and Athenians, (the implacable Enemies of the Macedonians,) though they were thus deserted by their Confederates, con∣sulted with their Commanders about carrying on of the War. But Antipater having by this Artifice thus broken the Confederacy, led his whole Army against the Athenians; upon which the People (being forsaken of their Confederates) were greatly terrifi'd, and Ant. Ch. 321. knew not which way to turn themselves; and all having their Eyes upon Demades, cry'd out, That he should be sent Ambassador to Antipater to treat for Peace in their behalf. But he refus'd to come into the Senate: For he had been thrice condemn'd for violating the Laws, and so become infamous, and disabled by the Law to sit in Council: But being re∣stor'd by the People to his former Credit and Reputation, he forthwith (together with Phocion, and others join'd with him in Commission) undertook the Embassy. When Antipater had heard what they had to say, he told them, That he would make Peace with the Athenians upon no other Terms, but upon giving up all they had into his Hands: For the same Answer the Athenians gave to Antipater when he sent Ambassadors to them at the time he was shut up in Lamia. Hereupon the People being not able to resist, were The Athenians submit. brought to a necessity to give up all the Power and Government of the City into the dispose of Antipater; who with great Humanity and Generosity granted their City their Estates and all other Things to them back again. But he dissolv'd the Government by a Democracy, and order'd that the Value of every Person's Estate should be the Rule for the chusing of Magistrates; as that those who were worth above Two thousand Drachma's might be capable of being Magistrates, and giving of Votes for chusing of them. As for those that were not of such Estates, he remov'd them as Turbulent and Factious, not suf∣fering Ant. Ch. 321. them to have any thing to do in any publick Business; and granted new Seats and Estates in Thessaly to any that would remove thither. Upon which, above Two and twenty thousand of that sort of Citizens were transplanted out of their own Country. The Government of the City, and Country belonging to it, was given to the rest who had the Estates before limited and appointed, of whom there were about Nine thousand. And these govern'd the State for the future according to the Laws of Solon. And all their Estates were left to them intire, and untouch'd. But they were forc'd to receive a Garison under Menyllus the Governor to keep them in aw, and prevent new Stirs and Disturbances. As for the Matter of Samos, it was referr'd to the Decision of the Arrideus and Alexander. Kings. And thus the Athenians (beyond their Expectation) were kindly us'd, and were at Peace. And for the future, (Governing the Commonwealth without Tumults and Seditions, and quietly following their Husbandry,) they grew very rich in a short time. Antipater being return'd into Macedonia, honourably and bountifully rewarded Craterus according to his Desert, and gave him Phila his eldest Daughter in Marriage, and then Antipater re∣turns into Ma∣cedonia. Craterus return'd into Asia. Antipater carry'd himself with the same Moderation and winning Behaviour towards all the Cities of Greece, well ordering and reforming their Ant. Ch. 321. Governments, whereby he wan Praise and Renown in every Place. As for Perdiccas, he restor'd the City and Territory of Samos to the Samians, and Perdiccas re∣stores the Sa∣mians. caus'd all those that had been Exiles above Three and forty Years, to return into their Country. Having now gone through the Occurrents in the Lamian War, we shall pass to the War in Cyrene, lest we should straggle too far into Times far distant from the con∣tinu'd The end of the Lamian War. Course and Connexion of the History. But to make Things more clear and evi∣dent, we must have recourse to Matters done a little before. After Harpalus had left Asia, and at length arriv'd with his Mercenaries in Creet, as in The War in Cyrene. the Book next before this is related; Thimbro, one of his special Friends, (as he thought him to be) having assassinated Harpalus, possess'd himself both of the Monies, and Sol∣diers, to the Number of Seven thousand Men. He got likewise the Navy into his Hands, Thimbro. and putting the Soldiers aboard, sail'd to the Country of the Cyrenians; where joining with the Cyrenian Exiles, he made use of their Conduct for the prosecuting of his De∣signs, because they were well acquainted with the Ways, and Passes in the Country. Upon the approach of the Cyrenians, Thimbro fought them, and routed them, killing ma∣ny upon the spot, and taking many Prisoners. Then he possess'd himself of the Port,
and forc'd the conquer'd Cyreneans (now in a great Fright) into a Composition, and to Ant. Ch. 321. buy their Peace at the Price of Five thousand Talents of Silver, and that they should de∣liver to him one half of all their Chariots ready and fitted for any warlike Expedition. He sent likewise Ambassadors to other Cities, soliciting them to join with him, as if he purpos'd to conquer all the Lower Africa. He seiz'd likewise upon all the Merchants Goods in the Haven, and gave them for Plunder to his Soldiers, the more to encourage them to stick to him in the War. But in the height of his Prosperity, a sudden Blast of Fortune brought him very low upon the following occasion. Mnasiclus, one of his Captains, a Cretian born, an expert Commander, began to quarrel with him about the Division of the Spoil; and being of a bold and turbulent Spirit, he thereupon Deserted, and went over to the Cyrenians; where making great Complaints of Thimbro's Cruelty and Breach of Faith, he persuaded them to dissolve the League and assert their Liberty. Thereupon they stopt their hands, and would pay no more of the Talents of Silver agreed upon, having only paid Sixty. Thimbro hereupon accus'd them of Treachery and breach of Faith, and seiz'd upon Eight hundred of the Cyrenians that were in the Port, and laid close Siege to Cyrene; but not being able to prevail he drew off, and return'd to the Port. The Barceans and Hespe∣ritans sided with Thimbro: Whereupon the Cyrenians drew out part of their Forces out of the City, and with them wasted and spoil'd the neighbouring Territories; to whose assistance Thimbro (whose aid was desir'd) march'd out with what Soldiers he had then ready at hand. The Cretian taking advantage of that opportunity when he conceiv'd Ant. Ch. 321. few were left in the Port, advis'd them that were left in Cyrene to set upon the Port, who readily comply'd with him, and he himself was the Principal Actor in the Attempt, which was easily accomplish'd by reason of Thimbro's absence, so that whatever Merchandize was left in the Port he restor'd to the Merchants, and fortify'd the Haven with all the Care and Diligence imaginable. This first Disaster greatly discourag'd Thimbro, having both lost so convenient a Post, and likewise his Carriages. But afterwards plucking up his Spirits, and taking of Taricha by Assault, his Hopes reviv'd. However, not long after he again sustain'd a mighty Loss: For the Soldiers belonging to the Fleet by being excluded the Harbour, were in great want of Provision, and therefore every day rov'd up and down the Fields to get what they could for the supply of their Necessities. Thereupon, the Africans lying in Ambush, fell upon them as they were roving all over the Country, and kill'd multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners: The rest escap'd to their Ships, and sail'd away towards the Confederate Cities; but were overtaken with so violent a Storm, that many of their Ships were swallow'd up by the Sea, and of the rest, some were driven to Cyprus, and others to the Coasts of Aegypt. Notwithstanding which distresses, Thimbro went on still with the War: For he sent some of his Friends into Peloponnesus, to list Soldiers of those Stran∣gers Ant. Ch. 321. that were then still at Tenarus: For there were then many Disbanded, wandring up and down, seeking to be Listed by any that would employ them, to the number of Two thousand and Five hundred and upwards. Those that were sent took these into Pay, and set sail with them straight towards Cyrene: Before whose arrival the Cyrenians hearten'd by their Successes, had fought with Thimbro, and had cut off great numbers of his Men; By reason of which losses Thimbro gave up all for gone, as to the War against Cyrene; but the unexpected arrival of the Soldiers from Tenarus, so strengthen'd his Army that he took fresh Courage, and resum'd his former Hopes of Victory. The Cyrenians perceiving that the War was renew'd, crav'd supplies from the neigh∣bouring Africans and Carthaginians; and having rais'd an Army compos'd of their own Citizens and others, to the number of Thirty thousand men, they resolv'd to lay all at stake, and try it out in a Battel. A very sharp Battel therefore was fought, in which Thimbro was Victor, with the slaughter of a Multitude of his Enemies; which chear'd up his Spirits to that degree, as if he should be presently be Master of all the neighbouring Cities. The Cyrenians after this Fight, having lost all their Commanders, join'd Mnasiclus the Cretian, with some others, in the chief Command of the Army. But Thimbro lifted Ant. Ch. 321. up with his Victory, besieg'd the Haven of Cyrene, and assaulted the City every day: The Siege continuing long, the Cyrenians for lack of Bread sell out one with another; and the Rabble (being the greatest in number) thrust sorth the Rich out of the City; some of whom fled to Thimbro, others into Aegypt. Those in Aegypt address'd them∣selves to Ptolemy for assistance, to help them in their return, and prevail'd so far as that they went back with great Forces both for Sea and Land, under the Command of Ophel∣las their Governor. When their Return was nois'd abroad, those Exiles who were with Thimbro contriv'd to steal away in the Night, and join'd with those that were arriv'd; but being detected they were all knock'd on the Head.
The Ringleaders of the Sedition in Cyrene being terrify'd with the return of the Exiles, Ophellas routs Thimbro. made Peace with Thimbro, and resolv'd to join with him against Ophellas. But Ophellas routed Thimbro, and took him Prisoner, and recover'd all the Towns, and deliver'd the Cities with their Territories into the Hands of Ptolemy. And thus the Cyrenians and the Cyrene pos∣sessed by Pto∣lemy. neighbouring Cities lost their former Liberty, and became subject to Ptolemy. Perdiccas and King Philip having overcome Ariarathes, and deliver'd the Province to Eu∣menes, and so departed out of Cappadocia. When they came into Pisidia, they determin'd to raze those two Cities, one of the Larandians, the other of the Isaurians: For in the Laranda s by Perdiccas. life time of Alexander they had killed Balacrus the Son of Nicanor, who was appointed to be their General, and Governor of the Province. Laranda therefore they took upon the first Assault, and put all that were able to bear Arms to the Sword, and sold all the rest Ant. Ch. 321. for Slaves, and laid the City equal with the Ground. As for the City of the Isaurians, it was large and well fortify'd, and mann'd with resolute and stout Men, and therefore P. 640. after they had assaulted it two Days together, and had lost a great number of Men, they were forc'd to draw off. For the Inhabitants, being plentifully furnish'd with Weapons, and all other Things necessary for the enduring of a Siege, were resolute to undergo all Hazards, and readily sold their Lives for the Defence of their Liberty. But upon the third Day having lost many of their Citizens, insomuch as they were not able sufficiently to man their Walls for lack of Men, they put in execution a most Heroical Piece of Re∣solution, worthy for ever to be remembred. For perceiving that they were destin'd to inevitable Destruction, and had not Force sufficient for their Defence, they judg'd it not advisable to deliver up the City, and all that they had, to the Will of the Enemy, inso∣much as their certain Ruin with the most barbarous Usage was obvious before their Eyes. Therefore they all unanimously resolv'd to die honourably together; to that end in the Night they shut up their Wives, Children and Parents in their Houses, and set them on The sad Destru∣ction of the Ci∣ty of the Isau∣rians. Justin. l. 3. c. 6. says, This was done by the Cappadoci∣ans. And O∣rosus says the same. lib. 3. c. the last. fire, making Choice by that means to perish and be bury'd together. When the Flame mounted up into the Air, the Isamians threw all their Wealth, and every thing that was Valuable, or that might be of any advantage to the Enemy, into the Fire. The Besiegers were stricken with Admiration at the Sight, and ran here and there, seeking where to break into the City; but those that remain'd upon the Walls for their Defence, threw many of the Macedonians down headlong from the Battlements. At which Perdiccas much more admir'd, and enquir'd what was the Reason, that having set all their Houses and every thing besides on fire, they were so diligent and careful to defend the Walls. At length when Perdiccas with his Macedonians were drawn off from the City, the rest of the Isaurians cast themselves headlong into the Fire, and so every one's House became a com∣mon Sepulchre for himself and all his Relations. Perdiccas the next day gave the Ran∣sacking Ant. Ch. 321. of the City to the Soldiers, who (when the Fire was extinguish'd) found much Silver and Gold in the Rubbish; the City having been Rich and Prosperous a long time together. After this Destruction, Perdiccas marry'd two Wives, Nicea the Daughter of Antipater, to whom he was contracted; and Cleopatra, Alexander's half Sister, the Daughter of Phi∣lip Perdiccas marries two Wives. by Amyntas. Perdiccas indeed had entred into League with Antipater before he was establish'd in his Government, and upon that account the Marriage was consummate: But after he had gain'd the King's Forces, and was possess'd of the Superintendency and Administration of the Affairs of the Kingdom, he chang'd his mind: For affecting the Affects the Kingdom of Macedon. Kingdom, his Design was to marry Cleopatra, concluding that for her sake, and by her Authority, the Sovereign Power would be yielded up to him by the Macedonians. But because he had no mind as yet to discover his Intentions, (to comply with the present Cir∣cumstances of Affairs) he marry'd Nicea, lest Antipater should oppose him in his Projects. Ant. Ch. 321. But Antigonus smelling out what he was contriving, (and being one that had a great kind∣ness for Antipater, and the most active Man of all the Commanders,) Perdiccas resolv'd to dispatch him, and take him out of the way. Loading him therefore with false Accusations, and unjust Aspersions, his Design ap∣pear'd plainly to take away his Life. But Antigonus being a crafty Man, and of a bold Spirit, made as if he would defend himself against those Things that were laid to his Charge: But in the mean time he secretly prepar'd for his flight, and in the Night with Antigonus se∣cretly opposes him. his Servants and his Son Demetrius went aboard some Ships that belong'd to Athens, and sail'd into Europe, on purpose to confederate with Antipater. About that time Antipater and Craterus were in the Field against the Aetolians with Thirty thousand Foot, and Two thousand five hundred Horse: For they only remain'd unconquer'd of those that were P. 641. engag'd in the Lamian War. But the Aetolians, though they were press'd upon by such mighty Forces, yet were not at all discourag'd; but having got together Ten thousand
brave, sprightly Men, betook themselves to the difficult Passes in the Mountains, where they had before dispos'd and lodg'd much of their Wealth, and all their Wives, Ant. Ch. 321. Children, and Old People. And though they had quitted the Cities that was not Te∣nable, yet they plac'd strong Garisons in those that were fortisied; and so undaun∣tedly waited for the approach of the Enemy. Antipater and Craterus therefore having entered Aetolia, when they saw all the Cities that were weak and untenable forsaken of their Inhabitants, made towards them that were posted in the Fastnesses of the Mountains. At the first Assault they made upon those dreadful and unaccessable Precipices, they lost Multitudes of their Men; for the Valour of the Aetolians being supported and confirm'd by the Strength of the Places, easily repuls'd the Enemy that ran themselves, upon Difficul∣ties that were insuperable. But afterwards, when Craterus his Soldiers in the Winter had secur'd themselves, by Huts and warm Tents, the Aetolians were forc'd to abide (in the depth of Winter) in Places cover'd over with Snow, where they remain'd in great lack of Provision; so that they were reduc'd to a most desperate Condition: For they were The great strait of the Etolians. brought to that strait, that they must of necessity either leave the Mountains, and fight with an Army far superiour in number to themselves, and with Commanders who were every-where famous for their Conduct, or if they staid longer, certainly to perish with Hunger and Cold. And now all hopes of Deliverance being despair'd of, suddenly and unexpectedly ap∣pear'd a Release at hand from all their Miseries, as if some God in a special manner had Ant. Ch. 321. had Compassion of such Brave and Noble Souls: For Antigonus, who fled out of Asia, and was now come into the Camp, inform'd them what Perdiccas was inhatching and contriving; and that having marry'd Cleopatra, he was ready as King to come over with his Army into Macedonia, to wrest the Kingdom out of their hands. At which strange and unexpected News, Antipater and Craterus, and all those with them were so affrighted, that they call'd a Council of War, where, upon Consultation, it was resolv'd, that Mat∣ters should be ended and compounded with the Aetolians as well as they could; and that Peace made with the Etoll∣ans. Forces should be forthwith transported into Asia; and that Craterus should be General in Asia, and Antipater have the Chief Command in Europe; that Ambassadors should likewise be dispatch'd to Ptolemy (who was Perdiccas's Enemy, and their Friend, and design'd to be cut off as well as they) to move him to join with them as a Confederate. Hereupon they forthwith struck up a Peace with the Aetolians, intending notwithstanding in due time afterwards, to root them up and all their Families, and to send them into some remote and desart Corner of the World far from Asia. The Pacification according to the Terms before agreed upon, being put into writing, and sign'd, they prepar'd themselves for the Expedition. Perdiccas, on the other side, calling together his Friends and General Officers, consul∣ted Perdicas mar∣ches against Ptolemy. with them whether he should transport his Army into Macedonia, or march first against Ptolemy. All agreeing that Ptolemy was first to be conquer'd, lest he should obstruct his Expedition into Macedonia, he sent away Eumenes before with a considerable Army, to secure the Passes at the Hellespont, to prevent all passage that way: And he himself march'd out of Pisiclia with all his Forces towards Egypt. And these were the things done this Year.
CHAP. III. The Description of Alexander's Funeral Chariot. Ptolemy honour'd in Egypt. Per∣diccas prepares for Egypt against Ptolemy. Eumenes beats Neoptolemus, who deserted. The Battel between Eumenes and Craterus, who was kill'd with Neopto∣lemus. Combate between Neoptolemus and Eumenes. Perdiccas comes into Egypt: Assaults the Fort call'd the Camel's Wall; His miserable Loss in the River Nile; is kill'd. Ptolemy makes Arrideus and Pytho Protectors of the Kings. Eumenes condemn'd to die. The Etolians invade Thessaly. Polyspherchon routs the Etolians. The Provinces again divided by Arrideus. Antigonus routs Eumenes, who flies to Nora. Antigonus besieges Nora. Eumenes his Invention to exercise the Horse. Ptolemy gains Syria and Phoenicia by Nicanor. WHen Philocles was Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Quintus Au∣lius were created Roman Consuls, Arrideus (to whom was committed the Care Olymp. 114. 3. Ant. Ch. 320. of conveying away Alexander's Body to his Sepulchre, having now the Chariot ready upon which he was to be carry'd) prepar'd himself for the Journey. But forasmuch as the whole Business and Concern was manag'd as became the Majesty of Alexander, and upon The Description of Alexander's Funeral Chari∣ot. that account did not only exceed all others in respect of Expence, State, and Pomp, (for the Charges amounted to many Talents) but also in respect of Curiosity of Workmanship, we conceive it fit to recommend something to Posterity in writing concerning it. And first was provided a Coffin of beaten Gold, so wrought by the Hammer as to answer to the Proportion of the Body; it was half fill'd with Aromatick Spices, which serv'd as well to delight the Sense as to preserve the Body from Putrefaction. Over the Coffin was a Cover of Gold, so exactly fitted, as to answer the higher part every way: Over this was thrown P. 642. Ant. Ch. 320. a curious Or Crimsen Soldiers Coat. Ant. Ch. 320. Purple Coat embroider'd with Gold, near to which were plac'd the Arms of the Deceas'd, that the whole might represent the Acts of his Life. Then was provided the Chariot, in which the Body was to be convey'd, upon the top of which was rais'd a Triumphant Arch of Gold, . As thick as  Scales. set thick and studded over with precious Stones eight Cubits in breadth, and twelve in length: Under this Roof was plac'd a Throne of Gold, join'd to the whole Work, foursquare, on which were carv'd the Heads of Tragelaphi Goat-Harts, bred near the River Phasis in Colchis. Plin lib. 8. c. 33 Goat-Harts, and to these were fastned Golden Rings of two Hands breadth in the diameter; at which hung, for Show and Pomp, little Coronets of various beautiful Colours, which, like so many Flowers, gave a pleasant Prospect to the Eye. Upon the top of the Arch was a Fringe of Network, where hung large Bells, to the end the Sound of them might be heard at a great distance. On both sides the Arch at the Corners stood an Image of Victory in Gold, bearing a Trophy: A Like a Plaz∣za. Peristthylium of Gold supported the Archwork, the Chapiters of whose Pillars were of Ionian Workmanship: Within the Peristthylium, by a Network of Gold of a finger's thickness in the Workmanship, hung four Writing-Ta∣bles, whether of Brass, Stone, or Wood. Ant. Ch. 320. Tables one by another equal to the Dimensions of the Wall, whereupon were portray'd all sorts of living Creatures: The first Table represented a Chariot curiously wrought, wherein Alexander sate with a Royal Scepter in his Hand: About the King stood his Life-Guard compleat in their Arms; the Macedonians on one side, and the Persians that bore Battle-Axes on the other; and before them stood the Armor-Bearers: In the second, Elephants adorn'd in their Warlike Habiliaments follow'd them of the Guard, on which sate Indians before, and Macedonians behind, arm'd according to the Customs of their several Countries. In the third might be seen Squadrons of Horse drawn up in Battalia: In the fourth appeared a Fleet order'd in a Line of Battel. At the entrance into the Arch stood Lions in Gold, with their Faces towards them that approach'd to enter. From the middle of every Pillar an A Tree so call'd Achanthus in Gold, sprouted up in Branches spiring in slender Threads to the very Chapiters: Over the Arch about the middle of the Roof on the outside was spread Or Crimson Carpet. Purple Carpet in the open Air, on which was plac'd a vast Golden Crown, in form of an Olive Coro∣nets, us'd to be worn by Con∣querors. Olive Coronet, which by the reflection of the Sun-Beams darted such an amazing Splendor and Brightness, that at a distance it appear'd as a Flash of Lightning. Under the Seats or Bottom of the whole Work ran two Axle-trees, about which mov'd four Persian Wheels, whose Spokes and Nathes were over-laid with Gold, but the Felloes were shod with Iron: The Ends and Out-parts of the Axes were of Gold, representing the Heads of Lions, every one holding a Dart in in his Mouth. In the very Centre of Ant. Ch. 320.
the Arch, about the midway in the length, was artificially fix'd a Upon which the whole might turn, as a hinge. Pole, by the help whereof the Arch might (in rough places, and where it was apt to be shaken) be pre∣serv'd from being over-turn'd. There were four Draught-Trees, to every of which were fix'd four Courses of Yoaks, and to every Course were bound four Mules, so that the Mules were sixty four in number, the choicest for Strength and Largeness that could be P. 643. got: Every Mule was adorn'd with a Crown of Gold, and Bells of Gold on either side their Heads; and on their Necks were fitted Rich Collars set and beautified with precious Stones. And in this manner was the Charriot set forth, the Sight of which was more stately and pompous than the Report; so that the Fame of it brought together Multitudes of Spectators: For the People out of every City where-ever it was coming met it, and ran back again before it, never satisfy'd with the Delight they took in viewing and gazing. And suitable to so stately a Show, a vast Company of Workmen and Pioneers (that plain'd the Ways for its passage) attended it. And thus Arrideus (who had spent two Years in Preparations) brought the King's Body from Babylon to Aegypt. Ptolemy, in Honour of the King met the Corps with his Army as far as Syria, where he receiv'd it, and accompanyd it with great Care and Alexander was first bury'd at Memphis. Pausan. Attic. c. 6. Observance: For he had resolv'd not as yet to conduct it to the Temple of Hammon, but to keep the Body in the Alexandria. See Curtius, l. 10. c. ult. The Body em∣balmed was 300 years after view'd by Au∣gustus in Ale∣xandria. Suet. Ant. Ch. 320. City which Alexander himself had built, the most Famous almost of any City in the World. To this end he built a Temple in Honour of Alexander, in Greatness and Stateliness of Structure becoming the Glory and Majesty of that King; and in this Repository he laid the Body, and honour'd the Exequies of the Dead with Sacrifices and magnificent Shows, agreeable to the State of a Demi God. Upon which ac∣count he was deservedly Honour'd, not only by Men, but by the Gods Themselves: For by his Bounty and Generosity he so gain'd upon Men, as they flock'd from all Parts to Alexandria, and chearfully listed themselves into his Service, notwithstanding the King's Army was then preparing War against him: And though he was then in imminent Dan∣ger, yet all readily ventur'd their Lives to preserve him. And the Gods Themselves, for his Virtue, and kind and obliging Temper towards all, rescu'd him out of all his Ha∣zards and Difficulties that seem'd insuperable: For Perdiccas, who before suspected the increase of his Power, had resolv'd (bringing the These Kings were Arrideus and Alexan∣der, Alexan∣der's Children. Perdiccas pre∣pares for Egypt against Ptole∣my. Kings along with him) of an Exepe∣dition into Egypt with the Strength of his Army: To that end he had deliver'd to Eu∣menes a considerable Body of Men, with sufficient number of brave Officers, with Com∣mand to march to the Hellespont, to stop the Passage of Antipater and Craterus over into Asia. Amongst the Commanders the most Illustrious were Alcetas his Brother, and Ne∣optolemus: But these he order'd in all things to be observant to Eumenes, because he was both a skilful and prudent General, and a constant and faithful Friend. Eumenes there∣fore, with the Forces deliver'd him, came to the Hellespont, and compleated his Army with Horse (rais'd out of his own Province lately gain'd) in which his Troops were be∣fore only deficient. But after that Antipater and Craterus had transported their Army out of Europe, Neopto∣lemus, Eumenes beats Neoptolemus. Ant. Ch. 320. out of Envy to Eumenes (having a considerable Army of Macedonians under his Com∣mand) secretly sent Messengers to Antipater, and colleaguing with him, contriv'd how to intrap Eumenes; but his Treachery being discover'd, he was forc'd to fight, and in the Battel lost almost all his Men, and was very near being cut off himself. Eumenes be∣ing thus Conqueror (after this great Slaughter) join'd the rest of those that were left, to his own Army; and so did not only by this Victory increase his Forces, but strengthen'd himself with a great number of Macedonians that were excellent Soldiers. Neoptolemus fled off the Field with three hundred Horse, and went over to Antipater. Whereupon a Consultation was had between them, in reference to the Concerns of the War; in which it was determin'd to divide the Army into two Bodies; one to march under Antipater into Cilicia to fight with Perdiccas, and the other with Craterus to fall upon Eumenes; and P. 644. when he was routed, then Craterus to return to Antipater; that so the whole Army be∣ing join'd together in one Body, and having Ptolemy their Confederate, they might be better able to deal with the King's Army. Eumenes having Intelligence of the Enemy's march, gather'd Forces together from all Parts, especially Horse; for because he had not Foot able to cope with the Macedonian Phalanx, he rais'd a great Body of Horse, by whose assistance he hop'd to be in a Condi∣tion to overcome the Enemy. And now at length the Armies drew near one to another; whereupon Craterus drew Battel between Eumenes and Craterus. up his Men together, in order, by a set Speech to encourage them to fight; in which Harangue he promis'd, That if they were Conquerors, they should have all the Pillage of
the Field, and all the Bag and Baggage as a Prey to their own use: All being thus en∣courag'd, he drew up his Army in Battalia; the Right Wing he commanded himself, Ant. Ch. 320. the Left he gave to Neoptolemus: His Army in the whole consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, most of them Macedonians, Men famous for their Valour, in whom he plac'd the Confidence of his Victory; with these, there march'd along with him above Two thou∣sand Horse. Eumenes likewise had Twenty thousand Foot of divers Nations, and Five thou∣sand Horse, on whole Valour chiefly he had resolv'd to venture, and lay all the Stake in this Battel. The Horse on both sides moving forward in two Wings a great distance before the Foot, Craterus with a Body of choice Men made a brave Charge upon the Enemy, but his Horse stumbling, he was thrown out of the Saddle to the Ground, and not being known, was by the confus'd throng of Horse trampl'd under Foot, and so unfortunately lost his Life; upon whose Fall the Enemy was so encourag'd, that dispersing themselves up and down, they made a terrible Slaughter. The Right Wing being thus distress'd, and at length totally routed, was forc'd to retreat to the Foot. But in the left Wing commanded by Neoptolemus, oppos'd to Eumenes, there was a very sharp Engagement, the two Gene∣rals singling out one another: For being known to each other by their Horses, and other Combat be∣tween Neop∣tolimus and Eumenes. special Marks, they fought hand to hand, and by combating thus singly, they put a Re∣mark upon the Victory; for after they had try'd it out by their Swords, they presently began an admirable and new sort of Encounter, Anger and Revenge mutually stirring up each other: For letting their Bridles fall upon their Horses Necks, they catch'd hold Ant. Ch. 320. with their left hands one upon another, and so grappling together, their Horses (vio∣lently pressing forward) ran from under them, leaving them both tumbling on the Ground together. And though it was a difficult matter for either of them, after so violent a Fall, to rise again, and besides being press'd down by the weight of their Arms, yet Eumenes (rising first) wounded Neoptolemus in the Ham (with so great a Gash and Cut), that he lay Hamstrung groveling upon the Ground, and by reason of the grievousness of the Wound, was not able to raise himself upon his Feet: But the Stoutness and Courage of his Mind overcoming the Weakness of his Body, he got upon his Knees, and gave his Adversary three Wounds upon his Arm and Thigh; but none of them being mortal, (while they were yet warm) Eumenes gave Neoptolemus a second Blow upon his Neck, and kill'd him outright. In the mean time great Slaughter was made among the rest of the Horse on both sides; so that while some were kill'd and others wounded, the Fortune of the Day at the first was very uncertain: But as soon as it was nois'd abroad that Neoptolemus was slain, and both Wings broken, the whole Body fled, and made away to the The Battalion of the Mace∣donian Foot. P. 645. Ant. Ch. 320. Phalanx as to a strong Wall of Defence. But Eumenes (content with keeping of his Ground, and the Posses∣sion of the Bodies of both the Generals) sounded a Retreat to his Soldiers. Then he set up a Trophy, and after he had bury'd the Slain, he sent to the Phalanx, and to them that were thus routed, to let them know, That whoever would, should have liberty to take up Arms with him, or to go their way wherever they pleas'd. The Macedonians accepted of these Terms of Peace, and upon Oath of Fidelity given, they had liberty to march away to the next Towns to supply themselves with Provision. But they dealt treacherously with Eumenes; for recollecting their Forces, and furnishing themselves with Provision, in the Night they stole away and went to Antipater. Eumenes indeed did all he could to revenge this Breach of their Oaths, and to that end forthwith endeavour'd to pursue the Phalanx; but by reason of the Strength of the Enemy, and his own Indispo∣sition, (through the Wounds he had receiv'd,) he was not able to do any thing effectual∣ly, and therefore he judg'd it better to forbear from further Pursuit. Having therefore gain'd so glorious a Victory, and cut off two eminent Commanders, his Name grew very famous. Antipater having receiv'd those that had escap'd, after they were refresh'd hasted away to Cilicia, and to aid Ptolemy. But Perdiccas comes into Aegypt. Perdiccas hearing of the His first Vi∣ctory over Ne∣optolemus, for Perdiccas was kill'd before the News of this last arriv'd, as appears after∣wards. Victory gain'd by Eu∣menes, prosecuted his Expedition into Aegypt with much more Assurance. When he came near to the River Nile, he encamp'd not far off Pelusium; and while he was cleansing an old Sluce, Nile so overflow'd, that it defeated all his Design, and spoil'd his Works, and many of his Friends deserted the Camp, and went over to Ptolomy. For he inclin'd to Cruelty, and having remov'd the rest of the Captains from the Sovereign Command, he made it his only Business to be sole Monarch, and absolute Tyrant. Ptolemy on the contrary was courteous and mild, and gave free Liberty to the rest of the Captains to advise him in all his Enterprizes. Besides, he had put strong Garisons Ant. Ch. 320. into all the convenient Places of Aegypt, and had furnish'd them with all sorts of Wea∣pons, and other Things that were necessary. By which means he succeeded in every
thing for the most part that he undertook, while many that lov'd the Man chearfully ex∣pos'd themselves to undergo all Hazards for his sake. But Perdiccas, to repair his Losses, call'd together the Commanders, and having regain'd some by Gifts, and others by large Promises, and all by smooth Words, he hearten'd himself so as to bear up against the Hazards and Difficulties that were coming apace upon him. And when he had order'd them all to be ready for a March, about Evening he mov'd from thence with his whole Army. Not acquainting any whither he would lead them, he march'd all Night with a swift March, and at length encamp'd upon the Banks of the Nile, not far from a Castle call'd the Camel's Wall. When it was Day he pass'd his Army over, the Elephants leading the Way, and next to them the Targateers, with those that carry'd the Sealing Ladders, and other things he had occasion to use in a Siege: His best Horse at length brought up the Rear, with Ant. Ch. 320. whom he intended to attack the Ptolemeans, if it happen'd that they appear'd. In the middle of their March Ptolemy's Horse shew'd themselves, making forward in a swift Ca∣reer for the Defence of the Town; who though they hasted away to enter the Fort, and by sounding of Trumpets and shouts of Men gave sufficient notice to all of their Approach, yet Perdiccas was not at all amus'd, but boldly led up his Army close to the Fort; and forthwith the Targateers with their Ladders mounted the Wall; and those that rid the Perdiccas as∣saults the Fore call'd the Ca∣mel-wall, but is red. Elephants threw down the Fortifications, and demolish'd the Bulwarks. Whereupon Ptolemy, with those of his own Guard about him, to encourage the rest of his Officers and Friends manfully to behave themselves, catch'd hold of a Sarissa and mounted the Bulwark, and so being on the higher Ground, struck out the Eyes of the foremost Ele∣phant, and wounded the Indian that sate upon him. And as for those that seal'd the Walls. he hurl'd them down shamefully cut and wounded (together with their Arms) into the River. After his Example Ptolemy's Friends valiantly bestirr'd themselves, and by killing the Indian that govern'd the next Elephant, the Beast became unserviceable. The As∣sault P. 646. continuing long, Perdiccas his Soldiers assaulted the Wall by turns, striving with all the Vigour imaginable to gain the Fort by Storm. On the other hand Ptolemy calling to his Friends now to approve their Faithfulness and Loyalty to him by their Courage, Ant. Ch. 320. fought like a Hero, and gave an Example of Valour to all the rest. In this sharp Dispute, many fell on both Sides. The Ptolemeans had the advantage in the Height of the Place, and the Perdicceans in Greatness of their Number, which far exceeded the other. At length the whole Day being spent in the Assault, Perdiccas rais'd his Siege, and march'd back to his Camp, and in the Night decamp'd, and with a quiet and silent March came into a part of the Country over-against Memphis, where Nile (dividing it self into two Parts) made an Island sufficient to receive and encamp the greatest Army. Into this Place therefore he pass'd over part of his Army, though the Passage was very difficult through the depth of the River; for the Water reaching up to the Chin, the Soldiers could not stand upon their Legs, and were likewise cumber'd with their Arms. Perdicca, therefore discerning the Unruliness of the River, plac'd the Elephants on the Left, to break the force of the Stream. The Horse went on the Right, by whose Help he took up them that were hurry'd down by the Current, and set them safe on the Shoar on the other side. But there happen'd in this Passage that which was strange and unusual: For when the first were gotten over, those that follow'd were in very great Hazard. For the River rose Perdiccas  of his Men in the River Nile. Ant. Ch. 320. on a sudden, without any apparent Cause, and swept away whole Sholes of Bodies at a time, which put all into a Consternation. The Cause of this Inundation could not be found out, though it was enquir'd into. Some imputed it to a Dyke or Sluce in the higher Grounds, whose Banks might be broken down, and so all its Water ran into Nile, by which means the Ford was so much the higher. Others conceiv'd it was great Rains that fell in the Lands above that increas'd the Waters of the River. But it was neither of these. But the true Cause why the Passage at first was without danger, was because the Sand then was firm and unmov'd; but afterwards when by the treading of the Horses and Elephants, and the Passage of the Army, the Sand was stirr'd and carry'd away by the Force of the River, the Ford by this means was, as it were, dug into, and made into Holes, and so the Passage was deeper in the middle of the River. Perdiccas therefore not being able to pass the rest of his Army over, fell into a great strait, being those that were got to the other side were very unequal to the force of the Enemy, and those on this side the River were not able to succour them. Hereupon he commanded all those that were landed in the Island, to return. The Army thus forc'd to repass the River, those that could swim, and were strong-bodied Men, with great difficulty recover'd the other side of the Nile; but most of them lost their Arms. The rest who were not so skilful, some of them were drown'd, and others were carry'd down the Stream, and Ant. Ch. 320.
fell into the Hands of the Enemy. Very many for a long time toss'd and tumbled hither and thither, were at length devour'd by Crocodiles. Above Two thousand having pe∣rish'd P 647. in this manner, (among whom were some eminent Commanders,) the Hearts of the Soldiers were much turn'd against Perdiccas. But Ptolemy caus'd all those Bodies to be burnt that were brought dead down the River to him, and having perform'd all Funeral Obsequies and Observances due to the Dead, he sent their Ashes and Bones to their Kin∣dred and Friends. This far more inrag'd the Spirits of the Macedonians against Perdiccas, and knit their Hearts in affection to Ptolemy. When the Night came on, the Camp was full of Cries and Lamentations, that so many Men should miserably perish without a Stroke stricken, amongst whom there were no fewer than a Thousand, who were swallow'd by the mon∣strous Crocodiles. Hereupon many of the Commanders rail'd against Perdiccas; and the whole Phalanx of Foot being totally disaffected, discover'd their Hatred by their Murmurings and Threats: And a Hundred of the chief Commanders deserted him; of whom, the chief∣est of them was Pithon, who had conquer'd the Rebellious Greeks, not inferiour in Valour and Reputation to any of Alexander's Commanders. Afterwards some of the Horse en∣ter'd into a Conspiracy, and made to his Tent, and in a Body fell upon him, and kill'd Perdiccas kill'd. him. The next day, when the Soldiers were in a Consult, Ptolemy came to them, and salu∣ted the Macedonians, and made an Apology for what he had done. And seeing that they wanted Provision, he furnish'd the Army with abundance of Bread, and supply'd the Ant. Ch. 320. Camp with all other Things that were necessary. But though he was upon this account in great Grace and Favour with the Soldiers, and so able easily to gain the Protectorship of the Kings, yet he demanded it not, but bestowed the chief Command upon Python and Arrhideus, to whom in Gratitude he was much oblig'd. For when the Macedonians appointed a Consult concerning that honourable Trust and high Command, by the Ad∣vice Ptolemy makes Arrhi∣deus and Py∣tho Protectors of the Kings. of Ptolemy they all unanimously created Python and Arrhideus (who convey'd the the King's Body) to be Protectors of the Kings, investing them with Sovereign Autho∣rity. And in this manner Perdiccas, after he had enjoy'd the Sovereign Command for the space of Three Years, lost both it and his Life together. After his Death, News was The two Kings were Arrihi∣daeus, and A∣lexander, a young Child. brought, that Eumenes had won the Day in Cappadocia, and that Craeterus and Neoptolemus were both slain. Which News, if it had arriv'd the Day before Perdiccas his Death, that prosperous Success would have been a Protection to his Person, so as none durst have lifted up their Hands against him. But the Macedonians now hearing how Eumenes had succeeded, condemn'd him and all his Adherents (to the number of Fifty Noble Lords, amongst whom was Alcetas the Eumenes con∣demn'd to die. Brother of Perdiccas,) to die. And at that very time they put to Death those that were Perdiccas his chiefest Friends, then in their Hands, with his Sister Atalanta, the Wife of Attalus the Admiral of the Fleet. For at and after the Death of Perdiccas, Attalus the Ant. Ch. 320. Admiral lay with the Fleet before Pelusium; and when News was brought him of the Death of Perdiccas and his Wife, he loos'd from thence, and arriv'd at Tyre; where Archelaus, a Macedonian Governor of the City, kindly receiv'd him, and deliver'd up to him the City, and faithfully restor'd to him the Money intrusted in his Hands by Perdiccas, to the Value of Eight hundred Talents. And thus Attalus abiding at Tyre, receiv'd all Perdiccas's Friends that fled to him from the Camp at Memphis. After Antipater was gone over into Asia, the Aetolians, in pursuance of their League made with Perdiccas, mach'd into Thessaly with a Design to divide Antipater's Army. P. 648. The Aetolians invade Thes∣saly. They had Twelve thousand Foot, and Four hundred rather. Four thousand Horse, commanded as General by Alexander an Aetolian. In their March they besieg'd the Locrians in Amphissa, and harrass'd their Country, and took some of the neighbouring Towns and Villages. They routed likewise Polycles, An∣tipater's General, and kill'd him, with a great number of his Men. Of the Prisoners they took, some were sold for Slaves, and others were ransom'd. Afterwards they broke into Thessaly, and brought over many there to join with them in the War against Antipa∣ter, insomuch as they made up in the whole a Body of Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse; while they were taking in the Cities, the Acarnanians bearing a Grudge to the Aetolians, invaded Aetolia, wasted and spoil'd the Country, and be∣sieg'd Ant. Ch. 320. the Cities. When the Aetolians heard what Danger their Country was in, they left the rest of their Forces in Thessaly under the Command of Menon of Pharsalis, and they themselves speedily march'd back with their own Soldiers into Aetolia, and struck such a Terror into the Acarnanians, that they presen reliev'd their Country. While
they were thus employ'd, Polyspherchon, who was left General in Macedonia, came into Polyspher∣chon routs the Aetolians. Thessaly with a brave Army, and fought and routed the Enemy, killing Menon the Gene∣ral, and cutting off most of his Army, and so recover'd Thessaly. As for the Affairs of Asia, Arrhideus and Pytho, Protectors of the Kings, leaving the River Nile, came with the Kings, and the whole Army to Triparadi∣sus, call'd by Pliny, Nat. Hist. Paradi∣sus. l. 1. c. 23. The Triple Garden. Triparadisus in Higher Sy∣ria, or Caelo Syria. Higher Syria. There Wife of Ar∣rhideus, one of the Kings of Macedon. Ant. Ch. 320. Euridice the Queen taking upon her to intermeddle and pry too curiously into Matters that concern'd her not, and to controul the Protectors; Pytho and his Friends hereby became much disgusted, and perceiving that the Macedonians were more observant to her Commands than to theirs, they call'd a Council, and gave up the Protectorship Whereupon the Macedonians chose Antipater Protector, with absolute Authority. A few days after Antipater going to Triparadisus, found Eurydice stiring up the Macedonians to a Sedition against him; whereupon there arose no small Mutiny in the Army. Antipater hereupon call'd a General Council, and so argu'd and canvass'd the Business with them, that he allay'd the Spirit of the People, and brought Eurydice (through fear of him) into a better Temper. After these Things were over, Antipater made a second Division of the Provinces, and allotted to Ptolemy that whereof he was then in Possession. For it was not Practicable to remove him, because it appear'd Ptolemy had gain'd Aegypt as a Conqueror. Syria he gave to Laomedon of Mitylene; and Cilicia to Philoxenus. Of the other Provinces, he The Provinces again divided by Antipater. assign'd Mesopotamia and Arbelitis to Amphimachus; the Province of Babylon to Seleucus, and Susiana to For Antigi∣nes, Captain of the Silver Targateers. Antigonus, because he was the first that set the Wheel a going in order to overthrow Perdiccas. To Peucestas he granted Persia; to Tlepolemus, Carmania; to Pithon, Media; and to Philip, Parthia. Aria and Drangana he allotted to Stasandrus the Cyprian; Bactriana and Sogdiana to Stasanorus of Solium, born in the same Island; Parapamisada, to Oxyartas the Father of Rhoxana, whom Alexander marry'd; and India, bordering upon Parapamisada, to Pithon the Son of Agenor. Of the Kingdoms next adjoyning, that which border'd upon the River Indus, continu'd under the Power of Porus; that which lay to Hydaspes, remain'd with Taxilis. For these Kings were not to be Dispossess'd, but with the Royal Army, and a skilful and expert General. As to the The Lesser Asia. P. 649. Northern Provin∣ces, he gave the Government of Cappadocia to Nicanor, and the Greater Phrygia and Cilicia for Lycia. Cili∣cia to Antigonus, to hold them as he did before. Lastly, to Cassander he assign'd Caria; to Clitus, For Lydia. Lycia; and to Arrhideus, Phrygia at the Hellespont. Antigonus he appointed Gene∣ral of the Royal Army, and commanded him to pursue and destroy Eumenes. To Anti∣gonus he also join'd Cassander and Clearchus, that if he secretly projected any thing, he Ant. Ch. 320. might be discover'd. He himself march'd with the Kings and his Troops towards Ma∣cedonia, that he might conduct the Kings back into their own Country. Antigonus therefore being declar'd absolute Commander of Asia, drew out the Forces out of their Winter-Quarters to fight with Eumenes, and to that end furnishing himself with Antigonus routs Eume∣nes. all necessary Preparations for the War, he march'd towards Eumenes, who then lay in Cappadocia; where one call'd Perdiccas, one of his chief Commanders, had deserted him, and lay encamp'd with Three thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse (that follow'd him) about three days March distant. But Eumenes sent out Phenices of Tenedos with Four thousand good Foot and a Thousand Horse against him; who, with a swift March, fell upon the Rebels on a sudden in the Night when they were asleep, and took Perdiccas and all his Army Prisoners, about the second Watch of the Night. Eumenes put to Death the chief Ringleaders of the Defection, and spar'd the rest of the Soldiers, and mix'd them amongst his own, and by this means gain'd all their Affections. After this, Antigonus, by a Correspondence with one Apollonides, General of the Horse on Eumenes his side, by large Promises so effected the Business, that he prevail'd with him to betray Eumenes, and come over to him in the heat of the Fight. Eumenes was then encamp'd in Cappadocia, Ant. Ch. 320. in In the Coun∣try of Orcy∣nia on Cappa∣docia. Ush. Ann. 300. Places very convenient for Engagement with Horse. Antigonus therefore made thi∣ther with his whole Army, and possess'd himself of the higher Ground under the Foot of the Mountains: He had at that time above Ten thousand Foot, (of whom most were Macedonians, brave and valiant Men,) and Two thousand Horse, and Thirty Elephants. Eumenes had no less than Twenty thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse. Presently a sharp and bloody Battel was fought, in which Antigonus (through the sudden and unex∣pected Desertion of Apollonides with his Horse, and going over to the other side,) got the Day, killing Eight thousand Men of the Enemy upon the place, and possessing himself of all their Bag and Baggage, so that the Eumeneans (through the Slaughter that was made) were in a Consternation, and by the loss of all their Carriages, were brought to an utter Desperation. Hereupon Eumenes design'd to fly into Armenia, to perswade some Eumenes flies to Nora. of the Inhabitants to join with him in Arms; but being prevented by a swift Pursuit, and
perceiving his Men to run away from him to Antigonus, he possess'd himself of a strong Fort call'd Nora. It was indeed very small, not above Two Furlongs in compass, but in Strength impregnable. For the Houses were built upon a very high Rock, and it was wonderfully fortisy'd both by Nature and Art. Besides, there was there laid up great store of Corn, Fuel, and other Things of that kind, so that all that fled for shelter thi∣ther, might be abundantly supply'd with all Things necessary for many Years together. Those that were his fast Friends, accompany'd him in his Flight, and resolv'd at the last and utmost Extremity to die with him. They were in Number, both Horse and Foot, about Six hundred. Antigonus being now strengthen'd with the Forces of Eumenes, and the Revenues of his Provinces, and having gotten together a great Mass of Treasure, began to aspire to P. 6, 0. Matters of higher Concern; for none of the Asian Commanders were as yet so Potent, Ant. Ch. 320. as to dare to contend with him for the Sovereign Command. For the present, indeed he bore a fair outside towards Antipater, but secretly had resolv'd, that when he had firmly settl'd his Affairs, he would neither regard him nor the Kings. And in the first place, he block'd up them in the Fort with a double Wall, and with deep Trenches and Antigonus besieges Nora. Works of Earth of a wonderful height. Then he enter'd into Parley with Eumenes, wil∣ling him to renew their ancient Friendship, and endeavour'd to perswade him to join with him as an Associate in all his Affairs. But Eumenes foreseeing a change of Fortune at hand, insisted upon Terms, and that degree of Favour that seem'd very unequal and unfit to be granted to one in his present Circumstances: For he requir'd, as of Right, to be restor'd to all his Provinces, and to be fully acquitted and discharged of all pretended Offences whatsoever. Antigonus promis'd to acquaint Antipater with his Demands, and leaving sufficient Strength for continuing the Siege, he march'd against the Generals, (that were moving towards him with all their Forces,) viz. Alcetas the Brother of Per∣diccas, and Attalus the Admiral of the Fleet. Some time after, Eumenes sent Ambassa∣dors to Antipater to treat upon Terms of Peace, (amongst whom was Hieronymus a Co∣lonel, who wrote the History of the Successors.) In the mean time he himself having experienc'd many Changes and Turns of Fortune, was not at all discourag'd, knowing very well what quick and sudden Alterations had happen'd on both Sides. For he saw that the Macedonian Kings were but only vain and insignificant Shadows of Princes, and those many valiant Commanders that were with them, so manag'd their Commands one after another, as to seek only the Advancement of their own private Interests. There∣fore he hop'd, (as the Truth fell out afterwards to be,) that many would desire his Help Ant. Ch. 320. and Assistance, both upon the account of his Skill im Martial Affairs, as of his Constancy and Faithfulness. But when he saw that the Horse could not be Exercis'd in a Place so strait and craggy, and so were unserviceable for Horse-Engagements, he ingeniously found out a new and Eumenes in∣vents a way to Exercise the Horse in Nora. Plutarch's Life of Eu∣menes. unusual way for the Exercise of them: For he ty'd up their Heads by Chains to a Post or strong Stake, and drew them up so high, as that they should stand upon their hinder Feet, and but just touch the Ground with the Ends of their fore Feet. Whereupon the Horse presently striving to get his fore Feet to the Ground, did so curvet and caper, that Legs, Thighs, and every Member was in action, and by this Motion the Horse was all on a Foam; and thus they were all Exercis'd to the highest degree. He himself fed of the meanest Food with the rest of the Soldiers, and by this eating with them in common, not only gain'd to himself the Love of all his Fellow-Soldiers, but caus'd them to be at perfect Peace and Concord one with another. In the mean time Ptolemy in Aegypt (Per∣diccas with all the King's Army being broken in pieces) enjoy'd that Country as a Con∣queror: And casting his Eye upon Phoenicia and Celo-Syria, (as lying very commodiously to Aegypt,) he us'd his utmost Endeavour to possess himself of the Cities of those Coun∣tries. Ant. Ch. 320. To that end he created Nicanor, one of his Friends, General, and sent him into those Parts with a considerable Army, who coming into Syria, took Laomedon, the Gover∣nor of that Province, Prisoner, and brought all Syria under his own Power. He gain'd Ptolemy gains Syria and Phoenicia by Nicanor. At this time he entred Jerusalem. Joseph. Appian. l. 1. Ant. l. 12. c. 1. also all the Cities of Phoenicia, and put Garisons into them, and having in a short time finish'd a troublesom Expedition, return'd into Aegypt.
CHAP. IV. Antigonus routs Alcetas in Pisidia, and takes Attalus. Alcetas receiv'd into Ter∣messus, and there protected. He's murder'd there treacherously, his Body inhumanly us'd by Antigonus. Antipater's Death. Antipater put Demeas, one of the Athe∣nian Ambassadors, to Death. Polysperchon made Chief in Macedonia. Cas∣sander conspires to out him. Antigonus his Plots to be Sovereign of all. Arrideus secures himself in Phrygia, besieges Cyzicum. Antigonus goes to raise it. Eu∣menes got out of Nora by Antigonus his Order. Antigonus his further Acts. The various Fortunes of Eumenes. A Council in Macedonia call'd by Polysper∣chon against Cassander. The Decree of the Council. Polysperchon invites Olpmpias out of Epyrus into Macedonia. Writes to Eumenes to join with the Kings. AFterwards when Apollodorus executed the Office of Lord-Chancellor at Athens, and P. 651. Olymp. 114. 4. Ant. Ch. 319. Quintus Publius and Lucius Pa∣pirius. Antigonus beats Alcitas and Attalus. Quintus Poplias Consuls at Rome, Antigonus, after the Defeat of Eumenes, determin'd to march against Alcetas and Attalus. For those only remain'd of all Perdiccas his Friends and Kindred who were skilful Commanders, and had Forces suffi∣cient to cope with him for the Sovereign Power. To this end he march'd away with his whole Army out of Cappadocia, and made for Pisidia, where Alcetas then lay, and came with a swist March suddenly and unexpectedly to Critopolis, (as it was call'd,) having march'd Above 350 Miles. Two thousand five hundred Furlongs in 7 Days and 7 Nights time, and by that means was upon them before they were aware; and there he first possess'd himself of certain Hills, and other difficult Passes in the Country. When Alcetas his Party had in∣telligence of the Enemy's approach, they presently drew up a Of Horse. Phalanx in order of Battel, and by a fierce Charge endeavour'd to drive the Horse down the Hills, who had now gain'd the Tops of the Mountains. Hereupon began a sharp Engagement, in which many falling on both sides, Antigonus with a Body of Six The Greek is so, but the La∣tin is 600. thousand Horse bore down with all his Might upon the Enemy, endeavouring to cut off all ways and means of Re∣treat to Alcetas; this done, those upon the Tops of the Mountains, by the Advantage of the steepness and difficulty of the Places, easily put the Phalanx to flight. Hereupon Alcetas his Men being surrounded with the Multitude of their Enemies, and all Passes block'd up between them and their Foot, they look'd upon themselves all as dead Men. There∣fore seeing no other Remedy or Means left to escape, Alcetas (with the Loss of Multi∣tudes of his Men) at length with much ado broke through his Enemies, and got to the Foot. Hereupon Antigonus marching down from the Hills with his whole Army, and his Elephants, the Enemy (who were far inferior in Number) were mightily terrify'd: For all the Confederates were not above Sixteen thousand Foot, and Nine hundred Horse; whereas the Forces of Antigonus (besides Elephants) were above Forty thousand Foot, Ant. Ch. 319. and Seven thousand Horse. Those therefore, with Alcetas, (considering that they should meet with Elephants in the Front, and be surrounded with Multitudes of Horse, and forc'd to engage with Foot far exceeding them, both in Number of Men, and in the Skil∣fulness of their Arms, and besides had the Advantage of the higher Ground,) fell into Confusion and Amazement; nay, the Enemy hasted and came upon them so fast, that they were not able to draw up their Men in due order of Battel; so that the whole Ar∣my was presently broken in pieces, and Attalus Docimus and Polemo, and many other Commanders, were taken Prisoners. But Alcetas, with his Life-Guard, his Children, Alcetas re∣ceiv'd into Termessus. and those Pisidians that sided with him, got into Termessus, a City of Pisidia. Then Anti∣gonus came to an Agreement with the Captains, his Prisoners, and the rest he dispos'd of among his own Troops, using them with all Humanity, and by this means greatly en∣creas'd his Army. But about Six thousand Pisidians (valiant Men) resolv'd to stick to Alcetas, and promis'd they would never desert him upon any Terms whatsoever: For they lov'd him intirely for the Reasons following. For, When Alcetas, after the Death of Perdiccas, had no Confederates in Asia, he determin'd by some acts of Kindness or other to engage the Pisidians; because he knew he should thereby gain a Warlike People, that had a Country very difficult to enter, and full of strong Forts, to be his Confederates. Therefore in every Expedition he always bestow'd spe∣cial P. 652 Ant. Ch. 319. Marks of Honour upon them above all the rest of his Confederates. For he so divi∣ded the Spoil of his Enemies, that the Half was ever allotted to them. Moreover, by
his Familiarity and Freedom in Converse, daily Invitations of the most eminent Persons amongst them to his Table, and by his Bounty and Liberality in bestowing upon them many large Gifts and Rewards, he ingross'd to himself the Love of all: So that now (ha∣ving anchor'd all his Hopes, and plac'd his chiefest Confidence in them,) he was not frustrated in his Expectation. For when Antigonus encamp'd with his whole Army before Termessus, and demanded Alcetas to be deliver'd up to him, (and the Elders of the City had determin'd to give him up,) all the young Men got together, and resolv'd to run all Hazards, and the utmost Extremity, for his Preservation. The Elders indeed at first en∣deavour'd to disswade the young Men, and draw them off from their former Resolve, wishing them not to involve their Country in War for the sake of one Macedonian. But when they saw that they could not allay the Heat of the young Men, they secretly con∣sulted together, and in the Night sent away a Messenger to Antigonus, and by him faith∣fully promis'd, That they would deliver Alcetas up to him, either dead or alive. To this end they desir'd him, That by assaulting the City for some Days, he would decoy the young Men to sally out, and while he was skirmishing with them, to feign a Flight; by this means, when the young Men were out of the City, and busy in Pursuit, they should have an Opportunity to accomplish their Design. Antigonus assented hereunto, and drew Ant. Ch. 319. off from the City at a further Distance, and so egg'd on the young Men to Skirmishes, and light Pickeerings. The Or Aldermen. Elders now discerning Alcetas left alone, they employ'd the faithfullest of their Servants, and the most active Men of the City, (that were not engag'd with him,) and with them (in the Absence of the young Men) set upon him; but could not take him, for he kill'd himself with his own Hand, lest he should fall alive Alcetas mur∣der'd. into the Power of the Enemy: But they laid his Body upon a Bier, casting over it a course Cloth, and carry'd it out of the Gates, and, unknown to them that were skirmish∣ing, deliver'd it to Antigonus. By this Device they freed their Country, and prevented a War; but they could not avoid the Fury of the young Men. For when they return'd, and understood what was done, (through that ardent Love and Affection they bore Al∣cetas,) they were so enrag'd at their Governors, that they first possess'd themselves of a part of the City, and resolv'd to set the Houses on fire, and after to issue out with their Arms, and betake themselves to the Mountains, and wast and destroy all the Country round belonging to Antigonus. But afterwards they alter'd their Purpose as to the burning of the City, and began, by robbing and spoiling miserably, to lay waste a great part of the Enemy's Country. In the mean time, Antigonus having receiv'd the Body of Alce∣tas, us'd it with all the Disgrace and Contumely imaginable for the space of three Days together, and then beginning to putrify, contemptuously cast it out without any Burial, and so march'd out of Pisidia. But the young Men of Termessus bearing still a Love and Respect to the abus'd Body of the Dead, took it up, and decently bury'd it. He was of so kind and obliging a Na∣ture, Ant. Ch. 319. that there was something singular in him of Love and Respect to all those that de∣serv'd well, and therefore he was ever towards such unchangeable in his Love and Affe∣ction. Antigonus having left Pisidia, made towards Phrygia with his whole Army. When he came to the City of the Cretiens, Aristodemus the Milesian brought him the News of Antipater's Death, and that the chief Command, together with the Protectorship of the Antipater's Death. Kings, was devolv'd upon Polysperchon the Macedonian. He was pleas'd with the News, and now his Hopes were exalted, for he made it his Business to Rule and Govern all the Affairs of Asia, and to gain the Absolute and Sovereign Command there without stoop∣ing to any. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus at this time. In Macedonia, while Antipater was seiz'd with a grievous Sickness, (and old Age ma∣king way for his Dissolution,) the Athenians sent Demades (who was look'd upon as one P. 653. that had manag'd Things with the Macedonians with a great deal of Honesty and Inte∣grity) Ambassador to Antipater, to desire him to draw out the Garison from Munichia, as it was at first Articl'd and Agreed. Antipater at the first was very kind to Demades; but after the Death of Perdiccas, when some Letters of Demades (amongst others) were found amongst the King's Papers, wherein he press'd Perdiccas to hasten with all speed into Europe against Antipater; though he suppress'd his Resentment for a time, yet in Ant. Ch. 319. truth he bore him a Grudge. Therefore when Demades had deliver'd his Message, (as he was Commanded,) and had something sharply debated the Matter concerning the Ga∣rison; Antipater, without giving any Answer, committed his Son Demeas (who was joint Ambassador with his Father) to the Our Sheriffs. Executioners, who presently carry'd him away to the Prison, and for the Reasons before-mention'd Antipater put one of the Athenian Ambassadors to Death. cut off his Head.
Afterwards, Antipater, when he was very near his End, appointed Polysperchon, the Eldest almost of all Alexander's Captains, and one in great Honour and Reputation with the Macedonians, to be Protector of the Kings, with chief and absolute Authority. And his Son Cassander he created    Polysperchon ma  Comm Chiliarch, next in Power and Authority to Polysperchon. This Office was first made a Place of Honour and Credit by the Persian Kings, and af∣terwards by Alexander, when he grew great, and began to imitate this and other the Customs of the Persians. But Cassander relish'd not his Father's ordering of Matters, and judg'd it very dishonourable to his Family to have one that was nothing related, either in Blood or Affinity, to succeed in the Sovereign Command, when there was a Son who in Macedonia gave apparent and pregnant Evidences, both of Valour and Parts, sufficient to Govern the Affairs of the State in the room of his Father. In the first place therefore he took a Journey into the Country with some of his Friends, Cassander c to gain the Sverign Command in Macedonia. where having both leisure and opportunity, he discours'd with them about the Chief Command, and dealt with every one of them privately apart by themselves, to contrive Ways and Means for him to gain the Principality, and by large Promises prevail'd with them to join together in their Assistance, for the accomplishment of what he desir'd. He likewise privately sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy, to renew the League, and pray his Assi∣stance; and that he would to that purpose help him with Shipping out of Phaenicia, and Ant. Ch. 319. send them with all speed to the Hellespont. In like manner he sent Ambassadors to the rest of the Cities and Captains, to sollicit them to join with them in Arms. But the better to conceal his Design, and that he might not be suspected, he spent his time for many days together in Hunting. But Polyspherchon having gain'd the Guardianship of the Kings, call'd together a Gene∣ral Council of his Friends, and by their advice sent for Olympias, wishing that she would take into her Care Alexander's Alexander, one of the King▪ Son, who was then but a Child, and reside for the fu∣ture as Queen Regent in Macedonia: For by reason of the Quarrels and Heart-burnings between her and Antipater, she had withdrawn herself into Epirus. When the Death of Antipater was nois'd abroad in Asia, Stirs and Commotions began to change the face of Affairs there, while they that were in Power and Authority made it their Business, and sought every one how to advance his own particular Interest. The Antigonus piets to be So∣vereign. P. 654. chief of whom was Antigonus, who (upon the account of his having conquer'd Eumenes in Cappadocia, and was join'd with his Forces, and Alcetas and Attalus in Pisidia, and be∣sides was appointed by Antipater Viceroy of Asia, and had the Command of a great Army) bore himself very high, and swell'd with Pride in the Imagination of his own Greatness. Ant. Ch. 319. And being now possess'd already (in his own Conceit) of the Sovereignty, he resolv'd neither to regard the Kings nor their Guardians: For in regard he had a greater Army, he was confident he could possess himself of all the Treasures laid up in Asia, being there was none able to oppose him. He had then in his Army Threescore thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse, and Thirty Elephants. And besides these, he doubted not but to raise more, whenever he had occasion; for that there was Money enough in Asia for the listing of Soldiers abroad in any place where he pleas'd. Pondering these things in his Head, he sent for Hieronymus the Historian, Eumenes the Cardian's special Friend and Fellow-Citizen (he who fled to Nora) and having brought him to him by many rich Gifts and Presents, he sent him as an Agent to Eumenes, with Instructions to desire him to forget the Battel in Cappadocia, and to be his Friend and Confederate in the War; and that he should have a far larger Province, and much more Wealth than ever he enjoy'd before: And to let him know, That he should be Chiefest of his Friends, and share with him in the Advantages and Successes of all his Designs. Then without any further delay he call'd his Friends together, and imparted to them his whole Design; and to those who were of greatest account among them, to some he allotted Provinces, to others Commands in the Army; and by raising the Hopes and Ex∣pectations of every one of them, he made them all very forward to assist him in carrying on his Intrigues: For he determin'd to pass through all Asia, and to remove all the Gover∣nours Ant. Ch. 319. of the Provinces, and bestow them upon his Friends. While he was in execution of these Projects, Arrideus the Governour of Phrygia  the Hellespont, understanding what he was contriving, resolv'd to secure his own Province, Arrideus se∣cures himself in Phrygia a∣gainst Antigo∣nus. and to that end put sufficient Garisons into the principal Cities, and march'd against Cy∣zicum, being the greatest and most important City of all others for his purpose. He had with him above Ten thousand Foot of Mercenaries, a Thousand Macedonians. Five hun∣dred Persian Darters and Slingers, and Eight hundred Horse, together with all sorts of Engines for Battery, both for shooting of Darts and casting of Stones, and all other things necessary for the carrying on of a Siege. He came upon the City on a sudden, and ha∣ving surpriz'd most of the People when they were abroad in the open fields, he prest on
the Siege, and endeavour'd to force the Inhabitants (who were in a very great fright) to Cyzicum be∣ by Arri∣deus. receive a Garison. The Cyzians, though they were thus surpriz'd, and that many were shut out that were in the Fields, and those that remain'd were altogether unable to defend the Place, looking upon it as their Duty to assert their Liberty, cowardly sent forth Am∣bassadors to treat concerning the raising of the Siege; and to let Arrideus know, That the City was ready to submit to any thing he thought fit, except the receiving of a Gari∣son: But in the mean time they secretly arm'd all their young Men, and Slaves, that were fit for Service, and so lin'd the Walls round with Men for the Defence of the Town. But Arrideus still pressing the matter for the receiving of a Garison, the Ambassadors answer'd, Ant. Ch 319. That they would acquaint the Citizens with his Demands; which he consented unto, and so discharg'd them: and being thus freed, they spent all that Day, and the Night next following, in Preparations for the holding out of the Siege. Being thus deluded, he lost the Opportunity of accomplishing what he design'd: For the Cyzians, in regard the City was very strong, and well guarded on the Land side (for it was a Peninsula) and being P. 655. Masters likewise at Sea, they easily repuls'd the Enemy. Moreover, they sent to them of Byzantium for Soldiers, and Darts, and all other Things that were necessary and useful against an Assault. All which were speedily and readily sent to them; whereby their Hopes were so reviv'd, that they were the more encourag'd to stand it out to the utmost. They presently likewise put forth their Long Ships to Sea, and fail'd along the Coast, and took in those that were in the Fields, and brought them back to the City. Having therefore thus increas'd the number of their Soldiers (after the killing a great many of the Besiegers) they forc'd the Enemy to raise the Siege; whereupon Arrideus (cheated by this Stratagem of the Cyzians) after a fruitless attempt, return'd into his own Pro∣vince. In the mean time, Antigonus lying at Celena, was inform'd of the Siege at Cyzicum, and therefore resolv'd to lay an Obligation upon that City (then in danger to be ruin'd) to Antigonus goes to vaise the Siege at Cyzi∣cum. Ant. Ch. 319. favour him in his future Designs. To that end he detach'd out of his whole Army Twenty thousand of his best Foot, and Three thousand Horse, and with these march'd away with all speed to the Aid of the Cyzians; but came thither a little too late: And so though he made a show of a great Kindness to the City, yet he was wholly frustrated in his Design. But he sent Ambassadors to Arrideus, to expostulate Matters with him; first, Why he dar'd to besiege a Greek Confederate City without any Provocation: Then, to charge him with open Rebellion, and with a Purpose to make himself absolute Lord and Sovereign of the Province. Lastly, To command him to depart out of the Province, and thence-forward to live a private Life, and content himself with one only City for his Subsistence. Arrideus hearing these Demands of the Ambassadors (and charging them with Inso∣lency) told them he would not leave the Province; but that he would Garrison all his Cities, and was resolv'd to decide the matter with him by the Sword. In pursuance of what he had said (having every where fortified his Towns and Cities) he sent away a General with part of his Army, commanding him to join with Eumenes, and to free the Fort from the Siege, and Eumenes from the Straits and Difficulties wherein Eumenes got out of Nora, by Antigonus his Order. The Acts of Antigonus. Ant. Ch. 319. he then was, and to persuade him to be his Confederate in the War. Antigonus, in the mean time, eager to be reveng'd on Arrideus, sent away some of his Forces against him; and he himself march'd with a numerous Army towards Lydia, with a Purpose to depose Clitus the Lord-Lieutenant of that Province; who having before intelligence of his march, Garison'd all his principal Cities, and he himself sail'd over into Macedonia, to inform the Kings and Polysperchon of the Revolt and Impudence of An∣tigonus, and to crave their Aid and Assistance. Antigonus at his first approach had Ephesus deliver'd up to him by the Assistance of some in the City: Afterwards, when Aesculus the Rhodian arriv'd at Ephesus with four Ships, wherein were Six hundred Talents of Silver sent out of Cilicia to the Kings in Macedonia, he seiz'd upon the Money, alledging he had occasion to use it for the raising and listing Soldiers: By which Act he sufficiently declar'd to the World, That he was altogether designing his own Interest, and was an apparent Enemy to the Kings. After this, he besieg'd those Cities that stood out, some of which he took by Assault, and others he gain'd by fair Words and Promises. Having now related the Acts of Antigonus, we shall pass over to those Things that happen'd to Eumenes. This Man had the frequent Experience of sudden Turns and Eumenes his various For∣tunes. Changes of Fortune, being sometimes in low, and other times again (beyond all Expe∣ctation) in very prosperous Circumstances.
In former times, when he assisted Perdiccas and the Kings, he gain'd the Province of Cappadocia, and those Places that as Members belong'd to it, where he liv'd in the height of Prosperity, commanding both Men and Money at his Pleasure: For he conquer'd P. 656. Ant. Ch. 317. Craterus and Neoptolemus, two famous Captains, who then Commanded the before-uncon∣quer'd Troops of the Macedonians, and kill'd them both in the Fight: So that now he seem'd to be invincible, when on a sudden his Fortune was so chang'd, that he was rou∣ted by Antigonus in a great Battel, and forc'd to fly with a few Friends to a very little Fort for shelter. Being then shut up, and hemm'd in with a double Wall, he had no Friend left that could help him in his Distress; but after he had been coop'd up a Year together, now utterly despairing of Deliverance, unexpectedly and on a sudden appear'd an opportunity of Freedom from all his Troubles: For Antigonus, who a little before had straitly besieg'd him, and earnestly sought to take away his Life (the Scene being chang'd) now seeks to him to be a Partner with him in his Concerns; and so (upon a mutual Stipulation upon Oath between them) he was freed from the Pressures and Hard∣ships of the Siege. And thus after a long time being unexpectedly deliver'd, he continu'd a while in Cappadocia, where he again got together his old Friends, and his former Fel∣low-Soldiers that were dispers'd and scatter'd up and down in the Country; and was so wonderfully belov'd, that many of his Associates and Companions in the same Hopes and Expectations, presently flock'd to him, ready to join in Arms, and be observent to all his Commands. To conclude, within a very few days he had got together above Two thou∣sand Soldiers, who chearfully listed themselves, besides those five hundred Friends, who indur'd the Siege with him in the Fort: And, by the Assistance of Fortune, he was at length rais'd to that height, that he gain'd the Kings Forces, and defended the Interest of the Kings against all that dar'd to deprive them of their Sovereign Authority. But we shall give a more exact account of these Matters shortly hereafter, in their proper time and place. And so having now in short related the Affairs of Asia, we shall pass to Things done in Europe. Cassander, though he was excluded from the Chief Command of Macedonia, yet was Cassander pro∣jects. not at all discourag'd, but resolv'd to gain it; for he look'd upon it as a base and disho∣nourable thing, that the Sovereign Authority enjoy'd by his Father, shou'd now be ma∣nag'd by others. But discerning that the Macedonians favour'd Polysphercon, he privately discours'd with some of his Friends, and then sent them (that nothing might be suspected) to the Hellespont: He himself in the mean time continuing for some days together in the Country, and spending his time in Hunting, made every one believe that he had no Thoughts or Designs of aspiring to the Sovereign Command. But when he got all things ready for his Journey, he secretly slipt out of Macedonia, and made to the Cherso∣nesus, and thence forward to the Hellespont; where passing over, he went to Antigonus in Asia, craving his Assistance, and told him that Ptolemy would join with him. Antigonus readily embrac'd the Offer, and made him large Promises of Assistance, and engag'd forthwith to supply him with Forces both for Land and Sea-Service. But all this was no∣thing but Dissimulation, pretending as if he join'd with him upon the account of the Love and Kindness he always bore towards Antipater; whereas in truth he design'd to divert Po∣lysperchon with fierce and bloody Wars, to the end he might with more ease subdue Asia in the mean time; and so without any hazard, gain the Sovereign Command of all at last. While these things were in acting, Polysperchon, the Kings Protector, having a pro∣spect A Council call'd by Polysper∣chon. of a great War he was like to have with Cassander (and conceiving that it was not fit to undertake any thing, without consulting first with his Friends) assembled all his Cap∣tains, and all those that were of Chief Authority among the Macedonians. And forasmuch as it was apparent, that Cassander was strengthen'd with the Forces of Antigonus, to gain all the Cities of Greece; and that some of them were Garison'd with his Father's Forces, and others were govern'd by an Oligarchy, influenc'd chiefly by the Friends and Favourites P. 657. of Antipater: And besides all this, that Ptolemy, who had the Power in Aegypt, and An∣tigonus, who had openly and apparently deserted the Kings, were Confederates with Cas∣sander; and that both were richly stor'd with Men and Money, and had the Command of many Potent Cities and Provinces: For these Reasons he appointed a Consultation to consider how the War should be manag'd against them. After the matter was banded to and fro with variety of Opinions, it was at length resolv'd that the Cities of Greece should be restor'd to their Liberties, and the Oligarchy every where abolish'd: For by this means they conceiv'd they should weaken the Interest of Cassander; and much advance their own Reputation, and gain strong and powerful Confederates. Hereupon they that were present, forthwith sent to the Ambassadors of the Cities; and wishing them to be Courageous, promis'd to restore them to their several Democracies; and deliver'd to the
Ambassadors the Decree in Writing, that every one of them (when they return'd into their Countries) might the better inform the People of the Kindness of the Kings and Captains to the Grecians. The Decree was in this form: SInce it has ever been the Practice of our Ancestors, to express their Acts of Grace in the many The Decree made in the Council in Ma∣cedonia on the  of the Grecian C. Instances of their Bounty towards the Grecians, Our selves are likewise desirous to preserve and keep on foot what they determin'd; and are willing to evidence to the World the Kindness and Good-will we shall ever be careful to preserve towards the Greeks: And whereas it's well known that even in the Life-time of Alexander, and before the Kingdom devolv'd upon Us, we were of Opi∣nion, That all ought to be restor'd to that Peace and Form of Government which was order'd and appointed by our Father Philip, and writ to all the Cities at that time concerning that Affair: Yet afterwards it so fell out, that some unadvisedly, when we were far remote from Greece, made War upon the Macedonians; which unruly Persons being supprest and subdu'd, by the Help and Conduct of our Captains, many Cities were thereby involved in great Troubles, and brought under the Smart and Sense of many Inconveniencies: Impute therefore the Cause of all those Sufferings (as justly you may) to those Commanders. But now in Reverence and due Regard to that ancient Constitu∣tion, we grant to you our Peace, and the same Kinds of Government which you enjoy'd under Philip and Alexander, and full Power and Authority to manage all other things, according to the seve∣ral Rules and Orders by them prescrib'd. We likewise recall all them who have either volunta∣rily withdrawn themselves, or have been forc'd away by the Command of our Captains, from the time that Alexander first landed in Asia. It is likewise our Pleasure, That all those thus re-call'd by us, enjoy their Estates without quarrelling or remembrance of former Injuries, and that they be restor'd to the Franchises and Liberties of their several Cities; and whatever Decree is made against them, let it be abrogated, except such as are banish'd, by due course of Law, for Murther or Sacri∣lege. But we do not hereby intend to re-call the Exiles of Megalopolis, nor Polyenerus, who are condemn'd for Treason; nor the Amphisseans, nor the Tricceans, nor the Pharcadonians, nor the Heracleots. But as for all others, let them return before the 30th Day of the Month April. Xanthicus. But if there be any Laws or Orders made by Philip or Alexander against them, let them be brought to us, that such course may be taken therein, as may be most for the Service and Advnatage of us and of the Cities. Let the Athenians enjoy all other things as they did in the time of Philip and Alexander; and the Oropians hold Oropus as now they do. Yet we restore Samos to the Athenians, because our Father Philip before gave it to them. Let all the Grecians make a Law, That none take up Arms or act any thing against us; otherwise, That such be ba∣nish'd, and forfeit all their Goods. And we have order'd that Polysperchon shall manage these and all other Matters: And let all be observant to him, in what we have before written to you; for those that do contrary to what we have prescribed, we shall not in the least pardon. P. 658. This Decree being transmitted to all the Cities, Polysperchon writ to Argos, and the rest of their Cities, commanding them, That all that were in any Command in the Com∣monwealth under Antipater, should be forthwith banish'd; and that some should be put to death, and their Estates confiscated; that being reduc'd to extremity, they might be in no capacity to assist Cassander. He sent Letters likewise to Olympias, Alexander's Mother, who was then in Epirus for fear of Cassander, to intreat her to return with all speed into Polysperchon invites Olym∣pias into Ma∣cedonia. Writes to Eu∣menes to join with the Kings. Macedonia, and take care and charge of Alexander's little Son, till he was of age, and ca∣pable to take upon him the sole Management of Affairs. He writ moreover to Eumenes, that he would stick to the Interest of the Kings, and not League by any means with Anti∣gonus; but make his choice, either to come over into Macedonia, in order to join with him in the Protectorship of the Kings, or abide in Asia, and to receive both Men and Money from them to make War upon Antigonus, who had now openly declar'd himself a Rebel against the Kings, who would be sure to restore him the Province which Anti∣gonus had forc'd from him, and likewise all other Privileges and Advantages which he ever at any time before enjoy'd in Asia. And besides, he alledged, that it became Eumenes above all other Men to protect the Royal Family, as consonant to all those Demonstra∣tions of his Loyalty, in his late appearances on the behalf of the Kings; and if he stood in need of Forces, he himself, together with the Kings, would come over into Asia with the whole Army. These were the Transactions of this Year.
CHAP. V. Polysperchon courts Eumenes to assist the Kings. Eumenes his Prudence amongst the Macedonian Captains. Ptolemy sends to the Captains and others not to assist Eumenes. Antigonus contrives to kill Eumenes; who marches into Phoenicia. Nicanor deceives the Athenians, and still keeps Munychia, and subtilly gets the Pyreum. Order'd by Olympias to deliver the Pyreum and Munychia to the Athe∣nians; but he shifts it off. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, enters Attica; se∣cretly corresponds with Nicanor, and displeases the Athenians. Phocion's hard Usage at his Trial in Athens, is condemn'd, and executed. Cassander arrives at the Pyreum. Polysperchon comes against him, but returns. Besieges Megalo∣polis, but is there much damnify'd, his Elephants spoil'd by a Stratagem. A Sea-Fight between Clitus and Nicanor. Nicanor beaten. Clitus afterwards routed by Nicanor, is kill'd in his Flight to Macedonia. Antigonus goes after Eumenes. Eumenes near losing his Army by the Breach of a Dyke in Babylonia. The Greek Cities revolt to Cassander. The Athenians make Peace with him. He kills Nicanor. ARchippus being chief Magistrate of Athens, and Quintus Aelius and Lucius. Papirius Olymp. 115. 1. Ant. Ch. 318. Roman Consuls, the Letters from Polysperchon were deliver'd to Eumenes presently after his Release out of the Fort; in which were contain'd, besides what was before de∣clar'd, That the Kings had bestow'd of their Bounty upon him, Five hundred Talents to repair his Losses he had lately sustain'd, and had sent Letters to the Governors and Trea∣surers of Cilicia to pay to him the said Five hundred Talents, and what other Monies he Polysperchon sends to Eume∣nes to join with the Kings. should have occasion for, either for raising of Soldiers, or any other necessary Uses. And that they had order'd a Thousand Macedonian Soldiers so call'd from their Silver Shields. Argyraspides, with their Officers, to be observant to him, and readily and chearfully to serve him upon all Occasions, as he that was appointed General with full and absolute Power and Authority over all Asia. There came likewise Letters to him from Olympias, by which she earnestly intreated him to be Assistant both to her and the Kings; for that he only remain'd the most Faithful of all the Friends they had, who was able to relieve the desolate State and Condition of the King's Family. She likewise desir'd him to advise her, Whether it was better for her to remain still in Epirus, (and not trust him who claim'd the Guardianship of the Kings, but in truth sought the Kingdom,) or to return? Hereupon Eumenes forthwith writ to her back again, That he conceiv'd it most Advisable for her at the present to continue in Epirus till the War was ended: That he himself was resolv'd to be ever Faithful and Constant in his Love and Duty towards the Kings, and not in the least to adhere to Antigonus, who was aspiring to gain the Kingdom: And because Alexander's Son, by reason of the Tenderness of his Age, and the Covetousness of the Captains, stood in need of Help, he look'd upon it as his Duty to ex∣pose himself to the utmost Hazards for the Preservation of the Kings. Hereupon he forthwith Ant. Ch 318. commanded all his Soldiers to decamp, and so march'd out of Cappadocia, having with him about Five hundred Horse, and above Two Thousand Foot: For he had no Time to P. 659. wait upon the slow March of them, who had promis'd to join with him; because a great Army of Antigonus (under the Command of Leander. Menander) was near at hand, and it was now no staying for him in Cappadocia, being a declar'd Enemy of Antigonus: But though this Army came three Days too late, (and so lost their Opportunity,) yet they resolv'd to pursue the Troops with Eumenes; but not being able to reach him, they return'd into Cappadocia. For Eumenes making long Marches, presently recover'd Mount Taurus, and so got into Cilicia: Here Antigenes and Tautamus, the Captains of the Argyraspi∣des. Silver Shields, or Sil∣ver Targateers. Argyraspides, with their Friends, (in Obedience to the Kings Letters,) met Eumenes, after a long and tedious March, and joyfully Congratulated him for his unexpected Deliverance out of his great Troubles, promising to be ready on all Occasions at his Command. There met him likewise about Three thousand Argyraspides out of Macedonia, with great Demon∣strations of Love and Affection. This sudden and almost incredible Change was the Sub∣ject of every Body's Admiration; when they consider'd how the Kings and Macedonians (a little before) had condemn'd Eumenes and all his Fellows to Die, and now having forgot that Sentence denounc'd against him, not only pardon'd him, but promoted him to the highest Place of Command in the whole Kingdom. And it was not without just
Cause, that they who consider'd the wonderful Changes that attended Eumenes should be Ant. Ch. 318. taus affected: For who that does but observe the different Accidents in the course of Man's Life, would not be amaz'd at the various Turns and Changes of Fortune to and fro, first on one side, then on another? Or who, trusting in the present Supports of a prosperous Fortune, would upon that account be so far transported, as to forget the Infirmity of Human Nature? For every Man's Life (as dispes'd and order'd by the Providence of some one of the Gods) has been chequer'd (as it were) with the reciprocal Turns of Good and Evil in all Ages of the World. So that it is a Wonder, that not only what is strange and unaccountable, but that even every thing that falls out should be surprizing and unexpected. Therefore who can sufficiently value History? For by the variety and change of Affairs, (there represented,) a Check is given to the Pride of the Fortunate, and allays the Grief and Misery of the Unprosperous. Which Things Eumenes then wisely considering, and weighing beforehand the Instability of Fortune, he manag'd his Affairs with the more Caution and Prudence. For thinking with himself that he was but a Of Cardia in the Cher∣sonese of Thrace. Eumenes his prudent Deport∣ment. Ant. Ch. 318. Stranger, and had no Right to Kingly Power and Authority, and that the Macedonians (who were now under his Command) not long before judg'd him to Die; and that the Commanders and Captains were all inflam'd with the Heat of ambi∣tious Designs, he conceiv'd that in a short time he should be despis'd and envy'd, and at length be brought into danger of his Life. For none are willing to submit to the Com∣mands of those that they look upon to be their Inferiors, nor be Lorded over by them, who ought rather to be under the Commands of others themselves. Seriously therefore pon∣dering these Things with himself, in the first place he refus'd to accept of his Five hun∣dred Talents order'd him by the King's Letters for the Repair of his former Losses, and Refitting of himself with Necessaries: For he said, He needed not so large a Sum, seeing he pretended to no Principality there; and that which he now enjoy'd was not of his own Choice, but was forc'd by the Kings to undertake the present Service. To con∣clude, he said, That by reason of the continual Fatigues of War he was so worn out, that he was not able to endure those Hardships, and runnings from Place to Place, any longer, especially being that a Stranger had no Right to Command; and by Law was excluded from the Authority due to be executed by such as were of the same Nation with the Macedonians: For he said, There was represented to him a wonderful Apparition in his Dream, which he judg'd very necessary to discover to them all, for that it might (as he conceiv'd) conduce much to the promoting of Peace and Concord, and the Publick Good. He declar'd, That in his Sleep Alexander, the late King, seem'd to appear to P. 660. him (as he was when living) adorn'd in his Royal Robes, and sitting on his Throne gi∣ving out Orders to his Captains, and (as in his Health) disposing and managing all the Affairs and Concerns of the Kingdom. Therefore (says he) I am of Opinion, That a Throne of Gold should be made at the Charge of the King's Treasury, in which should be plac'd the Diadem, Scepter and Crown, and all the other Ensigns of Royalty; and that at spring of Day all his Captains should offer to him Sacrifices; and standing toge∣ther Ant. Ch. 318. near the Throne, should receive Commands in the King's Name, as if he were alive at the Helm of the Government. All were very well pleas'd with what he said; and thereupon every thing was presently prepared for the purpose, for the King's Trea∣sury was very rich; and that stately Work was forthwith finish'd, and the Throne was set up; whereon were plac'd the Diadem, Scepter, and the Arms he us'd to wear. Then was plac'd an Altar with Fire upon it, upon which all the Captains one after another cast Frankincense, (taken out of a Golden Casket,) and other costly sweet Odours, and ador'd Alexander as a God. After this were order'd a great number of Seats, upon which the Captains and great Commanders sate together, and there consulted and debated all the weighty and important Affairs. Eumenes in the mean time carrying himself with an equal Respect and Deference in all publick Meetings towards all the Captains, and sup∣pling them with fair and courteous Language, not only avoided the Strokes of Envy, but thereby gain'd all their Hearts. By the same Artifice (through the Prevalency of Su∣perstition relating to the King) he so elevated the Hopes and Expectations of the whole Army, as if some God were to be their General. In like manner he behav'd himself to∣wards the Argyraspides, and thereby so gain'd their Favour, that they counted him highly worthy to be the Protector of the Kings. Then he pick'd out the fittest Persons from among his Friends, and furnish'd them Ant. Ch. 318. with great Sums of Money, and employ'd them to hire Soldiers up and down upon large Pay. Whereupon some of them forthwith went into Pisidia and Lycia, and the border∣ing Countries, and diligently put in execution what they were commanded. Others went into Cilicia, and some into Coelo-Syria and Phoenicia, and others sail'd to the Cities in Cyprus. This Listing of Soldiers being nois'd abroad, and reported what large Pay was
offer'd, many came flocking in from the Cities of Greece, and enroll'd their Names for this Service; so that in a short time they had rais'd above Ten thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, besides the Argyraspides, and those who came along with him. The Forces of Eumenes being thus on a sudden increas'd to an incredible Number, Ptolemy sends to the Captains not to assist Eumenes. Ptolemy arriv'd with the Fleet at Zaphyrium in Cilicia, and sent away some Commanders to sollicit the Argyraspides not to side with Eumenes, whom all the Macedonians had con∣demn'd to die. He sent likewise to the Governors of the Garison in Where the King's Exche∣quer for Asia was kept. Strabo, l. 14. 72. Quindi, desiring them not to help Eumenes with any Money, and he would bear them out: But no Man regarded what he said, because the Kings and their Protector Polysperchon, and Olympias the Mother of Alexander, had written to them to be obedient in all things to Eumenes as to the Commander in Chief, and General of the Kingdom. But of all others, Antigonus was most displeas'd and uneasie at the Growth and Advance∣ment of Eumenes; for he look'd upon him as the most powerful Enemy he had set up Antigonus contrives to kill Eumenes. against him by Polysperchon, because he had deserted the Kings: Therefore he resolv'd by some Stratagem to cut him off; to which end he employ'd one of his Friends, Philo∣tas, and deliver'd to him Letters to the Argyraspides, and the rest of the Macedonians, (that P. 661. sided with Eumenes,) and sent along with him Thirty Macedonians (who were crafty and fair-spoken Men) with Orders to deal with Antigenes and Tautamus, the Captains of the Argyraspides, privately and apart by themselves, to destroy Eumenes, promising them great Rewards, and larger Provinces; and that they should likewise apply themselves to their Fellow-Citizens and Acquaintance amongst the Argyraspides, and by Bribes draw them to cut off Eumenes: But they were not able to prevail with any, except Tautamus, one of the Captains of the Argyraspides, who being corrupted by Bribes, promis'd not only for him∣self, but undertook to draw over his Collegue Antigenes to this foul Design: But Antigenes being a prudent and faithful Man, not only refus'd, but prevail'd with him that was be∣fore corrupted to alter his Purpose: For he told him, That it was more expedient that Eu∣menes should live than Antigonus; for he being already grown Great, when he became more Powerful would thrust them all out of their Governments, and give to them which of his Friends he pleas'd: But as for Eumenes, being but a Stranger, he durst not attempt to gain the Sovereign Authority, but would be content with his present Command, and to gain their Favour, would secure to them their Provinces, and perhaps add more to them. And in this manner were all the Projects against Eumenes frustrated and brought to nought. In the mean time Philotas delivering a Letter of Antigonus to the Com∣manders, writ to all the Captains and Soldiers in general; the Argyraspides and other Macedonians got together by themselves unknown to Eumenes, and commanded it to be read openly to them: In which were Accusations against Eumenes, and Advice to the Macedonians forthwith to seize upon him and put him to Death, and if they did not, that he would come presently and fall upon them with his whole Army, and do exemplary Justice on them for their Disobedience. Upon the hearing the Contents of these Letters, the Macedonians and their Captains were greatly terrify'd: For one of these two was un∣avoidable, either to fall under the revengeful Displeasure of Antigonus by adhering to the Kings, or to be punish'd by Polysperchon and the Kings for observing the Commands of Antigonus. While all the Soldiers were in these distracted Thoughts, Eumenes comes in amongst them, and hearing the Letters read, advis'd them to obey the Orders of the Kings, and not to give any regard to an open declar'd Rebel; and having spoken many things pertinent to the present Occasion, he not only avoided the present imminent Dan∣ger, but inclin'd all the Soldiers to him in a firmer Bond of Duty and Affection than ever they were before. And thus this Man, who was again on a sudden even involv'd in insuperable Dangers, yet was so wonderfully Fortunate, as thereby to strengthen himself the more. Ordering therefore his Army to march, he made for Phoenicia, and endea∣vour'd Eumenes marches into Phoenicia. to get Shipping from all Sea-Towns along as he went, in order to make up a strong Navy, that by having a Fleet in Phoenicia, he might be Master of the Sea, and have what Forces he pleas'd, and be able to transport Polysperchon at any time with safety out of Macedonia into Asia against Antigonus. To this purpose there he continu'd in Phoe∣nicia. While these Things were acting, Nicanor (who held Munychia) hearing that Cassander Nicanor de∣ceives the A∣thenians, still keeps Muny∣chia. had left Macedonia, and was gone to Antigonus, and that Polysperchon was suddenly expe∣cted with an Army in Attica, earnestly sollicited the Athenians to stand firm in their Affe∣ctions to Cassander. But when none would consent to what was desir'd, but all were rather for the Garison to march away with all speed; at first he over-perswaded the Peo∣ple with fair Words to forbear a few days, and that he would afterwards do what should be most for the Good of the City. But after the Athenians had been quiet for some days, P. 662.
secretly in the Night he brought Soldiers by little and little into Munychia, so that now he had got in strength sufficient to defend the place, and to oppose those that design'd a Siege. Hereupon the Athenians perceiving Nicanor meant nothing in what he did, for the ad∣vantage Ant. Ch. 318. and safety of the City, they sent a Messenger to the King and Polysperchon, de∣siring their assistance according to the Purport of their Letters, whereby they restor'd the Grecians to their Liberties: Then they had frequent Assemblies and Consultations a∣mong themselves, how to manage the War against Nicanor: And while they were busy∣ing their Heads about these Affairs, he drew out many of his Mercenaries secretly in the Nicanor gets Possession of the Pyreum by Subtilty. Night, possess'd himself of the Walls of the Pireum, and the Mouth of the Harbour. The Athenians hereupon, were vex'd to the Heart, to see how they were gull'd and cheated as to Munychia, and had carelesly lost the Pireum. They sent therefore some of the greatest Persons of Quality, and such who were Nicanor's special Friends (that is to say) Phocion the Son of Phocus, Conon the Son of Timotheus, and Clearchus the Son of Nau∣sicles, as Agents to Nicanor, to debate the late transactions they had with him, and requi∣ring him to permit them to enjoy their Laws and Liberties, according to the late Edict in that behalf. To whom he answer'd, That they must go to Cassander, for he had his Commission to be Governor of the Garison from him, and had no power to treat of himself. About this time came a Letter from Olympias to Nicanor, commanding him to deliver Olympias by Letters orders Nicanor to re-deliver the Py∣reum to the Athenians, and Muny∣chia, but he puts it off. Ant. Ch. 318 Munychia and the Pyreum to the Athenians: He understanding that the Kings and Polys∣perchon had recall'd Olympias into Macedonia, and committed the young Son of Alexander to her Care and Tuition; and had restor'd her to her former Royal State and Dignity, (the same that she enjoy'd when Alexander was living) meerly out of fear promis'd to re-deliver them, but always contriv'd some colourable excuse or another, and so protracted the Business. The Athenians in former times had ever a great esteem for Olympias, and now purposing (in the Reality of their Affections) to celebrate those publick Honours which were decreed to her, (and hoping that the Liberties of the City would be by her perfectly restor'd to them, and put out of the reach of all future danger) were very jo∣cund and exceedingly pleas'd. In the mean time the Promises of Nicanor not being perform'd, Alexander, the Son of Polysperchon, came with an Army into Attica: The Athenians indeed thought that he came Alexander, the Son of Polys∣perchon, comes with an Army into Attica. to restore to them Munychia and the Pyreum; but the Event prov'd the contrary, for he seiz'd upon both for the Service of the War: For some who had been Antipater's Friends, (and among them Phocius) fearing some Punishment from the Laws, met Alexander, and advising him what to do, persuaded him to retain the Forts in his own Hands, and not restore them to the Athenians till the War was ended with Cassander: Hereupon, Alex∣ander Encamp'd at the Pyreum, and would not permit the Athenians to treat with Nicanor; but by his separate Treatise with him, and secret and private Transactions of Affairs be∣tween Consults pri∣vately with Nicanor, and displeases the Athenians. them, he gave manifest Indications of the Injury design'd the Athenians. The People therefore met together in a Common Assembly, and Depos'd the present Magi∣strates; and set up such as most favour'd the Democracy, and condemn'd them that were of the Oligarchy; Some to Death, and others to Banishment and Confiscation of Goods: Amongst whom Phocton was one who had the Chief Command in the time of Antipater. These being all forc'd out of the City, fled to Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, and endeavour'd to engage his help for their Preservation: Alexander kindly receiv'd them, Ant. Ch. 318. Phocion con∣demn'd at A∣thens. P. 663. and writ on their behalf to his Father, to protect Phocion and his Friends, as those that favour'd his Interest, and engag'd readily to afford their assistance in all his Concerns: The Athenians likewise sent an Embassy to Polysperchon to accuse Phocion, and to sollicite for the restitution of Munychia, and restoring them to their ancient Laws and Liberties. Polys∣perchon indeed had a very great desire to retain the Pircum, because that Port might be of weighty concern and importance in the carrying of the War, but was asham'd to act contrary to the Edict divulg'd by himself; and fearing lest the Grecians should desert him, if he dealt so basely with that City, which was the Metropolis, he chang'd his Mind: Having therefore heard the Ambassadors, he courteously dismist those from the Athe∣nians with a Gracious Answer; but seiz'd upon Phocion and all his Followers, and sent Ant. Ch. 38. them bound to Athens, granting Power to the People, either to Pardon them, or put them to death: Whereupon a General Assembly being call'd in Athens, Judgment of Death was resolv'd upon Phocion and the rest that were accus'd: This was carry'd on by those who had been banish'd under Antipater, and others that favour'd not that Govern∣ment, both these strongly urg'd to have them put to death.
The sum of the Accusation was this; That after the Lamian War they endeavour'd for Phocion's hard usage at his Tryal in Athens. the most part to Inslave their Country, and to abolish the Democracy, and the Ancient Laws: Time being allotted to the Accus'd to plead their Cause, Phocion began to speak for himself; but the People tumultuously cry'd out against all that he said, and rejected his Defence, so that the Accus'd knew not what Course to take: When the Tumult ceas'd, Phocion began again to speak, whereupon the whole Multitude set up a shout on purpose, that what he said should not be heard: For the Common People (being not long before excluded from having any share in the Administration of the Government, and now newly restor'd beyond all expectation to their Right) bore an inveterate Ha∣tred against those who depriv'd the Citizens of their Laws and Liberties. While Phocion was thus overborn, and even in a desperate Condition strugling to pre∣serve his Life; those that were next to him, understood the Justice and Equity of his Cause; but those at a distance could hear nothing for the Noise and Clamour that was made by the tumultuous Rabble, but only discern'd the various trembling motions of his Body, through the inevitable danger that seem'd to threaten him. At length Phocion in despair of his own Life, cry'd out aloud, desiring them to condemn him to Die, but to spare the rest. But the Common People being Fierce and Inexorable; some of Phocion's Friends stood Ant. Ch. 318. up to make his Defence. Hereupon the People were quiet for a while, and heard what they said at first; but when they proceeded so far as to press Arguments for the clearing of his Innocency, they were cast out with tumultuous and contradicting Clamours: At length being all condemn'd by the unanimous Voice of the People: they were carry'd a∣way to the Gaol there to be executed, and were follow'd by many Honest and Sober Men, who bewail'd their Condition, and the greatness of their Misery: For upon seri∣ous Consideration of the inconstancy of every Man's Fortune, it affrighted many to see that Magistrates and Persons of eminent Quality, and Men that had shew'd many acts of kindness in the course of their Lives, should neither have Liberty to plead for themselves, nor otherways enjoy the Benefit of Law. But many of the Rabble being incens'd against Phocion unmercifully, even rent his Heart in pieces with Scoffs and Scorns, and bitterly upbraided him with the Misery of his present Condition. For Hatred smother'd to∣wards Men while in Prosperity, when it breaks forth with Anger against them in time of their Adversity, becomes altogether Savage and Implacable. Being therefore all put to Phocion and others put to Death. Ant. Ch. 318. Death (according to the Custom of the Country) by drinking a Potion of Hemlock, all their Bodies were cast forth unburied, out of the Bounds and Limits of Attica: And this was the end of Phocion, with others that suffer'd with him in the same Calamity. After this, Cassander having got Five and thirty long Ships, and Four thousand Men, P. 664. Cassander ar∣rives at A∣thens. Polysperchon comes against him. Sail'd into the Pireum, and being receiv'd by Nicanor, Governor of the Fort, possess'd himself of the Pireum and the Harbour: But Munychia Nicanor kept himself, with a Force sufficient to defend the Place. At this time Polysperchon and the Kings lay in Phocis; where being inform'd of Cassander's being landed at the Pireum, Polysperchon marched into Attica, and Encamp'd near the Pireum: He had with him Twenty thousand Macedonian Foot, and Four thousand Confederates, a Thousand Horse, and Sixty five Elephants; he resolv'd therefore to besiege Cassander: But because Provision was scant, and the Siege was likely to be long and tedious, he was forc'd to leave so many of the Soldiers in At∣tica as the Country was able to maintain, under the Command of Alexander, and he himself marched into Peloponnesus with the greater part of the Army, to reduce the Mega∣lopolitans to the Obedience of the Kings; for they being for an Oligarchy sided with Cas∣sander. While Polysperchon was busied in these Affairs, Cassander sail'd with his Fleet to the Aegeans, and brought them in to join with him; but the Salaminians (who were disaffe∣cted) he closely besieg'd, and being well furnish'd both with Men and Arms, he assaul∣ted them several days together, and reduc'd them to very great Extremities: But when the City was near being taken by Storm, Polysperchon sent a considerable Force both by Sea and Land to attack the Besiegers; at whose approach Cassander being affrighted, he rais'd the Siege, and sail'd back to Pireum. Then Polysperchon pass'd over to Peloponnesus, to settle Matters there for the Service and Advantage of the Kings. Coming there he Ant. Ch. 318. call'd a Senate, and spoke to them concerning their joining with him as Confederates in the War; he sent likewise Commissioners to the Cities, with Orders to put to Death them that were created Magistrates in the Oligarchy by Antipater, and to restore the Peo∣ple to their ancient Laws. Many obey'd the Order, so that while Slaughters and Banishments fill'd the Cities, they that favour'd Antipater's Party were ruin'd and destroy'd; and the Democratital Go∣vernments being restor'd to their ancient Laws, all join'd with Polysperchon: The Mega∣lopolitans
only kept close to Cassander, therefore he determin'd to besiege their City. The Megalopolitans hearing what was design'd by Polysperchon, order'd by a publick Decree to∣bring Polysperchon besieged Mega∣lopolis, but was bassed with great loss. in every thing into the Town that was in the Fields: Then taking an account of their strength they found that in ancient Citizens, Strangers and Servants, they were in number Fifteen thousand who were able to bear Arms; They forthwith therefore form'd some into Regiments; others they appointed to work in the Fortifications; and to some were allotted the care and charge of Guarding of the Walls; so that at one and the same time, some were employ'd in drawing a deep Trench round the City, some carrying Earth out of the Fields, and others repairing and making up the Breaches in the Walls, others hammering of Arms, and others were busy in making of Darts and Artillery: So that the Dangers which threatned, and the forwardness of the Inhabitants put the whole City in action: For the Greatness of the Kings Army, and the wonderful strength of the E∣lephants that attended them, was nois'd abroad in every place. And now all things were ready and prepar'd, when Polysperchon approach'd with his Army, and Encamp'd near Ant. Ch. 318. the City, dividing his Forces into two Camps, one of Macedonians, and another of Con∣federates; and then brings to the Walls wooden Towers of that height as to overtop them; and upon the Towers Men placed with all sorts of Weapons, and with these he drave them off, who were placed upon the Rampiers. P. 665 In the mean time, the Walls being Undermin'd, and the Props and Supporters set on fire, three of the largest Towers were overwhelm'd and tumbled down, with the ruin of the like number of Turrets plac'd between them. This great and sudden Destruction caus'd the Macedonians to set up a shout, and the strangeness of the thing amaz'd the Be∣sieg'd: And now the Macedonians rush through the Breach into the City, and the Mega∣lopolitans before in parties, now all together (having the advantage of the Difficulty of the Place occasion'd by the Rubbish) made up to one part, and bravely bore the Brunt of the Enemies attack, and beat them off: Then they cast up another Work of Earth to guard the Breach; and working Night and Day without any intermission, rais'd ano∣ther Wall between them and the Enemy; which was presently compleated; for being they were furnish'd with every thing that was necessary, and had many Hands at work, the Megalopolitans quickly repair'd the damage sustain'd. As for those that assaulted them from their Wooden Towers, they ply'd them with their Engines of Artillery, and with Darts and Stones out of Bows and Slings, gall'd and wounded many of their Enemies. After many were kill'd and wounded on both sides, till Night approaching, Polysperchon sounded a Retreat, and drew off his Men into the Camp. The next day he remov'd the Rubbish before the Breach, to make way and passage for the Elephants, for he thought by the strength of these Creatures to break through into Ant. Ch. 318. the City: But the Megalopolitans by the help and conduct of Damides (who in the Wars un∣der Alexander, experimentally knew the Nature and Use of the Elephants) altogether baffl'd the Enemy: For he making use of his own Reason and Industry against the Beasts Strength and Violence, made their strong Bodies Useless and Unserviceable; for in a Damides spoils the Elephants of Polysper∣chon at Me∣galopolis, by a Stratagem. great number of Planks he drave sharp Spikes, and then strew'd them here and there in deep Trenches cover'd with Earth, so as that the Points of the Spikes might not be seen, and thus over these he left the Passage into the City: But he suffer'd none of the Soldiers to stand in the Front, but plac'd a great number of Darters and Archers, and Engines of Artillery in the Flank. Polysperchon therefore having clear'd the Place, and now approaching with the throng of his Elephants, an unexpected misfortune befell them: For none appearing in Front to oppose them, the Indians press'd them forward to make their way into the City, who by the great weight of their Bodies press'd down upon the Spikes, so that their Feet being wounded, and even pierc'd through, they were so founder'd, that they were neither able to go forward, or return back: And besides, showers of all sorts of Darts and Arrows being poured upon them from the Flankers, some of the Indians were kill'd, and others so wounded, that they were not able to do any further service. In the mean time, the Elephants (through the multitude of Darts, and the strange and unusual Wounds by the Spikes) were so cruelly tormented, that they forc'd back Ant. Ch. 318. through their own Men, and trode down many under foot: At length the strongest and most formidable amongst them fell down, others became altogether Unserviceable, and some kill'd many of their own Men. Upon this Success the Megalopolitans were greatly encourag'd; but Polysperchon wish'd he had never undertaken the Siege; and because he could stay no longer there, he left part of the Army to carry it on, and betook himself to matters of more necessary con∣sequence. Then he sent away Clitus the Admiral with the Fleet, Commanding him to P. 666.
lie upon the Coasts of the Hellespont, to stop the Passage of the Forces out of Asia into Europe, and to join with Arrhideus, who had fled to the City of the Ganians, being Ene∣my to Antigonus. After he had pass'd over the Hellespont, and taken in the Cities of the Propontis, he strengthen'd his Army with the Forces of Arrhideus. Nicanor the Governor of Munychia, on the other side, being sent away with the whole Fleet by Cassander, sail'd to those Parts where Clitus lay: He join'd likewise with the Navy of Antigonus, so that he had a Fleet of above a Hundred Sail. Hereupon there was a Fight at Sea near Now Con∣stantinople. Ant. Ch. 318. Byzantium, wherein Clitus was Conqueror, A Sea-fight be∣tween Clitus and Nicanor. Clitus Victor. and sunk Seventeen of the Enemy's Ships, and took no fewer than Forty, together with all their Men. The rest got into the Haven of Chalcedon. Clitus being thus successful, suppos'd the Enemy by reason of this great loss durst never engage more at Sea. But Antigonus having intelligence of this Defeat of the Fleet, by his Industry and ad∣mirable Conduct, presently repair'd it: For having sent for several Transport Ships in the Night from the Byzantians, on these he put on board Darters, Slingers, and other light-arm'd Men, sufficient for the present design, and in the Night transported them to the other side; who before Day setting upon the Enemy at Land (who had left their Ships and were there Encamp'd) put Clitus and his Men into great Terror and Confu∣sion; who in that sudden Fear and Amazement leap'd into their Vessels; so that through the cumber of their Luggage, and multitude of Prisoners, the Tumult and Disorder ex∣ceeded. In the mean time, Antigonus had fitted out some Men of War. Long Ships, and Mann'd them with many of his stoutest Foot Soldiers, and bid them boldly attack the Enemy, for they were sure to be Conquerors. Hereupon they came up with Nicanor in the Night, and about Another Sea-fight between Clitus and Nicanor. Clitus totally reuted. Ant. Ch. 318. Clitus slain by Lysimachus his Soldiers. break of Day fell in suddenly upon the Enemy still in confusion, and presently upon the very first Charge put them to flight; some of the Enemy's Ships they broke in pieces with the Beaks of their own, and brush'd off the Oars of divers; some they gain'd with∣out fighting; being deliver'd up by the Men themselves that were on board. At length all the rest (except the Admiral's Ship) fell into their Hands. Clitus forsook his Ship and got ashore, and design'd to have preserv'd himself by getting into Macedonia; but in his way falling amongst some of Lysimachus his Soldiers, he was slain. Antigonus his Reputation for Skill and Prudence in the management of Martial Affairs, was much advanc'd by this remarkable Victory. Hereupon he was very earnest and in∣tent Antigonus goes after Eu∣menes. to be Master at Sea, and (without the least doubt of the matter) to gain the So∣vereignty of Asia. To this end he pick'd out of his whole Army, Twenty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, that were the briskest and most active Men, and march'd towards Cilicia to break Eumenes before he grew too strong. But Eumenes understanding the hot Temper of Antigonus, march'd away into Phaenicia to regain it for the Kings, then unjustly detain'd from them by Ptolemy: But not having an opportunity to do what he design'd, he remov'd out of Phaenicia, and march'd with his Army through Caelo-Syria, to get into the higher Provinces. Afterwards he lost some of his Men at the River Tigris, by an attack upon him in the Night by some of the Inhabitants. In the like manner he Eumenes near losing his whole Army by the Breach of a Dike in Baby∣lonia. Ant. Ch. 318. was fallen upon in the Province of Babylon, by Seleucus, near the River Euphrates, and was in great danger to have lost all his Army; where by the Breach of a Dyke his whole Camp was very near being over-flow'd and drown'd. But setting his Wits at work he fled to a high Bank of Earth, and diverting the Water another way, preserv'd both himself and his Army. And so beyond his expectation he escap'd Seleucus, and got into Persia with Fifteen P. 667. thousand Foot, and Three thou∣sand in the Margent. Thirteen hundred Horse. Having refresh'd his Soldiers after all their Toils and Labours, he sent to the Governors and Captains of the higher Provinces to fur¦nish him with more Men and Money. And in this State were the Affairs of Asia this Year. But as for Europe, after the Losses and Misfortunes of Polysperchon at Megalopolis, many of the Greek Cities revolted from the Kings to Cassander. And because the Athenians In Greece the Greek Cities revolted to Cassander. could not get rid of the Garison either by the help of Polysperchon or Olympias, one of the most eminent Citizens made bold to say in the publick Assembly, That it was for the In∣terest of the City to close with Cassander. At the first there was a great Hurly-burly, some being for and others against what was said: But the advantage being more calmly debated and consider'd, by common consent it was at length decreed, That Peace should The Athenians make Peace with Cassan∣der. Ant. Ch. 318. be made with Cassander, upon such Conditions as could be obtain'd by their Ambassa∣dors. In pursuance whereof, (after some Meetings) these were the Terms of Peace agreed upon, That the Athenians should quietly enjoy the City, the Territory and all the Profits, together with the Shipping and all other things, and should for the future be
Friends, and Confederates with Cassander; but that Cassander should for the present hold Munichia till the War was ended with the Kings: And that the Common-wealth should pay a Tribute of Ten Minas; and that an Athenian should be constituted Protector and Guardian of the City, whom-ever Cassander pleas'd. Whereupon Demetrius the Phalerian was chosen; who being invested with the Office, kept the City in perfect Peace, and carry'd himself very obligingly towards all the Citizens. After this Nicanor brought his Fleet into the Pireum, adorn'd with the Beaks of Ships gain'd in the late Victory: Upon the account of which success he was at the first highly Cassander kills Nicanor. honour'd by Cassander, but afterwards perceiving that he grew Proud and Haughty, and still detain'd the Fort of Munichia with his own Soldiers, he had a jealousie of him that he intended to revolt, and therefore laid a Trap for him and cut him off. Then he march'd into Macedonia, where many of the Inhabitants revolted to him; many likewise of the Greek Cities were inclin'd to join with Greek, Anti∣pater, but Er∣roneous. Many in Mace∣donia join with Cassander. Ant. Ch. 318. Cassander. For Polysperchon seem'd to be sloth∣ful and careless in managing the Affairs both of the Kingdom and the Allies. Cassander on the other hand, behaved himself with great Candor towards all, and approv'd him∣self industrious in the Management of Publick Affairs, so that he gain'd many who coun∣tenanc'd him in his seeking to obtain the Supream Authority. But now because Agathocles the Year next following became Tyrant of Syracuse, we shall, as we design'd at the beginning, put an end to this Book, and begin the next with Agathocles his advance to the Throne, and go on with the Affairs proper and pertinent to our History.
BOOK XIX. IT's an old Saying, (brought down to us by Tradition) That none overturn De∣mocracies, P. 670. PREFACE but Men that overtop others in Power and Interest. For which reason some Cities are always jealous of such of their Fellow Citizens as grow Great and Powerful; and therefore do what they can to depress them. For when Men are in Power, the next Step is to domineer over their Country; and for those that (through the Greatness of their Interest above others) have Grounds to expect the Sovereign Au∣thority, 'tis very difficult to be free from an Itch of Monarchy. For 'tis very natural for them that are ambitious, when they have much, to thirst after more, and never set Bounds to their insatiable Ambition. The Athenians therefore, upon this very account, made a Law, which they call'd Ostracism, for the banishing such as grew Great amongst them; not so much to punish them for any Fault they had committed, but to prevent the Mischief and Prejudice to their Country, which by their Power and Interest they were in a Capacity to bring upon them: For they remembred (as it were an Oracle) what Solon had formerly said, who foretel∣ling the Tyranny of Pisistratus, compos'd this Elegiack: A City by Great Persons is o'erthrown; And Fools beneath a Monarchy do groan. Of all other Places, Sicily was most infected with this Itch of Monarchy, before the Romans reduc'd it into the Form of a Province. For the Cities, deceiv'd by the Flat∣teries of the Orators, advanc'd inconsiderable Men to that height, till they became abso∣lute Lords over the deluded Multitude. But the Advancement of Agathocles to be Prince of Syracuse, is above all others Agathocles. the most singular and remarkable: For he began at first in very mean and unlikely Cir∣cumstances; but at last he involv'd not only Syracuse, but all Sicily and Lybia it self in Blood and Slaughter. He was so mean and low in the World in his Original, that he follow'd the Trade of a Potter; from whence he rose to that height of Power and Cruelty, that he Lorded over the greatest and richest Island in the World; and for some time gain'd the greatest part of Africa, and some Parts of Italy, and fill'd the Cities of Sicily with Butcheries and Oppressions. None of the Tyrants that ever were before him committed the like Villany, or exercis'd such barbarous Cruelty upon their Subjects. For as for his own Kindred, he put them all to Death, Root and Branch; and so plagu'd the Cities, that he sometimes butcher'd all that were at Men and Women's estate; and would would cut the Throats of Multitudes of poor Innocents for the Faults of a few, without any difference or distinction; and then presently would murder whole Cities, Men, Women, and Children. But because this Book, with others that follow, comprehend the Tyranny of Agathocles, omitting any further Preface relating thereunto, we shall now connex things coherent with those that were before related, first allotting to everything we treat of its due and proper time. In the preceding Eighteen Books, we have endeavour'd to set forth whatever was done in the known Parts of the World, from the beginning of Time, to the Year next before the From the ta∣king of Troy 866 years. Reign of Agathocles, to which time, from the Taking of Troy, are computed Eight hundred sixty six Years. In this Book, beginning with the first of his Reign, we shall end with the Battel P. 671. fought by Agathocles with the Carthaginians, containing an account of Affairs for the space of Seven Years.
CHAP. I. Agathocles his Parentage and Education: His Rise: His Stratagems: His bloody Massacre at Syracuse. He gains the Sovereign Power. The Affairs of Italy. Olympias returns into Macedonia by Polysperchon's means. The Armies revolt to her. Her Cruelties. She murders Euridice, and Arrideus her Husband. Af∣fairs in Asia. Eumenes and Seleucus. Eumenes join'd by many of the Captains. The number of their Forces. He comes to Susa. Attalus and others imprison'd by Antigonus in a strong Castle, seeking to escape, are afterwards besieg'd, and taken. IN the Rule of Demogenes Chief Magistrate of Athens, and when Lucius Plotius and Olymp. 115. 4. Ant. Ch. 315. An. M. 3633. Manius Fulvius were Roman Consuls, Agathocles became Tyrant of Syracuse. That things as they were severally done may be more clearly and distinctly understood, we shall premise a few things concerning the foremention'd Prince. Carsinus of Rhegium being banish'd from his Country, dwelt at Thermis in Sicily, which City was then in the hands of the Carthaginians: This Man married a Woman of that Place, who when she was big with Child, us'd often to be troubled with strange Dreams. The Parents of Agathocles. Being therefore much perpiex'd in his Mind concerning this Embrio, he intrusted this Affair with some devout Carthaginians, who were then going to Delphos, and desir'd them to enquire of the Oracle concerning this Child; who faithfully performing what they were enjoyn'd, the Oracle gave this Answer, That that Child would bring dreadful Cala∣mities upon the Carthaginians and all Sicily. The Father being terrify'd with this Predi∣ction, expos'd the Child in the open Fields, and left it with some to watch to observe its end. After several days it still continu'd alive, and the Guard upon it growing remiss and careless, the Mother in the mean time stole the Child away in the Night, but durst Ant. Ch. 315. not bring it back to her own House for fear of her Husband; but intrusted it with her Brother Heraclides, and call'd it Agathocles, after the Name of her own Father. Where being brought up, he grew very Beautiful, and of Strength of Body above what was usual at his Age. When he came to be seven years old, Carsinus was invited His Education. by Heraclides to Invited to a Feast at a Sa∣crifice. Sacrifice, and there seeing Agathocles playing with other Children about the same Age, he greatly admir'd both his Strength and Beauty; and when his Wife told him, That the Child which he so expos'd, if he had been brought up, would have prov'd as Manly a Child as that he then saw; he answer'd, that he was sorry for what he had done, and then fell a weeping: Whereupon the Woman perceiving that what she had done would be very pleasing and agreeable to her Husband, she discover'd to him the Truth of the whole matter; whereat he was mightily pleas'd, and took away his Son; and out of fear of the Carthaginians, remov'd with all his Family to Syracuse: but being but a poor Man, he taught his Son, then a Child, the Potter's Trade; at which time Ti∣maleon the Corinthian having routed the Carthaginians at the River Cremissus, made all free of the City that would come in to him, amongst whom Carsinus (with Agathocles) were inroll'd as Citizens; and Carsinus died a little time after. The Mother of Agathocles had in a certain place set up her Son's Statue in Stone, upon which a Swarm of Bees fastned, and began to make their Wax-Combs upon the Hips of the Statue; which remarkable Passage being related to those who apply themselves to Studies of that kind, all unanimously agreed, That when he came to be a Man, he would Ant. Ch. 315. be famous; which happen'd accordingly: For Demas, a Nobleman of Syracuse, falling Agathocles a Catamite to Demas. in love with Agathocles, first supply'd him liberally with every thing he had occasion for; so that he began in some measure to taste of Plenty; afterwards being created Demas. General of the Agragentines, he advanc'd him to be a , Captain of 1000. Colonel in the room of one that was then lately dead. He was indeed very remarkable and of great Esteem before he was an Offi∣cer, upon the account of the Strength of his Body; for in the time of Training and Military Exercise, he bore so great a weight of Armour, and carry'd such mighty Weapons, that no other Man was able to bear. But now since he was made a Military Tribune, his Fame spread abroad much more than it did before; for he was eager to fight, daring in Action, and bold, nay, impudent in his Harangues to the People. Demas afterwards fell sick, and died; and having left all his Estate to his Wife, Agathocles marry'd her, and Agathocles his rise. so was esteem'd one of the richest of the Citizens.
Afterwards the Crotonians being besieg'd by the Brutians, the Syracusians sent a great Army to their relief, under the Command of Antander, the Brother of Agathocles and o∣thers: P. 267. But the Sovereign Command and chief Management of the Affair was committed to Heraclides and Sosistratus, Men that employ'd themselves all their Lives long in Assassi∣nations, Murders, and all kinds of Wickedness and Debauchery. Which the Nothing said of them in the preceding Book, therefore some mistake or want. Rho∣domanus thinks there was either ano∣ther Book be∣tween these, or a want of what was inserted in the preceding Book. See his Notes. Book Ant. Ch. 315. next preceding this hath particularly set forth. With those in this Expedition (by a De∣cree of the People) was join'd Agathocles, who was then a Colonel; and though he had remarkably approv'd his Valour against the Barbarians, yet he was so envy'd by Sosistra∣tus, that he altogether disregarded him, not allowing him the Honour due to his Deme rits: At which he was so exasperated, that he accus'd Sosistratus and his Followers to the People, as having designs to advance him to the Monarchy. But the Syracusians giving no regard to those Accusations, Sosistratus, after his return from Crotona, became Supream and Absolute Lord of his Country. Agathocles being incens'd against him, first (with those that sided with him) remain'd in Italy, and endeavour'd to possess himself of Crotona, but failing in his design, with some few along with him, he escap'd to Tarentum; by whom he was entertain'd and taken in∣to Pay; but committing many rash and inconsiderate Acts, he began to be suspected of some intended Innovation; and thereupon his Commission was taken from him; upon which he got together the Exiles of Italy, and reliev'd them of Rhegium, who were then besieg'd by Heraclides and Sosistratus. Afterwards, when the Monarchy was abrogated at Syracuse, and Sosistratus was expell'd out of the City, he return'd into his Country. And Ant. Ch. 315. in regard at that time, many of the Nobility who were for an Oligarchy (to the number of Six hundred of the greatest Persons of Quality) were together with the Magistrates thrust out of the City, a War broke out between the Exiles, and those that were for a Democracy; and the Carthaginians sided with Sosistratus and his Exiles: Hereupon, there were daily Skirmishes and Drawing-up of Armies one against another; in which Agathocles Agathocles his Stratagem. acting sometimes as a Private Soldier, and at others as a Commander, gain'd the Repu∣tation both of Valour and Policy; for always upon every opportunity, he invented some stratagem or other which prov'd advantageous to his Party; amongst which there was one thing especially to be remember'd. The Syracusians had Encamp'd near to Gela, and at that time in the Night he broke into the Gela. City with a Thousand Men at Arms, who were presently met by Sosistratus, with a strong and well-order'd Party, who forc'd them that had entred, back, and kill'd Three hundred of them: The rest looking upon themselves all as lost, endeavour'd to get out at a Sally-port, and were beyond all Hope and Expectation, freed from their pre∣sent imminent danger by Agathocles: For he fought with great Valour and Resolution at the Head of his Men, and receiv'd seven Wounds; and when he was even ready to faint (through loss of Blood) and the Enemy bearing down upon him, he commanded the Trumpeters to sound a Charge at both parts of the Walls; which being presently done, those who came to force out them that were entred, could not discern the truth of the thing, because of the Darkness of the Night, and therefore believing that another Ant. Ch. 315. Party of the Syracusians had broken in at both Places, they made an Halt and pursu'd no further. And so being divided into two Parts, at the Sound of the Trumpets, they forthwith ran together to defend the Walls. In the mean time, Agathocles with his Sol∣diers, having thus made room for themselves, got safe to the Trenches; and thus having deluded the Enemy, he not only wonderfully preserv'd his own Men that first entred, but seven hundred more that came in to his assistance. After this, Acestorides the Corinthian being created General at Syracuse; Agathocles was thought to aspire to the Monarchy for his good Service, but he avoided the Danger that hung over his Head upon that account: For Acestorides (not willing to cut him off P. 673. for fear of a Tumult) commanded him to depart the City, and ordered some to kill him in the Night as he was making away. But Agathocles conceiving what the General was plotting against him, pick'd out one of the young Men that was very like himself, both in Stature and Feature; and delivered to him his Horse, Arms, and Garments, and by this means subtilly deceiv'd them who were sent out to be his Murderers; but he himself slink'd away in By-paths in a poor ragged Coat; and they by the Arms and other signs, conjecturing that the other was Agathocles, (the Darkness of the Night not permitting a Ant. Ch. 315. perfect Discovery) perpetrated indeed the Murder, but miss'd the Person. Afterwards the Syracusians having re-admitted the Exiles that were driven out of the City with Sosistratus, and having made Peace with the Carthaginians; Agathocles himself now an Exile, rais'd an Army of his own in the Heart of the Country; at which not only the Citizens but the Carthaginians were much affrighted; and therefore he was courted
to return into his own Country; and when he came, being conducted into the Temple of Ceres by the Citizens, he there swore that he would do nothing to the Prejudice of the Democracy. Putting on therefore a Cloak of Dissimulation, as if he would protect the Democracy, and having caught the People by divers Tricks and Devices, he was made General and Conservator of the Peace, till all Matters should be appeas'd amongst the Exiles that were return'd to the City. For every Company and Fraternity were divided into many Fa∣ctions, and very great Heart-burnings there were between private and particular Persons: But the Senate of Six hundred that was appointed to govern the City after an Oligarchy, was most fierce against Agathocles's Party; for the Members of this Assembly were such as were the Richest and of the best Quality among the Syracusians. Ant. Ch. 315. However, Agathocles, who now affected the Sovereignity, gain'd many opportunities for the accomplishing of his Designs: For he had not only a Command of an Army as General, but News being brought that there was an Insurrection in the Bowels of the Country at Erbita, he gain'd a further opportunity to increase his Army, and raise what Men he pleased without suspicion. Under colour therefore of his Expedition to Erbita, he rais'd Men out of Morgantina and other Cities, in the Heart of the Country, together with those that had formerly serv'd him in the Wars against the Carthaginians; for all these had a great respect for Agathocles, upon the account of the many instances of his kind∣ness towards them, throughout the whole War. On the other hand they hated the Six hundred who had been a part of the Oligarchy in Syracuse, and no less abhorr'd the People who forced them into Obedience. There were Three thousand of them that were thus very ready with Heart and Hand to overturn the Democracy: To these he join'd some of the Citizens, who by reason of their Poverty envy'd the Power and Pomp of the great Ones. When every thing was ready, he order'd the Soldiers to meet him at spring of Day, in a Body at Near Syra∣cuse. Timoleontium; and he himself in the mean time sent for Pisarchus and Decles, Ant. Ch. 315. (who seem'd to be the most leading Men among the Six hundred) pretending to discourse with them concerning some Matters relating to the Publick Good: When they came to him, accompany'd with forty of their Friends, he pretended he was to be betray'd by them, and thereupon seiz'd them all, and accus'd them to the Soldiers, declaring, that for his love to the People, he was likely to be hurried away to destruction by the Six Agathocles Cruelties in Sy∣racuse. hundred, and sadly bewail'd his Miserable State and Condition; at which all the Soldiers were so enrag'd that they cry'd out, that Revenge should be presently taken without any further delay, upon the Authors of such Injustice: Upon which he commanded the Trum∣pets to sound a Charge, and order'd his Soldiers to kill those that were the Ring-leaders of the Mischief, and spoil and plunder the Six hundred, and all those that sided with them, of all their Goods and Estates. Hereupon all being now eagerly set upon Ravage P. 674. and Spoil, the whole City was fill'd with Horror and Confusion; for the most Innocent of the Citizens not dreaming of any Massacre design'd against them, ran out of their Houses into the Streets, to see what the Ground was of the Uproar; whereupon, the Soldiers, partly through their Covetousness to enrich themselves, and partly through Madness and Rage, fell upon the Naked People that (through Ignorance) had no Arms Ant. Ch. 315. to defend themselves, and put them all to the Sword. For the Soldiers having secur'd all the Narrow Lanes and Passes in the City, the Citizens were inhumanly Murder'd, some in their Houses. and others in the Streets, and many (altogether Innocent, not ac∣cus'd of the least Fault) were knock'd on the Head while they were asking the reason why they were to be kill'd. For the common Soldiers (having now all in their Hands) made no difference betwixt Friend and Foe; but he was sure to be reputed an Enemy where most was to be gotten by his Fall; so that then you might see the whole City fill'd with Violence, Murders, Slaughters, and all kinds of Wickedness: For some out of former grudges spar'd not to load those they before hated with all sorts of Disgrace, ha∣ving now full sway to do whatever they pleas'd; others judging it an act of Prudence to enrich themselves by the Butcheries of them that were rich; spar'd no means, nor o∣mitted any contrivance to destroy them. For some broke down the Gates of the Out-Courts, others by Ladders ascended the House Tops, and some fought with them that de∣fended themselves from the Roofs of the Houses. Nay, there was no safety even to them who fled to the Temples under the shelter of the Gods; but Piety towards the Gods was crusht and born down by the Cruelty of Men: And these things Greeks against Greeks in their own Country, and Kindred against Kindred in a time of Peace, without any re∣gard Ant. Ch. 315. either to the Laws of Nature, or Leagues or Reverence to the Gods, dar'd thus audaciously to commit: Upon which account not only Friends, but even Enemies them∣selves, and every sober Man, could not but pity the miserable Condition of these distressed
People. All the Gates were shut up, and above Four thousand were kill'd in one day, for no other fault but that they were in greater esteem than others: Of those that endeavour'd to fly, some in running to get out of the Gates were laid hold on, others who cast them∣selves over the Walls escap'd to the next Towns. Some through Fear and Inconsiderate∣ness leap'd off the Walls and broke their Necks. After all, there were thrust out of the City as Exiles, above Six thousand, of whom the greatest part fled to Agrigentum, where they were receiv'd and entertain'd with that Humanity as was agreeable to their present Condition. But those of Agathocles his Faction, (who spent the whole day in Butchering of the Citizens) were not sparing in committing their Rage and Villanies upon the Wo∣men, but thought they should be reveng'd upon them that escap'd Death, if they could but abuse their Kindred and Relations, in the most Vile and Beastly manner imaginable: For that it was very reasonable to think, that it would be more bitter than Death it self to Husbands and Parents to think of the Abuses of their Wives, and the Ravishings of their Daughters: But from hence we must forbear composing a Tragedy as is very usual Ant. Ch. 315. with other Writers, especially to stir up compassion towards them that are involv'd in such horrible Sufferings; because none will expect an express account of every Particu∣lar, when the whole is so ready and clear to be understood. For they that durst impu∣dently at Mid-day murder Innocents in the open Streets and Market place, have no need of a Writer to set forth what they did in the Houses in the Night, and how they behav'd themselves towards Wives and young Maids then in the power of their Enemies, with∣out any guard or defence to protect them. But Agathocles, after he had glutted himself with the slaughter of the Citizens two whole Days, brought together all the Prisoners, and releas'd Dimocrates, upon the account of an old Friendship between them: But as to the rest, such as were his greatest Enemies, he put to Death, and banish'd the other. Then calling a common Assembly, he accus'd the P. 675. Six hundred, and those who had favour'd the Oligarchy, declaring that he would purge the City of all those that affected a Monarchy; and restore the People to perfect Liber∣ty, and that he would henceforth stand upon equal ground with them all, and live a pri∣vate Life, free from further Cares and Toils. Upon saying of which he threw away his Ge∣nerals Ant. Ch. 315. Coat, and put on a Jacket, and so went his way, making a shew of himself as but one of the Common People. He did this dissemblingly to act the Part of a Commoner; being in the mean time very well assur'd, that there were many in the Assembly that were Brethren in Iniquity with himself, who would never suffer the Generalship to be devolv'd upon any other. Hereupon, those that had robb'd the oppress'd People of their Goods, immediately cry'd out, and with a loud Voice wish'd him not to desert them, but to take upon him the intire and absolute Management of all Affairs. At first he seem'd to be very shy; but Agathocles gains the Sove∣reign Command being afterwards more earnestly prest by the Multitude, he told them he was willing to accept of the chief Command as General, provided he should not be join'd with any o∣ther Collegue, for he should never be content to be accountable (as the Law then was) for the Miscarriages and Irregularities of those that should be join'd with him in Com∣mission. Hereupon, the People having agreed, that the whole Power should be in him alone, they voted him General, with full and absolute Authority; so that for the future he plainly acted the Part of a Monarch, and manag'd the Affairs of the whole City. The Syracusians as yet , Without Hernts Tame and Quiet, some curb'd by Fear, and others kept down by Force, durst not discover (as a thing vain and to no purpose) the Heart-burnings that were among them. But many of the Poorer sort, and those that were in Debt, were much pleas'd with Ant. Ch. 315. this Revolution: For Agathocles had promis'd in the Senate, that all former Debts should be . Caus'd to be cut off. remitted and made Void, and that Lands should be allotted and shar'd out to the Poor. After he had finish'd these things, he order'd that none for the future should be kill'd or otherwise abus'd. But on the contrary, changing his former course, he carry'd him∣self with a great deal of mildness towards the People, encouraging many with Rewards, and not a few with large Promises, and courting all with smooth words, he no little winded himself into the favour and good Opinion of the People: And though he was ad∣vanc'd to so high a pitch of Honour, yet he put not on a Diadem, nor suffer'd the At∣tendance of a Life-Guard, nor admitted any difficulty of access to his Person, which is the common practice almost of all Tyrants: But he made it his business chiefly to look after the Publick Revenue, and the making and providing all sorts of Weapons and Arms: He built likewise other long Ships to encrease and strengthen his Fleet: And lastly, brought many of the Cities and Towns in the Heart of the Country to stoop to his Au∣thority. And thus then stood the Affairs of Sicily.
In Italy this was the Ninth year of the War of the Romans with the Samnites; before The Affairs of Italy. which time there had been very sharp Battels and Engagements between them; but then (except some Incursions into the Enemies Country) there was little or nothing done worth taking notice of; only some Forts were taken, and the Country harrass'd. But in Apu∣lia The Romans. Ant. Ch. 315. they wasted and spoil'd all Now Capi∣tania in the Kingdom of Naples. Daunia, and having conquer'd the Canutii in France, now calld Chartres. Canutii, receiv'd of them Hostages. There were added likewise two other Tribes to the former, the one of Falernia, and the other of Ufentina. While these things were acting, the Crotonians made Peace with the Brutians; but the War being continud another year with the Exiles, (who were expell'd by the People for their conspiring with Heraclides and Sosistratus, of which we have given a particular Ac∣count in the No such Ac∣count appears there. P. 676. former Book) they created Parones and Menedemus their Generals. In the mean time the Exiles went to Thurium, and there listed Three hundred Mercenaries, and endeavour'd in the Night to have broke into the City: But being repuls'd by the Crotoni∣ans, they Encamp'd in the Confines of the Brutians; but within a short time after they were every Man cut off by a much stronger Party, who sallied out of the City against them. And now having given an account how things went in Sicily and Italy, we shall pass to the things done in other Parts of Europe. Eurydice being Queen-Regent in Macedonia, as soon as she heard that Olympias was pre∣paring for her return, sent an Express to Cassander, then in Peloponnesus, wishing him to Affairs in Ma∣cedonia. hasten to her Aid and Assistance; and in the mean time, by her Bribes and Promises, she brought over the most active and stirring Men among the Macedonians, to favour her in her designs. But Polysperchon got an Army together, and being join'd with Aeacides of Epirus, he brought back Olympias, with His Name was Alexander, the Son of Roxana. Ant. Ch. 315. Olympias re∣turns into Ma∣cedonia. Alexander's Son into the Kingdom. And hearing that Eu∣rydice was at Evia in Macedonia with an Army, aiming to make an end of all by one Bat∣tel, he makes swiftly after; and presently as soon as the Armies Encamp'd one over a∣gainst the other, on a sudden the Macedonians (in reverence to Olympias, and calling to mind the many Advantages and Kindnesses they had receiv'd at the hands of Alexander) turn'd about; whereupon, King Aridaeus call'd Philip. Philip with all his Servants were presently taken. Euridice the Wife of Philip. Eu∣rydice likewise, together with Polycles (one of her Counsellors) were afterwards taken; being before return'd to Amphipolis. Olympias having thus gain'd the custody of both the Kings, and likewise the Kingdom, without Blood; us'd not her good Fortune with that Humanity as she ought to have done: But at the very first imprisoning both Eurydice and Philip her Husband, she us'd them very cruelly: For she coop'd them both up in a very straight and narrow Place, where through a little narrow Hole every thing for their necessary use was deliver'd in to them. And for many days together, she thus (against all Law and Conscience) ex∣ercis'd her Rage and Revenge upon these miserable Princes. But when she perceiv'd that the Macedonians spoke ill of her, out of Pity and Commi∣seration She cruelly Murders Euri∣dice and Ar∣rideus her Husband. Ant. Ch. 315. towards those that were thus miserably dealt with, she deliver'd Philip to certain Thracians, (after he had reign'd Six Years and Four Months) to be stabb'd with Ponyards. But Eurydice she order'd to be more severely dealt with; because she was to free of her Tongue, that she was still blabbing it out, that she was fitter to rule the Kingdom than Olympias: And therefore she sent to her a Sword, a Rope, and a Cup of Poison, bidding her chuse which she would to dispatch her self with, neither valuing the former State and Dignity of the Injur'd Lady, nor commiserating the common lot of Mankind: And therefore she came at length to experience the same turns of Fortune her self, and came to an end, every way worthy her Cruelty. For Eurydice in the presence of the Person that brought her the Instruments of her Death, pray'd the Gods that she might have the like Present sent to her; and then having bound up the Wounds of her Husband, as well as the shortness of time would permit, she wrapp'd him up, and so without any Wo∣manish Complaints, or any base dejection of Spirit, through the greatness of her Mise∣ry, she strangled her self in her own Garter. Having made an end of these two, she kill'd Nicanor, the Brother of Cassander: Then she pick'd out a Hundred Macedonians of Cassander's Friends, and put them all to Death. Having gratify'd her Revenge by these Cruel Acts, many of the Macedonians were incited to hate her mortally for her Cruelty: For they all remember'd the Words of Antipater, who, like an Oracle, a little before his Death, had given strict charge not to admit this Woman to govern the Kingdom. Olympias therefore managing things after this rate in Macedonia, it clearly pointed out a Revolution in the State.
In Asia, Eumenes having with him the Argyraspides under their Captain Antigenes, win∣ter'd Ant. Ch. 315. Affairs in Asia. P. 677. Eumenes and his Army near being drown'd by Seleucus. in the Province of Babylon, in the Towns call'd Carrhe; thence he sent Ambassadors to Seleucus and Pitho, requiring them to assist the Kings, and that they would join with him in the War against Antigonus. Pitho was appointed Lord-Lieutenant of Media, and the other of the Province of Babylon, when the second Division of the Provinces was made in Triparadisus. Seleucus answer'd, That he, and those with him, would supply the Kings with what ever they wanted, but that he would never observe any of the Com∣mands of Eumenes, who was adjudg'd to die by the common Suffrage of the Macedo∣nians. After many Disputes relating to this Resolution, Pitho and Seleucus. they sollicited Antigenes and the Argyraspides by their Agent to cast off Eumenes. But the Macedonians rejecting what they requir'd, Eumenes commended them for their Fidelity and march'd away, and came to the River Tigris, and there encamp'd Three hundred Furlongs from Babylon: For he design'd to march to Susa, because he intended to raise Forces out of the higher Provinces, and to make use of the King's Treasures as there should be occasion. But he was forc'd to pass the River, because that part on this side was eaten up by Forraging and Depredations, and the Country on the other side was yet untouch'd, and afforded plenty of Forrage and other Provision for his Army. While he was getting Vessels together, in order to his passing over the River, Seleucus and Pitho Ant. Ch. 315. sail'd up the River with two Galleys of three Tire of Oars, and many other little Vessels, being part of those that Alexander built at Babylon. As soon as they arriv'd at the place where the Passage was intended, they renew'd their Sollicitation to the Macedonians to perswade them to cast off Eumenes, and not to abet and encourage a Fellow against them who was but a Stranger, and had destroy'd Multitudes of the Macedonians. But when Antigenes could not be prevail'd with upon any Terms whatsoever, the Seleucians sail'd to an old Sluce, and broke down the Head of it, where it was grown up through length of Time: Upon which the Macedonian Camp was surrounded with Water, and all the Tract of Ground overflow'd, so that the whole Army was in great danger to be utterly lost. All that day therefore they rested, consi∣dering and advising what was best to be done in such an Exigent. The next day, without any Disturbance from the Enemy, they transported the greatest part of the Army in Flat∣bottom'd Boats, to the number of Thirty, forc'd forward with long Poles: For Seleucus had only Horse with him, and those far inferiour in Number to the Enemy. And now Night approach'd, when Eumenes (in great Pain for his Carriages left behind) caus'd all the Macedonians to repass the River; and then, by Direction of one of the Natural In∣habitants, he set upon cleansing another such-like place, by which the Water might be Ant. Ch. 315. easily diverted, and the Ground all round about drain'd dry. Which when Seleucus per∣ceiv'd, (minding to be rid of them out of his Province with what speed he could) he sent Ambassadors to them to make a Truce, and so permitted them to pass over the Ri∣ver: But forthwith sent Expresses to Antigonus in Mesopotamia, to desire him with all speed to come down with his Army, before the Governors of the Provinces came in with their Forces. Eumenes having now passed the River Tigris, as soon as he came into Susiana, he divided Eumenes comes into Su∣siana. his Army into three Bodies, by reason of the Scarcity of Provision; and thus marching through the Country three several Ways, he was in great want of Bread Corn, therefore distributed Rice, Of which the Indians make Oil: A white Grain. Millet and Dates (with which that Country abounded) amongst the Soldiers. Although he had before taken care to send away the Kings Letters to the Lords Lieu∣tenants of the Upper Provinces, yet he then again sent Expresses, to desire them all to meet him with their Forces in Susiana. At which time it so happen'd, that they had their Forces then in the Field, and were got together for some other Reasons. Of which, it's Ant. Ch. 315. necessary here to say something before we proceed further. Pitho was Lord Lieutenant of Media, and General of all the higher Satrapies, by Na∣tion The Captains in Asia draw into the Field, and the reason. P. 678. a Parthian, who had kill'd Philotas the former General, and had plac'd Eudamus his own Brother in his Room. Upon which, all the other Provinces join'd together, lest they should be serv'd the same Sawce, because Pitho was of a restless Spirit, and had en∣gag'd himself in Matters of high Importance. Having therefore overcome him in Battel, and cut off most of his Army, they drove the Man himself out of Parthia; who first sought for shelter in Media, and in a short time after he went to Babylon, and prayed Assistance from Seleucus, and that they might join together in one common Interest. The Governours therefore for these Causes having drawn their Forces together, Eumenes his Messengers came to the Armies when they were ready, and prepar'd in the Field. Peucestes was the most Renown'd Captain of them all, and was made General by an
unanimous Assent. He was formerly Squire of the Body to Alexander, and advanc'd by the King for his Valour. He was Lord Lieutenant of the greatest part of Persia, and in great Esteem among the Natives. And for this Reason, he of all the Macedonians was allow'd by Alexander to wear a Persian Gown, because he thought thereby to ingratiate himself with the Persians, and engage them to be more observant to all his Commands. Ant. Ch. 315. The Number of the Forces that join'd with Eu∣menes. He then had with him Ten thousand Persian Archers and Slingers, and of other Nations (taken into the Rank of Macedonians) Three thousand, with Six hundred Horse of Greeks and Thracians, and of Persian Horse Four hundred. Polemon a Macedonian, Gover∣nor of Carmania, had Fifteen hundred Foot, and Seven hundred Horse. Sibyrtius, Go∣vernor of Arachosia, had a Thousand Foot, and Six hundred and ten Horse. Androbazus likewise was sent from Parapamysus (of which Province Oxyartes was Governor) with Twelve hundred Foot, and Four hundred Horse. Stasander, Governor of Aria and Dranginas, being join'd with the Bactrians, had with him Fifteen hundred Foot, and a Thousand Horse. Out of India came Eudamus with 300 in the Margin. Ush. Ann. 307. Five hundred Horse, and Three thousand Foot, and a Hundred and twenty Elephants, which he got after Alexander's Death, when he treacherously slew Porus. There were in the whole, with the Gover∣nors of the Provinces, above The Particu∣lars make One and twenty thousand. Eighteen thousand and Seven hundred Foot, and Four thousand and Six hundred Horse. When all these came into the Province of Susiana, and join'd with Eumenes, a publick Assembly was call'd, where was a hot Dispute concerning the Choice of a General. Peucestes, upon the account of his bringing in most Men into the Field, and his eminent Post under Alexander, conceiv'd he had most Right to challenge the chief Command. Antigenes, Captain of the Argyraspi∣des. Silver Targateers, insisted upon it, That the whole Power of Election ought to be committed to his Macedonians, who under Alexander had conquer'd Asia, and by their Valour had so signaliz'd themselves, as to gain the Reputation of being Ant. Ch. 315. Unconquerable. But Eumenes fearing lest by their Divisions they should become an easy Prey to Antigonus, advis'd that they should not make only one General; but that all who were before chosen Captains, and Commanders, should meet every day in the King's Pa∣vilion, and there consult of all the publick Affairs. For a Tent had been before erected to Alexander, and his Throne plac'd therein, to which they us'd to resort, (offering In∣cense as to a God) and there debate all Matters of Weight, and special Concern. This Advice being Approv'd and Applauded by all, they met there every day, as in a City govern'd by a Democracy. Afterwards being come to Susa, there Eumenes was supply'd with what Monies he had occasion for out of the King's Exchequer. For the Kings by Eumenes come to Susa. their Letters had order'd the Treasures, that they should issue to Eumenes alone so much Money as he at any time requir'd. Hereupon he gave the Macedonians Six Months Pay P. 679. before-hand, and to Eudamus (who brought the Elephants out of India) he paid Two hundred Talents, under colour to defray the Charge and Expence of the Elephants, but in truth the more to engage him to his Interest. For if Contests should arise, that Party would have the greatest Advantage with whom he sided, by reason of the Terror occa∣sion'd by the use of these Beasts. The rest of the Governors, every one maintain'd their own Soldiers they brought with them. This done, Eumenes continu'd for some time in Ant. Ch. 315. Susa, and there refresh'd his Army. In the mean time Antigonus, who Winter'd in Mesopotamia, resolv'd forthwith to set upon Eumenes before he grew too strong: But when he heard, that the Provincial Go∣vernors with their Forces, together with the Macedonians, were join'd with him, he let his Soldiers rest, and made it his Business to raise more. For he saw that he had need of a great Army, and reason to make more than ordinary Preparations for the War. In the midst of these Preparations, Attalus, Polemo, Docimus, Antipater, and Philotas, who before were Commanders in Alcetas his Army, and were taken Prisoners, and now kept Several Cap∣tains being Prisoners in a strong Castle, seek to escape. close Prisoners in an extraordinary strong Castle, hearing of Antigonus his intended Ex∣pedition into the higher Provinces, (conceiving now they had gain'd a fair opportu∣nity,) hir'd some of their Keepers to suffer them to escape. Having therefore gotten Arms, about Midnight they set upon the Guard: They themselves were but Eight in Number, (surrounded with Four hundred Men,) yet Valiant and Expert Soldiers through their Experience in the War with Alexander. Xenopithes, the Governor of the Castle, they Ant. Ch. 315. threw off from the Walls headlong down a steep Rock, a Furlong high; and as to the rest, some they kill'd upon the place, and others they hurl'd down, and then set the Houses on fire. Hereupon they took into the Castle Five hundred Men that were with∣out expecting the Issue: It was indeed very well stor'd with Provision, and all other Things necessary: But they consulted together, whether it was better to stay there, and trust to the Strength of the Place, waiting for Relief from Eumenes, or to get away,
and wander about in the Country, making use of a Change and Turn of Fortune when it might happen. Much Canvassing and Disputing there was on both sides: Docimus was for leaving the Place; but Attalus declar'd, he was not able to endure Labour, by reason of the Hardship of his late Imprisonment. Whilst they were thus at Difference amongst themselves, above Five hundred Foot and Four hundred Horse were drawn out of the Neighbouring Garisons, and got toge∣ther in a Body, besides Three thousand of the natural Inhabitants and upwards gather'd from all Parts of the Country; these created one from among themselves to be their Ge∣neral, and laid close Siege to the Castle. Being therefore thus unexpectedly again coop'd up, Docimus acquainted with a Passage under-ground, where no Guard was set, by a private Messenger kept Correspondence with Stratonice the Wife of Antigonus, who was not far distant from the Place: And after∣wards he, with one other in his Company, through this Pass slipt out to her; but, con∣trary Ant. Ch. 315. to her Promise, he was seiz'd and secur'd. And he that came out with him; under∣took to conduct the Enemy into the Castle, and accordingly brought in a great Number, and with them gain'd one of the highest Rocks within the Fort. And although Attalus, and all those with him, were far inferiour in Number, yet they defended the Place couragiously, fighting valiantly every day, till at length they fell into the Enemies hands after a Siege of Sixteen Months. CHAP. II. Antigonus marches after Eumenes to Tigris. Eumenes cuts off many of his Men at Pasitigris. Antigonus goes into Media. Eumenes comes to Persepolis. The Description of Persia. Peucestes his great Feast. Eumenes his Policy. His Tale of the Lion. A Battel in Pareteceni, between Antigonus and Eumenes. Anti∣gonus returns into Media. The Story of Ceteus his two Wives striving which should be burnt. Eumenes marches to Galiene; Cassander to Macedonia. Olympias goes to Pydna; is there besieg'd. The Epirots forsake their King, and join with Cassander. Antigonus designs to surprize Eumenes, who stops his March by a Stratagem. The last Battel between them in Gabiene. Eumenes basely deli∣ver'd up. Antigonus returns to Media. The dreadful Earthquakes in the Country of Rhages. AFterwards Democlides was chief Governor at Athens, and Caius, Junius and Quinius Olymp. 116. 1. Ant. Ch. 314. An. M. 3634. Antigonus marches after Eumenes to Tigris. P. 680. Emilius were Consuls at Rome. At that time was celebrated the Hundred and six∣teenth Olympiad, at which time Deinomenes the Laconian gain'd the Victory. About this time Antigonus march'd out of Mesopotamia and came to Babylon, and made a League with Seleucus and Pitho, and having strengthen'd himself with Forces receiv'd from them, made a Bridge of Boats over the River Tigris, and pass'd over his Army, and hasted away with a swift March after the Enemy. Of which, Eumenes having Intelligence, he sent to Xenophilus, Or Treasurer. Governor of the Citadel at Susa, not to give any Money to Antigonus, nor by any means to come out to Parly with him. He himself march'd with the Army to Tigris, a day's Journey distant from Susa, where he came into the Country of the Uxians, a free People. The River is in some Places three, and in others four Furlongs broad. The depth in the middle of the Channel was equal with the height of the Elephants. It runs in a Current from the Mountains Seven hundred Furlongs, and empties it self into the Red Sea. There are many Sea Fish and Whales in this River, which appear chiefly at the In the Dog-Days. About the end of July. Rising of the Dog-Star. The Eumeneans had the River before them for a Defence, and mann'd the Bank all along from the Head of the River to the The Red Sea,  Persian Gulf. Sea, with Forts every where built upon the Bank, and there waited for the Enemies approach. But because those Forts requir'd a great number of Men to keep them, in regard they stretch'd out a great length, Eu∣menes and Antigenes sollicited Peucestes to send for Ten thousand Archers more out of Persia; who at first refus'd, complaining how he was deny'd to be General of the Army. But afterwards upon mature Deliberation with himself he comply'd, concluding that if Ant. Ch. 14. Antigonus prevail'd, he should lose both his Province, and be in danger of losing his Life
besides; careful therefore to preserve his own Interest, and hoping thereby with more ease to gain the chief Command by having more Men than any of the rest, he brought Ten thousand Archers more into the Camp according to their Desire. And though An Army 30 days March a∣sunder, and all able to hear the ord of Com∣mand in one day. some of the Persians were distant one from another Thirty days March, yet they had plac'd their Guards with that Art and Exactness, that they all heard the Word of Com∣mand in one and the same day; the Reason of which is worthy Remark: For Persia is full of long and narrow Valleys, and has many high Watch-Towers, upon which were plac'd some of the Inhabitants that were Men of loud and strong Voices: When the Voice was heard by those in the next Division, they imparted it in the same manner to the other, and they again to the rest, one after another till what was Commanded came at length to the end of the Province. While Eumenes and Peucestes were busy about these Affairs, Antigonus came with his Antigonus comes to Susa. Army to the King's Palace in Susa, and made Seleucus Lord-Lieutenant of the Province, and leaving with him a sufficient Army, order'd him to besiege the Cittadel, Xenophilus the Treasurer refusing to obey his Commands; but he himself march'd away with his Army against the Enemy, through a hot scalding Country, very dangerous for Foreign Armies to pass. Therefore they were forc'd to march in the night, and encamp near Ant. Ch. 314. the River before Sun-rising: However he could not secure himself from all the Inconve∣niencies and Mischiefs of that Country: For though he did all that was possible for him to do, yet through the excessive Heat of the Season, (being about the rising of the See the fore∣going Page. Dog-Star,) he lost a great Multitude of his Men. Coming at length to the River Co∣prates, he prepar'd what was necessary for the passing over of his Men. This River is∣sues from a Mountainous Country, and runs into Tigris, and is Four Acres broad, and was Fourscore Furlongs distant from Eumenes his Camp. The Stream is so rapid and swift, that there's no passing over without Boats, or a Bridge. Having therefore got together a few Flat bottom'd Boats, in them he put over some of his Foot, ordering them to draw a Trench and cast up Works to defend it, and there to attend the coming over of the rest. Eumenes having Intelligence by his Scouts of the Enemies Designs, pass'd over the Bridge of Tigris with Four thousand Foot and Thirteen hundred Horse, and found above Eumenes cuts off Antigonus his Men near Tigris. Three thousand Foot and Three hundred Horse of Antigonus his Army got over The River Coprates. Pasitigris. P. 681.; and no less than Six thousand who were forraging up and down the Country: These he sud∣denly set upon and routed them, and presently put the rest to flight. As for the Mace∣donians (who stood their Ground) being overpower'd with Number, he forc'd them all to the River, where running headlong into their Boats, and overcharging them, they sunk down: Upon which many of them endeavouring to swim, some few of them escap'd, but the rest were all drown'd. Others that could not swim, (judging it more advisable to fall into the Enemies hand, than certainly to lose their Lives in the River,) were taken Prisoners, to the number of Four thousand. Antigonus, for want of Boats, was not able to help them, though he saw such Multitudes perish. Conceiving therefore Ant. Ch. 334. that it was impossible to pass the River, he march'd back to the City Badaca, seated upon the River Ulaie. By reason of the vehement Heat, this March was very sweltering and The River Ulaie. troublesome, and many of the Army were tir'd out, so that they were Heartless, and even at their Wits end: But when he came to the City before-mention'd, staying there some days, he refresh'd his Army. Thence he judg'd it advisable to march to Ecbatane in Antigonus marches into Media. Media, and making that the Seat of War, to take in all the higher Pro∣vinces. There were two Ways that led to Media, and both were difficult; that over the Moun∣tains was pleasant, and the High-way; but scorching hot, and very long, almost Forty Days Journey. That through the Country of the Cosseans was strait, narrow, and steep, leading through the Enemies Borders, and barren and scant of Provision, but a short Cut, and more cool; yet it was not easie for an Army to march this way, unless Agree∣ment were made with the Barbarians, who inhabit the Mountains. The Cosseans. They have been a Free People time out of Mind, and inhabit in Caves, and feed upon Acorns and Mushrooms, and the salted Flesh of wild Beasts. But he look'd upon it as a dishonourable thing for him who commanded so great an Army, to court these Barbarous People with smooth Words, or gain them by rich Gifts. He pick'd out there∣fore the choicest of his Targateers, and divided the Archers and Slingers, and such like light-arm'd Men into two Bodies, and deliver'd them to Nearchus, with command to go before him, and first secure the Streights, and difficult Passes. These being posted all a∣long in the Way, he himself led the Phalanx, and Pitho commanded the Rear. Ant. Ch. 314.
They that were sent with Nearchus, had endeavour'd to possess themselves of a few Watch Towers; but being hindred and prevented of many, and the most Necessary and Commodious Places, they lost many of their Soldiers, and being set upon on every side by the Barbarians, they had much ado to make their way through them. And as for those that follow'd Antigonus, (having enter'd the Streights) they fell into dangers that were inextricable: For the Natives being well acquainted with the Places, and having before possess'd themselves of the Steep and Craggy Rocks, cast down massy Stones upon the Soldiers Heads as they passed by; and besides making use of showers of Arrows, they so gall'd them, that they were neither able (through the inconveniency of the Place) to an∣noy their Enemies, nor avoid their shot: And in regard the Passage was very craggy and difficult, the Elephants, Horses, and heavy arm'd Men, were involv'd both in Toils and Hazards at one and the same time, and in no capacity to help themselves. Antigonus being brought into these streights; now repented that he did not follow the Counsel of Pitho, who had advis'd him to have bought his Passage by Money. But after the loss of many of his Men, and the rest still in imminent hazard, after nine Days trouble∣some march, he came at length to the Inhabited Parts of Media. One Mischief on the Neck of another thus falling upon the Army, the intolerable Di∣stresses Ant. Ch. 314. P. 682. they were brought unto, stirr'd up the Soldiers to cry out against Antigonus, in∣somuch as they gave him very harsh and bitter Words. For in Forty Days time, they had three several times been miserably slaughter'd; but by fair Words, and plentiful Provision of all things necessary, he at length quieted them. Then he commanded Pitho to go over all Media, to get together Horsemen and Horses and Carriages, which he easily perform'd, the Country abounding with Horses and Cattle. For Pitho return'd, bringing along with him Two thousand Horsemen and a Thousand Horses, ready furnish'd, and so many loads of Munition as that the whole Army might be compleatly arm'd, together with Five hundred Talents out of the King's Treasury. Antigonus form'd the Horse into Regiments, and distributed the Horses among those that had lost their own, and gave the Draught-Beasts freely among those that wanted them, whereby he regain'd the former Love of the Soldiers. In the mean time, the Governors of the Provinces, and Captains of the Forces with Eumenes, when they heard that the Enemy was in Media, were in various Opinions what to resolve upon: For Eumenes, Antigenes, and the rest who came up from the Sea-Coasts, were for returning thither again. But those who came from the higher Provinces (upon the account of their Friends and Relations that were left at home) were for defending those Parts. The Contest waxing hot, Eumenes considering that one part of the Army Eumenes comes to Persepolis. (which was now divided into two) was not strong enough to cope with the Enemy, comply'd with the Governors of the Upper Provinces. Decamping therefore from Pa∣sitigris, he mov'd towards Persia, and came to the Regal Seat of the Kingdom, Persepolis, Ant. Ch. 314. at the end of Four and twenty days march. The Country in the first Entrance into it, and as far as the Ladders (as they are call'd) The Description of Persia to∣wards Perse∣polis. is Flat and Low, exceeding Hot, and barren of Provision; but the rest is higher, of a wholesome Air, and very Fruitful: Wherein are many shady Valleys, variety of . Plea∣sant Gardens, natural Walks bounded on either side with all sorts of Trees, and water'd with refreshing Springs. So that those that pass this Way, many times stop here and so∣lace themselves in these pleasant Places with great delight. Here the Inhabitants brought in to Peucestes abundance of all kinds of Prey and Booty, which he largely distributed among the Soldiers, to gain their Favour and Good will. In this Tract inhabit the most Warlike of the Persians, being all Archers and Slingers, and is far more populous than any of the other Provinces. When they came to Persepolis, the King's Palace, Peucestes the Governor, and General of the Province, order'd a magnificent Sacrifice to the Gods, and to Alexander and Phi∣lip, and to that end sending almost over all Persia for Beasts to be sacrific'd, and abun∣dance of all other Provisions, necessary for a Festival and publick Solemnity, he Feasted the whole Army. In this Festival the Guests were placed in four Rounds, including one within another, Pencestes Feasts the Ar∣my in Persia. Ant. Ch. 314. the greatest surrounding all the rest, which was ten furlongs in Compass, and was fill'd with Mercenaries and Confederates. The second Round was eight Furlongs, in which were plac'd the Argyraspi∣des. Macedonian Silver Targateers, and the rest of Alexander's Fellow-Soldiers. The other Circle was of four Furlongs, and fill'd with inferior Officers, special Friends, Commanders, and Horse-men.
That in the midst of all was two Furlongs, wherein the Generals, Masters of the Horse, and the Nobility of Persia, had their several Tents allotted them, and in the midst of them were plac'd the Altars of the Gods, and of Alexander and Philip. The Tents were made of green Booths of Trees, cover'd with Arras, and all sorts of P. 683. Tapestry Hangings; Persia plentifully affording every thing for Pleasure and Delight. The Rounds were at that convenient distance one from another, as that the Guests found nothing of trouble or uneasiness, but every thing that was prepar'd was near at hand. All being thus gracefully manag'd, with the general applause of the common Soldiers, thereby expressing how great Peucestes was in their Favour and Esteem, he was suspected by Eumenes, conceiving that Peucestes did this to ingratiate himself with the Army, and thereby to gain the Sovereign Command; he therefore forg'd a Letter, by which he rais'd up the Spirits of the Soldiers, and made them more Courageous, and brought down the haughty Spirit and Pride of Peucestes; but advanc'd his own Reputation with the Army, with the hopes of good Success for the future. The Contents of the Letter were these: That Olympias with Alexander's Son (having kill'd Cassander) had fully recover'd the Kingdom of Macedon, and that Polysperchon with the main Power of the King's Army Ant. Ch. 314. Eumenes his Policy to forge a Letter from Olympias. and his Elephants, had put over into Asia against Antigonus, and was then in Capadocia. This Letter was writ in Syriack Characters, in the Name of Orontes, Governor of Arme∣nia, an intimate Friend of Peucestes. These Letters going for current, because of the con∣tinual Correspondence between him and the Lord-Lieutenants; Eumenes order'd them to be carry'd about, and shew'd to the Captains and most of the Soldiers. Hereupon, the whole Army chang'd their Mind, and all Eyes were upon Eumenes as the chief Fa∣vourite, and therefore resolv'd to depend upon him, as he whose Interest in the Kings would be able to advance whom he pleas'd, and to punish whom he thought fit. When the Feasting was ended, Eumenes the more to terrify them that were regardless of his Orders, and that affected the Sovereign Command, call'd in Question in due form of Law, Sibertius the Governor of Aracosia, Peucestes his special Friend. For Peucestes sending away some Horse into Aracosia, had secretly commanded Sibertius to intercept the Carriages coming from thence. Whereupon, Eumenes brought him into that eminent Danger, that unless he had privately withdrawn himself he had been knock'd on the Head by the Soldiers. By this piece of Policy, having terrify'd others, and advanc'd his own Honour and Reputation, he put on a new Face again; and so gain'd upon Peucestes with smooth Words and large Promises, that he became both kind and courteous to him, Ant. Ch. 314. and chearful and ready to afford Aid and Assistance to the Kings. Desiring likewise to be assur'd of the rest of the Governors and Captains by some Pledges, which might en∣gage them not to forsake him, he pretended to want Money, and desir'd them to con∣tribute every one according to his Ability to the Kings. Hereupon, receiving Four hundred Talents from among so many of the Captains Good Policy by borrowing of Money. and Generals as he thought fit, those whom he before suspected of Treachery or Deser∣tion, became most Faithful Attendants and Guards to his Person, and stuck close to him in all Encounters. While he thus prudently manag'd Affairs, and was providing for the Future, News was brought by some who came out of Media, that Antigonus was marching with his Army into Persia: Whereupon he mov'd forward, with a design to meet and engage the Ene∣my. The second Day of their march he sacrific'd to the Gods, and plentifully feasted the Ar∣my, wishing them to continue Firm and Faithful to him: But minding to comply with the humour of his Guests, who lov'd to drink freely, he fell into a Distemper, which caus'd him to lye by it, and so hinder'd his March for some Days. In the mean time the Army was greatly dejected, to consider, that the most Expert and Bravest Commander of all the Generals, should be now Sick at the very time (as they thought) they were even ready to fight the Enemy. But his Distemper abating, and after a little time having recover'd himself, he pursu'd Ant. Ch. 314. P. 684. his March, Peucestes and Antigenes leading the Van; and he himself in a Litter follow'd after with the Elephants, to prevent disturbance by the Croud, and the Inconveniency by the straightness of the Places they were to pass. And now the two Armies were within a days march one of another, when the Scouts on both sides brought an account of their approach, and what numbers they were, and ways Eumenes and Antigonus their Armies near, but fight not. they took. Whereupon, each Party prepar'd for Battel: But at length they parted with∣out fighting; for there was a River and a deep Trench between the two Armies. Both indeed were drawn forth in Battalia, but by reason of the Badness of the Ground they could not come to fight: Wherefore, drawing off one from another three Furlongs space, they
spent four Days in light Skirmishes, and foraging the Country thereabouts, being pinched with want of all things necessary. The fifth day Antigonus, by his Agents, again sollicited the Governors of the Provinces and the Macedonians, to desert Eumenes, and commit them∣selves to his Protection. For he promis'd that he would leave to every one of them their own several Provinces, and would bestow large Territories upon the rest, and others he would send into their own Country, loaden with Honours and great Rewards; and as for those that were willing still to bear Arms, he would give them Places and Posts in the Ant. Ch. 314. Army suitable to their several Circumstances: But the Macedonians would not harken to any thing of these Terms, but sent away the Messengers with great Indignation and Threats: Upon which Eumenes came amongst them, and gave them Thanks, with Com∣mendations of their Fidelity, and told them an old Story, but very pat to the present Occasion; That a Lion falling in Love with a young Lady, treated with her Father to Eumenes his Tale of the Lion. bestow her upon him in Marriage; who answer'd, That he was very willing to give the young Woman to be his Wife, but that he was afraid of his Claws and Teeth, lest when he was marry'd, according to the Nature of his Kind, he would devour the poor Girl. Hereupon, the Lion beat out his Teeth, and tore off his Claws: Upon which the Fa∣ther perceiving that now he had lost whatever before made him formidable, fell upon him and easily cudgell'd him to Death. And that now Antigonus was acting a Part not much unlike to this: For he courted them with fair Promises, till such time as he can get the Army into his Power, and then he'll be sure to cut the Throats of the Commanders. This fine Story thus handsomely told, was highly applauded by the Army; and here∣upon he dismiss'd them. The next Night some Deserters from Antigonus came in, and gave Intelligence, that he had order'd his Army to march at the second Watch. Hereupon, Eumenes upon seri∣ous Ant. Ch. 314. Thoughts, and musing of what his Designs might be, at length hit upon the truth of the Matter, that the Enemy's purpose was to march to Gabene, which was a Country three days march distant, then untouch'd, abounding in Corn and Forage, sufficient to supply the greatest Army plentifully with all sorts of Provision; and besides, was a Place of great advantage, full of Rivers and deep Gutters that were unpassable. Contriving therefore to prevent the Enemy, he put in execution the like project; and sent away some of the Mercenaries (whom he hir'd for Money) under colour of Run-aways, with order to inform Antigonus that Eumenes would fall upon his Camp that Night. But Eu∣menes himself sent away the Carriages before, and commanded the Soldiers with all speed to eat their Suppers and march: All which was presently dispatch'd. In the mean time, Antigonus, upon the Intelligence receiv'd from the Deserters, re∣solv'd to fight the Enemy that Night, and therefore put a stop to his march, and plac'd his Army in order of Battel. During which hurry of Antigonus, and while he was preparing to meet his Enemy, Eumenes stole away with his Army and made towards Gabene before. Antigonus for some Eumenes marckes to∣wards Gabene. Ant. Ch. 314. time waited with his Soldiers at their Arms, but receiving Intelligence by his Scouts, that Eumenes his Army was gone, he perceiv'd a Trick was put upon him. However, he went on with what he before design'd; and to that end, giving the Word of Command to his Army to march, he posted away with that haste and speed, as if he had been in a Pursuit. But when he understood that Eumenes was got Two Watches of the Night. six Hours march before him, and so P. 68. perceiving he was not able at so great a distance to overtake him with his whole Army, he contriv'd as follows; he deliver'd the rest of the Army to Pitho, willing him to come softly after him; and he himself posted away with the Horse: About spring of Day he came up even with the Rear of the Enemy's Army, as they were marching down a Hill; upon the Top of the Mountain he made a Halt, and presented himself to the View of the Enemy Eumenes, at a convenient Distance, seeing the Enemy's Horse, conceiv'd the whole Army was near at hand, and therefore made a Stand; and drew up his Men in order of Battel, as if they should forthwith Engage. In this manner these two Generals put Tricks one upon another, as if they were striving which should out-wit one the other; hereby shewing, that all their hopes of Victory lay and were grounded upon their own Stratagems. By this means therefore, Antigonus put a stop to the Enemy's march, and gain'd time for his Army to come up to him; which at length joining with him he drew up in Bat∣talia, and in that order march'd down the Hill in a terrible manner upon the Enemy. The whole Army, (with those brought in by Pitho and Selencus) amounted to above Eight and Twenty thousand Foot, Eight thousand and Five hundred Horse, and Sixty Ant. Ch. 34.
five Elephants. Both the Generals rang'd their Armies in an Array that was strange and unusual, as if they strove which should excell each other even in this piece of Art also. In the Left Wing Eumenes plac'd Eudamus the Captain of the Elephants from India, who Battel between Eumenes and Antigonus in the Country of the Paretece∣ni. had with him a Body of an Hundred and fifty Horse: In Front of these were drawn up Two Squadrons of choice Horse arm'd with Launces, Fifty deep; and were all join'd to them who were plac'd upon the rising Ground near the Foot of the Mountain. Next to them was drawn up Stafandrus, with Nine hundred and fifty of his own Horse. Af∣ter these, he order'd Amphmachus Lord-Lieutenant of Mesopotamia, who had under his Command Six hundred Horse. Next to them were drawn up the Horse from Arachosia, lately commanded by Sibycitus, but by reason he was then fled, the Command was given to Cephalus. Close to these were Five hundred Horse from Paropamisada, and as many Thracians from the upper Colonies. In the Van of all these stood Five and forty Ele∣phants, drawn up in a Half-Moon, lin'd with so many Archers and Slingers as was thought fit. Then he drew up his main Body of Foot in a Phalanx in this manner: At the farthest Point were plac'd above Six thousand Foreign Soldiers, then five Thousand out of seve∣ral Countries arm'd after the manner of the Macedonians; after these were drawn up no more than Three thousand Argyraspides, but Men never conquer'd, and for their Va∣lour dreaded by the Enemy. And lastly, after all Three thousand Targateers of the Life-Guard; which, together with the Argyraspides, were commanded by Antigenes and Tautamus. And in the Van of this Phalanx stood Forty Elephants, lin'd with light-arm'd Men. Next to the Phalanx in the Right Wing he drew up Eight hundred of Carmanian Horse, under the Command of Tlepolimus the Governor of that Province; and after them Nine hundred who were call'd Companions. Then the Squadron of Antigines and Peucestes, being Three hundred Men in one Troop. In the utmost part of the Wing was plac'd Eumenes his own Regiment, consisting of as many Horse; and before these was a Forlorn-Hope made up of Eumenes his Servants, plac'd in two Bodies, consisting of Fifty Horse apiece. There were likewise Two hundred Horse drawn up into Four Squadrons, P. 686. and plac'd in the Flank at a distance from the main Wing, to be a Guard to that part. And besides all these, he plac'd Three hundred Horse, cull'd out of all the Provinces for strength and speed, to be a Guard to the Rear of his Squadron: And in the Van of this Wing thus array'd, were plac'd Forty Elephants, for the better Defence of the whole. Eumenes his whole Army amounted to Five and thirty thousand Foot, Six thousand and one hundred Horse, and One hundred and fourteen Elephants. Antigonus observing from the Top of the Hills how the Army of the Enemy was drawn up, drew up his likewise so as might be most convenient to the present Circum∣stances. Ant. Ch. 314. For taking notice that his Enemy's Right Wing was very strongly guarded with Horse and Elephants, he fronted them with the choicest of his own Horse, who being in small Parties at a considerable distance one from another, might Charge in manner of a Running Fight, wheeling off one after another, and so still renew the Fight by fresh Men. And by this means, the Strength of that part of the Enemy's Army, wherein they plac'd their greatest Confidence, was wholly eluded. For in this Phalanx he had plac'd about a Thousand Archers and Launceteers on Horseback out of Media and Arme∣nia, who had ever been us'd to this way of Charging by Turns. Next to them were drawn up Two thousand and Two hundred Tarentines, who came up with him from the Sea Coasts, who were Men very expert in laying Ambuscades, and contriving other Stratagems of War, and had a great Respect and Kindness for him: A Thousand like∣wise out of Phrygia and Lydia; Fifteen hundred under the Command of Pitho; and Four hundred Spear-Men led by Lysanias. After all these follow'd those call'd the Anthippi: i. e. Enemies or Opposers of the Horsemen. Anthippi, and them out of the higher Provinces, to the number of Eight hundred. And of this Body of Horse was the Left Wing compleated and made up, all under the Command of Pitho. In the main Battel, of Foot were plac'd in the Front Nine thousand Foreigners; next to them Three thousand Lycians and Pamphilians, and above Eight thousand out of divers Nations, Arm'd after the Macedonian manner; and in the Rear were the Macedo∣nians, Ant. Ch. 314. to the number of Eight thousand, which Antipater had formerly sent as Recruits when he took upon him the Government of the Kingdom. In the Right Wing of Horse, close to the Right of the Phalanx of Foot, were first plac'd Five hundred Mercenaies; next to them a Thousand Thracians, and as many Confederates; and close after them were a Thousand call'd Companions. These were all commanded by Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, which was the first time he appear'd in Arms to assist his Father: In the ut∣most part of the Wing were plac'd Three hundred Horse, with which Antigonus himself engag'd. This Squadron consisted of Three Troops of his Servants, and as many of
thers, drawn up in equal Distances one from another, supported by a Hundred Taren∣tines. Round this Wing were plac'd Thirty of the strongest of his Elephants in form of an Half-Moon, interlin'd with light-arm'd Men: Many of the other Elephants he plac'd in the Front of the Phalanx of Foot, and a few with some Horse in the Flank on the Left. The Army array'd in this manner, he march'd down upon the Enemy in an ob∣lique Battel: For he order'd the Right Wing to be stretch'd out far in length, and the Left to be much contracted, designing with this to make a Running Fight, and to En∣gage Hand to Hand with the other. And now the Armies drew near one to the other, and Signal of Battel being given on both sides, Shouts eccho'd one to another, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge. And first the Horse with Pitho fellon, although they had no Forlorn either of Men or Elephants Ant. Ch. 314. for a firm Defence, yet overpowering the Enemy in Number and Swiftness, made use of that Advantage: But looking upon it not safe to encounter the Elephants in the Front, P. 687. they wheel'd about, and pour'd in showers of Shot upon the Enemy in the Flank, and with little or no Prejudice to themselves, by reason of their speed, and nimbleness of their Horses, for they forely gall'd the Enemy, who were neither able to fall upon the Assail∣ants by reason of the Weight of their Arms, nor in a Capacity to avoid them as Occa∣sion requir'd. Hereupon Eumenes seeing how the Right Wing was distressed by Multi∣tudes of Archers on Horseback, sent for some of the swiftest Horse from Eudamus, who commanded the Left Wing; and by this Body of Horse brought in from the other Wing, (though it were but small) he made so fierce a Charge upon the Enemy, being seconded by his Elephants, that he easily put the Pithonians to flight, and pursued them as far as to the Foot of the Mountains. In the mean while the Foot fought stoutly a long time together; at length, after many falling on both sides, the Eumenians routed them by the Valour of the Argyraspi∣des. Silver Shields. For though they were now very old, yet by frequent use of their Arms in many Battels, they so excell'd all others, both as to Courage and Skill in their Weapons, that none Ant. Ch. 314. were able to stand before them. And therefore at this very time, though they were only Three thousand, yet they were the very Strength and Support of the whole Army. When Antigonus perceiv'd that his Left Wing was routed, and the whole Battalion of Foot. Phalanx put to flight, though he was advis'd (being that part of the Army with him was yet intire) to retreat to the Mountains, and receive in again those that were fled, yet he would not hear of it; but prudently making use of the present Opportunity, both sav'd his own Men, and gain'd likewise the Advantage. For the Argyraspides, with Eumenes and the rest of the Foot, having put the Enemy to flight, continu'd their Pursuit to the Foot of the Mountains: Upon which, Antigonus, through an open Passage made into the Enemies main Body, with a Party of Horse fell upon the Flank of Eudamus his Regiments which were in the Left Wing and by his sud∣den and unexpected Charge put them to flight, and after the slaughter of Multitudes, sent away some of the swiftest of his Horse to recall his own Men that were before fled, and so caus'd them to rally at the Foot of the Mountains. And Eumenes also perceiving the flight of his Men, hasten'd to the Relief of Eudamus, and recall'd by sound of Trum∣pet those of his that fled. And now the Stars began to appear, when the Generals ha∣ving recall'd their flying Men on both sides, prepar'd for Fight afresh; such was the Heat and Vigour both of the Officers and Common Soldiers. The Night was very clear and serene, and the Moon at Full; and the Armies being about Four Acres distant one over-against another, the clattering of Arms, and the neighing of Horses, seem'd Ant. Ch. 314. on both sides as if they had been in the midst of one another. It was now Midnight when they had drawn off about Thirty Furlongs from the Place of Battel where the Dead lay, and by reason of the Troublesomness of the March, and the Toils and Grie∣vances of the Fight, with the want likewise of Provision, both sides were but in an ill Condition: Therefore they were forc'd to leave off fighting, and encamp. Eumenes had a design to have march'd back to the Slain in order to have bury'd them, as a sign of his being absolute Victor: But the Army refus'd, and all were instant with loud Cries to return to their Carriages, which were then at a great distance from them, so that he was forc'd to submit. For being there were so many that affected the chief Command, he had no Power to move the Army by Threats, nor saw at that time any convenient op∣portunity to gain upon them that were Obstinate by Arguments and Intreaties. But An∣tigonus on the contrary was an Absolute General, without any dependance upon the Popu∣larity, P. 688. and therefore forc'd the Soldiers to encamp near the Dead Bodies; and so gaining
the Priviledge of burying the Dead, he rais'd a Doubt who was Victorious, saying, That he who had Power to bury his Dead, was ever to be esteem'd Conqueror of the Field. In this Battel, there were kill'd on Antigonus his side Three thousand and Seven hundred Foot, and Fifty four Horse, and above Four thousand wounded. On Eumenes his Party were slain Five hundred and Forty Foot, but very few Horse, and above Nine hundred hurt. Antigonus, after the Battel was over, perceiving that the Spirits of his Soldiers were very low, resolv'd with all the hast he could, to remove far off from the Enemies Camp, Ant. ch. 314. and that his Forces might march the more readily, he sent away the wounded Men and heavy Baggage to a Town near at hand. Then having bury'd the Dead, about Break of Day, (detaining with him the Herald that was sent to him by the Enemy to beg the Bodies of the Dead,) even at that very Hour he commanded his Soldiers to dine. At Night he discharg'd the Herald, and gave Leave to come and bury the Dead the next day. He himself presently at the first Watch of the night mov'd with his whole Army, and by continu'd and long Marches, got a long way off from the Enemy to a Country untouch'd, where he had plenty of Provision for the refreshing of his Army: For he march'd as far as to Gamarga in Media, a Country under the Command of Pitho, abound∣ing in all Things for the maintaining of the greatest Armies. Eumenes having Intelli∣gence Antigonus marches back to Gamarga in Media. by his Scouts that Antigonus was gone, would not follow after him, both be∣cause his Army was in want of Provision, and in other ill Circumstances, as likewise for that he had a great desire to inter his Dead in the most solemn manner he possibly could. Upon which occasion, here sell out a strange Accident at this time, very unusual and dissonant from the Laws of the Grecians: For there was one Ceteus, who commanded them The Story of Ceteus his two Wives. that came out of India, and fought with great Resolution, but di'd in this Battel: He left two Wives behind him, who follow'd him all along during the Campagne: One he had but lately marry'd, the other had been his Wife for some years before; and both lov'd their Husband exceedingly. It had been an ancient Custom in India, for Men and Wo∣men to marry themselves with their own mutual Liking, without consulting the Advice of their Parents. And in regard that in those former times young People would rashly marry one another, and often repent afterwards, as being deceiv'd in their Choice; ma∣ny Wives were corrupted, and through their inordinate Lusts fell in Love with other Men; and because they could not with their Credit and Reputation leave them they first chose, they would often poison their Husbands; to the more ready effecting of which, the Country did not a little contribute, by bearing many and divers sorts of Poisonous Plants, some of which never so little bruis'd either in Meat or Drink, do certainly kill the Party. This wicked Art growing still more and more to Perfection, and many being destroy'd by this Means, and though several were punish'd for these Pieces of Vil∣lany, yet other would not be reclaim'd, nor restrain'd from the like Practices; another Law therefore was made, That Wives should be burnt together with their dead Husbands, ex∣cept they were with Child, or had born Children; and that she who would not observe the Com∣mon Law of the Land, should remain a Widow, and, as one convicted of that Impiety, should be excluded from all sacred Rites, and all other Benefit and Privilege of the Laws. This being thus establish'd, hence-forward this Wickedness of the Wives was chang'd into a contrary P. 689. Ant. Ch. 314. Practice. For being that every Wife, to avoid that insufferable Disgrace, was voluntarily to Die, they became not only careful to preserve the Health, and provide for the Well-being of their Husbands, as that which was likewise their own Preservation; but the Wives strove one with another, as who should gain the highest pitch of Honour and Reputation. An Example of which sell out at this time. For although by the Law one only was to be burnt with the Husband, yet at the Funeral of Cetius, both strove which should die, as for some Honourable Reward of their Virtue: Whereupon the Matter was brought before the Generals for their Decision. The Younger declar'd, That the other was with Child, and therefore her Death could not satisfy the Law: The Elder pleaded, That it was a greater Piece of Justice, that she who was before the other in Years, should be preferr'd before her in Honour: For in all other Cases, the constant Rule is to yield more Honour and Respect to the Elder, than to the Younger. The Captains being in∣form'd by the Midwives, that the Elder was with Child, preferr'd the Younger before the other: Upon which, she lost her Cause, went out weeping and wailing, renting her Vail in pieces, and tearing her Hair, as if some sad and dreadful News had been told her: The other rejoicing in the Victory, made forthwith to the Funeral Pile crown'd by the Women of her House with Attires call'd Attires Wo∣men us'd to wear, with La∣bels hanging down. Mitres, and by her Kindred brought forth
most richly adorn'd, as to some Nuptial Festival, setting forth her Praises all along as they went, in Songs fitted for that occasion. As soon as she came to the Pile she threw off her Attire, and distributed them amongst Ant. Ch; 14. her Servants and Friends, leaving these behind her, as tokens of Remembrances for them that loved her. Her Attire was multitudes of Rings upon her Fingers, set with all man∣ner of precious Stones of divers Colours. Upon her Head were a great number of little Golden Stars, between which were plac'd sparkling Stones of all sorts. About her Neck she wore abundance of Jewels, some small, others large; increasing by degrees in big∣ness as they were put on one after another. At length she took leave of all her Family and Servants, and then her Brother plac'd her upon the Pile, and to the great Admira∣tion of the People (who flock'd thither to see the Sight) with an Heroick Courage she there ended her Life. The whole Army solemnly in their Arms march'd thrice round the Pile before it was kindled: She in the mean time (disposing of her self towards her Husband's Body,) dis∣cover'd not by any Screeks or otherwise, that she was at all daunted at the Noise of the Crackling Flames, so that the Spectators were affected some with Pity, and others with Admiration, and extraordinary Commendation of her Resolution. However, there are some who condemn this Law as Cruel and Inhumane. After the Funeral was over, Eumenes march'd from Patetacine to Gabiene, which being Eumenes marches to Ga∣biene. Ant. Ch. 314. yet untouch'd, was in a condition to supply the Army with all Things necessary, which was distant from Antigonus his Army (going through the Countries inhabited) Five and twenty Days Journey; but passing through the Desarts, (where there's no Water,) 'tis but Nine Days Journey: Being thus far distant one from another, he there winter'd, and so gave his Army time to refresh themselves. As for the Affairs of Europe, Cassander, while he lay at the Siege of Tegea, hearing of Cassander marches into Macedonia. the return of Olympias into Macedonia, and of the Death of Eurydice and King Philip, and what was done to the Sepulchre of Jollas his Brother, agreed with the Taegeans, and march'd with his Army into Macedonia, leaving his Consederates in great Trouble and Perplexity. For Alexander the Son of Polysperchon was then entred Peloponnesus, and ready P. 690. to set upon the Cities with a great Army. And the Aetolians to ingratiate themselves with Olympias and Polsyperchon, seiz'd upon the straight Passes at Pylas, and block'd up the Passage to stop Cassander in his march: But he perceiving that it was very difficult for him to force his way through those narrow Streights, by the help of some Ships and se∣veral Boats out of Eubea and Locris, pass'd over into Thessaly. And hearing that Polysper∣chon lay with his Army in Perrhabea, he order'd away Callas his General, with some For∣ces to fight him. In the mean time, Dinias being sent away to secure the Strights of Perrhabea. Streights, possess'd himself of those Passes before the Forces of Olympias could reach them. As soon as Olympias heard that Cassander was entring Macedonia with a great Army, she created Aristonous General, and commanded him to fight Cassander. She her self (taking Ant. Ch. 314. along with her the Son of Alexander and Roxana his Mother, and Thessalonica the Daugh∣ter of Philip the Son of Amyntas, Deidamia the Daughter of Eacides King of Epirus, and Sister of Pyrrhus (who afterwards made War upon the Romans) and the Daughters of At∣talus, and other Kindred and eminent Relations) enter'd into Pydna, so that a great Olympias goes to Pydna, and is there besieg'd. throng of People, Useless and Unserviceable for War, attended upon her: Neither was there Provision in that Place sufficient for such a Multitude, to hold out any long Siege. All which disadvantages, though they were clear Evidences of the greatness of the Danger, yet she was resolv'd to stay here, expecting many Greeks and Macedonians to come in to her assistance by Sea. There were with her some Horse from Ambracia, and many of the Troops of the Houshould; and the rest of Polysperchon's Elephants: The other had been before taken by Cassander at his former irruption into Macedonia; who now having recover'd the Passes at Perrhebea, so as that he had his way open to Pydna, begirt the Town round with a Mud-wall from Sea to Sea; and sent for Shipping and all sorts of Weapons and Engines of Battery from his Confederates, with a design to block up Olympius both by Sea and Ant. Ch. 314. Land. But when he had Intelligence that Eacides, King of Epirus, was coming with a strong Army to the Relief of Olympias, he deliver'd some Forces to the Command of Atarchias, with Orders to meet the Epirots, who presently executing what he was commanded, pos∣sess'd himself of the Passes into Epirus, so that Eacides was wholly deseated in his Design. For the Epirots were forc'd against their Wills to the Expediion into Macedonia, and therefore mutiny'd in the Camp: However, Eacides, desirous by any way possible to R∣heve Olympias, cashier'd all those that favour'd not his Design; taking in those who were
willing to run the same risk with himself; he was indeed very forward to Engage, but had not yet force enough; for the Party that stuck to him was very small. In the mean time, the Epirots that were sent away into their own Country, revolted from the King, and his People, by a common Decree of the State, Banish'd him the The Epirots forsake their King, and join with Cassan∣der. Kingdom, and Consederated with Cassander; like to which never before hapned in Epi∣rus from the time that Neoptolimus, the Son of Achilles, reign'd there. For the Kingdom ever descended from the Father, by Right of Succession to the Son, till this time. When Cassander was thus supported by the Confederacy of the Epirots, and had sent Lyciseus both as General and , Governor. Ant. Ch. 314. Viceroy into Epirus, they in Macedonta, who before were at a stand, whether they should Confederate with Olympias or not, now (seeing no hopes remaining for the retrieving her Affairs) join'd with Cassander. So that now the only Prop remaining to rely upon for Relief was Polysperchon, and this was presently in a strange manner shatter'd and broken in Pieces; for when Callas, who was sent as Gene∣neral Olympias her Affairs brought very low. by Cassander, sate down with his Army near to Polysperchon in Perrebia, he so cor∣rupted most of his Soldiers with large Bribes, that very few remain'd, especially of those that were look'd upon to be most Faithful: And thus low were the Affairs of Olympias P. 691. sunk in a very short time. As for the Affairs of Asia at this time; Antigonus then Wint'ring in Gadamalis, other∣wise Gaderlis, looking upon his Army too weak for the Enemy, contriv'd how to fall upon them unawares, and to Out wit them. Eumenes his Soldiers were so scatter'd and dispers'd in their Winter-quarters, that some of them were six days march distant one from another. But Antigonus judg'd it not adviseable to march through the Countries Antigonus his design to have surpriz'd Eu∣menes. that were Inhabited, both in regard the Journey would be very long and tedious, and likewise presently known to the Enemy, but conceiv'd it much more for his advantage to lead his Army through the dry and barren Desarts, though it were far more trouble∣some, for that it was much the shorter Cut; and by that means his march would be se∣cret, Ant. Ch. 314. and so he might fall upon the Enemy suddenly and unexpectedly, as they lay dispers'd and scatter'd in their Quarters, never dreaming of any such thing. Upon these Considerations he commanded his Soldiers to be ready for a March, and to prepare for themselves Ten Days Victuals  neither Rosting nor Bling. such as need not the Fire. He himself gave it out, that he would march through Armenia: But on a sudden, contrary to the Expectation of his whole Army, The Winter Tropck. in the Depth of Winter, he march'd towards the De∣sarts. In their march he order'd Fires to be made in the Day, but to be put out in the Night, left that any seeing them far off from the Mountains, might discover his approach to the Enemy: For the Desart was almost all wholly Plain and Champaign, surrounded with many high Hills, from whence it was easie a long way off to discover the Fires. But when the Army had spent Five days in this tedious Journey, the Soldiers for very Cold, as for other necessary Uses, fell to making of Fires by Night as well as by Day; which some of the Inhabitants of the Wilderness espying, they presently the very same day sent away Messengers upon Dromedaries to give Intelligence thereof to Eumenes and Peucestes. This Beast will commonly run . Fifteen hundred Furlongs a Day. 00 M Peucestes being inform'd, that the Enemy's Army was seen half way of their march, began to think of running away To the utmost ounds of their Winter Quarters. as far as he could, being afraid the Enemy would be upon him before he could get the Forces together, from every Quarter where they then lay dispers'd. Eumenes perceiving the Fright he was in, bid him be of good Heart, and continue upon the Edge of the Wilderness, for he had found out a way that Antigonus should not come into those Parts in three or four days. And having done that, they Ant. Ch. 314. should be able within that time easily to get all their Forces together; and so the Ene∣my being tir'd out, and starv'd for want of Provision, would all fall into their hands. All wonder'd at this strange Undertaking, and every one was earnest to learn what it was that should give a stop to the Enemy. Eumenes hereupon commanded all the Cap∣tains Eumenes his stratagem to stop Antigonus in his march. and Soldiers that were then at hand, to follow him with a great number of Urns full of Fire, and then chose out some of the Highest Ground in the Country, which look'd every way towards the Wilderness, and there mark'd out several Places within the Compass of Seventy Furlongs, and alloted to every Captain a Post distant about Twenty Cubits one from another, with Command to kindle a Fire in the Night in every Place; and at the first Watch to make the greater Fires, as if they were then still upon the Guard, and going to Supper and refreshing themselves; at the Second, that the Fires should be less; and the Third to be left near Out and Extinct, that so at a Distance it might seem as if the Army were certainly there Encamp'd together. The Soldiers observing the Order given them, some of the Inhabitants of the Moun∣tains over against them (Friends to Pitho the Governor of Media) perceiv'd the Fire,
and supposing the Army was really there Encamp'd, ran down into the Plain, and in∣form'd both Pitho and Antigonus; who being amaz'd, (and as it were Thunder-struck at P. 692. this strange and unexpected News) made an Halt, and Consulted with those that brought them the News what Course was best to be taken. For Men that were tyr'd out, and Ant. Ch. 314. in want of every thing that was necessary, to Engage with an Enemy prepar'd, and furnish'd with plenty of all sorts of Provision, was alledg'd to be a desperate and hazar∣dous Adventure. Concluding therefore that they were betray'd, and that the Enemies Forces were drawn together, (upon Intelligence given them of what was design'd) it was resolv'd not to march forward, but turn aside to the Right; and so the Army mov'd in∣to both parts of the Countries inhabited, to the end the Soldiers might refresh them∣selves after their toilsom March. In the mean time, Eumenes having by this Stratagem thus deluded the Enemy, got all his Army together from all Parts where they were in their Winter-Quarters, and for∣tifying his Camp with a Rampire and a deep Trench, he there receiv'd his Confederates as come in to him, and plentifully furnish'd his Camp with all things necessary. But Antigonus, after he had march'd through the Desert, receiving Intelligence from the Inhabitants, that the rest of Eumenes his Forces were almost all come to him; but that his Elephants coming out of their Winter-Stations, were not far off with a very slen∣der Guard, sent out Two thousand Horse-Lanceliers, Two hundred Tarentines, and all his light-arm'd Foot to intercept them: For setting upon them as they were without a sufficient Guard, he hop'd he might easily make himself Master of 'em; and so deprive the Enemy of the main Strength of his Army. But Eumenes fearing the worst that might happen upon that account, sent away (for a further Guard) Five hundred of his best Ant. Ch. 314. Horse, and Three thousand light-arm'd Foot. As soon as Antigonus his Soldiers came in sight, the Commanders of the Elephants drew them into a square in the form of a Tile, and plac'd the Carriages in the middle, and so march'd on. They were supported in the Reer with no more than four hun∣dred Horse. The Enemy then pouring in all their Force upon them, and pushing on still with great Violence, the Horse in the Reer being over-power'd, made away. The Masters of the Elephants stood for some time, gall'd with Darts and Arrows on every side, not able to endamage or touch the Enemy: And just now when they were ready to give up all, in comes unexpectedly the Eumeneans, who Extricate them out of all their Dangers. A few Days after, the Armies Encamp'd within forty Furlongs one of another; and now being about to lay all at stake, both sides prepar'd for Battel. Antigonus drew up his Horse into two Wings, and committed the Left to Pitho, and The Last Battel between Anti∣gonus and Eu∣menes in Ga∣biene. Ant. Ch. 314. the Right to his Son Demetrius, where he himself intended to Charge; the Foot was in the middle Battel, and all the Elephants he plac'd in the Front of the whole Army, in∣terlin'd with Light-arm'd Men. His whole Army was Two and twenty thousand Foot, and Nine thousand Horse, besides those that were listed in Media; and Elephants Sixty five. When Eumenes understood, that Antigonus had plac'd himself in the Right Wing with the best of his Horse, he himself fronted him with the Choicest of his own, in the Left; for here he plac'd most of the Governors of the Provinces, with the Best of that Horse which they themselves brought into the Field, and with these he ventur'd himself. In this Wing likewise was Mithridates, Son of Ariobarzanes, descended from one of those seven Persians, who slew Smerdis, one of the Magi, a Man of exemplary Valour, and brought up in the Feats of War from his very youth. In the Front of this Wing he plac'd Threescore of the best of his Elephants, drawn up in form of an Half-Moon, interlin'd with Light-arm'd Men. As to the Foot, the Targateers were plac'd in the Front; then the Argyraspides; and P. 693. in the Rear all the Foreigners, and those that were arm'd after the manner of the Mace∣donians, and so many Elephants and Light-arm'd Men were plac'd in the Front of the main Battel of the Foot, as was thought sufficient. In the Right Wing were drawn up such Horse and Elephants as were judg'd the most Weak and Feeble of all the rest, and over these was appointed Philip as Commander, who was order'd to retire leisurely as he Ant. Ch. 314. fought, and diligently to observe the Event of the other side. Eumenes his Army amounted to Thirty six thousand and seven hundred Foot, Six thousand and fifty Horse, and a Hundred and fourteen Elephants. A little before the Battel, Antigenes, General of the Argyraspides, had sent a Macedonian Horseman to the Enemy's Phalanx, with Command to ride up as close to them as possi∣bly he could, and proclaim with a loud Voice what he had order'd him. Hereupon, when he was come up within hearing of that Part of the Army where Antigonus his
Macedonian Phalanx was drawn up, he cry'd out with a loud Voice thus, Oh ye Villains! Ye fight against your Fathers, who ventur'd their Lives, and perform'd all those Noble Acts with Philip and Alexander, whom you shall shortly experience to be Men worthy those Kings and those former Conquests! The Youngest of the Silver Shields. Argyraspiaes at that time were at least Three∣score years of Age; but most of the rest were Seventy, and some older; all of them for Strength and Skill in their Weapons unconquerable: For continual Practice of their Arms had made them Expert and Daring. Proclamation being made, as we have before said, there were many harsh Words and discontented Speeches cast out in Amigonus his Army. That they should be forc'd to fight against their own Countrymen, and with those that were so much older than themselves. In Eumenes his Army on the other hand, they were continually crying out while the Army was drawing up, to be led out against the Enemy: Eumenes seeing the Alacrity of the Soldiers, lift up the Ensign of Battel, upon which forthwith the Trum∣pets sounded a Charge, and the whole Army set up a shout for the Onset. The Ele∣phants in the first place fought one with another; then the Horse Charg'd on both sides. The Field was very Large, Sandy, and Waste, so that so much Dust was rais'd by the Trampling of the Horses, as that a Man could not see what was done, though but at a small distance from him: Which Antigonus observing, sent forthwith away some Median Horse, and a Body of Tarentines, to set upon the Baggage of the Enemy. For he hop'd by reason of the Dust that was rais'd (as the thing in truth prov'd) that they would not be discern'd, and that if he got possession of the Carriages, he should easily bring the whole Army into his power. Hereupon, those that were sent forth se∣cretly slipping by the Enemies Wing, set upon the Pages, , Drudges. Scullion Boys, and others that were with the Baggage, and about five Furlongs distant from the Place of Battel. There they found a Multitude of Useless and Unserviceable Rabble, and a very small Guard in the Place, so that they were presently put to flight, and the rest all fell into Eumenes his Carriages taken. the Enemies hands. In the mean time, Antigonus charging the Enemy with a strong Body of Horse, so terrify'd Peucestes, Governor of Persia, that he with his Horse got out of the Dust, and drew Fifteen hundred more after him. But Eumenes, though he was left Ant. Ch. 314. but with a very few in the out Skirts of the Wing where he was, yet counted it base to flag or fly; judging it more honourable to be Faithful to his word, in the Quarrel of the Kings, and to die in an honest and just Cause with Resolution, made a fierce Charge upon Antigonus; so that now there was a sharp Dispute between the Horse; where the Eumeneans excell'd the other in Heat and Resolution, but the Antigontans them in Num. and Multitude; and many fell on both sides. At which time, the Elephants fighting one with another, the Leader on Eumenes his side, engaging with one of the Stoutest of the other, was there slain. Hereupon, Eumenes perceiving his Horse to be worsted on P. 694. every hand, withdrew with the rest of the Horse out of the Fight, and pass'd over to the other Wing, and join'd himself to those with Philip, whom he had order'd to make a leisurely Retreat. And thus ended the Engagement between the Horse. But as to the Foot, the Argyraspides (or Silver Shields) in a full Body flew with that Violence upon the Enemy, that some they kill'd upon the spot, and they rest they put to flight: For they were not to be withstood; who though they engag'd with the Ene∣my's Ant. Ch. 314 main Battel, yet they signaliz'd both their Valour and Dexterity to that degree, that they kill'd above Five thousand without the loss of one Man, and put the whole Nota. Foot to flight, though they were far more in number than themselves. When Eumenes understood, that all the Carriages were taken; and that Peucestes was not far off with the Horse, he endeavour'd to get all to rally in a Body together again, and to try their Fortune in a second Engagement with Antigonus: For he concluded, if he prevail'd he should not only recover his own Carriages, but likewise possess himself of the Enemy's: But Peucestes would not hear of fighting any more, but got further off, so that Eumenes was forc'd to yield the Day. Then Antigonus dividing his Horse into two Bodies, he himself with one sought how to intrap Eumenes, observing which way he made; the other he delivered to Pitho, with Orders to fall upon the Argyraspides, who then were forsaken by their Horse; who forth∣with setting upon them, as he was commanded, the Macedonians drew up in form of a Square, and got safe to the River, exclaiming against Peucestes, as the Cause of the rout∣ing of the Horse. When Eumenes came up to them in the Evening, they consulted together what was then fittest to be done. The Governors of the Provinces were for returning with all speed into the Higher Provinces; but Eumenes was for staying where they were and fight∣ing, and in regard the Enemies main Battel was broken and cut off, and that they were
then equal in Horse on both sides. But the Macedonians seeing that they had lost their Carriages, Wives, and Children, and whatever was dear to them, declar'd they would neither do the one or the other. And so at that time, without agreeing in any thing, they parted. But afterwards, the Macedonians secretly corresponding with Antigonus Eumenes base¦ly deliver'd up by his own Men. seiz'd upon Eumenes, and deliver'd him up into his Hands. And having receiv'd their Car∣riages, and Faith taken for security, they all march'd away together: Whose Example the Governors of the Provinces and most of the other Captains and Soldiers follow'd, for∣saking their General, chiefly consulting their own Safety and Preservation. Antigonus having thus strangely and unexpectedly possess'd himself both of Eumenes and his whole Army, seiz'd upon Antigenes, Captain of the Argyraspides, and put him alive into a Coffin, and burnt him to Ashes. He put to death likewise Eudamus, who brought the Elephants out of India, and Celbanus and some others: Who upon all occasions appear'd against him. But for Eumenes, he put him in Prison, and took time to consider how to dispose of him. For he had in truth an earnest desire to have gain'd so good a General to his own Interest, and to have oblig'd him upon that account; but because of the great Kindness and strict Correspondency which pass'd between him and Olympias, and the Kings, he Ant. Ch. 314. durst not absolutely rely upon him; for but a while before, though he had deliver'd him out of the straits he was in at Nora in Phrygia, yet he presently upon it fell in and sided with the Kings; and therefore, upon the pressing Importunity of the Macedonians he put him to Death. But in respect of his former Familiarity with him, he caus'd his Body to be burnt, and his Bones to be put into an Urn, and deliver'd to his nearest Friends. Amongst those that were Wounded and Prisoners, was Hieronymus of Cardia, Historio∣grapher, P. 695. who having been ever in great Esteem with Eumenes during his Life, after his Death found great Favour also with Antigonus. Antigonus returning into Media with his whole Army, spent the rest of the Winter in a Town not far from Ecbatane, where stood the Palace-Royal of that Province. He di∣stributed The dreadful Earthquake in the Kingdom of Rhages. Strabo Jays Two thousand Towns and Ci∣ties. his Army here and there all over that Province, and especially in the Country of Rhages; so call'd from the Calamities it had miserably suffer'd in former times. For being heretofore full of Rich and populous Cities, there hapned such terrible Earthquakes in those Parts, that both Cities and Inhabitants were swallow'd up altogether, not one left, and the very Face of the Country was so chang'd, that new Rivers and Ponds ap∣pear'd in the room of the Old. CHAP. III. The Innundations at Rhodes. Antigonus kills Pitho, getting him into his power by Dissimulation. Then marches into Persia. Revolters from Antigonus cut off in Media. He divides the Asian Provinces, and contrives to destroy all the Argy∣raspides. Gets great Treasure in Susa. Cassander besieges Olympias in Pydna; The great Distress to which it was reduc'd. Amphipolis surrender'd to Cassander. He kills Olympias. Marries Thessalonices; Builds Cassandra. Imprisons Rhoxana and her Son Alexander. His Expedition into Peloponnesus against Alexander, the Son of Polysperchon: The History of Thebes. Cassander re∣builds Thebes. ABout this time hapned a Flood near the City of Rhodes, which destroy'd many of the Inhabitants. The first Flood did little prejudice, because the City was but Olymp. 116. 1. An. M. 3656. Ant. Ch. 314. then newly built, and far larger in Compass: But the second was more Mischievous, and destroy'd Multitudes. The last fell out at the Beginning of the Spring, accompany'd with violent Storms of Rain, and Hail-stones of an incredible Bigness; for they were a Mina in weight, and sometime more, so that they not only beat down Houses, but kill'd The dations at Rhodes. many Men. And in regard Rhodes was built in Form of a Theatre, and that the Water ran for the most part into one Place, the lower Parts of the City were presently fill'd with Water, (for that the Winter being now look'd upon to be over) no care was taken to cleanse the Channels and Aqueducts; and the Pipes likewise in the Walls were choked up; so that the Waters flowing in altogether on a sudden, all the Ground about the Some Monu∣ment in the Town, in Me∣mory of some remarkable E∣vent either God or Bad. Deigma, (as it is call'd) and the Temple of Bcchuss was fill'd with Water; and now it rising up like a standing Pond to the Temple of Esculapius, all were in a Consternation,
and could not agree together what should be done, in order to their Preservation. Some were for making to the Ships, and others for hasting to the Theatre. Some now almost surrounded with the Evil that threaten'd them, in great Terror and Amazement climb'd up to the top of the highest Altars, and others to the top of the Pedestals of the Statues. The City being in this Danger to be overwhelm'd and ruin'd, with all its Inhabitants, Ant. Ch. 314. on a sudden they were unexpectedly deliver'd: For the Wall burst asunder in a large Breach, and the Water that stood on an Heap made its way through, and ran with a violent Current into the Sea, and so every one presently had free passage to his own House. It was of great advantage to these distressed People, that this Inundation was in the day time: For most of the Citizens ran to the highest parts of the City for shelter. And another advantage was, that the Houses were not built of Tile, but of Stone; so that they who got to the House-tops escap'd without any great Damage: However, there perish'd in this common Calamity above Five hundred Souls; and some of the Houses were born down to the Ground, and others very ill torn and shaken. And in this dan∣ger was Rhodes. Antigonus, while he Winter'd in Media, discover'd Pitho plotting to draw over the Sol∣diers then in their Winter-Quarters, partly by Bribes, and partly by fair Promises to his own Interest, and to make a Turn and Defection in the Army. But Antigonus cover'd and conceal'd his Design, and made show as if he gave no Credit to the Informers, but chid them as those that contriv'd only to set him and Pitho together by the ears. In the mean while, he caus'd it to be nois'd abroad, That he intended to leave Pitho, with a conside∣rable Ant. Ch. 314. P. 696. Army for his Defence, Lord-Lieutenant of the higher Provinces; and he wrote like∣wise to him, and desired him to hasten to him with all speed, that after they had consulted together of some weighty Affairs, they might forthwith march away into the Lesser Asia. To the parts on the Sea-Coasts. Thus he manag'd his Business, whereby to remove all ground of Suspicion, and to get the poor Man into his hands, upon an expectation and hopes to be left Governor of those Provinces: For it was a difficult matter to take one by force who was in so great Repute with Alexander, and for his Valour advanc'd by him to Places of Honour; and who being then Governor of Media, was a help and support to the whole Army. Pitho was at that time in the furthest Parts of all Media in his Winter-Quarters, and had now corrupted many, who had promis'd to join with him in the Defection. His Friends likewise acquainting him by their Letters with Antigonus his Purpose, possess'd him with an Expectation of mighty Things: And thus guil'd, to Antigonus he went; who having now seiz'd his Prey, brought him before a Council of War even of his own Antigonus kills Pitho. Confederates, where he was easily convicted, and forthwith had his Head chopp'd off. Hereupon Antigonus gathering all his Army together, committed the Government of Media to Orontobates a Median born; but made Hippostratus General of the Army, who Ant. Ch. 314. had Three thousand 500 foreign Foot-Soldiers under his Command. He himself taking with him the Body of his Army, went to Ecbatana, where receiving Five thousand Ta∣lents of massie Silver, he march'd into Persia; and it cost him twenty days march before Antigonus marches into Persia he arriv'd at the Capital City Persepolis. In the mean time, while Antigonus was on his march, Pitho's Friends, who were con∣cern'd with him in the Conspiracy (the chief of whom was Meleager and Menoetas) and other Well-willers of Eumenes and Pitho, who were scatter'd abroad into Corners, met together, to the number of Eight hundred Horse; and in the first place wasted the Ter∣ritories of the Medes who refus'd to join with them. Then receiving Intelligence where Revolters from Antigonus cut off in Me∣dia. Hippestratus and Orontobates lay encamp'd, they broke in upon them in the night, and were not far off from effecting what they design'd; but being overpower'd by number, and having only entic'd some of the Soldiers to run the same course with them, they were forc'd to retreat; yet some of the nimblest of them (all being Horse-men) made many sudden Incursions upon the Country, and caus'd a great Consternation and Hubbub amongst them; but were atlast inclos'd in a place compass'd about with Rocks, and were there all kill'd or taken. But Meleager and Cranes the Median, and some of the better sort of them stood it out to the last, and died with their Swords in their hands. And this was the Condi∣tion of the Conspirators in Media. As for Antigonus, as soon as he came into Persia, the People honour'd him as a King, as he that was now undoubtedly absolute Lord of all Asia: There calling together a Council of his Nobility, he propounded to them the matter concerning the Government Ant. Ch. 314. Antigonus di∣vides the Asian Provinces. of the Provinces: In which Consultation they left Carmania to Tlepolemus, and Bactria to Stasanor; for it was no easie matter to expel them, having gain'd the Hearts of the People by their fair Deportment, and likewise were associated with potent Confederates.
Eritus he sent into Aria; who dying shortly after, was succeeded by Evagoras, a Man of wonderful Valour and Prudence. Oxyatres likewise, the Father of Roxana, was permitted to enjoy the Province of Parapamisus, as he did before: For neither could he eject him without a long expence of Time and a very great Army. But he sent for Sibyritus, a Well-willer of his, out of Arachosia, and bestow'd upon him the Government of that Province, and gave him the most turbulent of the Silver Shields, under colour of serving him in the War, but in truth with a design to have them all cut off; for he gave him private Instructions to employ them in such Services as that by degrees they might all be destroy'd. Amongst these were those that betray'd Eumenes, that Ven∣geance P. 697. The Argyras∣pides contriv'd to be destroy'd. might in a short time after overtake these perfidious Villans for their Treachery against their General. For Princes, by reason of their great Power, may reap advan∣tage by the wicked Acts of others; but private Men who are the Actors, for the most part are by those means brought into miserable Disasters. Antigonus moreover finding that Peucestes was much belov'd in Persia, made it one of his first Works to strip him of that Government. At which all the Natives greatly re∣pin'd; and a Chief Man amongst them call'd Thespias spake openly against it, and said, Ant. Ch. 314. That the Persians would be govern'd by no other Man but Peucestes; whereupon he flew Thespias, and made Asclepiodorus Governor of Persia, and committed to him a con∣siderable Army; and held on Peucestes with vain Hopes of preferring him with higher Preferments elsewhere, until he had drawn him quite out of the Country. While Antigonus was on his way to Susa, Xenophilus, who had the keeping of the King's Treasure there, being sent by Seleucus, went and met him at Pasitigris, and of∣fer'd him his Service in whatsoever he pleas'd to command him. Antigonus receiv'd him very graciously, and seem'd as if he honour'd him above all the Friends he had, fearing left he might alter his Mind, and keep him out when he came thither. But when he He gets great Treasure at Susa. came into the Castle of Susa, he possess'd himself of it, and there seiz'd upon the Gol∣den Vine, and store of other such Rarieties, to the value of Fifteen thousand Talents: All which he turn'd into ready Money, besides what he made of Crowns of Gold, and other Presents and Spoils taken from the Enemy, amounting to Five thousand Talents more, and a like quantity collected out of Media, besides the Treasure had from Susa; so that in the whole he heap'd together Five and twenty thousand Talents. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus at that time. Since we have handled the Affairs of Asia, we shall now pass over into Europe, and relate what was done there concurring and cotemporary with the former. Cassander ha∣ving Ant. Ch. 314. shut up Olympias in Pydna in Macedonia, could not assault the Walls by reason of the Winter Season; but he block'd up the City with his Forces on every side, and drew a Cassander be∣sieges Olym∣pias in Pydna. Mud-wall from Sea to Sea; and to prevent all Relief by Sea as well as by Land, he guarded the Mouth of the Harbour with his own Shipping. Insomuch as their Provisions being near spent, the Besieg'd were reduc'd to that Extremity of Want, that they were near starv'd. For they were brought to that strait, that every Soldier was allow'd but About Seven Quarters and half a Pont. Five Choenices of Bread-Corn every Month, and the Elephants were fed with Saw∣dust. At last they kill'd the Draught-Beasts and Horses for Meat. While the City was in this State, and Olympias earnestly expecting Foreign Aid, the Elephants pin'd away for want of Food. And the Horse-men that were Foreigners al∣most all dy'd, having no proportion of Bread allotted them, and many of the other Sol∣diers far'd no better. Some of the Barbarians (Hunger overcoming what Nature would have otherwise dreaded and abhorr'd) fed upon the Carkasses of the Dead. The Town being now fill'd with dead Bodies, the Colonels and Captains of the King's Guards buri'd some, and threw others over the Walls; insomuch as not only the Queens, (who were bred up deliciously all their Days,) but even the Soldiers, who were Ant. Ch. 314. always inur'd to Hardship, could not indure the Sight, nor Stink of the Carkasses. And now the Spring came on, and the Famine increas'd every day, whereupon most of the Soldiers came up in a Body, and intreated Olympias to suffer them to leave the Place because of the Scarcity, who (not being able to supply them with Bread, nor in a condition to raise the Siege) let them go; and they were all kindly received by Cas∣sander, P. 698. and dispos'd of into several Towns and Cities round about. For he hop'd, that the Macedonians coming to understand by them how weak Olympias was, would conclude her Affairs Desperate and Remediless. And he did not miss the Mark in his Conjecture; for they who were just now sending Relief to the Besieged, presently alter'd their Pur∣pose, and sided with Cassander. Only Aristonous and Monimus of all the Macedonians continu'd firm and faithful to Olympias, of whom Aristonous was Governor of Amphipolis, and the other of Pella. At length Olympias perceiving that many went over to Cassander, and those who were her Friends were not able to help her; without further delay got ready a Galley of
Five Oars on a Bank, with a design to rescue her and all her Kindred out of the present Danger: But being discover'd to the Enemy by some of the Deserters, Cassander sail'd to the Place, and seiz'd the Vessel. Whereupon Olympias looking upon her self in a despe∣rate Condition, sent an Herald to Cassander to treat upon Terms of Pacification; but he insisting upon the delivering up of her self to his Mercy, with much ado she at length prevail'd only for the preservation of her Person: Being therefore now possess'd of the City, he sent some away to summon Pella and Amphipolis. Monimus the Governor of Pella hearing how Things went with Olympias, presently surrender'd: But Aristonous at first resolv'd to hold out and maintain the Cause of the Kings, in regard he had a strong Garison, and had been then lately Prosperous and Suc∣cessful. For a few days before, he had fought with Crateuas, one of Cassander's Captains, Amphipolis surrender'd to Cassander. and cut off many of the Enemy, and drave Crateuas himself, with Two thousand of his Men, into the City Bedys in Bisaltia, and there besieg'd him, took him and disarm'd him, and then upon mutual Pledges of Faith given and taken, discharg'd him. Being encourag'd upon this account, and knowing nothing but that Eumenes was still living, and concluding he should be sure of Aid and Relief from Alexander and Polysperchon, he refus'd to surrender Amphipolis. But as soon as he receiv'd Letters from Olympias, (whereby she commanded him upon the Faith of his former Engagement to restore the City,) he observ'd her Commands, and Amphipolis surender'd to Cassander. deliver'd it up, upon assurance of his own Preservation. But Cassander perceiving that he was a Man of great Interest by reason of the Honours conferr'd upon him by Alexan∣der, and minding to take all such out of the way as might be in a Capacity to make any Disturbance, by the help of Crateuas his Kindred he put him also to Death. Then he incited the Relations of such as were put to Death by Olympias, to prosecute her in the General Assembly of the Macedonians, who thereupon very readily comply'd with what they were put on to do; and though she her self was not then present, nor had any Person there to plead her Cause, yet the Macedonians condemn'd her to Die. Cas∣sander thereupon sent some of his Friends to Olympias, and advis'd her to get out of the way, and promis'd to procure for her a Ship, and cause her to be convey'd safe to Athens. And this he did not as any ways minding her Preservation, but as one conscious of her own Guilt by her flight, it might be judg'd a just Vengeance upon her if she pe∣rish'd and was cut off, as she was in her Voyage. For he was afraid as well of the Fickle∣ness of the Macedonians, as of the Dignity of her Person. But Olympias refus'd to fly, but said, She was ready to defend her Cause before all the Macedonians. Cassander therefore fearing lest the People calling to mind the worthy Acts and Kind∣nesses of Philip and Alexander towards the whole Nation should change their Minds, and so take upon them to defend the Queen, sent to her a Band of Two hundred Soldiers Ant. Ch. 314. well Arm'd and Accouter'd, with Orders to dispatch her forthwith; who rushing on a Cassander kills Olympias. sudden into the Palace, as soon as they saw her, (in Reverence to her Person,) drew back, without executing what they were commanded. But the Kindred of those she P. 699. had put to Death, both to ingratiate themselves with Cassander, and likewise to gratify their own Revenge for the Death of their Relations, cut her Throat, she not in the least crying out in any Womanish Terror or Fear to spare her. In this manner died Olympias, the greatest and most honourable Woman in the Age wherein she liv'd, Daughter of Neoptolimus King of Epirus; Sister of Sister of A∣lexander, that is, Pyrrhus. Alexander, who made the Expedition into Italy; Wife of Philip, the greatest and most victorious Prince of all that ever were before in Europe; and lastly, the Mother of Alexander, who never was exceeded by any for the many great and wonderful Things that were done by him. Cassander now seeing all Things go on according to his Heart's Desire, in his Hopes and Expectations was already possess'd of the Kingdom of Macedon: He therefore now marries Thessalonices Daughter of Philip, and Sister of Alexander by the same Father, am∣bitious Marries Thes∣salonices. to be related in Affinity, and esteem'd as one of the Royal Family. He built likewise Cassandria (calling it after his own Name) in Builds Cas∣sandria. Pallene, and Peopled it by Inha∣bitants Ant. Ch. 314. drawn out of the Cities of the The Cher∣sonesus of Pallene in Thrace. Chersonesus, and out of Potidea and many other neighbouring Cities, and plac'd there likewise those Olynthians that were left, of whom there were still a considerable Number. To this City he laid a large and rich Territory, and made it his earnest Care to advance the Glory and Splendour of this Place; so that it grew up in a short time to that degree of Power, as to excell all the Cities of Mace∣donia. Cassander likewise minding to cut off all the Posterity of Alexander, (that there might be none of his Line left to succeed in the Kingdom,) purpos'd to kill the Son of Alexan∣der, and Roxana his Mother. But for the present being willing first to observe what Peo∣ple's
Discourses were concerning the cutting off of Olympias, and having as yet no cer∣tain Account how Things went with Antigonus, he committed Roxana and her Son close Prisoners to the Castle at Amphipolis under the Charge of Glaucias, then by him made Imprisons Rox∣ana and her Son Alexan∣der. Ant. Ch. 314. Governor, and one of his Friends, in whom he plac'd great Confidence. He likewise took away from the young King those Children that were bred up with him as his Com∣panions, and order'd that he should be no longer attended as a King, nor regarded other∣wise than as a private Person. And now Ruling the Kingdom in all Things as King, he Royally and Sumptuously In∣terr'd at Aegis, Eurydice and Philip, the late King and Queen; and Cinna, whom Al∣cetas had put to Death, gracing the Dead with the Solemnity of Funeral Sports and Plays. Then he rais'd Soldiers out of Macedonia for the Expedition resolv'd upon into Pelopon∣nesus. While he was employ'd in these Affairs, Polysperchon, who was then besieg'd in Naxius in Perrebea, when he heard of the Death of Olympias, in despair of retrieving of his Affairs in Macedonia, with a few in his Company broke out of the City, and pass'd through Thessaly, together with Aeacides, and came into Aetolia, where he judg'd he might safely abide, and observe how Things went, for that there was a good Understanding be∣tween him and this Nation. But Cassander having now rais'd a considerable Army, marches out of Macedonia with an Cassander's Expedition in∣to Peloponne∣sus against Alexander the Son of Poly∣sperchon. Ant. Ch. 314. intent to drive Alexander the Son of Polysperchon out of Peloponnesus: For he with his Ar∣my was the only Enemy left, and had possess'd himself of many convenient Posts and Towns there. Through Thessaly he march'd without any opposition; but found the Pass at Pylas guarded by the Etolians, whom having with much difficulty beaten off, he came into Boeotia, where getting all the Thebans together that were remaining from all Parts, he set upon repeopling of Thebes, conceiving now he had a fair opportunity put into his hands for the rebuilding of that City, famous both for its renowned Actions, and the an∣cient Stories concerning it. And by so good a Work, he concluded he should reap the Fruit of an Immortal Fame and Glory. This City had felt very many Changes and Turns of Fortune, and those to the utmost The History of Thebes. Extremity, being sometimes in danger of being raz'd to the Ground. Of which, to say something briefly will not be any foreign Digression. After Deucolion's Flood, when Cadmus had built the Cittadel, call'd Cadmea after his own P. 700. Name, the People call'd Spartans or Sparsans flock'd thither in droves, call'd so by some, because they flock'd together from all Places; others call'd them Born at Thebes. Thebigens, because the Natives of Thebes were forc'd away by the Flood, and dispers'd here and there up and down in the Country. When these were again return'd, they were afterwards expell'd by force of Arms by the Enchlensians, and then even Cadmus himself was forc'd to fly to the Illyrians. After this, when Amphion and Zethus rul'd, and there first built the City, (as the Homer. Poet says,) . Who first Thebes Walls with Seven Gates did raise. Ant. Ch. 314. The Inhabitants were again expuls'd, when Polydorus the Son of Cadmus return'd into the Kingdom, where all Things were then carelesly manag'd, by reason of the sad Condition of His 7 Sons and 7 Daugh∣ters by Niobe were kill'd by Jupiter and Diana with Arrows. Paus. in Boet. Diod. lib. 4. Amphion for the Loss of all his Children. Then again in the time of the Reign of his The Posterity of Polydorus. Posterity, (when all the Country was call'd Boeotia, from one Boeotus the Son of Melanippes and Neptune, who reign'd there,) the Thebans were expell'd the third time by the The Posterity of the 7 Cap∣tains who be∣sieg'd Thebes. Epigoni of Argos, when they took the City by force. Those that escap'd of those that were expell'd, fled to Alalcomenia and the Mountain Tilphosius; but after the Death of these Argives, they return'd into their own Country. This Story of the Crows is, That the Oracle said, the Boeotians should be expell'd when they saw white Crows, which happen'd afterward by play∣ful Boys painting Crows white, and then letting them go. A little while after, the Boeotians were ejected by the Aeolians. See the Annot. upon Erasm. Adag. (Ad Corvos.) p. 374. In the time of the Trojan War, when the Thebans were in Asia, those who stay'd at home, together with other Boeotians, were expell'd by the Pelasgians: and after they had endur'd many and various Calamities in the course of near four Generations, (according to the Oracle relating to the Crows,) they return'd, and inhabited Thebes. From this time this City continu'd in a State of Prosperity near Eight hundred Years. And the Thebans at the beginning had the chief Command over all the rest of their Country.
Afterwards when they attempted to be Sovereign Lords of all Greece, Alexander the Son of Philip took it by Storm, and raz'd it to the Ground. In the Twentieth Year next after, Cassander, to make himself Famous, and advance his own Reputation, he so Ant. Ch: 314. far prevaid with the Boeotians for their Concurrence, as that he rebuilt the City, and re∣stor'd Cassander re∣builds Thebes. it to those Thebans that were then remaining of the old Stock. Many of the Greek Cities afforded their Assistance to the rebuilding of this Place, out of Compassion to the distressed Condition of the Thebans, and the ancient Fame and Glory of the City. The Athenians built the greatest part of the Walls, and others assisted according to their several Abilities; and Contributions were sent not only from all Parts of Greece, but from some both in Sicily and Italy. And thus the Thebans came to be restor'd to the ancient Seat of their Ancestors. Then Cassander mov'd with his Army towards Peloponnesus; and when he found that Alexander the Son of Polysperchon had fortify'd the Isthmus with strong Guards, he turn'd aside to Megara; and there he fitted out some Boats, and in them trans∣ported his Elephants to Epidaurus, and the rest of his Army in other Ships. Thence coming to Argos, he forc'd them to quit their Confederacy with Alexander and join with him. Afterwards he brought over to him all the Cities and Towns, with the Territories of Messina, except Ithom; and Hermonides he took in upon Articles of Agreement: But upon Alexander's marching down to fight, he left Two thousand Men at Geraneia, a Hill near the Istmos, in Megaris. Geraneia, near the Istmos, under the Command of Molycus, and and return'd into Macedonia. CHAP. IV. Antigonus his Army feasted by Seleucus in Babylon. Falls out with Seleucus, who flies to Ptolemy, and is kindly receiv'd. Ptolemy, Seleucus, Cassander, and Ly∣simachus, join against Antigonus, They send Ambassadors to him, who Winters in Cilicia He goes into Phoenicia, and there builds Ships; besieges Tyre. The Praise of Phyla, Wife of Demetrius. Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in Peloponnesus. The Acts of Ptolemy, one of Antigonus his Captains. An∣tigonus his Policy. Tyre deliver'd. The Agreement of Ptolemy's Captains and the rest at Cyprus. The Acts of Seleucus. A Fleet comes to Antigonus from the Hellespont and Rhodes. Things done in Peloponnesus. Cassander's Acts there, and in Greece. The great Victory by Sea and Land obtain'd by Polyclitus Seleucus, his Lieutenant: He's rewarded by Ptolemy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. The Romans War with the Samnites. AT the end of the former Year, Praxibulus was created chief Magistrate at Athens, P. 701. Olymp. 116. 2. Ant. Ch. 313. An. M. 3657. Antigonus comes to Baby∣lon, his whole Army feasted by Seleucus. and Spurius Nautius and Marcus Popilius bore the Office of Consuls at Rome; at which time Antigonus left one Aspisa a Native, Governor of Susiana. He himself resol∣ving to carry away with him all the Monies, prepar'd Carriages and Camels for that purpose to bring it down to the Sea-side, and so having it along with him, march'd with his Army towards Babylon, which he reach'd in Two and twenty days March; where Seleucus the Governor of the Provinces received him with Royal Presents, and feasted the whole Army. But when Antigonus demanded an Account of the Revenue, he told them, He was not bound to give any Account of that Province which the Macedo∣nians had bestow'd upon him as a Reward of his Service in Alexander's Life-time. The Difference growing wider and wider every day, Seleucus remembring Pitho's fall, was thereupon the more afraid, lest Antigonus should catch an Opportunity to put him also to Death. For he seem'd to have a Design to cut off (as soon as possible he could) all Men in Power, and such as were in a Capacity to struggle for the chief Command: Whereupon, for fear of the worst, he forthwith made away with Fifty Horse only in his Company, intending to go into Egypt to Ptolemy. For his Kindess and courteous Beha∣viour Falls out with Seleucus, who flies to Ptole∣my. Ant. Ch. 313. towards all that came to him for Protection and Shelter, was cry'd up in every Place. When Antigonus came to understand this, he rejoic'd exceedingly, in that he was not forc'd to destroy his Friend and potent Confederate, but that Seleucus by his own voluntary Banishment had seem'd to deliver up the Province of his own accord, without a Stroke struck. Afterwards the Caldeans came to him, and foretold, That if Seleucus got absolutely away, he should be Lord of all Asia, and that in a Battel between them Antigonus him∣self Caldean South∣.
should be kill'd. Whereupon being sorry that he had let him go, he sent some away to pursue him; but having follow'd him some little way, they return'd as they went. An∣tigonus was wont to slight these kind of Divinations in other Men, but at this time he was so amaz'd and affrighted with the high Esteem and Reputation of these Men, that he was very much disturb'd in his Thoughts: For they were judg'd to be Men very ex∣pert and skilful through their exact and diligent Observation of the Stars: And they af∣firm, that they and their Predecessors have study'd this Art of Astrology for above Twenty thousand Years. And what they had foretold concerning Alexander's Death, if he en∣ter'd into Babylon; was found true by late Experience. And in truth, as those Predi∣ctions concerning Alexander came afterwards to pass, so what they now said relating to Seleucus were likewise in due time accomplish'd. Of which we shall treat particularly when we come to the Times proper for that purpose. Seleucus, when he was got safe into Egypt, was entertain'd by Ptolemy with all the Ex∣pressions of Kindness and Affection that might be; where he bitterly complain'd against Ant. Ch. 313. Seleucus kind∣ly receiv'd by Ptolemy. Antigonus, affirming that his Design was to expel all Persons of eminent Quality out of their Provinces, and especially such as were in Service under Alexander; which he back'd with Arguments from Pitho's being put to Death, and Peucestes being depriv'd of the Govern∣ment of Persia, and from the Usage he himself had lately met with; and all these, though they had never done any thing to deserve it, but rather upon all Occasions perform'd all the Acts of Kindness and Service to him that was in their Power, and this was the Re∣ward of all they reap'd from their Service. He reckon'd up likewise the Strength of his Forces, his great Treasure, and his late Successes, which so puff'd him up, that he was in hopes to gain the Sovereign Command over all the Macedonians. Ptolemy, Se∣leucus, Cassan∣der, and Lysi∣machus, join against Anti∣gonus. P. 702. Ant. Ch. 313. Having by these Arguments stirr'd up Ptolemy to make War against him, he sent some of his Friends over into Europe, to prevail with Cassander and Lysimachus with the like Ar∣guments to appear in Arms against Antigonus. Which Orders being forthwith executed, Foundations were laid for a mighty War, which afterwards follow'd. Antigonus upon many probable Conjectures, conceiving what was Seleucus his design, sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, to desire them, that the ancient Friendship might be preserv'd and maintain'd amongst them. And then having made Pi∣thon, who came out of India, Lord-Lieutenant of the Province of Babylon, he broke up Antigonus Winters in Ci∣licia. his Camp, and march'd towards Cilicia. As soon as he came to In Cilicia. Mallos, he distributed his Army into Winter-Quarters, about the Month of After the st∣ting of Orion. November: And he receiv'd out of the Treasury in the City of Quindi Ten thousand Talents, and Eleven thousand Ta∣lents out of the yearly Revenues of that Province. So that he was very formidable both in respect of his great Forces and the vastness of his Treasure. And now being remov'd into the Upper Syria, Ambassadors came to him from Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, Ambassadors sent to him from Ptolemy, Cassander and Lysimachus. who being introduc'd as he sate in Council, demanded all Cappadocia and Lycia, to be be deliver'd up to Cassander; Phrygia, bordering upon the Hellespont, to Lystmachus; all Syria to Ptolemy; and the Province of Babylon to Seleucus; and all the common Stock of Mo∣neys which he had incroach'd upon since the Battel with Eumenes, to be shar'd e∣qually amongst them; which if he refus'd, then they were to let him know, that their Ant. Ch. 33. Masters intended with their joint Forces to make War upon him. Whereunto he an∣swer'd roughly, That he was now making a War upon Ptolemy; and thereupon, the Ambassadors return'd, without any effect of their Embassy: And upon this Answer, Pto∣lemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus entred into a League amongst themselves, and gathered their Forces together, and made it their business to provide Arms, and all other things necessary for the War. And now Antigonus perceiving how many great and potent Adversaries had confede∣rated against him, and what a Storm was ready to fall upon him, sought the Alliance and Confederacy of other Cities, Nations, and Princes; and to this purpose dispatch'd away Agisilaus to the King of Cyprus, Idomineus and Moschion to Rhodes, and one Ptolemy, his own Brother's Son, with an Army to raise the Siege of Amisus in Cappadocia, and to drive out those that were sent thither by Cassander. He commanded him likewise to go to the Hellespont, and fall upon Cassander, if he attempted to pass over out of Europe into Asia. He sent away likewise Aristodemus the Milesian, with a thousand Talents, with Orders to enter into a League of Amity with Alexander and Polysperchon, and to hire Soldiers, and make War upon Cassander: And he himself dispos'd Becons and Courriers throughout all Asia, which was wholly at his Command, hereby to give and get Knowledge of all things that pass'd, and to manage his Affairs with the greater Expedition.
Having taken this Order, he marches into Phaenicia to provide a Fleet: For at that He goes into Phenicia, and there builds Ships. Ant. Ch. 313. time the Enemy had the Command of the Sea, being furnish'd with abundance of Ship∣ping, when he himself had not one. Encamping near to Tyre, with design to Besiege it, he sent for the petty Kings of Phaenicia, and Governors of Syria, and dealt with them to join with him in the Building of Ships, because all the Ships that belong'd to Phaenicia were then with Ptolemy in Aegypt. He gave them likewise Order to bring him with all speed Four Millions and Five hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat; for to so much came the yearly Expence of his Army. Then he got together Hewers of Timber, Sawers, and Ship Carpenters, from all Parts, and caus'd Timber to be brought down from Mount Lebanon to the Sea-side, employing therein Eight thousand Men to Work, and a Thou-Beasts for Carriage This Mount runs through Tripolis, Byblia, and Sidonia, and abounds in most beautiful tall Cedars and Cypress Trees. He appointed three Arsenals in Phaeni∣cia, P. 703. one at Tripolis, another at Byblia, and the Third at Sidon; a Fourth he had in Cilicia, whither Timber was brought from Mount Taurus; and a Fifth in Rhodes, where the In∣habitants suffer'd him to build Ships of Timber, convey'd thither at his own Charge. While Antigonus was thus employ'd and lay Encamp'd by the Sea side, Seleucus came with a Fleet of an Hundred Sail out of Aegypt, quick Sailers, and Royally furnish'd, and in a scornful manner skirr'd under the Noses of them; which not a little troubled the Minds of his new Associates, and those that join'd with him in the carrying on of the Work. For it was very apparent, that the Enemy now being Master at Sea, would be sure to waste and spoil those who out of kindness to Antigonus had join'd with their Ad∣versaries. But Antigonus bid them be of good chear, for before the end of Summer, he said, he would be at Sea with a Fleet of Five hundred Sail. Agesilaus, in the mean while, return'd with his Embassy out of Cyprus, and brought word, that Nicocreon, and the most potent Kings of that Island had already confederated Ant. Ch. 313. with Ptolemy; Nevertheless, that Citticus, Lapitbius, Marius, and Cyrenites, would join with him: Whereupon, he left Three thousand Men under the Command of Andronicus, to maintain the Siege against Tyre, and he himself march'd with the rest of the Army against Antigonus be sieges Tyre. Gaza and Joppe, which stood out against him, and took them by force; and such of Pto∣lemy's Men as he found there, he took and distributed them among his own Regiments, and plac'd Garisons in both those Cities to keep them in Obedience. Which done, he return'd to his standing Camp about Tyre, and prepar'd all necessaries for a Siege against it. At the same time, Aristo, who was intrusted by Eumenes to carry Craterus his Bones, delivered them to Phila to be buried, who was marry'd first to Craterus, and at that time to Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, who was a Woman of excellent Parts and Prudence; for by her prudent Behaviour and Carriage towards every Soldier in the Army, she was a∣ble The Praise of Phila, the Wife of Deme∣trius. to qualify and moderate those that were most Turbulent, and she put forth the Daugh∣ters and Sisters of those that were Poor, at her own Charge; and prevented the Ruine of many that were falsly accus'd. Its reported, that Antipater her Father, (who was the most prudent Prince that Govern'd in this Age) was us'd to consult with Phila his Daughter, in the most weighty Affairs, while she was but yet a Girl. But the Prudence of this Woman will more fully appear in the following Narration, and when things tended Ant. Ch. 313. to a Revolution, and the fatal Period of Demetrius his Kingdom. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus and Phila at this time. Amongst the Captains sent away by Antigonus, Aristodemus pass'd over to Laconia, and having got leave of the Spartans to raise Soldiers, got together Eight thousand out of Pelo∣ponnesus; Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in Peloponnesus. and upon Conference with Polysperchon and Alexander, join'd them both in a firm League of Amity with Antigonus, and made Polysperchon General over the Forces in Peloponnesus; but prevail'd with Alexander to pass over into Asia to Antigonus. Ptolomeus, another of his Captains, going into Cappadocia with an Army, and there Ptolomey, a Captain of An∣tigonus, raises the Siege of Amisus in Cappadocia. finding the City of Amisus besieg'd by Asclepidorus, a Captain of Cassander's, rais'd the Siege and secur'd the Place; and so having sent away Asclepidorus packing upon cer∣tain Conditions, recover'd that whole Province to Antigonus; and marching thence through Bithynia, came upon the back of Zibytes King of the Bithynians, whilst he was busie in besieging of two Cities at once, that of the Assarenians, and the other of the Cal∣cedonians, and forc'd him to raise his Siege from both; and then falling to Capitulations both with him and the Cities that were besieg'd, after Hostages receiv'd, remov'd thence Ant. Ch. 313. towards Ionia and Lydia; for that Antigonus had written to him to secure that Coast with Two other Ci∣ties raised by him in Bithy∣nia. P. 704. all possible speed, having intelligence that Seleucus was going into those Parts with his Fleet; whither indeed he came and besieg'd Erythras: But hearing of the Enemies ap∣proach left it, and went away as he came. Mean while, Alexander the Son of Polysper∣chon,
came to Antigonus, who made a League with him; and then calling a general Antigonus his Policy. Council of the Army and the Strangers there resident, declar'd unto them how Cassander had murder'd Olympias, and how villainously he had dealt with Roxana and the young King, and that he had forc'd Thessalonices to marry him, and that it was very clear and evident that he aspir'd to the Kingdom of Macedonia. Moreover, that he had planted the Olynthians, the most bitter Enemies of the Macedonians, in the City call'd after his own Name; That he had rebuilt Thebes that was raz'd by the Macedonians: Having thus incens'd the Army, he made and wrote an Edict, That Cassander should be taken as an open Ene∣my, unless he raz'd the two Cities, releas'd the King and Roxana his Mother, and return'd them safe to the Macedonians: And lastly, Unless he submitted to Antigonus, as General and sole Protector of the Kingdom; and free all the Greek Cities, and withdraw all the Garisons out of them. When the Army had approv'd of this Edict by their Suffrages, he sent Courriers away to publish it in all places: For he hop'd, that by this Means all the Grecians, in expecta∣tion of having their Liberties restor'd, would be his Consederates, and readily assist him in the War, and that all the Governors of the Higher Provinces, who before suspected him, as if he design'd to deprive the Posterity of Alexander of the Kingdom, (now that Ant. Ch. 313. it clearly appear'd that he took up Arms in their behalf) would observe all his Com∣mands of their own accord. Having dispatch'd all these Matters, he sent back Alexander with Five hundred Talents into Peloponnesus, with his hopes rais'd in expectation of mighty Matters: And he himself with Shipping had from Rhodes, and others he had lately built, set sail for Tyre; where being now Master at Sea, he so block'd it up for thirteen Months together, that no sup∣ply of Victuals could be brought thither, and thereby reduc'd the Inhabitants into so Tyre deliver'd to Antigonus. great distress, that at length (upon suffering the Soldiers to march away with some small things that were their own) the City was surrender'd to him upon Terms; and he plac'd a Garison in it for its Defence. In the mean time, Ptolemy hearing what a Declaration Antigonus with the Macedonians had made, concerning the Liberty of the Grecians, made the like himself, as desirous that Prolemy pro∣claims Liberty to the Greci∣ans. all the World should take notice, that he was no less zealous for the Liberty of Greece than Antigonus was: For both of them well considering of how great moment it was to their Affairs to gain the good Will of the Grecians, strove one with another which should oblige them most by Acts of Grace. Then he join'd to his Party the Governor of Caria, who was a Man of great Power, and had many great Cities under his Command. And thô he had before sent Three thousand Soldiers to the Kings in Cyprus, yet he hastned a∣way Ptolemy sends Men into Cy∣prus. many more, to reduce those who had there sided against him. Those sent were Ten thousand, under the Command of Myrmidon, an Athenian born, and an Hundred sail of Ships, Commanded by Polyclitus: And the General over all he made his Brother Menelaus. These coming into Cyprus, join'd then with Seleucus and his Fleet, and in a Council of War advis'd what course was fit to be taken. The Result of which was, that Polyclitus with Fifty sail should pass into Peloponnesus, and there should make War upon Aristodemus, Polysperchon, and his Son Alexander: That Myrmidon should go with an Army of Foreign∣ers The Agreement of the Captains of Ptolemy, and the rest at Cyprus. P. 705. The Acts of Se∣leucus. into Caria, there to help Cassander against Ptolemy, a Captain of Antigonus, who pressed hard upon him; and that Seleucus and Menelaus staying in Cyprus, should bear up Nico∣creon the King, and the rest of their Confederates, against their Enemies. Having thus therefore divided their Forces, Seleucus went and took Cyrinia and Lapi∣thus; and having drawn over Stasiecus, King of the Malenses, to his Party, he forc'd the Prince of the Amathusians to give him Hostages for his Fealty for the time to come. As for the City Citium (seeing it would come to no Agreement with him) he fell to be∣siege it with his whole Army. About the same time came Forty Ships out of the Hellespont and Rhodes, under the Command of one Themison, their Admiral, to Antigonus; and after them came Diosco∣rides Ant. Ch. 313. A Fleet comes to antigonus from Helles∣pont and Rhodes. with Fourscore more; though Antigonus had already a Navy of his own, new built in Phenicia, to the Number of an Hundred and twenty Ships, with those that he left at Tyre; so that he had in the whole Two hundred and forty Men of War, of which there were Ninety of four Tire of Oars; Ten of Five, Three of Nine; Ten of Ten; and Thirty open Gallies. Antigonus dividing this Navy into Squadrons, sent Fifty of them into Peloponnesus, and the rest he committed to Dioscorides, his own Brother's Son, with this Charge, That he should guard the Seas, and help his Friends as their occasion requir'd, and that he should gain unto his Party such of the Islands as hitherto stood out against him. And in this Posture stood the Affairs of Antigonus.
And now, having related the things done throughout all Asia, we shall give a particu∣lar Account of the Affairs of Europe. Apolenides being made Commander of the Argives by Cassander, in the Night broke in∣to Arcadia, Things done in Peloponnesus. and surpriz'd the The City Stymphalus, near the Stym∣phalian Lake. City of the Stymphalions. And while he was absent, some of the Argives (Enemies to Cassander) corresponded with Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, and promis'd to deliver up the Argos. City into his Hands. But Alexander being too slow, Apolonides comes to Argos before him; and surpriz'd Five hundred of the Conspirators that were in a Senate in the A public Place where the great Mn us'd to Sa∣crifice, or a Place where a Court was held belonging to the Senate. The Acts of Cassander in Peloponnesus. and elsewhere. Prytaneum, and kept them in, and burnt them there alive; most of the rest he banish'd, and some few more he took and put to Death. Cassander having intelligence, that Aristodemus was arriv'd in Peloponnesus, and that he had listed there great numbers of Soldiers, in the first place sought to draw off Polysper∣chon from Antigonus; but not being able to prevail, he march'd with an Army through Thessaly and came into Boeotia; where having assisted the Thebans in raising of their Walls, he pass'd into Peloponnesus, and first having taken Cencrea, he Spoil'd and Harrass'd all the Territory of Corinth. Then he took two Castles by Storm, and upon future Faith and Allegiance, dismiss'd all the Garison Soldiers that were plac'd there by Alexander. After∣wards he besieg'd Orchomenon, and being let into the Town by Alexander's Enemies, he put a Garison into the City; Those that sided with Alexander took Sanctuary in Diana's Temple, whom he gave up to the Citizens to do with them as they thought fit; where∣upon the Orchomenians drew them all out of the Temple by Force, and against the com∣mon Laws of Greece put them all to Death. Cassander went thence into Messenia, but finding the City strongly Garison'd by Polys∣perchon, he thought not fit for the present to besiege it, but march'd into Arcadia, where he left Damides Governor of the City Stam∣phalus. Vid. p. 705. City, and return'd to Argia. P. 706. Argolides, and there celebrated the Nem'an Games, and return'd into Macedonia. When he was gone, Alexander with Aristodemus lay before the Cities in Peloponnesus, to expell the Garisons of Cassander, and endeavour'd all he could to restore the Cities to their Liberties: Which coming to the Ears of Cassander, he sent to him Prepelaus to work upon him to desert Antigonus, and enter into a League of Friendship and Amity with himself; promising, that if he would do so, he would give him the Sovereign Command of all Peloponnesus, and create him Ge∣neral of the Army, and would advance him to high Places of Honour and Preferment. Alexander seeing he was now like to attain that for which from the beginning he made War upon Cassander, enters into a League with him, and so is made General of all the Forces in Peloponnesus. In the mean while, Polyclitus, Secleucus his Lieutenant, sailing from Cyprus came to Cencrea; where hearing of the Defection of Alexander, and finding no Enemy there to The great Vi∣ctory both by Sea and Land obtain'd by Po∣lyclitus, Se∣leucus his Lieutenant. Encounter, he chang'd his Course and set sail for Pamphylia; and from thence arriving at Aphrodisiades in Cilicia, he there understood that Theodotus, Admiral of Antigonus his Navy, pass'd by from Patara, a Port in Lycia, with the Rhodian Fleet, furnish'd with Mariners out of Caria; and that Perilaus with a Land-Army coasted along by the Shore, for the defence of the Fleet if need should be: In this case he out-witted them both; for he Landed his Men in a Place out of view, where the Land-Army must of necessity pass, and himself with the Fleet went and lay behind a Foreland, waiting for the coming of the Énemy; there the Enemy's Foot fell into an Ambush, and Perilaus himself being taken Prisoner, and his Men all either kill'd or taken. The Fleet at Sea seeing the Land-Army engag'd, hasted to their Relief; but then Polyclitus coming upon them in this Con∣fusion, with his Ships drawn up in a Line of Battel, put them easily to flight; so that Po∣lyclitus took all their Ships and most part of the Men in them, and amongst the rest Theo∣dotus Ant. Ch. 313. himself their Admiral, sorely martyr'd with Wounds, of which he shortly after died. Polyclitus having sped so well on all hands, sail'd back first to Cyprus, and then to In Aegypt. Pe∣lusium, where Ptolemy richly rewarded him for so great a Service, and withal promoted him to a far higher Dignity and Place of Honour than he was in before, as the Author He's highly re∣warded by Pto∣lemy. of so great a Victory: But releas'd Perilaus and some other Prisoners, which Antigonus desir'd by a Messenger sent to him for that purpose. And then himself going to a Place call'd Ecregma, came to a Parly with Antigonus, but Antigonus refusing to grant him what he demanded, he left him and return'd. Having now given an account of the Affairs of the European Greeks, both in Greece and Macedonia, we shall run over to the Parts lying towards the West. Agathocles, Prince of Syracuse, having possess'd himself of a Castle belonging to the Messenians, promis'd to restore it upon receiving of Thirty Talents of Silver: Which The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. when the Messenians had paid, he not only broke his Faith, but endeavour'd to have seiz'd upon Messina it self. For being inform'd that part of the Walls were fallen down, he
sent a Party of Horse by Land from Syracuse, and he himself in some Ships call'd Barks or Fri∣gnts. He∣miolias, went by Sea, and arriv'd in the Night close under the Walls of the City: But they coming to understand his Design before-hand, wholly defeated him in what he had contriv'd. However, He came to Mylas, and upon laying Siege to the Castle, had it Ant. Ch. 313. deliver'd up to him; and then return'd to Syracuse. In Harvest-time he made a second attempt upon Messina, and Encamping near the City, made continual Assaults, but was not able to effect any thing considerable: For many Exiles were flock'd into this Place from Syracuse, who both for the sake of their own Preservation, and out of Hatred to the Tyrant, fought most Courageously. About this time came Ambassadors from Carthage, arguing the Case with Agathocles, and complaining of the Breach of Articles; and making Peace with the Messenians, they forc'd the Tyrant to restore the Mylas. P. 707. Castle, and then sail'd back into Africa. After which Agathocles went to Abecenus, one of his Confederate Cities, and there he put to Death Forty, whom he look'd upon to be his Enemies. In these times the Romans were at War with the Samnites, and took Ferentum by Storm; and the Inhabitants of Nuceria (call'd Alphatema) were, by the Persuasions of some Per∣sons, prevail'd with to desert the Romans, and join in League with the Samnites. CHAP. V. The Acts of Aristodemus, Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus. The Dime∣ans in Achaia seek to free themselves from Cassander's Garison: They take the Cittadel. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, Assassinated. The praise of Crate∣sipolis his Wife. The Acts of Cassander in Etolia, and other Parts of Greece. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Cassander sends an Army into Caria; and Aristotle with a Fleet to Lemnos. The Acts of Cassander's Army in Caria. Antigonus Leaves his Son Demetrius in Syria to watch Ptolemy. His troublesome March into Asia. The Affairs of Sicily. Acrotatus his Misgovernment and Cruelties in Sicily. The Acts of Agathocles. The Affairs of Italy. WHEN the former year was ended, Nichodorus was created Archon at Athens, and Olymp. 116. 3. Ant. Ch. 312. An. M. 3658. Lucius Papirius chosen the Fourth, and Quintus Publius the second time Consul at Rome. At that time Aristodemus, made General by Antigonus, hearing of the Defecti∣on of Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, after he had open'd the Justice of the Cause be∣fore the Senate of the Etolians, sollicited them to be assistant to the Affairs of Antigonus. Then passing into Peloponnesus with the Mercenaries, found Alexander with the Eleans be∣sieging Aristodemus raises the Siege of Cyllene. The Acts of Aristodemus in Pelopon∣nesus. Cyllene, and coming in nick of time rais'd the Siege; and then leaving a Garison to defend the Place, he mov'd towards Actria, and frees Patras from the Garison of Cas∣sander; but Egeum he took by Force, and being possess'd of the Place, was ready to re∣store the Egeans to their Liberty, according to the former Decree, but that he was pre∣vented by this Accident. The Soldiers began to Plunder; and upon that occasion many of the Citizens were kill'd, and the greatest part of the Town was burnt down to the Ground. After which he sail'd back into Etolia; the Dymeans, who were aw'd by a Garison Ant. Ch. 312. Of Dyme in Achaia. The Dimeans seek to free themselves from Cassander's Garison. of Cassander's in the Castle, separated their City from the Cittadel by a Wall drawn round it, and encouraging one another to stand up for their Liberties, besieg'd the Castle, and infested it with continual Assaults. Of which Alexander receiving Intelligence, he came upon them with his Army on a sudden, and drave them within their Walls, and enter'd pell-mell with them into the City, and took it: Some of the Dymeans he put to the Sword, others he Imprison'd, and many of them he Banish'd. After Alexander went away, the rest of them were quiet for a little while, being both terrify'd with the greatness of the late Calamity, and likewise wanting the Assistance of their Confederates. But some time after, they made application to Aristodemus his Mercenaries, who march'd to them from Egeum. Whereupon, they again assaulted the Cittadel, and took it, and freed the City, and put many of the Garison to the Sword, and put to Death such of their own Citi∣zens as favour'd Alexander's Party.
Amongst these Turns and Changes of Fortune, while Alexander with his Army was Alexander, Son of Polys∣pachon kill'd. marching from Sycion, he was kill'd by Alexion, a Sycionian, and some others, who pre∣tended themselves to be his Friends. His Wife, Cratesipolis, after his Death, took upon her the Management of Affairs, and kept the Army in due Obedience: Her obliging Carriage and Bounty was such, as that she was greatly belov'd of the Soldiers; for she The praise of Cratesipolis, Wife of Alex∣ander, Son of Polysperchon. was continually affording all the help she could to them that were in Distress, and re∣lieving and supporting many that were in Want: Besides, she was a Woman of admirable Prudence in managing Affairs, and of Courage beyond the natural Temper of her Sex. For when the Sycionians in contempt of her, (after the Death of her Husband) rose up in Arms for the Recovery of their Liberty, she executed her Revenge by cutting off Mul∣titudes Ant. Ch. 312. of them in a Field-battel; and crucify'd Thirty of those she had taken Prisoners; and so having settled the Affairs of the City, she reign'd over the Sycionians, having under her Command multitudes of Soldiers ready upon all occasions for any Undertaking, though never so hazardous. And this was then the State and Condition of Pelopon∣nesus. Cassander perceiving that the Etolians assisted Antigonus, and were then likewise engag'd in a War with their Neighbours the Acarnanians, judg'd that the most probable way to P. 708. bring down the Etolians, was for him to join with the Acarnanians. To this end, he march'd out of Macedonia with a great Army, and came into Etolia, and Encamp'd near Cassander joins with the Acarnanians against the Etolians. the River Campylus. Here he invited the Acarnanians to a common Consult, where he set forth how they had been vex'd for many Generations past, by War from their unruly and troublesome Neighbours; and therefore advis'd them, that they should leave their little Forts and Castles, (though they were fortify'd) and betake themselves to a few Cities, lest being so dispers'd and scatter'd in their Habitations, they should not be able to get together to assist one another, when the Enemy at any time should suddenly and unexpectedly break in upon them. The Acarnanians follow'd his Advice, and the most of them remov'd to Stratopolis, which was the strongest and largest of their Cities. The Ant. Ch. 312. Oeniades and some others, went to Saurion; the Doreans with the rest to Agrinium. Cassander hereupon, left Lyciscus his General in those Parts, with a considerable Body of Men, with Orders to assist the Acarnanians; and he himself march'd with his Army The Acts of Cassander. to the City Leueades, and by Treaty gain'd them for Consederates. Then with a swift March he came suddenly into Adria, and took in Apollonia his first approach. Thence marching into Illyria, he pass'd over the River Hebrus, and fought with Glaucius the Illyrian King, and routed his Army; after which he made Peace with him, upon Condition, that he should not make War upon any of his Confederates. Then he took in Epidamnum bordering upon the Adria∣tick Sea. Now called Duraz∣zo, called also Dyradrium. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Ant. Ch. 312. Epi∣damnum, and placing there a Garison return'd into Macedonia. After Cassander had left Etolia, the Etolians joining together, to the Number of Three thousand besieg'd Agrinium, girting it round with a Trench and a Breast-work. But the Inhabitants that came before out of the Country, treated and agreed with the Enemy, That upon delivery up of the City their Persons should be secure, and they should have liberty to depart and leave the Place. Whereupon, after Faith given for their security, they went out, and when they were in their way, the Etolians Falsly and Treacherously, when the other never suspected any thing, pursu'd 'em, and kill'd 'em almost every Man. Cassander being return'd into Macedonia, as soon as he heard how the Cities in Caria (that had Confederated with Ptolemy and Seleucus) were infested by the War, put over Cassander sends an Army into Caria. an Army into Caria, both to help the Confederates, as also in time to divert Antigonus, that he might have no leisure to come into Europe. He commanded also by his Letters Demetrius, Phalerius, and Dionysius Governor of the Fort of Munychia, to fit out forthwith Twenty Ships for Lemnos. Who thereupon, presently dispatch'd away the Ships, under Sends Aristotle with a Fleet to Lemnos. the Command of Aristotle, their Admiral, and he arriving at Lemnos, and being there join'd with Seleucus and his Fleet, he prevail'd with them of Lemnos to desert Antigonus. But they afterwards retracted what they had before engag'd to, and thereupon he wasted and harrass'd the Country, and drew a Trench round the City and besieg'd it. About this time Seleucus arriv'd at Coos; whose coming there being nois'd abroad, Dios∣corides, Admiral of Antigonus his Fleet, sail'd to Lemnos, and drave Aristotle out of the Island, and took many of his Ships, together with all their Men on board. One Cassander and Prepalaus were Commanders of the Forces sent into Caria by Cassan∣der; who hearing that Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in those Parts, had distributed his Army into their Winter-Quarters, and that he himself was busie in the burying of his Father, sent away Eupolemus with Eight thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse, to a Ant. Ch. 312. Place call'd Caprima, in Caria, to lie in Ambushment for him there: But Ptolemy getting
notice thereof by some that fled over to him, got together out of the next Winter-Quar∣ters The Acts of Cassander's Army in Caria P. 709. Eight thousand and Three hundred Foot, and Six hundred Horse, and falling about Midnight into the Enemies Trenches, and finding them near all fast asleep, took Eupole∣mus Prisoner, and forc'd all his Men to submit to discretion. And this was then the Condition of those sent by Cassander into Asia. But Antigonus perceiving that Cassander aim'd at the Sovereignty of Asia, left his Son Demetrius in Syria, with instructions to intercept Ptolemy's Men, whom he suspected were then coming with an Army further up into Syria; and to that purpose left with him Ten thousand Foot of other Nations, Two thousand Macedonians, Five hundred out of Lycia Antigonus leaves his Son Demetrius in Syria to watch Ptolemy. and Pamphilia, Persian Archers and Slingers Four hundred, and Five thousand Horse, and above Forty Elephants; and four Men for his Counsellors, Nearchon, Pitho Son of Age∣nor, who came lately from Babylon, Andromicus of Olynthus, and Philippus; all Men of mature Age and Judgment, and such as had attended upon Alexander in all his Wars: For Demetrius himself was but a young Man, not above Two and twenty years of Age. Upon Antigonus himself, while he past with the rest of his Army over Mount Taurus, there fell a mighty Snow, wherein he lost many of his Men. Whereupon, he return'd Ant. Ch. 312. His troublesome march into Asia. back into Cilicia, where he advis'd himself of a better Way to pass that Mountain, and with little damage to his Army; and so coming to Celenae in Phrygia, he there put his Army into their Winter-Quarters. Then he sent for the Fleet out of Phenicia, of which Medius was Admiral, who by meer chance in his way met with a Fleet of Thirty six Sail belonging to the City of Pydna, and defeated them, and brought the Ships with all their Men under his Subjection. In this Posture stood the Affairs both of Greece and Asia at this time. In the mean time in Sicily the Exiles of Syracuse, who were then in Agrigentum, stirr'd up the great Men of the City not to suffer Agathocles in that manner to make The affairs of Sicily. a Prey of the Cities; alledging that it was better to set upon the Tyrant before he grew too strong, than to loiter till he was in greater power, and then to be forc'd to Contend with him when it was more hazardous: Whereupon the Agrigentines approving of his Advice, decreed by their suffrages War against him; and joining in Confederacy with the Geloans and Messenians, they sent some of the Exiles to the Lacedemonians with Orders to procure a General to be sent to them from thence. For they suspected that some of their own Citizens were too much inclin'd to Tyranny themselves, but judg'd that Foreigners if they remembred the Government of Timolion the Corinthian, would better manage the publick affairs. When they arriv'd therefore in Laconia they found Acrotatus, the Son of King Claomenes, much hated by many of the young Noblemen at Ant. Ch. 312. Acrotatus in∣vited to be Ge∣neral by Agri∣gentines. home, and therefore very desirous to be imploy'd abroad. For when the Lacedemonians after the Fight with Antipater had acquitted those that escap'd in that Battel from all Censures of Disgrace, he only oppos'd the Decree; so that many were offended at him, especially those that were liable to the penalty of the Laws. And upon that account they had lain in wait for him, and beaten him, and were con∣stantly seeking to intrap him: Being therefore for this reason desirous of a foreign Command, he very freely comply'd with the Agragentines; and thereupon with∣out the Order of the Ephori (resolving upon the Voyage) he set Sail with a few Ships for Agrigentum: But being driven back by a Storm into Adria, he arriv'd in the Territory of the Apolloniates; where finding the City besieg'd by Glocias, King of the Illyrians, he perswaded the King to raise the siege, and enter into a League of Friendship with the Apolloniates. Then he sail'd to Tarentum, and there Solicited the People to join P. 710. with him in procuring the Restoration of the Syracusians to their Ancient Liberties, and so far prevail'd, that they Decreed to assist them with Twenty Sail of Ships. For on the account of his Kindred and the nobleness of his Family, his words were of great Ant. Ch. 312. Weight and Credit. While the Tarentines were making preparations, he himself sail'd to Agrigentum, and there took upon him the Command of the Army; whereupon the People were in high expectations, in so much as that all concluded that an end would be presently put to the Tyranny: But in a short time it plainly appear'd that he did no∣thing worthy, either the Nobility of his Birth, or the reputation of his Country. But on The misgover∣ment and cruel∣ty of Acrotatus the Corinthian in Sicily. the contrary became more cruel and bloody than the very Tyrants themselves, and so fell into the Hatred of the People: He degenerated likewise from the custom of his Country in his manner of living; and so indulg'd himself in voluptuousness, that he seem'd more like a Persian, than a Spartan. After he had lavish'd away the greatest part of the publick Revenues, partly by his misgovernment, and partly by robbing of the Treasury; in the Conclusion he invited Sosistratus (the most eminent person among the Exiles, and one who had been a General of Armies) to Supper, and treacherously kill'd him, having not anything in the least to lay to his charge, but only that he might take out of the way
a stout and valiant man, and one that was able to discern and discover his Miscarriages: Which wicked fact being presently nois'd abroad, the Exiles in a Body came upon him, and every body else forsoook him, and in the first place they depos'd him, and presently after attempted to stone him to death; to avoid therefore the rage of the People he stole Ant. Ch. 312. away in the night and landed privatly in Laconia: After his departure the Tarentines recall their Fleet they had before sent into Sicily. Hereupon the Agrigentines Geloans and Messenians by the mediation of Amilcar the Car∣thaginian General, make peace with Agathocles; the Conditions of which were as follow; that Heraclea Selinum and Himera, part of the Greek Cities, should belong unto the Car∣thaginians, as they did before; all the rest under the power of the Syracusians should be free to be govern'd after their own Laws. But afterwards Agathocles, when he saw the The Acts of A∣gathocles in Sicily. coast clear, and Sicily free and clear'd from all appearance of an Enemy, he fell upon the Cities, and without any difficulty brought them under his subjection; and gaining many in a very short time, strongly fixt himself in the Principality. For in the multitude of his Confederates, the greatness of his Yearly Revenues, and the power of a mighty Army, he grew very strong. For besides his Confederates and those rais'd from among the Syracusians, he had of mercenaries Ten thousand Foot and Three thousand and fifty Horse; he furnish'd himself likewise with all sorts of Arms, foreseeing that the Carthagi∣nians (who had smartly rebuk't Amilcar for making the Peace) would in a short time make War upon him. And such was the estate of Sicily at this time. In Italy the Samnites having now been in Wars with the Romans for many Years last The affairs of Italy. Ant. Ch. 312. past, took Plistia, wherein was a strong Roman Garrison; and prevail'd with the Sora∣nions to massacre all the Romans that were there, and to confederate with the Samnites. Afterwards while the Romans were besieging of Satricula, they came upon them with a strong Army resolving to raise the siege; upon which follow'd a sharp Engagment, and after many kill'd on both sides the Romans carry'd the day; and then presently after they took the Town, and gain'd several other neighbouring Towns and Castles. And now the War was brought over amongst the Cities of Apulia; whereupon the Samnites Listed all that were of Age to bear Arms, and march'd out and Incampt close to the Enemy, being now resolv'd to win or lose all. The People of Rome there∣fore to prevent the worst, sent thither a great number of Souldiers: And because they P. 711. were accustom'd in perilous times to choose one of the most Noble and Eminent Persons to be their General, with full and absolute power and Authority; they therefore pitch'd upon Quintus Fabius and Quintus Aulius, Master of the Horse, for that honourable imploy∣ment. These Generals afterwards fought the Samnites at Lautulas, where they sustain'd great loss of their men; and the whole Army fled outright, only Aulius (being asham'd of the dishonour) oppos'd the whole Body of the Enemy, not out of any hopes or expectation of gaining the Victory, but to have it manifest and apparent to all from his own valour, that his Country was unconquerable. Not sharing therefore with the rest of the Citizens in the Dishonour of the flight, he dy'd there a glorious and honourable death. The Romans now fearing lest they should lose all Apulia, sent Colonies into Luceria now Nocera. Luceria, the most famous City of all those parts; and this prov'd of great advantage to them by the frequent Eruptions made upon the Samnites. For by the help and advantage of this City they became Conquerors, not only in this war, but several times afterwards; and even to our own present Age they have constantly made use of this City as a strong Fort and Citadel of War against all the neighbouring Nations.
CHAP. VI. Several Cities revolt, Lysimachus comes against them. Philip, Cassander's General, Routs the Epirots and Etolians. Cassander agrees with Antigonus. Antigonus gaines the Cities in Caria. Cassander's Acts in Greece. The Samnites Routed by the Romans. Polemon sent by Antigonus into Greece, to set the Cities at liberty. The Acts of Antigonus and Cassander. Polemon's Acts in Greece for Antigonus. Ptolemy goes against Cyrene and Cyprus; Then against Deme∣trius. The Battle with Demetrius at Gaza. Ptolemy takes Tyre. The Acts of Antigonus his Commanders in Greece. The Epirots make Alcetas King, who is beaten by Lyciscus, Cassander's General, and he's beaten again by the other. Cassander goes against the Apolloniats. Seleucus recovers Babylon with a small Army. Demetrius Routs Cilles, Ptolemy's General. Ptolemy returns to Egypt, first wasts Samaria, Gaza, Joppa, &c. Athaneus sent against the Nabatheans by Antigonus. The Customs of the Arabians. Atharieus kill'd, with most of his Men! Demetrius sent against them. Description of the Asphaltes, or Lake of Sodom. Demetrius sent against Seleucus in Babylon. The Wars between the Romans and Samnites in Italy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. THE Affairs of this Year being brought to this Conclusion, Theophrastus became Olymp. 116. 4. Ant. Ch. 311. An. M. 3659. chief Magistrate of Athens, and Marcus Petilius and Caius Sulpitius were invested with the Consular dignity at Rome. Then the Callantini∣ans. Callentinians, the Inhabitants residing in the parts on the left hand of Pontus, cast out the Garrison put upon them by Lysima∣chus, and recover'd their liberty. In the same manner the Istrians freed their City, and Confederated with the neighbouring inhabitants to joyn together in a War against their Prince. The Thracians and Scythians likewise joyn'd with their Neighbours; so that all Several Cities revolt from Lysimachus. the Forces together were of that strength, that they were able to cope with the most potent Army. Lysimachus hearing what was done, march'd with his Army against the Rebels, and Lysimachus comes to reduce them. passing through Thrace, when he had got over Mount Emus, Incampt near Odessus, which (upon blocking it up) the Inhabitants in a great Consternation deliver'd up to him: Reducing likewise the Istrians in the same manner, he marcht thence against the Callan∣tians; about which time the Thracians and Scythians came in with a great Army to the assistance of their Confederates: Upon which Lysimachus advancing forwards, fac'd them, and forthwith lifting up his Ensigns for Battle, the Thracians were so terrifi'd that they marcht off and went their way. But the Scythians he Ingag'd, and Routed them, killing a great number, and driving the rest out of the Country. Then he laid close Siege to the City of the Or Callen∣tians. Callentinians, setting all his wit at work, and making it his main and only business how he might be reveng'd on the Authors of the defection. While he was busying himself in this concern, News was brought him that Antigonus had sent two Armies to the assistance of the Callentinians, one by Land and another by Sea; and that Lyco the Admiral was with the Navy in Pontus, and that Pausanias was Incampt with a great Land Army at Hieron. At this News Lysimachus was much concern'd, and thereupon leaving a considerable Body to maintain the Siege, he speedily march'd away Ant. Ch. 311. with the main strength of the Army designing to ingage the Enemy; and being ready to pass over Emus, he found Seuthes King of Thrace (who had revolted to Antigonus) obstructing his passage with a great Body of Men; upon which they ingag'd and he forc'd his way through the Barbarians with the loss of a great number of his own men, but many more of the Enemies. Then he fell upon the Pausanians, finding them in the Streights, whither they had fled. P. 713 These he gain'd by force, and having kill'd Pausanias, he discharg'd some of the Soldiers upon Ransom, and others that took up Arms with him he distributed amongst his own Troops. And thus stood the affairs of Lysimachus. But when this Enterprise succeeded not, Antigonus sent Telesphorus into Peloponnesus with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, and a con∣siderable number of Soldiers, with Orders to free all the Cities that they might live ac∣cording to their own ancient Laws. This he did, hoping by this means to gain credit amongst the Grecians as one that really intended the procurement and preservation of
their Liberties; and by this method he concluded he should find out how things stood with Cassander. Telosphorus therefore as soon as he arriv'd in Peloponnesus, went to Alexander's Garrisons, and set them all free, except Sicyon and Corinth. For in these Polysperchon had plac'd great numbers of Souldiers, trusting to them and the strength of the places. In the mean time Philip being sent by Cassander as General to make War upon the Etolians; as soon as he came with his Army into Acarnania, the first thing he did was to harrass and spoil Etolia; but not long after hearing that Eacides King of Epirus (who was now Restor'd to his Kingdom) had rais'd a strong Army, he made against him with Ant Ch. 311. Philip, Cas∣sanders Gene∣ral, Routs the Epirots and Etolians. all speed: For he endeavor'd all he could to Fight him before the Etolians had joyn'd him. And finding the Epirots ready prepar'd to fight, he forthwith engag'd, and kill'd multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners; amongst whom it happn'd that there were about Fifty of the Faction that were the instruments to restore Eacides whom he sent away bound to Cassander. Afterwards the broken Troops of Eacides Rallying again, joyn'd with the Etolians, and Philip set upon e'm and Routed e'm a second time with the slaughter of many, amongst whom was Eacides himself. Having effected such great matters in so short a time, the Etolians were so terrifi'd that they forsook their unfortifi'd Cities, and fled with their Wives and Children unto the fastnesses of the Mountains, where it was very difficult to come at them: And this con∣clusion had the affairs of Greece at that time. As for Asia Cassander, though he was chief Governour there yet overpress'd with the weight of the War, he agreed with Antigonus upon these terms; that he should deliver all the Soldiers into the hands of Antigonus, and should grant Liberty to all the Greek Cities Cassander's A∣greement with Antigonus. Ant. Ch. 311. there to Govern according to their own Laws; and that he should keep the Province he formerly possess'd as by grant from him, and should be ever after Antigonus his firm friend. And for the true performance of these Conditions he deliver'd to him his Brother Agathonas as Hostage; but within a while after he repented of what he had done, and got his Brother out of their clutches that had him in custody, and sent an Ambassador to Ptolemy and Seleucus, to desire them to send him Aid with all speed: At which Anti∣gonus was highly incens'd and sent away Forces both by Sea and Land with Orders to free all the Cities, and Created Medius Admiral of the Fleet, and Docimus General of the Forces at Land. These Commanders coming to Miletum dealt with the Inhabitants to stand for their Liberties, and took the Cittadel with the Garrison therein, and restor'd the ancient Laws to the Cities. In the mean time Antigonus took Tralles; and then lay before the City Caunus, and Antigonus gains the Cities in Caria. sending for his Fleet took that likewise, except only the Castle; about which he cast a Trench and made continual assaults upon it in those parts where there was any hopes of Entry: He had sent Ptolemy to the City Jassus with a considerable Army, but he was fain to come back and joyn again with Antigonus; and so all those Cities in Caria came at that time into his hands. Within a few days after came Ambassadors from the Etolians and Beotians with whom Antigonus entred into a League of Confederacy; but going to Cassander to the Hellespont to Treat with him upon terms of Peace, he return'd without effecting any P. 713. thing, for they could not hit it upon any score: Whereupon Cassander casting aside all hopes of any accommodation, resolv'd again to pursue the settlement of his Affairs in Ant. Ch. 111. Greece. To that end he sail'd away with a Fleet of Thirty Sail and laid close Siege to the City In Eubea now Negropont. Cassander's Acts in Greece. Oreum, which he so fiercly assaulted that he took it by Storm; presently upon this came in Telesphorus from Peloponnesus with Twenty Ships, and a Thousand Soldiers, and Medius out of Asia with a Hundred Sail to the relief of Oreum; who spying Cassander's Ships then at Anchor in the Harbour, burnt four of them, and disabled almost all the rest. But the Athenians coming in to their relief, Cassander in scorn and contempt of the Enemy falls upon them afresh, and in the Ingagement sinks one, and takes three, to∣gether with all their Men: And thus were Affairs then manag'd in Greece. In Italy the Samnites wasted and spoil'd the Towns and Country round about that sided with their Enemies: But the Roman Consuls march'd into those Parts with an Army, in order to succour their Confederates; and there encamping near Cinna in the face of the Enemy, they allay'd the Fears of the City. A few days after, the Armies on both sides drew up in Battalia, and fought a bloody Battel, wherein multitudes fell on Samnites Rou∣ted by the Ro∣mans. both sides; but at length the Romans breaking through the main Body of their Enemies, totally routed them, and pursu'd them a long way, and kill'd above Ten thousand.
In the mean time, the Campanians (not knowing of this Battel) in contempt of the Romans, rebell'd: Whereupon the People of Rome forthwith sent out a strong Army against them, under the Command of Caius Menius, as General, with absolute and un∣limitted Power, with whom was join'd, according to the Custom of the Romans, Marcus Follius, Master of the Horse. These Consuls sitting down with their Army near Capua, the Campanians at first resolv'd to fight them; but afterwards hearing of the Rout and Slaughter of the Samnites, thinking the Romans would fall upon them with their whole Forces, they made Peace with them: For they gave up the Ringleaders of the Defection who after they were Or indicted before the Jud∣ges call'd Ju∣dices Questio∣num, Judges of the Questi∣ons: Or when the Trial was appointed. examin'd, prevented the Sentence of Condemnation by murder ing themselves. But the Cities were pardon'd, and so return'd to their former Alle∣giance. The former Year being ended, Polemus executed the Place of the Chief Magistrate at Olym. 117. 1. Ant. Ch. 110. The Acts of Po∣lemon in Greece. Athens, and Lucius Papirius the Fifth, and Caius Junius the Second Consulate at Rome, in which Year was celebrated the Hundred and seventeenth Olympiad, in which Parme∣nio of Mitylene carry'd away the Prize. At this time Antigonus sent Polemon into Greece, to set at liberty all the Grecian Cities, and with him a Hundred and fifty Men of War. Long Ships, under the Command of Medius his Admiral; on board of which Vessels were Five thou∣sand Foot and Five hundred Horse. Having made a League with the Rhodians, he re∣ceiv'd likewise Ten Ships of War more from them, to help forward the restoring of the Greek Cities to their Liberties. About the same time Antigonus his General. Ant. Ch. 310. Ptolemy arriv'd in the Harbour of Boeotia (call'd the Deep) with the whole Fleet, and receiv'd from the Boeotians Two thou∣sand and Two hundred Foot, and Thirteen hundred Horse. He sent likewise for Ship∣ping from Oreum, and wall'd Salganeus in Boeotia near Chalchis. Sagonea, and there rendezvous'd his whole Army; for he was in good hopes that the Chalcideans would confederate with him, who were the only Eubeans that were Garison'd by the Enemy. But Cassander was jealous of Chalcis in Boeotia. P. 714. Chalcis, and therefore rais'd his Siege before Oreus, and sent for his Forces thither. Antigonus being inform'd that the Armies lay encamp'd one over-against another in Eubea, recall'd Medius with the Fleet into Asia; and forthwith got his Forces together, and with a swift March made for the Hellespont, with a purpose to pass over into Ma∣cedonia, that he might either seize upon it while Cassander was busie in Eubea, and the Country void of sufficient defence; or that by forcing him to come in with Aid for the defence of the Kingdom, he might thereby divert him from prosecuting the War in Greece, and necessitate him to endeavour the preservation of his Concerns nearer at home. But Cassander coming to understand what he design'd, left Plistarchus to guard Chalcis, and he himself march'd away wtth the whole Army, and took Oropus by Assault, and brought over the Thebans to be his Consederates, and enter'd into a Truce with the rest of the Boeotians; and having so done, he left Eupolemus to defend Greece, and return'd into Macedonia with his Head full of Care, concerning the Enemy's March into that Country. When Antigonus came to the Propontis, he solicited the Byzantines by his Ambassa∣dors to join with him as his Consederates; but it prov'd that there were there at the same time Agents from Lysimachus, treating with them not to engage in any thing either against him or Cassander. Whereupon the Byzantines resolv'd to sit quiet at home, and stand upon even Terms of Peace and Amity with both sides. This unlucky Accident giving a stop to Antigonus his further Progress in this Affair, Ant. Ch. 310 together with the approach of the Winter, he distributed his Soldiers in the Towns round about into their Winter-Quarters. In the mean time, the Corcyreans assisted the Apolloniates and them of Epidamnus, and upon Terms of Agreement sent away Cassander's Soldiers; and thereupon restor'd Apol∣lonia to their ancient Liberties, and Epidamnus they deliver'd up to Glaucias, King of the Illyrians. But Ptolemy, Antigonus his General, upon Cassander's return into Macedonia, and the Consternation Chalchis was in, had the City deliver'd up to him, and so freed the Chal∣cidains from receiving any further Garison; to the end every one might take notice, that Antigonus was sincere, and did really design to restore all the Greek Cities to their Liber∣ties: For it was a City of eery great Moment and Concern to such as were ambitious of gaining the Sovereignty of Greece, and valued a Place of Strength for that pur∣pose. Palemon likewise took Oropus, and deliver'd it up to the Boeotians, and made all Cassan∣der's The Acts of Po∣lemon in Greece. Soldiers Prisoners at War; and after he had brought in the Eretrians and Carystians to
join as Confederates, he led his Army into Attica, Demetrius Phalerius being then Chief Magistrate of the City. For those Athenians that desir'd to be restor'd to their ancient Laws, had not long before sent some privately to Antigonus to treat with him upon that account; and now being more resolv'd and encourag'd upon Ptolemy's drawing near to the Athens. Ant. Ch. 310. City, they forc'd Demetrius to make a Truce, and send an Agent to Antigonus, in order to treat of a League with him. Out of Attica Ptolemy. he march'd into Boeotia, and took the Citadel Cadmea, and freed the Thebans from that Garison. Thence he went forward into Phocis, and reducing several Cities there, he cast out the Garisons of Cassander in every Place where-ever he came. Then he invaded Locris; and because the Opuntians join'd with Cassander, he besieg'd them, and prest upon the Place with continual Assaults. About the same time the Cyrenians revolted from Ptolemy King of Aegypt, and besieg'd Ptolemy goes against Cyrene the Castle there so fiercely, as if they would presently have taken it; and when Messen∣gers came from Alexandria, persuading them to desist, they struck off their Heads, and fell to work against the Castle more fiercely than ever they did before. Ptolemy being exceedingly mov'd hereat, sent one Agis, a Captain of his, thither with an Army, and P. 715. withal a Navy to assist him by Sea, under the Command of Epenetus. Agis vigorously pursuing the War against those Rebels, took Cyrene by Storm, and committed the Au∣thors of this Sedition to Prison, and then sent them bound to Alexandria, and disarm'd the rest: And so having set things in order there (as he saw cause) return'd into Aegypt. Ptolemy having had this good Success at Cyrene, took Shipping, and with his Fleet pass'd over out of Aegypt into Cyprus, against those who rebell'd against their Kings; and having Ptolemy a∣gainst Cyprus. gotten Pygmalion (whom he found Corresponding with Antigonus) he put him to death. Then he took Praxippus King of the In Thessaly. Lapithi and Prince of In Arcadia. Cerynnia, who was suspected of a Revolt, and laid them fast: He took likewise Stasiecus, a petty King of the Malieans in Thessaly. Malieans, and destroying their City, remov'd the Inhabitants from thence to 24 Stath∣muses, every one of▪ which Theodotus says is 150 Fur∣longs. Paphos; which done, he made Nicocreon Commander over all Cyprus, and gave him the Cities, together with the Revenues of all the Kings which he had cast out of their Dominions, and then went with his Army into the Upper Syria, and sack'd the Cities Posideum and Potamos of the Carians. That done, he went with a flying Army into Celicia, and took Mallus, and sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves, and wasted all the Region thereabouts; and having stor'd all his Army with rich Plunder, sail'd back again to Cyprus. He so shar'd with his Soldiers in all Hazards and Dangers, that he stirr'd them up by his Example chear∣fully and readily to undergo all manner of Difficulties. Mean while, Demetrius, the Son of Antigonus, kept in Coelo-Syria, expecting the com∣ing of the Egyptians; but when he heard of the taking of so many Cities, he left Pithon to Command in those Parts, leaving his Corseletiers and Elephants with him, and he with his Horse and Companies of light-arm'd Soldiers hasted away with all speed toward Cilicia, to aid them that were in distress there; but coming too late, and finding the Ene∣mies all gone, he return'd speedily to his Camp again, spoiling many of his Horse by the way; for in six days time he made away from Mallus . Gees against Demetrius. Four and twenty days Journey by their ordinary Stages; so that through their immoderate Travel, none of their † Ser∣vants or Horse-boys were able to keep them company. Ptolemy therefore seeing all go every where as we would have it, for the present re∣turn'd into Aegypt. But not long after, being put on by Seleucus (for the hatred that he bore unto Antigonus) he resolv'd to march into Coelo-Syria, and there to try it out with Demetrius: Wherefore gathering all his Army together, he march'd from Alexan∣dria to Pelusium, having with him Eighteen thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, whereof some were Macedonians, and some hired Soldiers: As for the Egyptians, some Ant. Ch. 310. serv'd to carry their Darts and Weapons, and other Luggage of the Army, and some for Soldiers; and having pass'd the Desart from Pelusium, he encamp'd near the Old City of Gaza in Syria, not far from the Enemy. Demetrius, on the other side, call'd all his Army out of their Winter-Quarters, and appoin∣ted them to Rendezvous at Gaza, there to attend the Enemy's approach. His Friends indeed advis'd him not to sight with so Great a General, who had the advantage of a far more numerous Army; but he rejected their Council, and confidently prepar'd him∣self for Battel; tho' he was then but a mere Boy, and was to undertake so hazardous an Engagement without his Father. Calling therefore now the Soldiers as they stood at their Arms, he mounted an Ascent rais'd by Earth, and there stood as if he were in Amaze and Astonishment: Upon which, all the Soldiers cry'd out with one Voice, Be Courageous; and presently there was a deep silence before the Herald could command it:
For being that he had but newly taken upon him the Sovereign Command, none took any Offence at his Deportment, in relation either to Civil or Military Affairs, which is frequently the Lot of Old Captains, who have many times all their Faults ript up toge∣ther P. 716. at one time. For the Common People are not long pleas'd with the same Things; and what∣ever grows stale in the Use, has a pleasant Gust in the Change and Alteration. And besides the expectation of his coming to the Kingdom (his Father being now old) conjoin'd in his Succession both the Supreme Command and the Good-will of the People together. More∣over, he was a very proper and comely Person, and being clad in Royal Armour, ap∣pear'd Ant. Ch. 310. in that Majesty as possess'd the Beholders with Awe and Reverence, and rais'd up the Spirits of the Army with high Expectations of Great Things to come. He was likewise of a mild Disposition, becoming a new Prince and General, by which he wan the Love of all, insomuch as even those as were not as yet reduc'd into Orderly Regi∣ments, flock'd to him to receive his Commands, being much concern'd upon the account of his Youth, and the hazardous Battel that was presently to be fought. For he was not only to try the Fortune of War against a greater number of Men, but against the most Eminent and Expert Commanders of the Age, Ptolemy and Seleucus, who had been Captains under Alexander in all his Wars, and had been often Generals of their own Armies, never conquer'd to that day. Demetrius therefore, after he had with winning and obliging Expressions courted the The Battel be∣tween Ptolemy, Seleucus, and Demetrius at Gaza. Soldiers, and promis'd Rewards suitable to every Man's Merit, drew up the Army in Battalia. In the Left Wing (where himself intended to be) he plac'd first Two hundred choice Horse, amongst whom, with other of the Nobility, was Pitho, who had serv'd under Alexander, and had been made General of all the Forces by Antigonus, and Fellow-Partner with him in all his Concerns. In the Front he plac'd Three Regiments of Horse, and as many Flankers to support them: At a distance out from the Wing were Three other Regiments of Tarentines, to the end that Five hundred Horsemen with Lan∣ces, and a Hundred Tarentines, might be ready at hand as the King's Lifeguard. Next he plac'd Eight hundred Horse, which were call'd Associates; and after them Fif∣teen hundred out of several Nations; and before the whole Wing stood as a Guard Ant. Ch. 310. Thirty Elephants, lin'd with light-arm'd Men, of whom a thousand were Darters and Archers, and Five hundred Persian Slingers. And in this manner was the Left Wing drawn up, with which he intended to make the Onset: Then was rang'd the main Battel, consisting of Eleven thousand Foot, of whom Two thousand were Macedonians, and a Thousand Lycians and Pamphylians, and Eight thousand hir'd Soldiers. In the Right Wing he drew up the rest of the Horse, to the number of Fifteen hun∣dred, under the Command of Andronicus, who had Orders to keep in an oblique Line, and make a running Fight of it, still observing how it went with Demetrius. The rest of the Elephants, to the number of Thirteen, he plac'd before the main Battel of the Foot lining them with as many light-arm'd Men as were sufficient. And in this man∣ner Demetrius drew up his Army. As for Ptolemy and Seleucus, at the first they made it their Business to place their greatest Strength in their Left Wing, not knowing what the Enemy design'd: But being afterwards inform'd by their Scouts what was done, they forthwith so drew up, as that the greatest Strength being in their Right Wing, they might be the better able to engage with De∣metrius in the Left; and therefore in that Wing were drawn up Three thousand of the best Horse, amongst whom they themselves intended to charge. Before these were plac'd those who bore an artificial Palisado before them, sharp-pointed with Iron, and fa∣sten'd together with Chains, prepar'd against the Shock of the Elephants; for this being P. 717. drawn out in length, it was an easie matter by this means to put a stop to their further Career. In the Front of this Wing were plac'd light-arm'd Soldiers, who were comman∣ded to ply the Elephants and their Riders with Darts and Arrows as they came on. The Ant. Ch. 310. Right Wing being thus drawn up, and the rest of the Army so dispos'd as the present Oc∣casion at that time most requir'd, they led forth the Army with a great Shout towards the Enemy; who, on the other side, drawing down upon them, the Fight was begun by the Horse in the Fronts of both Wings, where the Demetrians had much the better; but within a little time after the Ptolemeans and Seleucians (having surrounded the Wing) made a fierce Charge with their whole Body; upon which (through the Resolution of both Parties) there follow'd a very sharp Engagement. Upon the first Onset they fought with their Lances, where many were kill'd, and as many wounded on both sides. Then they fell to it with their Swords, and there thronging together, thrust one another through, and fell in heaps together.
The Generals exposing themselves to the utmost Hazard, led on their Men, and en∣courag'd their Troops to stick to it like valiant Men. The Horse that were plac'd to guard the Wings, were all Brave and Gallant Men, and having their Commanders (who fought together with them) Eye-witnesses of their Valour, strove to outvie one another. And now the Fight between the Horse had been for a long time doubtful, when the E∣lephants (forc'd on by the Indians) made so terrible an Onset, as if it had been impossi∣ble for any to have stood before them: But when they came up to the Palisado, the Archers and Darters sorely gall'd both the Beasts and their Riders; and being still forc'd on forward and whipt up by the Indians, some of them stuck upon the sharp Points of the Palisado, with which (together with the multitude of Darts and Arrows that gall'd them) they were in that Pain and Torment, that they caus'd an horrible Tumult and Confusion. For these Creatures in plain and even Places bear down all before them, but in those that are Rough and Craggy, they are of no use or service, because of the ten∣derness of their Feet. Ptolemy therefore wisely foreseeing of what advantage this Pa∣lisado Ant. Ch. 310. would be, by that means frustrated the Rage and Fury of the Beasts. At length, most of the Indians that rid them being kill'd, all the Elephants were taken; upon which the greatest part of Demetrius his Horse were in such a Consternation that they forthwith fled; and he himself was left with a very few that attended him; but not being able with Demetrius routed. all the Arguments he could make, to persuade his Men to stand their Ground and not for∣sake him, he was forc'd likewise to retreat. A great part of the Horse that follow'd the other, retir'd in good Order, and kept themselves unbroken till they came to Gaza, so as that none of the Pursuers durst hastily fall upon them. For the Field being a large e∣ven Plain, they had the more Liberty to draw off in order and retreat in a form'd Body. Some likewise of the Foot, (who judg'd it the best course to forsake their Colours and look to themselves) cast away their Arms, and follow'd the Horse. About Sun-setting Demetrius. he pass'd by Gaza in Ju∣daea, where Sampson car∣ried away the Gates. Gaza; but some of the Horse left him and enter'd the City, to fetch out some Luggage. The Gates therefore being open, and the Streets full of Sumpter Horses, and all busie in leading and carrying out their Goods, there was such Disorder and Thronging at the Gates, that upon the approach of the Ptolimeans, none could get up to them to shut them to prevent their Entry; so that the Enemy breaking in, the City thus fell into the hands of Ptolemy. And this was the Issue of this Battel. Demetrius, without stop or stay, about Midnight came to Asdod in Ju∣daea, now a small Village. call'd Alzote. Azotus, having from the Place of Battel rid above Two hundred and seventy Furlongs. P. 718. Ant. Ch. 310. Thirty Mile. Thence he sent a Trumpet to beg the Bodies of the Dead, being very earnest to perform the last Office of right due to them that were slain. Many of his Nobility were there slain, amongst whom, the most eminent was Pitho, join'd in equal Commission with himself, and Beotus who had long liv'd with Anti∣gonus the Father, and was ever privy to all his Designs, and partaker of all his Councils. There were slain in this Battel on Demetrius his side, above This Five hundred should be Five thou∣sand as Plu∣tarch. Five hundred, of whom the greatest part was Horse, and the Chief of his Nobility; and Eight thousand and up∣ward were taken Prisoners. Ptolemy and Seleucus, not only granted him the dead Bodies, but sent him back his own Pavillion, with all the Furniture belonging to it, and all such Prisoners as were of his Houshold, free and without Ransom; withal letting him know, that they fought not with Antigonus for these things, but because he had not restor'd those Provinces to the Governors that were conquer'd by their joint Arms in the War first against Perdictas, and then against Eumenes; and for that after he had renew'd his League of Friendship with Seleucus, he had most Unjustly, and against all Right depriv'd him of the Province of Ba∣bylon. Other Prisoners Ptolemy sent into Egypt, with Orders to distribute them amongst the several Regiments in his Fleet. After Ptolemy had with great Pomp and Solemnity bury'd those that were slain in the Battel, he march'd with his Army against the Cities of Phenicia, besieging some, and per∣suading others to yield. Demetrius in the mean time (being no longer able to hold out) dispatch'd away a Messenger with Letters to his Father, to pray him to come away spee∣dily to his help; and he himself coming to Tripoli in Phenicia, sent for the Soldiers that were in Cilicia and elsewhere in Garisons remote and far distant from the Enemy's Quarters, to come to him. But Ptolemy keeping with his Army still in the open Field, march'd Ant. Ch. 310. into the Coasts of Sidon, and Encamping near Tyre, sent to Andronicus, Governor of the Garison there, to render up the City to him, making him large Promises both of Wealth and Honour. But he not only answer'd, That he would never betray the Trust which Antigonus and Demetrius had put in him, but also us'd many reviling Speeches against Pto∣lemy; but a little while after he was surpriz'd by a Mutiny of his own Soldiers, and fell into his Hands; and thereupon expected nothing but Death for his refusal to deliver up Ptolemy takes Tyre.
the City, and for his reviling Language: But Ptolemy not only forgot the Injury, but highly rewarded him, and took him into the number of his Friends, and honourably preferr'd him. For this Prince was of a most affable and gentle Disposition, and very Kind and Generous, which much contributed to the Increase of his Power, and the Advancement of his Honour and Reputation, and induc'd many upon that account to join with him, as his Allies and Confederates. For he honourably receiv'd Seleucus when he was cast out of Babylon, and made him and the rest of his Friends partners with him in that Plenty, and state of Prosperity that he himself enjoy'd: And therefore, when Seleucus desir'd some Forces from him to go along with him to Babylon, he very readily granted them, and with∣al promis'd he would assist him in every thing to his Power, till he had recover'd his former Government. In this Condition stood the Affairs of Asia at that time. In Europe, Telesphorus, Antigonus his Admiral, who then lay with the Fleet at Corinth, seeing how Ptolemy was preferr'd before him, and that all the Concerns of Greece were intrusted in his hands, accus'd Antigonus upon this Account, and deliver'd up to him those Ships he had with him. Then picking out so many of his Soldiers as were willing to join Ant. Ch. 310. with him in his designs, he began to play his own Pranks. For pretending to be at one with Antigonus, he enter'd Elis, and fortify'd the Citadel, and enslav'd the City. He robb'd likewise the Temple at Olympus, and took thence above Fifty Talents of Silver, wherewith he rais'd and hir'd Foreign Soldiers. And thus Telesphorus, out of Envy to the P. 719. Advancement of Ptolemy, became a Traytor to Antigonus. But Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in Greece, (as soon as he heard of the Defection of Telesphorus, and that he had seiz'd upon the City of the Elians, and robb'd the Temple at Olympus) march'd with an Army into Peloponnesus: And coming to Elis, raz'd the Ci∣tadel to the Ground, restor'd the Elians to their Liberty, and the Money to the Temple. Afterwards, he so far wrought upon Telesphorus, that he regain'd Cyllene, wherein Te∣lesphorus had put a Garison, and restor'd it to the Elians. In the mean time, while these things were in acting, the Epirots (Eacides their King The Epirots make Alcetas King. being dead) deliver'd up the Kingdom to Alcetas, who had been before him banish'd by his Father Arybilus. This Alcetas was an inveterate Enemy to Cassander, and therefore Ly∣ciscus, Cassander's General in Acarnania, march'd with an Army into Epirus, hoping he should easily depose him, the Affairs of the Kingdom being then scarce well settled. Lyciscus to this end Encamping at Cassopia, Alcetas sent his Sons, Alexander and Teucrus, Ant. Ch. 310. to all the Cities, to raise as many Soldiers as possibly they could; and he himself march'd forward with what Forces he had, and when he came near the Enemy, made an Halt, waiting for the coming up of his Sons. But Lyciscus, who far exceeded him in number, pressing upon him, the Epirots, in a great Terror and Amazement, ran over to the Enemy: Whereupon, Alcetas being thus forsaken, fled to Eurymenas, a City in Epirus; while he was closely besieg'd in this Place, in comes Alexander with an Aid to the Relief of his Father; upon which follow'd a sharp Engagement, in which many of Lyciscus his Men were cut off, amongst whom (besides other Persons of great account) were Micythus, a great Captain, and Lysander the Athe∣thenian, Cassander's Lord-Lieutenant of Leucadia. Afterwards, Dinias coming in to the Assistance of those thus worsted, there hapned a second Engagement, in which Alexander and Teucer being routed, they, together with their Father, fled to a strong Castle thereabout for shelter. Lyciscus presently took Eury∣menas, plunder'd it, and raz'd it to the Ground. Ant. Ch. 310. Cassander at this time hearing of the Defeat of his Forces, (but having no intelligence of the Success which follow'd) hasted away into Epirus to succour Lyciscus: But when he came to understand how well things had succeeded on his side, he made Peace, and en∣ter'd into a League of Friendship with Alcetas. Then with part of his Army he march'd into A City and Country upon the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea. Cassander goes against the A∣polloniates. Adria, in order to besiege the Apollonia, a City of Thrace. Apolloniates, who had cast out his Garison, and join'd with the Illyrians. But the Inhabitants were not at all affrighted, but having sent for aids from others that were their Confederates, they drew up in Battalia before their Walls: Upon which, there was a sharp Dispute for a long time together; but the Apolloniates o∣ver-powering the other in number put their Enemies to flight. Cassander therefore having lost many of his Men, and wanting Forces sufficient, and perceiving the Winter to draw on a pace, return'd into Macedonia. After his departure, the Leucas, a Pennsula near to the Ambra∣cian Glf, bor∣dering upon E∣pirus, call'd also Neritis. The City call'd Leucadia. Leucadians, assisted by the Corcyrians, drave out the Garison of Caessander. As for the Epirots, they were quiet under the Royal Government of Alce∣tas for a time; but when he grew more Severe and Tyranical, they Murder'd both him and his two Sons, Hesioneas and Nisus, who were but then young Children.
In Asia, Seleous, after the routing of Demetrius at Gaza in Syria, (receiving from Pto∣lemy no more than Eight hundred Foot, and Two hundred Horse) march'd towards Ba∣bylon P. 720. with that Confidence as to believe, that though he had no Forces at all with him, yet he should be able to go up into the Higher Provinces, only with his own particular Seleucus marches for Ba∣bylon   Numer, and gains the P∣v. Ant. Ch. 310. Friends and Servants; being verily persuaded, that the Babylonians (for the former Love and Affection they bare him) would readily come in and side with him; and that now he had a fair Opportunity to accomplish his Design, Antigonus being with his Army at a great distance from the Place. However, though he went on with such assuredness of Mind, yet his Friends that were with him, (seeing the inconsiderable Number of his Soldiers, and on the other hand the great Strength of his Enemies against whom he was marching, and the fulness of Pro∣vision, and number of the Confederates wherewith they were supply'd and furnish'd) were greatly discourag'd: Which Seleucus taking notice of, spoke to them to this effect: It becomes not the Captains and Fellow. Soldiers of Alexander, in the Expeditions of War, to confide only in the strength of Arms and confluence of Wealth, but in their Military Art and Prudence, through which he accomplish'd great and wonderful Things, by all for ever to be ad∣mir'd: But it is our Duty rather to believe the Gods who have assur'd us, that this Expedition shall be Prosperous and Successful. For he told them, That in Consulting the Oracle at The Tmple of Apollo at Dy∣dimus in Io∣nia, where the Priests and In∣halitants were call'd Bran∣chides Branchides, some considerable time before the God call'd him King; and that Alexander stood by him in his Sleep, and clearly discover'd to him the Royal Dignity, to which in due time he should be advanc'd; and further declar'd, That whatever was Great and Glorious amongst Men, was always to be attained by Hazards and Toil. And withal, carrying himself Fairly and Amicably to all his Soldiers he was honour'd by every body, and all were willing to run with him the Hazard of this desperate Enterprize. On then he march'd, and coming with them into Mesopotamia he there dealt with such Macedonians as he found dwelling in Carran, where Abraham so∣fourn'd. Carran, and some of them by Persuasions, and some of them by plain Force he drew to go along with him in this Expedition. As soon as Ant. Ch. 310. he enter'd into Babylon, the Inhabitants came in flocking to him, and offer'd him their Service; for he had before carry'd himself in the most obliging manner to all for the space of Four years together when he was Governor of the Province, thereby to gain the good will of the People, and to secure an Interest for himself, if at any time afterwards he should have an Occasion to contend for the Sovereign Command. Polyarchus also came in to him, who bare some kind of Office among them, with above a Thousand Men com∣pleatly arm'd. But they who stood for Antigonus, when they perceiv'd the general and irresistable Inclination of the Multitude towards him, fled all to the Castle, which was commanded by Diphilus; and Seleucus fell presently to besiege it, and having taken it by Force, deliver'd such Children and Friends of his as Antigonus (when Seleucus for fear fled away from Babylon into Aegypt) had there committed to Prison. This done, he fell to raising of Soldiers in the Country, and having bought Horses, distributed them among such as were fit to ride them. And withal, carrying himself with all Fairness and Affa∣bility towards all sorts; made them all ready to run any hazard with him, and so in a trice recover'd all his Government of Babylon. But afterwards, Nicanor, whom Antigo∣nus had made Governor of the Province of Media, march'd against him with Ten thou∣sand Foot, and Seven thousand Horse; and Seleucus without delay went out to meet him: Having with him in all a little above Three thousand Foot and Four hundred Horse; and passing the River Tigris, when he heard that the Enemy was not far off, he hid his Ant. Ch. 310. Men in the Fens there near at hand, purposing to set upon Nicanor at unawares; who when he came to the Bank of Tigris, and found no Enemy there, went and Encamp'd near P. 721. to a . Post-house of the Kings, little thinking the Enemy had been so near. But the Night following (through a careless Regard and Contempt of the Enemy) not keeping a due Watch Seleucus fell upon him, and rais'd a great Tumult in his Army: For the Persi∣sians putting themselves forward to fight, Evager their General, with sundry others of their Commanders were slain. After which Broil, the greater part of Nicanor's Army, what for the present Danger they were in, and what for the Disgust they had to Antigonus his Government, left him and came to the Service of Seleucus. Whereupon, Nicanor fearing lest at the next bout his Soldiers would deliver him up to Seleucus, fairly stole a∣way with some few of his friends, and fled through the Desart. Seleucus having by this means gotten a potent Army about him, and continu'd his fair Carriage to all Men as before, easily procur'd the Provinces of Media and Susa, and other Countries bordering thereup∣on, to come under his Subjection; and sent Ptolemy word how he had sped, having now gotten a full Royal Power and Majesty into his hands.
Ptolemy continu'd still in Coelo-Syria after the great Victory gain'd over Demetrius, whom Demetrius routs Celles, Ptolemy's General. he heard was return'd out of Cilicia, and lay encamp'd in the Upper Syria; whereupon, he sent one of his Nobility about him, call'd Celles (a Macedonian Born) with a great Army, Commanding him either to drive him out of every part of Syria, or to coop him up and tread him to dirt where he lay. While he was upon his March, Demetrius un∣derstanding by his Scouts, that Celles lay carelesly with his Army at Myus, leaving his Ant. Ch. 310. Carriages behind him, March'd away with a Company of Light-footed Lads, who tra∣vell'd all Night, and a little before Day fell in upon Celles his Camp, took it Without a stroke struck, and Celles himself pris'ner; by which Victory (it was judg'd) he was quit with them for the former Loss he had sustain'd. Yet because he thought Ptolemy himself was coming after with all his Army, he therefore pitcht his Camp in a place where he had a Bog on the one hand, and a Lough on the other. Demetrius writ Let∣ters of this his good Success to his Father Antigonus, wishing him either to send an Ar∣my speedily, or to come himself in Person into Syria. Antigonus was then at Cellnas in Phrygia, and having read the Letter, was wonderfully pleas'd with the News, both be∣cause the Victory was gotten by his own Son's Conduct (who was so young) and for that he had shewn himself a Man worthy to wear a Crown hereafter. Upon this News, he himself with his Army march'd out of Phrygia, and having pass'd over Mount Taurus in a few days time he joyn'd with Demetrius. Ptolemy hearing of the coming of Antigonus, call'd a Council of War, to advise whether it was better to stay where he was, and there to try it out with him in Syria, or to return in∣to Egypt and Fight with him from thence, as he had done before with Perdiccas? The re∣sult of the Council was, That he should not hazard himself by ingaging with an Army far more numerous than his own, and where there were such multitudes of Elephants, and all under the Command of a General never yet Conquer'd; and that it was much safer for him to fight in Egypt, where he would be better supply'd with Provision, then Ant. Ch. 310. the Enemy could be, and had places of Strength wherein he might confide. Deter∣mining therefore to leave Syria, before he went, he laid wast, and destroy'd the Prin∣cipal Ptolemy wasts Samaria, Jop∣pa, Gaza, &c. Cities he held there at that time in his Possession, as Achon in Syrophenicia, Joppa, and Samaria; and Gaza in Syria. Then taking along with him out of the Country, whatever he could drive or carry (loaden with Wealth) he return'd into Egypt. Antigonus, when he had without stroke stricken recover'd all Syria and Phenicia, took a Jouney into the Country of the Arabians, call'd the * Nabatheans; for thinking that they P. 722. Nabaioth of the Seed of Ishmael. never much favour'd his proceedings, he appointed one of his Nobility, call'd Atheneus, with Four thousand Foot, and Six hundred light Horse to fall in upon them, and to bring away what spoil he could out of their Country. It's worth our pains here to relate the Manners and Customs of these Arabians, for The Customs of the Arabians. the information of them that are ignorant; by the use of which Customs they have hi∣therto secur'd themselves and preserv'd their Liberty. They live in the plain and open Fields, calling that Desert their Country, wherein are neither Inhabitants, Rivers or Springs, whereby any Enemys Army can be reliev'd. It's a Law amongst them, nei∣ther to Sow, Plant, Build Houses, or Drink any Wine; and he that is discover'd to do any of these, is sure to Die for it. And the reason of this Law is, because they con∣ceive that those who are possess'd of such things, are easily (for fear of losing of what they have, or in hopes of gaining more,) forc'd to comply with the Will and Humour of those that are more powerful. Some of them breed up Camels; others imploy them∣selves in feeding of Sheep, roving to and fro in the Wilderness for that purpose. There are no few, indeed, of the Arabians, that though they give themselves to the Pasturage of Cattel in the Deserts, yet are far richer then the rest, but exceed not in number above Ant. Ch. 310. Ten thousand. For many of them use to carry Frankincense, Mirrh, and other rich Per∣fumes down to the Sea side, which they traffick for, and receive from them that bring them from Arabia the Happy. They highly prize and value their Liberty, and when any strong Armies invade them, they presently fly into the Wilderness, as to a strong Fort and Castle for refuge; for being no Water is there to be had, none can follow them through these Deserts: But as to themselves, they have a sure and safe Retreat, by the help of Earthen Pots and Vessels hid in the Earth prepar'd before hand. For the Soil is a fat Clay, under which lies a soft Stone, in which they dig great Caves very nar∣row at the entrance, but enlarging by degrees as they grow in depth, till they come at length to that bigness, as to be a hundred Foot Square; these Caves they fill up to the Mouths with these Vessels fill'd with Rain-Water; then they lay all even with the rest of the Ground, and leave certain Marks where to find the place known to none but them∣selves. For the Cattel (driven away along with them) they take so much Water as
may serve them for Three Days, lest while they are in their flight in dry and parch'd places, they should be ever and anon put to a stop by the continual watering of their Cattle. Their Food is Flesh, Milk and Roots. For Drink they have abundance of wild Ho∣ney, and a kind of Pepper growing upon some Trees, both which they mix together in Water for that purpose. There are likewise other kinds of Arabians, some of whom imploy themselves in Hus∣bandry, Ant. Ch. 310. Selling of Corn, with other Provisions, and agree with the Syrians in all other things, except dwelling in Houses. And such were then the Customs of these Arabi∣ans. Near at hand there was a Publick Meeting of these The Naba∣theans. Arabians, whither all bordering Nations us'd to come, as to a common Mart to sell off to them their Commodities, and to buy from them the Merchandize of their Country. To this Mart the Nabatheans now went, leaving their Wealth and Old Men with their Wives and Children upon the top of a Rock. The place was very strong, but Un-Wall'd, and distant Two Days Journey from the Countrey that was inhabited. Atheneus watching his opportunity, march'd speedily to this Rock; and having march'd out of the Province of Edom the space of Above Two hundred and threescore Miles. P. 723. Two thousand and two hundred Furlongs in Three Days and Three Nights, late at Midnight (the Arabians knowing nothing of his coming) possess'd himself of the Place; of the Soldiers there sound, some he put to the Sword, and others he made Pri∣soners, and such as were wounded he there left behind him; and carry'd away the great∣est part of their Mirrh and Frankincense, with Five hundred Talents of Silver, and stay∣ing there * not past Three Hours, for fear of the Countreys coming in upon him, re∣turn'd Above the time of a Watch. presently again. And now he and his Soldiers having gone Two hundred Fur∣longs, could go no further for very weariness, and therefore rested there, keeping nei∣ther Watch nor Ward, as presuming that the Country People could not reach thither in Two or Three Days after. But the Arabians receiving intelligence by some that saw the Army, presently got together, left the Fair and return'd to the Rock; where being more fully inform'd by the wounded Men, of what was done, they incontinently pur∣su'd the Greeks with Might and Main. And because Atheneus his Men kept no Watch, and after their long Journey lay weary and fast asleep, some of the Prisoners stole away from them; from whom, when their Country-men (whom they met) had learnt how the Enemies Camp lay, they hasted to the place, and coming upon them at Three of the Clock in the Morning, fell into their Trenches, to the number of Eight Thousand of Atheneus kill'd and most of his Men by the Nabathe∣ans. them, and cut the Throats of some snorting in their Cabins; others that made resistance they slew. To make short, they utterly destroy'd all their Foot, only Fifty of their Horse got away, and they wounded too for the most part. And thus Atheneus, tho' he began well, yet through his own imprudence lost all in the close. And therefore some, not without Cause, are of Opinion, that it's easier to improve Misfortunes to the best advantage, than to carry it with Prudence under extraordinary Successes. For the first through Fear of what further mischief may afterwards follow, puts a Man on to a more exact and careful management of his Concerns; but by prosperous Adventures Men are many times flatter'd into gross negligence and security. The Nabatheans having thus reveng'd themselves of their Enemies, and recover'd their Goods again, return'd to the Rock; and by a Letter of theirs, written to Antigonus in Syriac Characters, complain'd of Atheneus, and the wrong he had done them, and excus'd themselves. To whom Antigonus wrote back again cunningly, telling them, that Athe∣neus Ant. Ch. 310. was well enough serv'd by them; blaming him for what he had done, and assuring them he had given him no such Orders. This he did to cover what he was really de∣signing against them, and to make them the more secure, that thereby he might with more ease effectually accomplish what he was in contriving. For without some Strata∣gem it was no easie matter to overcome Men that wander'd up and down continually here and there, and had the Wilderness for an inaccessible Shelter and Refuge at the last. The Arabians upon the receit of the Letter rejoyc'd that they seem'd at present to be free'd from their great fears; but yet they did not wholly rely upon his Letter; But being between Hope and Fear, plac'd Spies upon Watch-Towers and other high pla∣ces, whence they might easily see afar off, when any Enemy made an incursion into Arabia; and they themselves put all things in readiness, waiting for the issue and event.
But Antigonus having for a time carry'd himself as a Friend towards these Barbarians, Demetrius sent against them. now judg'd he had a fair opportunity to set upon them, having brought them, as it were, to his bait. To this end therefore he chose out of all his Army, Four thousand Foot light Arm'd, and the swiftest of Foot he could find, and added to them Four thousand Horse, willing them to take with them as many Days Victuals as they could well carry, and such as needed no Cooking; and assigning Demetrius his Son to Command them, he Ant. Ch. 310. sent them away about the first Watch of the Night with this Charge, that he should by all means be reveng'd of them. He therefore Travell'd Three Days Journey through the Desert, hastning to fall upon them at unawares. But their Scouts perceiving the first approach of the Enemy towards their Borders, immediately gave notice of their coming to the Country: whereupon they presently got them to their Rock, where there was but one way up, and that made by Art, and there laid all their Baggage, and left a suf∣ficient P. 724. Guard to keep it; and the rest went and drove away their Cattle, some to one place and some to another in the Desert. Demetrius when he came to the Rock and saw all the Cattle driven away, presently went to Besiege it: but they that were within man∣fully defending it, by the advantage of the place, had all the day long the better of it; so that Demetrius was forc'd at last to draw off. The next Day when he approach'd again with his Forces to the Rock, one of the Barbarians cry'd out: What would'st thou have, O King, DEMETRIUS? or what has provok'd thee to make War upon us who inha∣bit the Wilderness, and in places where there's neither Water, Corn nor Wine, nor any thing else which you cannot be without. But as for us, who can upon no terms endure to be Slaves, we betake our Selves to a Country destitute of all things that are of abso∣lute necessity to all other Men; and we chuse to live a solitary Life altogether, like the Beasts of the Field, without doing the least harm to any of you. Therefore we in∣treat you Demetrius, and your Father, that you injure not us, but that you would ac∣cept of some Presents, and march away with the Army from us, and receive the Naba∣theans Ant. Ch. 310. into the number of your Friends for the time to come. Neither can you possibly stay here many days (though you had never so great a mind to do it) for want of Water and all other necessaries; neither can you ever force us to change our course of Life, tho' perhaps you may take some poor dispirited Pris'ners who will never endure to be brought under the Power of other Laws and Rules of Living After this was said, Demetrius drew off his Army, and wish'd them to send Ambassa∣dors to him to Treat of these Matters. Hereupon the Arabians sent their oldest Men, who (using the same Arguments with those before related) perswaded Demetrius to accept of such Gifts as were of greatest Esteem and Value among them, and so put an end to the War. Upon Hostages therefore given him, and such Gifts as were agreed upon between them, he drew off Almost For∣ty Miles. from the Rock, and so removing with his Army Three hundred Furlongs off, he encamp'd near to the Lake Asphaltes, or the Dead Sea, The Lake of So∣dom. Asphaltes; the nature of which it's not fit to pass over without giving some account of it. It lies in the midst of the Province of Edom; and stretches forth in length Above Sixty Miles. Joseph. lib. bellor. Jud. 5. C. 5. says it is 580 Furlongs long, and 150 broad Five hundred Furlongs: but in breadth it is but Threescore. The Water is very bitter and stinking, so that neither Fish, nor any other thing us'd to the Water can live in it. And though many remarkable Rivers of very sweet Water empty themselves into it, yet it re∣mains as corrupt and unsavory, both as to Tast and Smell as ever it did before. Every Year rises out of the middle of it great massy pieces of Bitumen and Pitch, sometimes big∣ger then Three Every Ple∣thra is 100 Foot. Plethras, and sometimes a little less then one. And upon that account the Barbarous Inhabitants call the larger pieces Bulls, and the less Calves. These pieces of Pitch and Brimstone floating upon the Water, seem at a distance to be as so many Islands: There are evident Signs that sorgoe and give notice of the casting up of this Bituminous Matter, at least Twenty Days before. For a horrid smell of Brimstone and Pitch infects the Air round about the Lake at many Furlongs distance; and all Metals, whether of Gold, Silver or Copper near the place, change their natural Colour, which presently returns again as soon as the Brimstone is exhal'd. The places bordering upon it are so burning hot (by reason of the Sulphur and Brimstone under ground) and cast forth such an horrible stench, that the Inhabitants are very unhealthy, and short liv'd: yet the Country thereabouts being water'd with many pleasant Rivers and refreshing Springs, bears abundance of Palm-Trees; and in a certain Vale near to this place grows that they call The Balm of Gilead. P. 725. Balm, from which they raise a great Revenue; inasmuch as this Plant grows in no other part of the World beside; and is of excellent use amongst Physitians for the healing and curing of Wounds, and other Distempers. The Inhabitants on both sides this Lake, are so earnest to carry away this Brimstone, that they fight one with nother; and they bring it off in a strange manner without Shipping. For they cast
in huge Bundles of Butrushes fastned close together, upon which Three or more of them place themselves, two of which ply the Oars that are fastn'd to the Bulrushes, and the third carrys a Bow and Arrows to defend themselves against such as attempt to make up upon them from the other side, or that offer them any violence. Assoon as they come to the Brimstone they get upon it, and hew it in pieces with Axes, as pieces of stone out of a soft Rock, and so loading the Bulrish Boat, they row back. If any fall into the Water through the deficiency of the Boat, yet he never sinks as in other waters, tho' he knows not how to swim, but lies upon the water as if he were the best swimmer in the World. For this Lake naturally bears any thing that has either a vegetative or an animal Life, except such things as are solid, and seem to be without Pores, as Silver, Gold, Lead, or the like; and these like∣wise are much longer and slower in sinking than when they are cast into other waters. And this profit and advantage the Barbarians reap from it; they Trans∣port this Pitch into Egypt and there sell it for the use of embalming of the Dead; for if they do not mix this with other Aromatick Spices, the Bodies cannot be pre∣serv'd long from putrefaction. Antigonus at the Reign of Demetrius having heard the Relation of his Voiage blam'd him for his making Peace with the Nabatheans, saying that those barbarous people having so escapt would thereupon grow more insolent than before, concluding that they were not favour'd out of love or compassion of the Conqueror, but in dispair of the Conquest; but he commended him for discovering the Lake Asphaltes, seeing that from thence he Ant. Ch. 310. might raise some yearly Revenue to himself, and made Hieronimus Cardianus the Historian his Treasurer for that Revenue, and commanded him to build Ships and gather together all the Bitumen, or liquid Brimstone that could be gotten out of that Lake: But Anti∣gonus in the event was frustrated of his hope; for the Arabians coming together to the number of Six thousand Men set upon them as they were in their Ships, gathering this Brimstone, and shot them almost all to death with their Arrows; whereby Antigonus lost all hopes of making any standing Revenue that way, and forbore all further pro∣secution of that design both upon the account of the miscarriage already, and likewise for that he had matters of greater weight and concern then in his head. For about that time a Courrier came, and brought Letters to him from Nicanor, Go∣vernor of Media, and others, how Seleucus was return'd and prosper'd in those parts: Whereupon Antigonus being much concern'd for the upper Provinces, sent his Son Demetrius with Five thousand Macedonian Foot, and Ten thousand Mercenaries, and Four thousand Horse with charge that he should march to the very Walls of Babylon, and having recover'd that Province should from thence march down to the Sea. Demetrius hereupon departed from Damascus in Syria, and went vigo∣rously on to fulfil his Fathers Command. But Patrocles, whom Celeucus had made President of Babylon, so soon as he heard that Demetrius was falling into Mesopotamia, not daring to stay his coming (because he had but a smal power about him) com∣manded the rest to leave the City, and that passing the Euphrates they should flee some into the Deseart, others over the Tigris into the Province of Susa, and to the The Red Sea in the Greek but mistook. Ant. Ch. 310. Persian Sea; and he himself with a company which he had about him trusting in the Barrs of the Rivers and Dikes of the Country thereabouts, instead of so many Fortresses and Bulwarks for his defence, kept himself still within the Bounds of his own Government, and cast about how to intrap his Enemy, sending ever and anon Tidings to Seleucus in Media how how things went with him, and desiring aid to be speedily sent to him. Demetrius when he came to Babylon and found the City it self void of Inhabitants, fell P. 726. presently to besiege the Forts and Castles that were therein,; and having taken one of them, gave the spoil thereof to his Soldiers: But having besieg'd the other for some days together, in hast, he departed, leaving Archelaus, one of his trusty friends, to maintain the Siege with Five thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse; and himself, seeing the time run out, which his Father had appointed him to finish his work in; return'd with the rest of the Army into the lesser Asia. While those things were acting, the Wars between the Romans and the Samnites con∣tinu'd still in Italy, wherein there were daily excursions into one anothers Territories, Besieging of Cities and Incamping of Armies on both sides: For the Contest between the most warlike Nations of Italy was, which should gain the Empire and Sovereign Wars in Italy. Command of the whole, upon which account many great Battles were fought. At length the Consuls of Rome with a part of their Forces Incampt in the face of the Enemy, watching for a fit opportunity to fall upon them, by which means they pre∣serv'd their Consederate Cities from annoyance and disturbance from the Enemy. With Ant. Ch 10
the rest of the Army Quintus Fabius the Dictator took Fretomanum, and carri'd away the persons of greatest quality that were Enemies, to the Romans, to the number of Two hundred and upwards, and brought them to Rome, and expos'd them as a publick Spectacle in the Forum; and when he had scourg'd them, according to the Roman Custom, cut off their Heads. He made likewise an inroad into the Enemies Territories, and took Celia and the Cittadel of A City in Campania in Italy. Nota, with abundance of Spoil, and divided a great part of the Country by Lot among the Soldiers; the Romans hereupon incourag'd with these successes which fell out according to their hearts desire, sent a Colony into the Island call'd Pontiae In∣sulae in the Tuscan Sea Plin. lib. 3. c. 6. Porcia an Island in the same Sea call'd commonly Porce. The Acts of A∣gathocles in Sicily. Ant. Ch. 310. Pontia. As for Sicily, after that Agathocles had made Peace with all the Sicilians, except the Messenians the Refugees of Syracuse, all flockt to Messina, because they saw that to be the only City that stood out against him. Agathocles therefore with all speed made it his business to break their Confederacy, and to that end sent away Pasiphilus his General with an Army to Messina, with private instructions to do what he thought fit, and most agreeable to the circumstances of Affairs as he should find them; hereupon he enter'd the Country on a suddain, and after he had taken many Prisoners, and got much spoil, he Solicited the Messenians to Peace and Amity, and that they would not suffer themselves so to be led aside as to join with the implacable Enemies of Agathocles. Upon which the Messenians hoping to extricate themselves out of the War without Blows, cast out all the Syracusians Fugitives, and receiv'd Agathocles with his Army into the City; who at the first carri'd himself very courteously and obligingly towards all, and courted them to admit those Exiles that were in his Army, (and had been by them according to Law formerly banish'd) into the Freedom and Liberties of the City. But afterwards he sent for such out of Tauromenium and Messina as formerly had oppos'd his Government, and put them all to death, to the number of Six hundred; for intending to make War upon the Carthaginians, he resolv'd to rid himself of every thing that lookt like an Enemy in Sicily: The Messenians therefore seeing their chief Citizens cut off that oppos'd the Tyrant, and that they themselves had driven those strangers out of the City that wish'd them so well, and that would have been their main strength against him, and had been forc't to receive those that had been formerly condemn'd for their notorious Crimes, much repented themselves of what they had done; but out of fear of the power of the Conqueror they were forc'd to stoop. Thence he mov'd in the first place towards Agrigentum, with design to make a prey P.  also of this City: But because the Carthaginians were there lately arriv'd with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, he desisted and left off that project, but wasted and harrass'd the Territories of the Carthaginians, and took some of their Forts and Castles by Storm, and gain'd others by surrender. Among these Turmoiles Dinocrates, Captain of the Syracusian Exiles, sent to desire Aid of the Carthaginians before Agathocles had brought all Sicily under his own Power and Soveraign Command; he himself receiv'd all those Exiles which the Messenians had Ant. Ch. 310 banish'd the City, and having now a very great Army, sent Nymphodorus one of his Trusty Friends with part of the Army to the City of the Centorippians: For this place being a Garrison of Agathocles, some of the Citizens had undertaken to betray it, upon condition they should be suffer'd to govern according to their own Laws. Upon this incouragement therefore breaking into the City in the night, the chief Com∣manders of the Garrison presently took the Alarum, and kill'd both Nymphodorus and all the rest that had enter'd within the Walls. Agathocles made use of this as an occasion and ground to accuse the Centorippians of Contrivances against his Government, and cut the Throats of all those that he look'd upon to be the Ringleaders of the Defection. While he was thus imploy'd the Carthaginians enter'd the Port at Syracuse with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, but all that they did there was the sinking of two Transport Ships (one of which belonged to the Athenians) and cut off the Hands of all those that were on board: Which was lookt upon as a piece of extream Cruelty towards those that never offer'd them the least Injury; and this God made presently to appear; For soon after some Ships that were forc'd from the rest of the Fleet about Brutta, fell into the hands of Agathocles, where those Carthaginians that were taken were serv'd the same sawce with those that were by them taken Prisoners before. But Dinocrates Commander of the Exiles having with him above Three thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse, seiz'd upon Or, Galatina Galaria (as it is call'd) invited thither by the Inhabitants, and cast out those that sided with Agathocles, and then Encamp'd before the Walls of the City.
Agathecles presently sent against him Pasiphilus and Demophilus with Five thousand Men, who fought with the Refugees; whose Captains were Dinocrates and Philonides, who com∣manded separately in the two Wings. The Battel was doubtful for a long time together, while both Armies obstinately stood to it Tooth and Nail: But Philonides, one of the Cap∣tains, being slain, that Wing fled, and Dinocrates was thereupon forc'd likewise to give Ground, and Pasiphilus kill'd many of them in the Pursuit, and recover'd Galaria, and put to Death the Authors of the Defection. Agathocles receiving Intelligence of what was done, resolv'd to fall upon the Carthagi∣nians Ant. Ch. 310. with his whole Army, who had then possess'd themselves of the Hill in Geloa, call'd That is, Wick∣ed. See p. 729. Emes. To that end, without any further Delay he made up to them, and as soon as he came near, offer'd them Battel, being puff'd up with the Success of his late Victory. But the Barbarians durst not engage, and thereupon (supposing he was absolute Master of the Field without sighting) he return'd to Syracuse, and adorn'd the chiefest Temples there with the Spoils. And these were the Actions of this Year as far forth as is needful for us to give an Account. CHAP. VII. Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, make Peace with Antigonus. Cassander murders Rhoxana and her Son. The Governors take the Stile of Kings upon them. The Carthaginians raise Forces against Agathocles. Four thousand Geloans murder'd by Agathocles. The Battel between Agathocles and Amilcar the Car∣thaginian at Himera. Agathocles routed. Several Cities revolt from Aga∣thocles. WHen Simonides was Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and the Romans had created Mar∣cus Olymp. 117. 2. Ant. Ch. 309. Cassander, &c. mak s Peace with Antigo∣nus. P. 728. Valerius and Publius Decius Consuls, Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, made Peace with Antigonus, the Form of which was put into Writing, and contain'd the Terms following: That Cassander should be the Sovereign Lord of all in Europe, till Alexander the Son of Rhoxana came of full Age: That Lysimachus should have the chief Command in Thrace: Ptolemy should enjoy the Sovereign Power in Egypt, and the bordering Cities in Arabia and Africa: That Antigonus should be Lord of all Asia; And the Greeks should Govern according to their own Laws. But these Conditions they observ'd not long; but every one took one Occasion or other to incroach upon more than his Part came to. Cassander seeing that Alexander the Son of Rhoxana now grew up towards Man's Estate, and hearing how it was the Discourse of some throughout all Macedonia, That it was now Rhoxana and her Son mur∣der'd. fit the young Man should be freed from his Prison, and assume the Government of his Father's Kingdom into his own hands; out of fear of being supplanted, commanded Glaucias the Keeper to murder both Rhoxana and the King, and to hide their Bodies when he had done, and by all means possible conceal their Deaths. This he effectually executed, and so by this means Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolemy, and Antigonus himself, were freed from all Grounds of Fear upon the account of the King. For now all the Seed Royal being extinct, and no Successor remaining, every one of the Captains that had possess'd themselves of Provinces or Cities, took upon themselves the Titles and The Captains take the Title of Kings. Stiles of Kings; and every one claim'd the Province, of which he was Governor, as a Conquer'd Kingdom. And thus stood the Affairs in Asia, Europe, Greece, and Mace∣donia. In Italy, the Romans march'd with a great Body of Horse and Foot against Pollitium, a City of the Marucci; where they remov'd part of the Citizens, and made them a new Colony, giving them Interamna (as it's call'd) to inhabit. Ant. Ch. 309. Carthaginians raise Forces a∣gainst Aga∣thocles. In Sicily, the Power of Agathocles increas'd every day, his Forces growing stronger and stronger: Whereupon the Carthaginians being inform'd, that he had gain'd almost all the Towns and Cities through the Island, and that their Captains and Commanders there were not able to deal with him, they resolv'd to pursue the War with more Vi∣gour. To this end they forthwith provided a Fleet of a Hundred and thirty Sail of Men of War, and made Amilcar (a Person of eminent Quality) General. and deliver'd to him Two thousand Soldiers rais'd out of the City, amongst whom, many were Men of Note: Out of Afric, Ten thousand; from Tyrrhenia, a Thousand Mercenaries and Two
hundred Charioteers, and a Thousand Slingers from the Baleary Islands. They provided likewise a great Treasure, all sorts of Weapons, store of Corn, and all other Things ne∣cessary for carrying on the War, as they had occasion to use. And now when the whole Fleet had hois'd up Sail and were come into the open Sea, on a sudden a violent Storm arose, which sunk Sixty of the Gallies, and broke in pieces Two hundred of the Ships loaden with Corn and Provision. The rest of the Fleet, after much Hardship at Sea, with much ado got into Sicily. Many of the most eminent Men of Carthage were lost at this time, which occasion'd a publick Lamentation in that City. For when any Mis∣fortune happens to that Place greater than ordinary, their Custom is to cover the Walls Ant. Ch. 309. with black Cassocks or Cloaks. Amilcar the General, after he was landed, muster'd those that were sav'd from the Storm; and to supply those that were lost, listed Foreign Mercenaries, and rais'd others from among the Confederates throughout all Sicily, whom he join'd with the rest of the Forces that were there before; and carefully providing every thing that was necessary for the War, he kept the Army in the Field, having under his Command about Forty thousand Foot, and near Five thousand Horse. Having therefore in a short time recruit∣ed himself, (and being accounted a Man of great Reputation for Honesty and Integrity,) he both reviv'd the Courage of the Confederates, and in no small measure struck a Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies. On the other side, Agathocles perceiving that he was far overpower'd by the Carthagi∣nians in Number of their Forces, concluded, that many of the Forts and Castles, and those Cities and Towns that bore him a Grudge, would revolt to the Enemy; especial∣ly P. 729. he fear'd the City of the Geloans, because he heard all the Enemies Forces were encamp'd in their Territories: And besides, no small Detriment befel him at this time in his Fleet, for about Twenty Sail then at Sea together, with their Men, all fell into the Hands of the Carthaginians. However, he conceiv'd it fit to put a Garison into the Place for its Secu∣rity, but durst not bring any Forces openly into the City lest the Geloans should prevent him, who had not then at any time before any Occasion offered them to rebel: And so by that means he might come to A , Cast away. lose a Town that had been very useful and serviceable to him. Therefore (to prevent Suspicion) he sent into the City Soldiers by degrees, a few at a time, (as if they had come there for other Purposes,) till he had got so many into the Town as far exceeded the Citizens in Number. And then a while after he came thither himself, and charg'd the Geloans with a traiterous design to revolt: However, whe∣ther this were true or not, or that they were falsly accus'd by the Exiles, or that his De∣sign was to scrape and get together what Money he could; he put to Death above Four Four thousand Geloans mur∣der'd by Aga∣thocles. thousand of the Geloans, and confiscated all their Estates; and threaten'd all the rest with Death that did not bring forth all their Money, whether Silver or Gold, coin'd or un∣coin'd. Whereupon all (out of fear of this thundring Edict) forthwith obey'd his Command; whereby he heap'd together a vast Treasure, and became a Terror to all his Subjects. And though he was judg'd to deal too severely and cruelly with the Geloans, yet he order'd them to be decently buri'd without the Walls; and then leaving the City with a strong Garison, encamp'd with his Army over-against the Enemy. The Carthagi∣nians possess'd the Hill Ecnomen, where formerly stood the Castle of Phaleris, as is reported, where they say the Tyrant had the Brazen Bull contriv'd to torment Offenders, by put∣ting Fire under it, thereby causing it to grow scorching hot by degrees. And therefore, by reason of this horrid Cruelty executed upon poor miserable Creatures, the Hill was call'd The wicked Place. Ecnomen. Agathocles possess'd himself of another Castle of Phaleris over-against them, which he call'd Phalerius: Between both Armies lay a River, which was as a De∣fence and Bulwark to both sides. There was an ancient Prophecy, That a great Battel should be fought, and Multitudes of Men destroy'd about this Place; and being that it Ant. Ch. 309. was uncertain on which side the Slaughter should mainly fall, out of a superstitious Awe of the Gods, the Armies were more backward and slow to ingage; and therefore nei∣ther Party for a long time durst pass the River with their whole Forces, till a sudden and unexpected Occasion forc'd them to fight. For the Africans making a sudden Incursion upon the Enemy, stirr'd up Agathocles to do the same: For when the Greeks were driving away their Cattel, and some Carriage. Horses and other Beasts out of the Camp, some sally'd out from among the Carthaginians to pursue them. But Agathocles foreseeing what The Battel be∣tween Agatho∣cles and Amil∣car at Hime∣ra. the Enemy would do, had before laid an Ambuscado of stout and resolute Men near the River, who, as soon as the Carthaginians had pass'd the River, and were in pursuit of those that were driving away the Cattel, rose out of the Ambush, and fell upon them as they were then in Disorder, and easily routed them and put them to flight. While the Barba∣rians were thus hew'd down, and flying to their Camp, Agathocles looking upon it now
as a sit time to ingage, led forth his whole Army against the Enemy; and falling upon them on a sudden, presently fill'd up a part of their Trench and cut through their Breast-work, and so forc'd their Camp. The Carthaginians amaz'd with this sudden Attack, ha∣ving no time to put themselves in order of Battel, fell in as Fortune led them, and ingag'd the Enemy in the best manner they could: And in regard the hotest Work was near the An. Ch. 309. Trench, the Ground all thereabout was strew'd with dead Carkasses; for the chiefest of the Carthaginians made to the Defence of that Place where they saw the Camp enter'd. P. 0. On the other hand, the Agathocleans incourag'd by the happy Success of their Attempt, and supposing they should put an end to the War by this one Battel, press'd resolutely upon the Barbarians: Amilcar therefore perceiving that his Men were too weak, and that the Grecians were continually pouring in more Men into the Camp, brings up a Thousand Slingers of the Baliary Islands, who wounded many by multitude of great Stones out of their Slings, and kill'd many that were forcing into the Camp, and broke in pieces the Shields and Armour of many of their Assailants. For these Men being us'd to cast Stones of Mina Weight. Three Pound Weight, were always very serviceable, and contributed much in several Battels to the gaining of the Victory, as being those that were diligently taught and well exercis'd in the Art of Slinging from their very Childhood. And now at this time they gain'd the Point, driving the Grecians back again beyond the Out-works of the Camp. But Agathocles broke into it in other places; and just as the Camp was forc'd, unexpectedly arriv'd Succours from Carthage, which again reviv'd the Spirits of the Carthaginians, and those in the Camp fought the Enemy in the Front, and the new Sup∣plies hem'd the Greeks in the Rear, and hew'd them down, so as the Fortune of the Day Agathocles routed. turn'd suddenly and unexpectedly. For the Grecians fled outright, some to the River Himera, and others to their own Camp, which was About 6 miles. Forty Furlongs distant; and being a Plain and Champain Country, they were pursu'd with no fewer than Five thousand of the Barbarian Horse, so that the Plain all along was cover'd with dead Bodies, the River contributing much to the Destruction of the Greeks. For the pursuit being about Noon, Ant. Ch. 309. and in the Dog-Days, many of them that fled were so parch'd with Thirst, by the Heat of the Weather and the Fatigue of their Flight, that they greedily swill'd themselves with salt Water, insomuch that as many (that had not the least Hurt) were found dead near the River as were kill'd by the Sword in the Pursuit. There were kill'd of the Bar∣barians in this Battel about Five hundred, but no fewer than Seven thousand of the Greeks. Agathocles being thus grievously defeated, after he had receiv'd all those that had escap'd, burnt his Camp and went to Gela. But he had caus'd it to be rumour'd abroad, that he was gone strait away for Syracuse. It happen'd that Three hundred African Horse then in the Country fell in among some of Agathocles his Soldiers, who told them, that Aga∣thocles was gone back to Syracuse, and thereupon the Horsemen enter'd Gela as Friends: But being thus deluded, they were all shot to Death by Darts: Yet Agathocles shut not himself up in Gela, because he could not get safe to Syracuse, but that he might divert the Carthaginians from Syracuse to the Besieging of Gela, that so by that means the Syracusians might have leisure enough to get in their Harvest, while he protracted the time at Gela. Amilcar indeed at the first intended to have besieg'd Gela; but hearing that there was there a strong Body of Men to oppose him, and that Agathocles was furnish'd with plenty of all things necessary, he laid aside that design, and made his approaches to the Forts and Ca∣stles, and had them all surrender'd to him; and to gain the good Opinion of the Sicilians, Several Cities revolt from A∣gathocles. Ant. Ch. 309. he carry'd himself Courteously and Obligingly towards all. The Camareans, Leontines, Cata∣neans and Tauromeneans, sent continually Ambassadors, and made their Applications to the Carthaginians. And a little time after, the Messenian. and Abacenians, and many other Cities who before were at variance amongst themselves, all went over to Amilcar; such was the Zeal of the Common People after the late Defeat, through the Hatred they bore against the Tyrant. But Agathocles led away all the Forces that were yet left him, to Syracuse, and there re∣pair'd the ruinous Parts of the Walls, and got in all the Corn and Fruits out of the Fields; and now contriv'd to leave a strong Garison for the Defence of the City, and to transport the Power and Strength of the Army into Africa, with an intent to draw the War out of P. 731. the Island into the Continent. We shall therefore, as we at first design'd, begin the fol∣lowing Book with the passing of Agathocles into Africa.
BOOK XX. THose who stuff their Histories with long and tedious Harangues, or are ever P. 3. PREFACE. and anon setting forth their Matter with Rhetorical Orations; are, not with∣out just Cause to be blam'd. For besides, that it interrupts and cuts off the natural Course of the History, by an unseasonable Introduction of set and contriv'd Speeches, it likewise gives an unpleasant Check to the earnest Expectation of such as are eager to know the Issue of the Matters of Fact. Yet it's no ways to be dis∣approv'd for such as desire to be cry'd up for Eloquent Orators, to compose publick O∣rations and Speeches made by Ambassadors, and Panegyricks of Praise and Dis∣praise, and such like. For they that manage both Parts well and distinctly in a modest Stile, are justly to be prais'd and commended in both kinds of the Discourse. But there are some who so over-abound in Rhetorical Flourishes, that they make their whole History but as an Appendix (as it were to the other). For such tedious manner of Writing, is not only troublesome, but in this respect likewise is to be condemn'd, That although the Writer seem in other things to have hit the Mark, yet by this kind of Wri∣ting he seems to straggle and wander from the due Course both of Time and Place: And therefore they who read such sort of Writings, partly pass over such artificial and fram'd Discourses, though they are never so pat and fit to the Purpose; and partly tir'd out with the tedious and unseasonable artificial Digression of the Author, leave off read∣ing altogether. For the Nature of History is simple, and in every part agreeable to it self, like to the Body of a living Creature, where the Cutting off of one Member is the Deformity of the whole. On the other side, that which is duly and orderly Compos'd, keeps within its proper Bounds, and the Coherence of the Whole, affords a clear and plea∣sant View and Understanding of the Matter in the Reading. However, we do not altogether abandon Rhetorick and Oratorical Flourishes out of History: For because it ought to be adorn'd with Variety, its absolutely necessary in some Places to insert these Speeches and Orations. And I my self would not be depriv'd of making use of them upon such Occasions; and therefore when the Circumstances of the Matter related are such as that the Speech of an Ambassador, or the Harangue of a popular Senator, or the like, fall in naturally and easily, he that does not then put him∣self forth to the utmost in this kind, deserves justly to be Censur'd and Condemn'd. A Man may be able to give many Reasons why Rhetorical Adornments are often to be made use of. For amongst quaint and eloquent Discourses, such asare worthy remark, and bring Profit and Advantage along with them together with the History, are by no means negligently to be pass'd over: Or when the Subject treated of is high and lofty, of things Famous and Remarkable, then it's very unbecoming, and not in the least to be endur'd, that the manner of Expression should sink meanly below the greatness of the Acts re∣lated. It may be likewise necessary when some extraordinary Event happens, so as that we are forc'd to make use of words adapted to the Occasion, in order to clear up and make plain the dark and intricate Grounds and Reasons of such an Accident. But what we have said of these things shall suffice, and we shall now proceed to the Relation of those Affairs we before design'd, first observing the Time, where we are now fallen in the Course of our History. In the former Books we have treated of the Affairs both of the Greeks and Barbarians from the most ancient Times, till the Tear next preceding the Expedition of Agathocles into Africa: From the Sacking of Troy to which time, are P 4. run up Eight hundred fourscore and three Years, and something more. In this Book we shall go on with things next in Course, and coherent with the former Relation, and be∣gin with the Descent of Agathocles into Africa, and end with that year wherein the Kings agreed to join together in a Common War against Antigonus, the Son of Philip, comprehending the Transactions of Nine years.
CHAP. I. Agathocles designs to invade Africa. His Cruelty; Pursu'd in his Voyage. An Eclipse of the Sun very great. Lands in Africa. Burns his Ships. His successes in Africa. Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals in Africa. Battel between them and Agathocles, who routs them, Kills Hanno. His stratagem by Owls. The Cruel Superstition of the Carthaginians in sacrificing their Children. The Actions at Syracuse. Actions of Agathocles in Africa. The Acts of Cassander in Ma∣cedonia. Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules Alexander's Son. The mise∣rable Destruction of Nichocles and his Family in Cyprus. The Wars of Parysi∣das his Sons, King of the Cimerean Bosphorus. The Valour of Satyrus, one of the Sons; His Death. The sad Death of Eumelus, another Son. IN the Chancellorship of Hieromnemones at Athens, and the Consulship of Caius Julius Olymp. 117. 1. Ant. Ch. 308. and Quintus Aemilius at Rome; Agathocles being routed at Himera in Sicily by the Car∣thaginians, and having lost the greatest and best Part of his Army, fled to Syracuse; where perceiving that he was for saken of all his Consederates, and that the Barbarians had got into their hands almost all Sicily (except Syracuse) and that they far over-power'd him by their Forces both by Sea and Land, undertook a very Rash and desperate Adven∣ture. For when all were of Opinion that it was not adviseable for him in the least to en∣deavour to contend with the Carthaginians, he even then resolv'd to leave a strong Ga∣rison Agathocles intends to in∣vade Africa. in the City, and with the Choicest of the rest of his Forces to make a Descent in∣to Africa; and by that means he hop'd by his Old and and experienc'd Soldiers, easily to vanquish the Carthaginians, who (through a long Peace) were grown Soft and Deli∣cate, and unexpert in their Arms; and besides, hereby he thought that their Confede∣rates, who had been for a long time very uneasie under the Yoke of their Government, would take an occasion to Revolt. And which most induc'd him was, That by this sud∣den and unexpected Invasion, he should load himself with the Spoils of a Country that was never before harrass'd, and that abounded in the Confluence of all forts of Worldly Blessings. And to sum up all, That he should by this Course draw the Barbarians, not only out of his own Country, but out of all Sicily, and transfer the War entirely over into Africa, which happen'd accordingly. For without advising with any of his Friends he made Antandrus, his Brother, Go∣vernor of the City, leaving with him a considerable Garrison; he himself Listed what Soldiers he thought fit for his purpose, ordering the Foot to be ready with Arms at Ant. Ch. 308. the first Call, and commanded the Horsemen, that besides Arms they should every one carry along with them a Saddle and Bridle, that when ever he could get Horses he might have have those ready to mount them who were furnish'd with all things en∣cessary for that purpose. For in the late Battle most of his Foot were cut off: but most of his Horse escap'd; but their Horses he could not transport into Africa. And to prevent all stirrs and commotions (in order to a defection) in Syracuse in his absence, he divided Kindred and Relations one from another, especially Brothers from Brothers, and Parents from Children, taking some along with him and leaving others behind: And he acted in this very wisely; for certain it was, that those who remain'd in Syracuse, although they hated the Tyrant, yet would attempt nothing to his prejudice, by reason of their natural Love and Affection to their Children, and near Relations and Kindred. And because he was in great want of Money, he took the Estates of Infants out of the hands of their Guardians; declaring, That he would have a far greater Care of them than they had, and be more faithful in giving them an Account, and making restitution when they came to full Age. He borrow'd likewise much from the Merchants, and converted to his own use some of the Sacred Treasures of the Tem∣ples; and took the Jewels and Ornaments from the Womens Backs. Whereupon, discerning that the Richer sort were highly displeas'd and incens'd at this Usage, and for that reason hated him, he call'd a General Assembly, in which he greatly lamented the late Overthrow, and the dreadful Calamities that from thence seem'd to hang over their Heads. He told them, that he indeed that was inur'd to Hardships, could easily endure the Miseries of a Siege; but that he should greatly pity the Citizens, Ant. Ch. 308. if they should be blockd up, and forc'd to undergo the like. Therefore he order'd those
that were not willing to suffer what might be their Fortune and Lot, to provide for His Cruelty. the safety of themselves and their Estates. Upon which, the most wealthy Citizens (who bore a most implacable hatred against him) forthwith left the City: But he presently P. 735. sent out some of his Mercenaries after them, and cut all their Throats, and consis∣cated their Estates. And thus, when by one and the same Act he had both enrich'd himself, and likewise purg'd the City of those that were his Enemies, he manumitted all the Slaves and Servants that were fit to bear Arms: And now having all things in readiness, and furnish'd with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, he only waited for a fair Wind. His Design being not commonly known, some reported that he intended an Expedition into Italy; others that he purposed to waste and destroy that part of Sicily that belong'd to the Carthaginians; to conclude, every body gave them (who were rea∣dy to Sail) all up for lost Men, and condemn'd the folly and madness of the Prince. The Enemy at that time had a Fleet far exceeding him in number in the Harbour, there∣fore he was forc'd for some days at the first, to lye still with his Men on Board, because he had not an opportunity to set Sail. Afterwards some Transport Ships loaden with Corn, making with full Sail toward the City, the Carthaginians pursu'd them with their whole Ant. Ch. 308. Fleet: Whereupon Agathocles (almost before in despair to accomplish his Design,) as soon as he saw the Mouth of the Harbor open, causing the Rowers to ply their Oars with all the quickness imaginable, he broke out of the Harbour. The Carthaginians being now come up near to the Transport Ships, and seeing a Fleet of their Enemies Ships sailing out of the Harbor, thought at first that they came to se∣cure and defend the Corn Ships; Whereupon they tack'd about, and prepar'd to Fight: But when they saw that they made their Course straight forward, and were far before them, they pursu'd them with all the Sail they could; and while these were striving to Out-sail each other, the Transport Ships unexpectedly escap'd the danger, and plentifully supply'd the City that was before in great streights for want of Corn and Provision. Aga∣thocles also, tho' closely pursu'd by the Enemy, by the advantage of the Night coming on (beyond all hope) got safe off This was on the 15 of Au∣gust. Ush. Ann. P. 323. Justin. lib 22. c. 6. Eclipse of the Sun. from them. The next day there was such an E∣clipse of the Sun, that the Stars appear'd every where in the Firmament, and the Day was turn'd into Night: Upon which Agathocles his Soldiers (conceiving that God there∣by did foretel their Destruction,) fell into great Perplexities and Discontents concerning what was like to befal them. Having therefore sail'd Six Days and Six Nights, early in the Morning they suddenly spy'd the Carthaginian Fleet making up close upon them: Upon which, all set themselves to it with might and main to ply their Oars: The Car∣thaginians concluding, that together with the Ships they should not only take all the Sy∣racusians prisoners, but should deliver their Country from present imminent danger: The Grecians on the other hand saw apparent destruction to themselves before their Eyes, and Ant. Ch. 308. intolerable Bondage and Slavery to all their Kindred and Relations they had left at home, if they did not recover the Shore before the Enemy. And now Africa was in view when all the Sailers and Rowers call'd out earnestly one to another to bestir them∣selves, so that the strife and pains to get to Land was incredible. The Barbarians indeed were more swift Sailors, because they were more accustom'd to the Sea than the others; but the Grecian Ships kept still a considerable distance before them: Making therefore a∣way with all the Expedition imaginable, when they came near the Shoar, they leap'd out of their Ships in throngs upon the Strand, as if they had been contending for the Mastery at the Gymnastick Games: For the first Squadron of the Carthaginians Ships were come up within a Darts cast of those in the Rear of the Grecian Fleet. After therefore some Contest for a while with their Bows and Slings (a few of the Barbarians Ships on∣ly being come up) Agathocles (overpow'ring the other by number) gain'd the advan∣tage; whereupon the Carthaginians tackt about and stood off a little above the Cast of a Dart. Hereupon Agathocles presently landed his Men at a place call'd the Quarries, Lands in A∣frica. and drew a Breast work for the security of his Shipping all along from Sea to Sea: And after he had effected this bold and daring attempt, he set upon another far more dan∣gerous: For taking to him such of his Captains and Commanders as were wholly at his Devotion, he first Sacrificed to Ceres and Proserpina, and then call'd a Council of War; where coming into the Assembly to make his Harangue, splendidly clothed in Royal Robes, and with his Crown upon his Head (after a few things premis'd, to make an in∣troduction to what he had further to say) he told them, That at the time they were pursu'd by the Carthaginians he had made a Vow to the Goddesses Ceres and Proserpina, the P. 736. Protectoresses of Sicily, that he would Consecrate all the Ships in the Fleet to them, by burning them all into so many burning Lamps; and therefore, since they were now safe and were deliver'd, it was just and fit that they should pay their Vows; and he pro∣mis'd Anti-Christ. 308.
that if they fought couragiously, he would return them far more than those Ships they then had: For the Gods by the Sacrifices, did foretel that they should be Conque∣rors throughout the whole War: While he was speaking, one of his Servants brought him a lighted Firebrand, which catching hold of, and commanding the like to be deliver'd to the rest of the Captains, he invocated the Goddesses, and was the first that made to the Admiral's Vessel, and standing upon the Stern, commanded the rest to follow his Exam∣ple: Whereupon, all the Captains of the Vessels set fire to their Ships, and forthwith the Flame mounted alost, the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and the whole Army set up a shout, and all as one Man offer'd up their joynt Prayers to the Gods, for their safe re∣turn to their own Country. And all this was done by Agathocles, that he might neces∣sitate his Soldiers to fight, without ever thinking of turning their Backs. For it was plain, that having no Shipping left for their last Refuge, they could not have the least hope of safety in any thing but by being absolute Conquerors. Then he consider'd, that having Burns his Ships. but a small Army, if he would guard his Fleet he must be forc'd to divide it, and so should not be strong enough to venture a Battle; and if he left the Ships without any Guard, they would  fall into the hands of the Carthaginians. However, while the whole Na∣vy was on fire, and the Flame spread it self round at a great distance, the Hearts of the Sicilians quak'd: For at first, being deluded by the jugling Tricks of Agathocles, and the the quickness of Execution, giving them no time to consider, they all consented to what was done: But when they had leisure distinctly to weigh every particular, they repent∣ed Ant. Ch. 308 themselves of what they had done; and pondering in their Minds, the vastness of the Sea by which they were separated from their own Country, they utterly despair'd of their Safety and Preservation. Agathocles therefore minding as soon as possibly he could, to cure this Pusilanimity in his Soldiers, led his Army to the Samatho in the Punick Language White. His Successes in Africa. great City (as it's call'd) within the Dominion of the Carthaginians. The whole Country through which they march'd, was beautify'd with Gardens, Planted with all sorts of Fruit-Trees, and Sluces, and Canals were cut all along for the convenience of Water, by which that whole Tract was every where abundantly water'd. This part of the Country was likewise full of Towns and Villages, adorn'd with stately Houses, whose Roofs were curiously wrought all setting forth the Wealth and Riches of their Owners. The Houses were full of all man∣ner of Provision of every thing that was needful, for the Inhabitants (through a long Peace) had stor'd up their Treasures in great plenty and abundance. The Country is planted partly with Vines, and partly with Olive-Trees, and furnish'd likewise with ma∣ny other Fruit-Trees: In another part, the Fields are pastur'd with Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cows and Oxen; and in the neighbouring Fens run great numbers of breed∣ing Mares. And what shall I say more? Those places abounded with plenty of all things for the use of Man, and the rather for that they were the Possessions of the Nobi∣lity of Carthage, who laid out much of their Estates and Wealth with more then ordina∣ry Curiosity to improve them for their Delight and Pleasure; so that the fertility and sweetness of the Country, was the admiration of the Sicilians, and rouz'd up their droop∣ing Ant. Ch. 308. Spirits in the view they had of those Rewards, and rich Returns, which they judg'd were well worthy the hazards to be run by the Conquerors to obtain them. Agathocles therefore perceiving that his Soldiers were now recover'd out of their dumps, and former melancholy apprehensions, makes a suddain Assault upon the Walls of the City; which being so surprizing and unexpected, and the Citizens unskilful in their Arms, after a short resistance he took the City by Storm; and gave the plunder of the Town to the Soldiers, which both encourag'd 'em and enrich'd 'em at once. Thence he forthwith P. 737. mov'd with his Army to ∣, White Tunis. Tunis, and gain'd that City, which is Two thousand Fur∣longs from Carthage. The Soldiers would willingly have Garison'd these Two Cities, having Stor'd and laid up in them the Plunder they had got. But Agathocles weighing About 250 Miles. what was most expedient in his present circumstances; therefore after he had convinc'd the Soldiers, that it was by no means convenient to leave any place to fly to for shelter, till they had conquer'd the Enemy by down-right blows, he raz'd the Citys to the ground, and incamp'd in the open Field. In the mean time the Carthaginians that lay near to the Sicilians Fleet, at first greatly rejoyc'd when they saw their Ships all in a Flame, supposing they were constrain'd to burn their Navy out of fear of their Enemies: But after they perceiv'd them to march forward up into the Country with their whole Army, and imagining what they intended to do, they then concluded, that the burning of the Ships was a design'd mischief to them: Whereupon they spread Leathern Hides upon the Fore-Castles of all their Ships, which is their constant manner when ever any misfortune seems to threaten the Carthaginian Common-wealth; Moreover, they took in∣to their own Gallies the Iron Beaks out of Agathocles's Ships, and sent Expresses to Car∣thage
to give them a particular Account of every thing that had hapned. But before these Ant. Ch. 308. Messengers reach'd the City, some out of the Country who had discern'd Agathocles his Fleet to be near at hand, presently ran to Carthage to give them an Account, who were there∣upon so amaz'd with the surprizing news of such an unexpected accident, that they forth∣with concluded that their Armies in Sicily were utterly cut off and destroy'd; for that it could not be that Agathocles, unless he were Victorious, would dare to leave Syracuse naked without any Garison, or pass over his Army when at the same time his Enemy was Ma∣ster at Sea. The City therefore was in a great hurly burly, terror and confusion, and the People throng'd into the Market-place, and the Senate met together to consult what was fit to be done in the present Exigency: for they had no Army at hand wherewith to fight the Enemy; besides, the common Citizens being raw and ignorant in matters of War, were altogether heartless, and every body thought the Enemy was then just at their Walls. Some therefore were for sending Ambassadors to Agathocles to propose terms of Peace, who might likewise at the same time discover the posture of the Enemy. Others were for staying and expecting till they should have perfect intelligence of every thing that was done. While the City was in this hurry and perplexity, arriv'd those that were sent from the Admiral of the Fleet, and declar'd to them all that was done: Whereupon, their Cou∣rage reviv'd; and the Senate blam'd all the Officers of the Fleet, that being Masters at Ant. Ch. 308. Sea, they should be so careless as to suffer the Enemies Forces to make a Descent upon Africa; and they created Hanno and Bomilcar Generals of their Army, notwithstanding Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals. they were at private feuds between themselves, and that ancient grudges had been in their Families one towards another. For they thought that these private Quarrels would much tend to the common advantage of the City: But they were very much mistaken, For Bomilcar had for a long time been ambitious of the Monarchy, but never yet had an opportunity fitted for his purpose to put his Designs in execution, and therefore he gree∣dily imbrac'd the offer of such a Command as was exactly agreeable to what he was aim∣ing at: And the chief cause of these Plots and Contrivances of his, was the severity and cruelty of the Carthaginians: For they advance the most eminent Persons to be Generals in their Wars, because they conclude they'l fight with more Resolution then others, when all lies at stake: But after the Wars are ended and Peace concluded, then they bring false Accusations against them, and most unjustly, through Envy, put them to death: And therefore some Generals out of fear of those unjust Sentences, either give up their Commissions, or seek to be absolute Monarchs; as Bomilcar one of the Carthaginian Ge∣nerals P. 738 then did; of whom we shall speak by and by. The Carthaginian Generals therefore seeing now that delays were dangerous, waited not for Soldiers to be rais'd out of the Country, and from the Cities of their Confederates, but led out the Citizens themselves into the Field, having under their Command no Ant. Ch. 308. Battle between the Carthagi∣nians and Agathocles. less than Forty thousand Foot, a thousand Horse, and Two thousand Chariots; and possessing themselves of a Hill not far from the Enemy, drew up in Batalia: Hanno com∣manded the Right Wing supported by them of the Sacred Brigade: Bomilcar the Lest, making his Phalanx very deep, because the nature of the place would not allow him to extend his wing further in front: The Chariots and Horsemen he plac'd in the Van, to the end, that with these at the first Charge they might try the Courage of the Greeks. Agathocles on the other side, viewing how the Barbarians had drawn up their Army, committed the Right Wing to Archagathus his Son, delivering to him Two thousand and five hundred Foot. Then he drew up about Three thousand and five hundred Syracusians: Next to them Three thousand Mercenaries out of Greece; and Lastly, Three thousand Samnites Tyrrhenians and Celts. He himself with the Troops of the Houshold, and a Thou∣sand heavy Arm'd Men commanded in the Left Wing, opposite to the Carthaginians Sa∣cred Brigade. The Archers and Slingers, to the number of Five hundred he mix'd here and there in the two Wings. The Truth was, his Soldiers were scarce all Arm'd; And therefore when he saw some of those that were naked and without Arms; he took the Covers and Cases of the Shields and stretcht them out upon Sticks in the round shape of a Shield, and so deliver'd 'em to them; however in truth useless, yet so contriv'd by him, to the end that those that were at a distance (and knew nothing of the Stratagem) should look upon them to be Arm'd Men. Perceiving likewise, that the Spirits of his Soldiers were very low, and much discou∣rag'd, by reason of the great numbers of their Enemies, especially of their Horse, he Ant. Ch. 308. let out several Owls (which he had before prepar'd for the purpose) into divers parts of the Camp here and there, to rid them of their fears; which Birds flying up and down His Stratagem of Owls. through the Army, and lighting ever and anon upon their Shields and Bucklers, chear'd
up the spirits of the Soldiers, all taking it for a very happy Omen because that creature is sacred to Minerva: These sorts of tricks and devices altho' they may seem to some to be foolish and vain, yet they have many times been the causes of extraordinary success. As it fell out likewise at this time; for the soldiers by this means growing more bold and couragious, and it being generally nois'd abroad that the Goddess plainly soretold that they should be victorious, they more resolutely underwent all dangers and difficulties: For when the Chariots charg'd fiercely upon them, some they pierc'd through with their Darts and Arrows, others they avoided and suffer'd to pass by, and most of them they drave back into the midst of their own Foot. In the same manner they receiv'd the Charge of their Horse, wounding many and putting them all at last to flight. When they had thus gallantly behav'd themselves in the first Charge, the Barbarians began to fall upon them with their whole Body of Foot at once; upon which there was a very sharp Engagment, wherein Hanno with that Body of Men call'd the Sacred Brigade (striving to win the day by his own Valour) makes a fierce Charge upon the Grecians, and hews down many of them: And tho' he was even overwhelm'd with showers of Darts and Arrows, yet he fell not; but receiving one Wound after another, on he still goes, till being overprest and altogether tir'd out, down he fell and gave up his last Breath. On the other hand Agathocles his Soldiers were so lifed up with expecta∣tions Ant. Ch. 308. of Victory that they were still more and more couragious; which when the other General Bomilcar came to understand, conceiving that the Gods had put an opportunity into his hand to gain the Tyranny, he reason'd with himself, That if the Army of Aga∣thocles were destroy'd, he could not mount the Throne because the City would be too strong for him; but if Agathocles were Conqueror, and by that means broke the Spirits of the Carthaginians, then (when they were brought low) he should be able to lead them which way he would; and as for Agathocles he concluded he should be able to subdue him P. 739. when ever he pleas'd. Revolving these things in his mind, he began to face about and Retreat, willing the Enemy should take notice of what they were about to do; then telling his Soldiers that Hanno was slain, order'd them to keep their ranks and get to a rising ground there near at hand; for that was now the last course for them to take. But the Retreat looking like a down-right flight, the Enemy prest so close upon them, that the Africans who were in the Rear, supposing that those in the Front of the Battle were Routed, took to their Heels likewise. In the mean time those in the Sacred Brigade fought bravely for a while after the death of Hanno, and resolutely prest forward upon the Enemy over the Carkases of their fellow-soldiers; but when they perceiv'd that most of their Army was fled, Ant. Ch. 308. and that the Enemy was surrounding them at their backs, they were forc'd likewise to give way and be gone. The whole Carthaginian Army being thus put to flight, the Barbarians made toward, Carthage; whom Agathocles pursu'd but a little way, and then return'd, and took the Pillage of the field; In this Battle were slain Two hundred Grecians, and not above a Thousand Carthaginians, though some have written above Six Thousand: Amongst other rich spoiles there were found many Chariots in the Carthaginians Camp, in which were carri'd above Twenty thousand pair of Fetters and Manacles. For concluding that they would easily overcome the Greeks, they agreed together to take as many Prisoners as they could, and threw them into the Dungeons setter'd hand and foot; but God (I conceive) purposely sets himself by meer contrary Events to cross the expectations of such, who proudly before hand resolve what shall absolutely be done. Agathocles having now Routed the Carthaginians both beyond their, and even his own expectation, blockt them up within their Walls; and thus we see Fortune whose common Course it is to make Chequer-work of good and bad success, of Routs and Victories in their several turns, now humbled the Conquerors as well as those that were before con∣quered. For the Carthaginians after they had beaten Agathocles in Sicily in a great Battle, besieg'd Syracuse; and now Agathocles having Routed them in Africa, Besieges Carthage: And that which was most to be admir'd was that this Prince was beaten by the Ant. Ch. 308. Barbarians in the Island when all his Forces were with him whole and intire: but now is Victorious in the Continent over the Conquerors with a piece of a broken and shatter'd Army. The Carthaginians therefore concluding that this miserable misfortune was brought upon them by the Gods, they all betook themselves to Prayers and Sup∣plications to the  All sorts of Prayers. Deity; especially thinking that Hercules, the Tutelar god of their Country, was angry at them, they sent a vast sum of Mony, and many other rich Gifts to Tyre. For in as much as they were a Colony which came out from them, they us'd in former Ages to send the Tenth part of all their Revenues as an Offering to that God:
But after that they grew wealthy, and their Revenues very great, they began to flack in in their Devotion, and sent thither but a small pittance to their God. Being therefore brought to repentance by this remarkable Slaughter, they remembred all the Gods in Tyre; they sent likewise out of their Temples to the Images of Golden Shrines in order to Suppli∣cations, supposing they should prevail the more in averting the Anger of the God by sending sacred gifts to pacifie him. They gave just cause likewise to their God Saturn to be their E∣nemy, for that in former times they us'd to sacrifice to this god the sons of the most eminent persons, but of later times they secretly bought and bred up Children for that purpose. And upon strict search made, there were found amongst them that were to be sacrific'd some Chil∣dren that were chang'd and put in the place and room of others. Weighing these things in their Minds, and now seeing that the Enemy lay before their Walls, they were seiz'd with such a pang of Superstition, as if they had utterly forsaken the Religion of their Ant. Ch. 308. P. 740. Fathers. That they might therefore without delay reform what what was amiss, they offer'd as a publick sacrifice Two hundred of the Sons of the Nobility; and no fewer than Three hundred more (that were liable to censure) voluntarily offered up them∣selves; Cruel Super∣stition. for among the Carthaginians there was a Brazen Statue of Saturn putting forth the Palms of his Hands so bending towards the Earth, as that the Boy that was laid upon them in order to be sacrific'd, should slip off and so fall down headlong into a deep fiery Furnace. Hence it's probable that Euripides took what he fabulously relates concerning the sacrifice in Taurus, where he introduces Iphigenia asking Orestes this Question— But what Sepulchre will me dead receive, Shall th' Gulf of Sacred Fire then me have? The ancient Fable likewise that is common among the Grecians, that Saturn devour'd his own Children, seems to be confirm'd by this Law among the Carthaginians. But after this change of affairs in Africa the Carthaginians sent to Amilcar into Sicily The actions at Syracuse. to hasten over to their assistance with all speed, and order'd that all the Beaks of Aga∣thocles his Ships should be carri'd to him. When the Messengers arriv'd, he commanded them not to say any thing of the Routing of their Forces, but to noise it abroad among the Soldiers, that Agathocles his Fleet and Land Army were both utterly destroy'd. And he himself sent away some (that were newly come from Carthage) to Syracuse, together Ant. Ch. 308. with the Iron Beaks, to demand the delivery up of the City, and to tell them that all their Forces were cut off by the Carthaginians, and their whole Navy burnt; and that if they would not believe them, the Beaks of their Vessels (there shew'd) were a sufficient evidence of the truth of what they related. when they that were in the City heard of this overthrow of Agathocles, many believ'd it: But the leading men of the City, minding to keep private a matter that was yet uncertain, and to prevent Tumults, forthwith dis∣mist the Messengers, and sent them away. They cast out of the City likewise the Kindred and friends of the Exiles, and Eight thousand at least of others that seem'd to be uneasie under the Government; whereupon when so great a Number on a suddain were forc'd to leave the place of their Birth, the City was full of Confusion, Lamentation and crying of Women running up and down in the Streets; neither was there any House at this time that had not its share of weeping and mourning. For they who favour'd the Tyrant bewail'd the Ruin of Agathocles, and the loss of their Sons; others wept for those of their friends who they suppos'd were all cut off in Africa; others griev'd and mourn'd for them that were compell'd to forsake their Houses, and the Gods of their Fore-fathers; and who were neither suffer'd to stay, nor could get well out of the City by reason of the Siege. And besides these most grievous and bitter sufferings (which they labour'd under) they were forc't to fly with their Wives, and drag along with them their little young Children; But Amilcar courteously receiv'd and secur'd the Exiles, and march'd to Syracuse with his Army, as if he should forthwith possess himself of the City, Ant. Ch. 380. upon the account of the place being destitute of Inhabitants, and the misery those were in (as he heard) who were left behind: However he sent Messengers before, and promis'd pardon to Antandrus, and all those that sided with him if he would deliver up the City into his hands. Upon which there was a Council of War call'd of those Captains that were in the greatest Authority; where after many bandings and debates pro and con, Antander (who was naturally a poor spirited Man, and of a weak head, and much below the courage and resolution of his Brother) was for delivering up of the Town: But Eurymnon the Etolian (whom Agathocles had left to assist his Brother in
Advice and Counsel) was of another Opinion, and prevail'd with them all to hold out till they had certain Intelligence of the Truth. Whereupon, Amilcar coming to under∣stand the resolution of the Townsmen, prepar'd all his Engines with a full Resolution to batter down the Walls Agathocles, after the late Battel, built two Ships of Thirty Oares a piece; and in one of them put on board the best of his Rowers, with Nearchus, one of the most faithful Friends he then had with him, and sent them away to Syracuse, to give an account of his P. 741. Victory. Having therefore the Wind fair, the Fifth day (in the Night) they arriv'd in the Harbour of Syracuse, and at break of Day, Crown'd with Garlands and singing the Pean, a Song of Praise to Apollo for the Victory. Pean all along as they sail'd, they made for the City; which being perceived by the Car∣thaginian Guard-Ships, they pursu'd them with all their might, and the other being not far before them, there was great striving among the Rowers on both sides. While the Sea-men were thus contending, both Besiegers and Besieg'd understanding the Matter, ran down to the Port, and each fearful of the event, call'd out and encourag'd every one their own Men. And now the Ship was upon the point of falling into the hands of the Pur∣suers, upon which the Barbarians gave a shout: but the Citizens not being able otherwise to assist, pray'd to their Gods for the Preservation of their Men on board. The Pursuers being now ready to board her not far from Land, she got within a Darts cast of the Shore, and by the help of the Syracusians, who came in to her relief, narrowly escap'd the Danger. Amilcar perceiving that the Citizens, (upon the account of the late Contest, and the sud∣den arrival of the Intelligence expected) were all flock'd down to the Port; and there∣upon conceiving part of the Walls were left Naked, order'd the stoutest of his Soldiers to rear up Scaling-Ladders; who finding there no Guards, mounted the Walls without be∣ing discern'd; and had almost possess'd themselves of an entire Part lying between two Towers, when they that us'd to go the Round, came just then to the Place, and so dis∣cover'd them. Upon which, they fell to it, and the Citizens came flocking in, before a∣ny Relief could be brought to the Assailants, so that some were kill'd outright, and others were thrown down Headlong over the Walls. At which Amilcar was so mortify'd, that he drew off his Forces from the City, and sent away Five thousand Men to the Relief of Carthage. While these things were in action in Sicily, Agathocles being now Master of the Field, Ant. Ch. 308. Acts of Aga∣thocles in A∣frica. took some Forts and Castles near to Carthage by Storm; and other Cities, some out Fear, and some through hatred of the Carthaginians, voluntarily surrender'd themselves. Having fortify'd his Camp near Tunis, he left there a sufficient Guard, and mov'd towards the Towns lying upon the Sea-Coasts: And first he took by Storm the New City, but dealt very favourably with the Inhabitants: Thence he march'd to Adrymetes, and besieg'd it, and Confederated with Elymas King of Lybia. News whereof being brought to the Carthagi∣nians, they bent all their Arms against Tunis; and possessed themselves of Agathocles his Camp; and with their Battering Rams press'd upon the City with continual Assaults. Agathocles receiving Intelligence of the slaughter of his Men, leaving the greatest part of his Army to carry on the Siege, and taking with him his Life-guard, and a small Body of Men, secretly march'd up to the Top of a Mountain, whence he might view both the Country of the Adrymetines, and likewise the Carthaginians that besieg'd Tunis. In the Night he commanded his Soldiers to kindle Fires, and with them to take up a large Tract of Ground, to the end the Carthaginians might think he was making towards them with a strong Army, and that the Besieg'd might conclude, that fresh Forces in vast numbers were come up to him for his Assistance; both being deceiv'd by this Stratagem were suddenly caught in the Snare; for they who besieg'd Tunis, fled, and left their Engines behind them; and the Adrymetines surpriz'd with Fear surrender'd the City, which was gain'd, upon cer∣tain Ant. Ch. 308 Terms agreed upon, but Thapsus he afterwards took by Storm: And several other Cities he took in this Tract, some by Force, and others upon Conditions. Having at length gain'd in the whole above Two hundred Towns and Cities, he resolv'd upon an Expedition .  into the Higher Libya: To that end he rais'd his Camp, and march'd on many days Journey. Then the Carthaginians march'd out with those Forces (besides others) which were sent out of Sicily, and besieg'd Tunis a second time, and recover'd a great part of the Country that was then in the Hands of the Enemy. When Couriers came from Tunis, and gave an account what the Carthaginians had done, Agathocles forthwith return'd: Being come within Two hundred Furlongs of the Enemy, he Encamp'd, and commanded his Soldiers not to kindle any Fires: Then making a sudden March in the Night, about spring of Day he fell upon those as were Wasting and Harrassing the Country, and disorderly roving up and down, and kill'd above Two thousand of them, and took many Prisoners, which was a great Step to his many Successes afterwards: For the Carthaginians being reinforc'd by their
Aids from Sicily, and strengthned by their Confederates in Africa, thought they had been too strong for Agathocles: But after this Misfortune, the Hearts of the Barbarians were quite down; for he had overcome Elymas the King of Libya, (who had deserted him) and kill'd likewise the General, with a great number of the Barbarians. And thus stood Affairs in Ant. Ch. 308. Sicily and Africa at this time. In Macedonia, Cassander came in to the Assistance of Autoleontes King of the Peonia is a part of Mace∣donia. Peonians, Acts of Cassan∣der in Mace∣donia. who was then in War with the Autariats, and rescu'd him out of the Streights and Dan∣gers he was in at that time, and transplanted the Autariats together with their Wives and Children, that were then with them, to the Number of Twenty thousand, and plac'd them near the Mountain Orbelus, a Mountain in Macedons Orbitaus. While he was thus employ'd, Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus, who was Autariats, a People of Dal∣matia. intrusted by him with an Army in these Parts, (took a Pique against Antigonus, thinking he was not rewarded according to what he might justly expect) revolted and join'd with Cassander. He had left one Phaenix, (one of his Confederates) President of the Province adjoining to the Hellespont, and sent over some Soldiers to him, wishing him to take care of the Castles and Cities there, and for the future not regard any Orders that came from Antigonus. It was generally agreed by Alexander's Captains, (as part of their Articles among them∣selves) that the Greek Cities should be all restor'd to their ancient Liberties. Therefore Ptolemy, King of Egypt, (charging Antigonus that he had put Garisons into several Greek Towns and Cities) prepar'd to make War upon him: And sent Leonides, a Captain of his own, into Cilicia Aspera, and there possess'd himself of certain Cities and Places belonging to Antigonus; and moreover, sent his Agent to some Cities appertaining to Cassander and Lysimachus, that they would follow his Advice, and not suffer Antigonus to grow too fast in Power. And as for Antigonus, he sent his younger Son Philip to make War upon Phaenix, and Ant. Ch. 308. others, who had revolted from him in Hellespont; but his Son Demetrius he sent into Cili∣cia, who putting in Execution what he had in Command, routed the Captains of Ptolemy that were there, and recover'd the Cities. While these things were doing, Polysperchon, (then residing in Peloponnesus) still affect∣ing Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules. the Government of Macedon, cry'd out against Cassander, and sent for Hercules, a Son of The Great. Alexander, (begotten upon Barfine) out of Pergamus, (now of the Age of Seventeen years) and sent up and down to those who were his own Friends, and Enemies to Cas∣sander, to help to set this young Man unto his Father's Kingdom. He sollicited likewise by his Letters the Aetolians, to assist him in his present Design; promising, that they should find more Grace and Favour at his hands than at any time before, if they would help him to restore the young Lad to his Father's Throne. All things going on according to his Heart's desire, (and the Aetolians complying with his request) many others came flocking in to restore the New King, so that there were got together above Twenty thousand Foot, and no less than a Thousand Horse. And P. 743. thus setting himself with all his might to the Work, he rais'd what Money he could, and sent some to sollicit his Friends in Macedonia to assist him. In the mean time, Ptolemy of Aegypt having all Cyprus under his Command, and find∣ing The miserable Destruction of Nicocles and his Family, in Cyprus. Ant. Ch. 308. that Nicocles, the King of Paphos, held Correspondence under-hand with Antigonus, sent two Confidents of his own, Argaus and Callicrates, with Instructions to make away Nicocles; for he was much afraid lest some others also should fall off, as he had perceiv'd many others had done before. Wherefore, passing into Cyprus, and taking with them a certain Number of Soldiers from Menelaus, who commanded the Army there, they beset the House of Nicocles; and then telling him what the King's Pleasure was, advis'd him to dispose of himself for another World. He at first went to clear himself of what was laid to his Charge, but when he saw that no Man hearkned to what he said, drew his Sword and slew himself. Axiothea his Wife, hearing of her Husband's Death, took her Daugh∣ters, who were all Young and Virgins, and cut their Throats, that they might not fall into any of the Enemy's hands, and was earnest with the Wives of Nicocles his Brothers to accompany her in her own Death; whereas Ptolemy had given no order concerning a∣ny of them, save only to preserve them. The King's Palace therefore thus fill'd with the sudden and unexpected Slaughters and dreadful Spectacles, so affected the Brothers of Ni∣cocles, that they shut every Man his own Door upon him, and set fire on their Houses, and slew themselves, so the whole Race of the Kings of Paphos came to a Tragick and Lamentable End. Having given an Account of those Affairs we before promis'd, we shall now proceed to those that follow next in order.
About this time in In the Cim∣merian Bos∣phorus near Pontus Euxi∣nus, or in Tau∣rica Chersone∣sus. Pontus, after the Death of Parysadas, King of the Cimmerian Bospho∣rus, his Sons Eumelus, Satyrus, and Prytanis, contended one with another for the Kingdom: Satyrus, the Eldest was appointed Successor by his Father, who reign'd Eight and Thirty Years. Eumelus compacting with some of the Natives adjoining, rais'd an Army, and laid claim to the Kingdom against his Elder Brother; of which Satyrus being inform'd, went against him with a great Army, and passing the River Thapsus, when he came near his Camp with his Carts and Wagons, wherein he had brought an infinite quantity of Pro∣vision; Ant. Ch. 308. and ranging afterwards his Army in the Field, (after the manner of the Scythian Kings) he led the main Battel himself. He had not in his Army above A Thousand in the Margent. Two thousand Greeks, and as many Thracians; all the rest were Scythians, which came to assist him, to the number of Twenty thousand, and no less than Ten thousand Horse. Eumelus was assisted by Ariophames, King of Thrace, with Twenty thousand Horse, and Two and twenty thousand Foot. Between these Forces a bloody Battel was fought, wherein Satyrus (who had with him a choice Party of brave Horse) encountred first with Ariopharnes in a Skirmish of Horse; who likewise commanded the middle Battel opposite to Satyrus; ma∣ny fell on both sides; at length he forc'd his way through, and put the Barbarian King to flight, and being the first in the pursuit put every Man to the Sword that was in his way. But when he heard, that his Brother Eumelus in the right Wing, had routed the Merce∣naries, he left off the Pursuit, and made up to the Succor of those that fled, and regain'd the day, and utterly broke and routed the whole Army, putting them all to flight; so that he gave a clear Testimony that he justly deserv'd to Wear the Crown, as well upon the Account of his Valour, as upon the Privilege of his Birth. Ariopharnes and Eumelus thus beaten, fled into the Ariopharnes his Palace. P. 744. Ant. Ch. 308. King's Palace, which was inviron'd with the River Thasis, of an exceeding depth, so that the Place was of difficult approach; it was surrounded likewise with steep Rocks and thick Woods, into which there were only two Entrances made by Art: One leading straight to the Palace, defended with high Towers and Bulwarks; the other on the other side, was made in the Fens, guarded with Forts and Towers of Timber, rais'd upon Pillars over the Water. The Place being very strong, Satyrus first wasted the Enemy's Country, and burnt their Towns, whence he carry'd a vast Number of Prisoners, and abundance of Spoil. Afterwards he attempted to force his way through the Passes, but losing many of his Men at the Bulwarks and Towers, he was forc'd to Retreat. But making an Attack upon that side towards the Fenns, he took the Timber-Forts which he demolish'd, and then pass'd the River. Upon which he began to fell a Wood, through which he must needs pass to the Palace; and while these attempts were carrying on in great Earnestness, King Ariopharnes fearing lest the Castle should be taken by Storm, valiantly fell upon them, perceiving there were no hopes of safety remaining but in an absolute Victory. He plac'd likewise Archers on both sides the Passage, by whom he sore gall'd the Fellers of the Wood, because they could neither see the Arrows before they pierc'd them, nor come at the Archers, nor return the like upon them, by reason of the thick and close standing of the Trees. However, Satyrus his Sol∣diers continu'd falling the Wood, and opening a Way to the Palace, for three Days to∣gether, though with great Toil and Hazard; the Fourth day they came under the Wall. But being worsted through showers of Arrows and straightness of the Places, they su∣stain'd very great loss: For Meniscus (who led the Mercenary Companies) having got Ant. Ch. 308. in at a Passage (though he Fought very manfully) was nevertheless (being over-laid with the Multitude within) forc'd to retreat: Whom Satyrus seeing in such imminent Danger, came up to him with seasonable Relief, and bearing up against the Enemy's Charge, was run through the Arm with a Spear, which was so sore, that it forc'd him to retire to his Camp, and the next Night died of the Wound, having reign'd scarce nine Months af∣ter the Death of Parasydas his Father. Hereupon, Meniscus, Captain of the Mercena∣ries, breaking up the Siege drew off the Army to a City call'd Gargaza, and from thence carry'd the King's Body down the River, to a City call'd Pantacapeum, to his Brother Prytanis, who having magnificently bury'd it, and laid up the Reliques in the King's Se∣pulchre, went presently to Gargaza, and there took into his hands the Army, together with the Kingdom Hereupon, came the Agents of Eumelus to him to treat concerning the parting of the Kingdom between them two, which he would not hearken to: Leaving therefore a strong Garison at Gargara, he return'd to Pantacapeum, there to settle the Affairs of his Kingdom. But a while after, Eumelus, by the help of some Babarians, possess'd himself of Gargara, and sundry other Towns and Castles. Whereupon, Prytanis march'd with an Army against him, but was overthrown in a Battel by his Brother; and being shut up
within a Neck of Land, near the Lough of Meotis, was forc'd to render himself upon Ant. Ch. 308. Conditions, which were to give up all his Army and depart the Kingdom. Nevertheless, when Prytanis return'd to Pantacapeum, which is the Place where the Kings of Bosphorus keep the standing Court, he there endeavour'd again to recover his Kingdom; but being foil'd there again, he fled to a Place call'd the Gardens, and was there slain. Eumelus, after the Death of his Brother, to confirm himself in the Kingdom, put to Death all the Friends, Wives and Children of both his Brothers, Satyrus and Prytanis; only Parisades, Satyrus his Son, being but a very Youth, escap'd his Hands; for by the P. 745. benefit of a swift Horse he got away out of the City to Agarus King of the Scythians. But when Eumelus saw that the People repin'd at the loss of their Friends whom he had mur∣der'd, he call'd them all together, and there excus'd himself, and restor'd to them their ancient form of Government, and to the Citizens of Pantacapeum their former Immuni∣ties, and promis'd to discharge them of all kind of Tributes, sparing for no fair words which might reconcile the Hearts of the People to him; by which means, having regain'd their good Opinions, he held a just and moderate Hand over them, and grew afterwards into no small admiration for all kind of Virtue among them. For he omitted not to oblige the Byzantians and Sinopians, and the rest of the Grecian Inhabitants of Pontus by all the de∣monstrations of Kindness imaginable. For when the Collantians were besieg'd by Lysima∣chus, and were brought to great distress through want of Provision, he entertain'd a Thou∣sand of them who left the Place for want of Bread, and not only granted them a safe Protection, but allotted them Habitations within the City. And divided likewise a Place Ant. Ch. 308. call'd Psoa, with the Territory thereunto belonging, among them by Lot. And for the Benefit of the Merchants that Traded to Pontus, he made War upon the Barbarous pira∣tical Heniochians, and them of Taurus, with the Acheans, and scowr'd and cleans'd the Seas of them. So that his Name was advanc'd to the Skies, (as the Fruit of his Generosity) not only in his own Kingdom, but almost all the World over, while the Merchants every where publish'd the Greatness and Braveness of his Spirit. Moreover, he much enlarg'd his Dominion, by the addition of a considerable Part of the Barbarians Country bordering upon him, and advanc'd the Fame and Reputation of his Kingdom, above whatever it was before. In conclusion, he had a Design to have brought under all the neighbouring Nations, and had certainly effected in short time what he had so design'd, if he had not been pre∣vented by Death: For after he had reign'd five Years and as many Months, he ended his days by a sudden and unusual Accident: For returning home out of Scythia, with a great desire to be present at a certain Sacrifice, and making towards his Palace in a Running upon Four Wheels. The sad Death of Eumelus. Chariot with four Horses, cover'd over with a Canopy; the Horses took a Fright at the Canopy, and violently ran away with him, the Coachman not being able to stop them in their Carreer: Upon which, Eumelus fearing lest he should be born away headlong down some steep Rock, threw himself out, but his Sword entangling in one of the Wheels, he was hurry'd away with the violent Motion of the Chariot, and kill'd forthwith. It's reported there were some Predictions concerning the Death of Eumelus and his Ant. Ch. 308. Brother Satyrus, though something Foolish and Vain, yet credited by the Inhabitants. For they say, that the Oracle warn'd Satyrus to be aware of one Musculus, lest he should kill him, and that for that reason he would not suffer any of that name, whether Bond or Free, to abide within his Dominions; and that upon that account he was afraid both of House and Field-Musculus is little Mouse,  Mice. Mice, and continually charg'd the Children to kill 'em, and stop up their Holes. At length, when he had done all that possibly he could to avoid his Fate, he was at last kill'd by a Wound in the Muscle of his Arm. And as for Eumelus, that he was charg'd by the Oracle to take heed of a Moving House; and therefore that he durst not go into his House before his Servants had made a diligent Search to see that both the Roof and Foundation were sound. But after that they came to understand that the Canopy plac'd upon the Chariot was the Occasion of his Death, every one concluded that the Prophecy was fulfill'd. But this shall suffice, concerning the Affairs of the Bosphorus. In Italy the Roman Consuls enter'd the Country of the In the Greek Italy is for Samnium, and Italium for Talium. Samnites with an Army, and P. 746. routed them in a Battel at Talius. But the routed Party afterwards possessing themselves of an Hill, and the Night drawing on, the Romans retreated to their Camp; but the next day the Fight was renew'd, and great numbers of the Samnites were slain, and above Two thousand and Two hundred were taken Prisoners. The Romans being thus successful, now quietly enjoy'd whatever they had in the open Field, and brought under all the revolting Cities, and plac'd Garisons in Cataracta and Ceraunia, Places they had taken by Assault, and others they reduc'd upon Terms and Conditions.
CHAP. II. The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia, and elsewhere. Polysperchon murders Hercules, Alexander's Son, by Instigation of Cassander. Amilcar taken, and put to Death by the Syracusians. His Head sent to Agathocles in Africa. The Transactions in Sicily. Archagathus Agathocles's Son, kills Lysiscus; he and his Son in in great Danger by the Army. Affairs in Italy. The Works of Appius Clau∣dius; the Appian Way. Ptolemy comes to Corinth; his Acts there. Cleopa∣tra, Alexander's Sister, kill'd by the Governor of Sardis. The further Acts of Agathocles in Africa. Ophellas decoy'd, and cut off by Agathocles. Ophellas his troublesome March to Agathocles. Lamias's Cruelty, and the Story of her. Bomilcar seeks to be Prince of Carthage, but is put to Death by the Citizens. Agathocles sends the Spoils of the Cyrenians to Syracuse; most lost in a Storm, Affairs in Italy. WHen Demetrius Phalerius was Lord Chancellor of Athens, Quintus Fabius (the se∣cond Olymp. 117. 4. Ant. Ch. 307. time) and Caius Martius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. At that time Ptolemy King of Egypt hearing that his Captains had lost all the Cities again in Cilicia, put over with his Fleet to Phaselis, and took that City by Force, and from thence The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia, and other Places. Ant. Ch. 307. passing into Lycia, took Xanthus by Assault, and the Garison of Antigonus that was therein. Then sailing to Caunus, took the City by Surrender, and then set upon the Citadels and Forts that were in it, and took them by Assaults. As for Heracleum, he utterly destroy'd it; and the City Persicum came into his Hands by the Surrender of the Soldiers that were put to keep it. Then sailing to Coos, he sent for Ptolemy the Captain, who was Antigonus his Brother's Son, and had an Army com∣mitted to him by Antigonus: But now forsaking his Uncle, he clave to Ptolemy, and join'd with him in all his Affairs. Putting therefore from Cholcis, and arriving at Coos, Ptolemy the King at first receiv'd him very courteously; yet after a while, when he saw the Inso∣lency of his Carriage, and how he went to allure the Officers by Gifts, and held secret Cabals with them, for fear of the worst he clap'd him up in Prison, and there poison'd him with a Draught of Hemlock: As for the Soldiers that came with him, he made them his own by large Promises, and distributed them by small Parcels among his Army. Whilst these Things were acting, Polysperchon having rais'd a great Army, restor'd Hercu∣les the Son of Alexander, begotten upon Barsinoe, to his Father's Kingdom. And while he lay encamp'd at Stymphalia, Cassander came up with his Army, and both encamp'd near one to another: Neither did the Macedonians grudge to see the Restoration of their King. Cassander therefore fearing, lest the Macedonians (who are naturally Inconstant) should Revolt to Hercules, sent an Agent to Polysperchon, chiefly to advise him concerning the Bu∣siness Ant. Ch. 307. of the King. If the King was restor'd, he told him, he must be sure to be under the Commands of others; but if he would assist him, and kill the young Man, he should enjoy the same Privileges and Honours in Macedonia that ever he had before. And be∣sides, that he should have the Command of an Army; that he should be declar'd Genera∣lissimo of Peloponnesus; and that he should share in the Principality, and be in equal Ho∣nour with Cassander. At length he so caught and ensnar'd Polysperchon with many large Promises, that they enter'd into a secret Combination, and Polysperchon undertook to murder the young King, which he accordingly effected; upon which Polysperchon openly Polysperchon betrays and murders Her∣cules by Cas∣sander's Insti∣gation. join'd with Cassander in all his Concerns, and was advanced in Macedonia, and receiv'd (according to the Compact) Four thousand Macedonian Foot, and Five hundred Thessa∣lian Horse; and having listed several other Voluntiers, he attempted to pass through Boeotia into Peloponnesus: But being oppos'd by the Boeotians and the Peloponnesians, he was forc'd to retire, and march into Locris, where he took up his Winter-Quarters. During these Transactions, Lysimachus built a City in Chersonesus, and call'd it after his own Name, Lysimachia. Cleomenes King of Lacedaemon now dy'd, when he had reign'd Threescore Years and Ten Months; and was succeeded by Aretas his Son, who Rul'd P. 747. Forty Four Years.
About this time Amilcar, General of the Forces in Sicily, having reduc'd the rest of that Amilcar ta∣ken, and put to Death by the Syracusians. Ant. Ch. 307. Island, marches with his Army to Syracuse, as if he would presently gain that City by force of Arms; and to that end hindred all Provision from the Town, having been a long time Master at Sea; and having wasted and destroy'd all the Corn, and other Fruits of the Field, attempted to possess himself of all the Places about A strong Fort near the Tem∣ple of Jupiter Olympus. Olympias lying before the Town. Then he resolv'd forthwith to assault the Walls, being incourag'd thereunto by the Augur, who by viewing of the Intrals of the Sacrifice, foretold that he should cer∣tainly sup the next day in Syracuse. But the Townsmen smelling out the Enemies Design, sent out in the night Three thousand Foot, and about Four hundred Horse, with Orders to possess themselves of Or Euryalus, a Fort upon the highest Point of the Hill over the City call'd the Epipole. Euryclus, who presently effected what they were commanded to do. The Carthaginians thinking to surprize the Enemy, fell on about midnight. Amilcar commanded the whole Body, and led them up, having always a strong Party near to support him. Dinocrates, Master of the Horse, follow'd him. The Army was divided into two Battalions, one of Barbarians, and the other of Grecian Confederates. A Rabble likewise of divers other Nations follow'd, to get what Plunder they could; which sort of People, as they are of no use in an Army, so they are many times the cause of sudden Alarms, and vain and needless Fears, which often occasions great Mis∣chief and Prejudice. And at that time the Passes being strait and rough, the Drivers of the Carriages, and other Servants and Attendants of the Army that were not of any Ant. Ch. 307. form'd Companies, quarrell'd one with another for the Way, and not being able to move forward by reason of the Throng, some fell to down-right Blows; so that many on each side coming in to help their several Parties, a great Tumult, Noise and Clamour, ran through the whole Army. Upon which, the Syracusians, who were posted at Euryclus, understanding the approach of the Barbarians by their tumultuous March, and having the higher Ground, fell in upon the Enemy. Some from the high Places where they were posted, gall'd them as they came on with their Darts and Arrows, and some prevented them by gaining the necessary Passes, and so block'd up their Way. Others drave those that fled Headlong down the Rocks; for by reason of the Darkness of the Night, and want of Intelligence, they thought the Enemy was coming upon them with a mighty Army; so that the Carthaginians. by reason of the Disturbance and Tumult amongst their own Men, . their Ignorance of the Ways, and straitness of the Passages, were at a stand, and confounded, and at last fled outright: And because there was no room to give way, great numbers of them were trodden under Foot by their own Horse; and part of the Army fought one with another, as if they had been Enemies, led into the Error by the Darkness of the Night. Amilcar indeed at the first receiv'd the Enemy's Charge with great Resolution, and call'd out to the Colonels and Commanders to stand to it, and valiantly bear the Brunt with the rest. But afterwards being deserted by his Soldiers, through the Consternation that was amongst them, (having much ado to save his Life) * For that some made away e∣ven upon the appearance of the Enemy, e∣specially being penn'd up, and in amaze through their Ignorance of the Places. he fell into the hands of the Syracusians. Here a Man may justly observe the Inconstancy of Fortune, and the surprizing Events Men are overtaken with, contrary to what they expected. For Agathocles not inferiour to any for Valour, and who had the Command of a great Army in the Battel at Hi∣mera, was not only beaten by the Barbarians, but lost the best and greatest part of his Army. But those that were left, and penn'd up within the Walls of Syracuse, with a small handful of Men, that had been before beaten, not only routed the Army of the Carthaginians, by whom they were besieg'd, but took Amilcar the General, one of the no∣blest of the Citizens of Carthage, Prisoner: And that most to be admir'd is, that a small Body of Men by an Ambuscado, and the Advantage of the Place, should utterly rout Ant. Ch. 307. an Army of an Hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse. So that it's very true what's in every Body's Mouth, Many things are vain and to no purpose in P. 748. War. After this Flight, the Carthaginians scatter'd and dispers'd far one from another, scarce got together the next day. But the Syracusians returning to the City with much Spoil, deliver'd Amilcar to them that were resolv'd to revenge themselves of him: They remem∣bred what was foretold by the Augur, That he should Sup in Syracuse the next day; the Truth of which, the Deity now confirm'd by the Event. The Kindred therefore of them that were slain, led Amilcar bound through all Parts of the City, and after they had most horridly tormented him, kill'd him with the greatest Scorn and Contempt ima∣ginable. Then the principal Men of the City sent his Head to Agathocles, with an Ex∣press Amilcar. Head sent  Africa. to give him an Account of the late Victory. But the Army of the Carthaginians after their Defeat, though they came to understand what was the Cause of such great Calamities and Misfortunes, yet were scarce after all Ant. C
freed from their Fears: And because they wanted a General, Quarrels arose between the Barbarians and the Grecians. The Exiles therefore, and the rest of the Greeks, made Dino∣crates General over themselves: And the Carthaginians intrusted the supream Command with those that were next in Dignity to the late General At this time, when the Agrigen∣tines The Agrigen∣tines seek to Command Si∣cily. perceiv'd that Sicily was now in that Condition, as that it might be easily gain'd, they began to seek after the Sovereign Command of the Island themselves. For they suppos'd, that the Carthaginians were not able to deal with Agathocles in the War; and that Dinocra∣tes, who had none but a company of Fugitives about him, might be easily vanquish'd; and that the Syracusians, who were grievously press'd for want of Provisions, would not so much as attempt to gain the Sovereign Command. And lastly, that which was of greatest weight was, That inasmuch as they took up Arms to free all the Greek Cities, they concluded, that all would readily concur, both upon the account of the Hatred they bore against the Barbarians, and the Natural Love and Regard they all had to the Laws of their own Country. They created therefore Xenodicus General, and sent him forth to the War with a considerable Army, who forthwith makes to Gela, and by some of his own Friends, was in the Night let into the City; and so gain'd both the Town more Forces, and a great deal of Money, at one and the same time. The Geloans having thus  Ch. 307. recover'd their Liberty, join'd in the War with the whole Strength and Power of the City, and most readily put to their helping Hands for the restoring all the Cities to their ancient Laws. This Attempt of the Agrigentines being nois'd abroad throughout the whole Island, a sud∣den itch of Liberty spread over all the Cities: And first, the Enneans sent Agents, and deli∣ver'd up their City to the Agrigentines, who freeing this City, march'd on to Erbessus, a Garison of the Carthaginians: Here was a sharp Engagement; but the Citizens coming in to the Assistance of the Agrigentines, the Garison was expuls'd, and many of the Bar∣barians kill'd, and Five hundred laid down their Arms and gave up themselves. While the Agrigentines were busi'd in these Affairs, some of Agathocles his Soldiers in Syracuse having taken Echetla, wasted and harrass'd the Country of the Leontines and Ca∣mareans. This Calamity grievously afflicted the Cities, because the Country was laid wast, and all the Corn and Fruits destroy'd: Whereupon Xenodicus the General march'd into those Parts, and drave the Enemy out of the Country of the Leontines and Camare∣nians, and then retaking Echetla, which was a very strong Fort, he restor'd the Democra∣tical Government to the City, and struck a Terror into the Syracusians. To conclude, he march'd up and down to the several Garisons and Cities, and freed them from the Cartha∣ginian Government. P. 749. In the mean time, the Syracusians being in great Straits and Perplexity for want of Pro∣vision, Ant. Ch. 307. when they understood that some Ships were coming with Corn, fitted out Twen∣ty Gallies; and understanding that the Barbarians kept but a slight Guard where they lay, they slipt by undiscern'd, and got as far as to the Megareans, and there waited for the Megara in Sicily, at the Foot of the Mountain Me∣gara. Merchants. But Thirty Carthaginian Gallies making up to them, they prepar'd themselves at first to fight: But being presently driven ashore, they left their Ships and swam out, and so escap'd to a certain Temple of Juno, upon which there was a sharp Dispute about the Ships; the Carthaginians threw in Grappling-Irons, and hal'd them with Force off from the Land, and so took Ten of them; the rest were sav'd by some Help that came in out of the City. And this was the Condition of Sicily at that time. In Africa, after that they who brought the Head of Amilcar were arriv'd there; Aga∣thocles, as soon as he had receiv'd it, rid up so near to the Enemy's Camp as that his Voice might be heard, and shewing them the Head, told them how all their Forces in Si∣cily were destroy'd, which presently caus'd most bitter Mourning and Lamentation among the Carthaginians, who bowed down themselves in Adoration of the Head of their King, (according to the Custom of their Country,) and looking upon his Death to be their own Calamity, had no Hearts further to prosecute the War. Agathocles on the other side, (lifted up with his Successes in Africa, and with such Confluence of Prosperity,) bore himself high in mighty Hopes and Expectations for the future, as if he had been now out of the reach of all Dangers. But Fortune did not think it fit to suffer Things to run on Ant. Ch. 307. in the same course of Prosperity, but brought him under most imminent Hazards and Diffi∣culties from his own Soldiers. For one Lysiscus, one of his Colonels, being invited by Agathocles to Supper, when he was heated with Wine, and in his Cups fell a railing against him with most bitter Imprecations. But , because he had a great Esteem for the Man upon the account of his Valour, pass'd by all with a left: But Archagathus his Son on the contrary being enrag'd at him, torted upon him with bitter Reproaches and Threats. When Supper was ended, and every one was return'd to his Tent, Lysis∣cus
contemptuously charg'd Archagathus as an incestuous Adulterer with his own Step-mother: For he was judg'd to be too familiar with Alcia, his Father's Wife. Whereupon Archaga∣thus, Agatho∣cles his Son, kills Lysiscus; all the Army Mutiny upon it. Archagathus, stirr'd up to a higher degree of Madness and Rage, snatch'd a Lance out of the Hands of one of the Guard and ran him through the Side, who falling down dead, immediately was carry'd into his Tent by those that attended him. As soon as it was day, the Friends of him that was slain, and many others of the Soldiers, ran up and down, and (inrag'd at the Fact that was committed) fill'd the Camp with Tumult and Confusion. Many likewise of the Captains, who were subject to be call'd in Question for their Crimes, fearing what might ensue, made use of the present Occasion, and stirr'd up the Soldiers to a terrible Mutiny: So that the whole Army inflam'd with the Hatred of his Cruelty, ran to their Arms to execute condign Punishment upon the Murderer. At length they resolv'd to put Archagathus to Death; and that if Agathocles did not deli∣ver up his Son, he should Die in his Room: Besides, they demanded of him their Ar∣rears, and chose new Officers and Captains to Command the Army. At length they possess'd themselves of the Walls of Tunis, and hemm'd in the Princes round with their Ant. Ch. 307. Guards. This Mutiny coming to the Ears of the Enemy, the Carthaginians sent some of their own Men, to persuade the Soldiers to a Revolt, promising them larger Pay, and am∣ple Rewards: Whereupon many of the Captains promis'd to bring over the Army to them. But Agathocles, when he saw he was in the utmost extremity of Danger, and Agathocles his Stratagem  deliver him∣self from his own Soldiers. P. 750. fearing lest if he were given up to the Enemy, he should end his Days with Disgrace and Dishonour, concluded that it was much better if he must Suffer, to be kill'd by the Soldiers: Whereupon he laid aside his Purple Robe, and put on a poor Country-fellow's Habit, and came into the midst of them; at which strange Sight there was a deep Si∣lence, and many came in from every Quarter flocking about him; where he made a Speech to them fitted for the present Occasion, wherein he set forth the Acts he had done to that time, and told them, He was now ready to Die, if they (his Fellow-Sol∣diers) thought fit it should be so. For he was resolv'd never (like a Coward) to make exchange of his Honour for his Life, of which (he said) they should be then Eye-wit∣nesses, and thereupon drew out his Sword as if he would run himself through: And just as he was ready to thrust it into his Body, the whole Army call'd out aloud to him to For∣bear, and all gave their Voices generally, That he should be Acquitted and Discharg'd from all further Accusation. The Soldiers then wishing him to put on his Royal Robes, he Ant. Ch. 30 return'd them many Thanks, shedding many Tears, and then Cloath's himself again as became his State and Dignity, and the People with chearful Countenances congratulated the Reassumption of his former Power. In the mean time, the Carthaginians expected every hour that the Greeks would come over to them. But Agathocles, that he might not lose the Advantage of the present Occasion, led the Army out against them; for the Carthaginians expecting continually a Revolt and a De∣sertion from the Enemies Camp, never in the least dream'd of what was really in Agita∣tion. But Agathocles, as soon as he approach'd the Enemies Camp, presently commanded his Men to sound a Charge, and so forthwith fell in upon them, and hew'd them down before him. The Carthaginians being surpriz'd by this sudden Attack, after the Loss of many of their Men, fled to their Camp. And thus Agathocles, who was near losing of his Life through the Rashness of his Son, by his own Valour not only extricated himself out of the Snare, but utterly routed his Enemies: But they who were the Heads and Ringleaders of the Mutiny, and as many others as bore a Grudge to the Prince, to the Number of Two hundred and upwards, vilely deserted, and went over to the Car∣thaginians. Having now gone through the Affairs of Africa and Sicily, we shall next take notice of what was done in Italy. For there the Hetruscans came with a great Army against Su∣trium, a Roman Colony: To whose Defence the Consuls march'd out with great Forces Affairs in Italy. Ant. Ch. 307. and fought and routed the Hetruscans, and pursu'd them to their very Camp. About' the same time the Samnites (when the Roman Army was abroad at a great distance without the least fear of an Enemy) besieg'd the Japyges, Allies to the Romans: Therefore the Consuls were forc'd to divide their Forces. Fabius continu'd in Hetruria; but Marcius march'd against the Samnites, and took the City of Allita by Storm, and freed their Allies from the Siege of Japyges. But Fabius, while the Hetrurians flock'd in great multitudes to besiege Sutrium, slipt secretly by the Enemy through the bordering Country, and made an Incursion into the Higher Hetruria, which had for a long time been free from all man∣ner of Inroads and Invasions; where breaking in upon the sudden, he wasted and harass'd the Country up and down, and routed those of the Inhabitants that made head against him, and kill'd many of them, and took a great number of Prisoners. Afterwards he
overcame and kill'd many of them in another Battel at a Place call'd Perusia, and put that People into a great Consternation. He was the first of the Romans that ever enter'd with an Army into those Parts. But he made Peace with the Arretines and Crotoneans, and them of Perusina; and taking the City call'd Castula, he forc'd the Hetrurians to raise their Siege before Sutrium. This Year there were two Censors created at Rome; the one of whom was Appius Clau∣dius, who with the concurrence of his Collegue, Caius Plautius, abrogated many of the ancient Laws: For to gratifie the People, he made no account of the Senate. He brought Water (which was from him call'd Appia) into Rome from Places About 10 miles. fourscore Furlongs di∣stant, P. 751. and expended a vast Sum of Money in this Work, receiv'd out of the Treasury by Consent of the Senate. Then he laid a Causey of hard Stone the greatest part of that way, which is from him call'd Appia, extending from Rome to Capua, a About 120 miles. Thousand Fur∣longs An Ch. 307. The Appian . and upwards; and with great Costs and Expence levell'd all the rising Grounds, and fill'd up all the Holes and hollow Places, making all even and plain; but hereby drain'd the Treasury almost of all the Money that was in it. And by this his laying out of himself in promoting the Publick Good, he left behind him an immortal Memorial. He also made up the Senate not only of the Nobility (as the ancient Custom was) but likewise of the Such as had been Slaves, and were see free. Libertines, by chusing many of them, and mixing them with the other, which the Patritians took very heinously. Moreover, he gave liberty to the Citizens to incorporate themselves into what Tribe they thought fit, and to be tax'd in what Rank soever they pleas'd. At length, perceiving how greatly he was envy'd by the Nobility, he avoided the Storm by insinuating himself into the favour of the Common People, and making use of them as a Bulwark against the Envy of the Patricians. In must' ring of the Horse, he never took any Mans Horse from him; neither ever remov'd any Person never so mean out of the Senate (that was once chosen) when he took an account of the Senators, which the Censors us'd to do. But the Consuls, both out of Envy, and to gratifie the Nobility, conven'd a Senate of such as were inroll'd by the former Censors, and not those that were allow'd by him: But the People oppos'd them, and sided with Appius; and that he might confirm the Ad∣vancement of such as were but of mean and obscure Birth, he preferr'd one Cains Flavius, the Son of a Libertine, to the Office of Aedilis, and to the highest Place in that Office. And this was the first Roman born of a Libertine, that ever before was advanc'd to that Honourable Station. Appius at length being remov'd out of his Office, out of fear of the Senate's Malice, kept his House, under pretence of being blind. Now Charinus was Chief Governor at Athens, and the Romans created Publius Decius and Olym. 118. 1. Ant. Ch. 306. An. M. 3642. The Acts of Pto∣lemy in Co∣rinth and other places. Quintus Fabius Consuls. And at Elis was celebrated the Hundred and eighteenth Olympiad, in which Apollonides of Tegeata bore away the Prize: At which time Ptolemy sailing from Myndus along the Islands which lay in his way, came to Andros, and putting out the Garison that was there, restor'd it to her former Liberty: Thence he sail'd to the Isthmus, and re∣ceiv'd Sicyon and Corinth from Cratesipolis. But for what reasons, and upon what account he took these eminent Cities into his hands, we have related in the former Books, and therefore we shall forbear repetition. He design'd also to restore the rest of the Greek Cities to their Liberties, judging that by gaining the Hearts of the Grecians, he should very much promote his own Interest. But when the Peloponnesians were order'd to pro∣vide Money and Victuals, but perform'd nothing of what they had agreed to, he was so incens'd, that he made Peace with Cassander, upon this Condition, That each of them should retain those Cities they had then in their hands. Then having put Garisons into Sicyon and Corinth, he return'd into Aegypt. In the mean time, Alexander's  Ant. Ch. 306. Cleopatra being incens'd against Antigonus, of her own accord in∣clin'd to Ptolemy, and left Sardis to go to him: She was Sister of Alexander, the Conque∣ror of the Persians, the Daughter of Philip Son of Amyntas, and the Wise of Alexander, who undertook an Expedition into Italy. And therefore upon the account of the Noble∣ness of her Birth, Cassander, Lysunachus, Antigonus, and Ptolemy, and even the Chiefest of Alexander's Captains after his death, were every one ambitious to marry her: For every one hop'd by this Marriage to draw all the the Macedonians after them; and therefore P. 752. each coveted to be related to the Royal Family, looking upon that as the way to gain the Sovereign Power and Command over all the rest. But the Governour of Sardis (whom Antigonus had commanded to retain Cleopatra) stopt her Journey; and afterwards by Order from Antigonus, with the help of some Women, privily murther'd her. But Antigonus, Cleopatra kill'd by the Governour of Sardis. who would no ways be thought guilty of her death, struck off the Heads of some of those Women, for having a hand in her Murder, and bury'd her with all the Magnificence
that might be. And such was the end of Cleopatra, before any Solemnization of Marri∣age; who was earnestly coveted as a Wife by all the most Noble Captains and Generals of the Army. Having now gone through the Affairs of Asia and Greece, we shall pass over to other Parts of the World. In Africa the Carthaginians sent an Army against the Numidians (who had revolted from them) in order to reduce them. Upon which, Agathocles left his Son Archagathus with Ant. Ch. 306. Agathocles. farther acts in Africa. part of the Army at Tunis; and he himself, with Eight thousand Foot, and Eight hun∣dred Horse of the most Valiant Men of his Army, and Fifty African Carriages, made after the Enemy with all speed possible. In the mean time the Carthaginians being come among the Numidians, call'd Suphons, caus'd many of the Inhabitants to join with them; and reduc'd likewise some of the Revolters to their former Alliance and Confederacy with them; but when they heard of the Enemies approach they Incamp'd upon an high piece of ground lying on the other side of a deep and unpassable River, to secure them∣selves against all suddain Attacks and incursions of the Enemy; and commanded the most active Numidians to hinder the march of the Grecians by vexing them ever and anon with continual Attacks in the Rear; who accordingly executing their Commands, Aga∣thocles sent out the Archers and Slingers against them; and he himself with the rest of the Army made towards the Enemies Camp. But the Carthaginians understanding his design drew the Army out of the Camp, and stood rang'd in Battle array, ready and prepar'd for fight: As soon as they saw Agathocles his Soldiers pass the River, they fell upon them in a full Body, and made a great slaughter at that part of the River where it was so difficult to pass; and in this indeavour to force their way through the River, the Greeks as far excell'd the Barbarians in valour as they did them in number and multitude; while both sides stood Ant. Ch. 306 stoutly to it for a long time, the Numidians in each Army left off fighting expecting the issue of the Ingagement, with a design to rifle the Carriages of that party that was Routed. At length Agathocles with those brave and valiant men he had about him, broke through that part of the Enemies Battalion, that was oppos'd to him, and put them to flight, and the rest presently follow'd them; only the Grecian Horse that sided with the Car∣thaginians under the Command of Clino bore the shock of the Agathocleans, who prest very sore upon them; upon which there was a very sharp Ingagement, and many fighting couragiously di'd upon the spot, the rest by good fortune escaping: Then Agathocles leaving off the pusuit, bent all his strength against them who had fled back into the Camp; but endeavouring to break in at places strongly fortifi'd and of difficult ap∣proach, he sustain'd as much loss as the Carthaginians; however he remitted nothing of his resolution, but being lifted up with his Victory still prest upon the Enemy, confidently concluding he could force the Camp. In the mean time the Numidians were very in∣tent in observing how things were like to go, but could not fall upon the Bag and Bag∣gage P. 753 of the Carthaginians because both Armies were so near the Camp. When therefore they saw that Agathocles was at a great distance, and the Guards but small in the Grecians Camp, they broke in there, and easily kill'd those that withstood them, and took many Prisoners, and possess'd themselves of other prey and plunder. Which as soon as Aga∣thocles came to understand, he hasted thither with his Forces, and recover'd some of the spoil: but the Numidians carri'd most away with them, and in the night got a long way off from the place. Then the Prince erected a Trophy, and divided all the Booty Ant. Ch. 306. amongst the Soldiers that none might repine at the losses they had sustain'd. The Greeks likewise that sided with the Carthaginians, he committed Prisoners to a Castle, who fearing the Prince would revenge himself of them in the Night fell upon the Guard in the Castle; but being worsted, they got into a Fort and shelter'd themselves there to the Number of a Thousand at least, amongst whom were above Five hundred Syracusians. As soon as Agathocles came to know what was done he march'd with his Army thither, where after Terms and Articles agreed upon, those Complotters came forth of the Hould, but he put them all to the sword. Being crown'd with this Victory, and having done all that he could possibly contrive for the subduing of the Carthaginians, he sent Ortho the Syracusian to Cyrene as his Ambassador to Ophellas, who was one of Alexander's Captains all along in the late Wars, and was then possess'd of Cyrene with the Ophellas Lord of Cyrene de∣co and cut off by Agatho∣cles. neighbouring Cities, and had the Command of a great Army, and was contriving how to inlarge his Dominion, and while he was beating his brains with these ambitious pro∣jects, Agathocles his Agent just then arriv'd, to solicite him to join with him in affording his assistance to subdue the Carthaginians. In return of which piece of service Agathocles promis'd him he would yield up to him the Soveragin Command of all Africa, and
that he himself would be content with Sicily, where being freed from all fear of future dangers and troubles from the Carthaginians he should be able with ease and safety to Ant. Ch. 306. reduce the whole Island to his Obedience. And if he should have a desire to inlarge his Dominion, he said that Italy was near at hand, where he might gratifie his Ambition in that respect. That Africa was far from him, separated by a large Sea, and that he came not into it of choice, but was driven thither of necessity. This therefore coming in the way so heightned him in his former hopes that he readily hearkn'd to him, and sent his Agent to Athens to pray their Aid and Association in this War. For he had marri'd from thence Eurydice the Daughter of Miltiades, who was General of the Con∣querors at the Battle of Marathon; and therefore upon the account of this Marriage, and other acts of kindness he was receiv'd into the Franchises of the City; many of the Athenians readily hearkned to this motion, and not a few likewise of the other Grecians willingly join'd in this Expedition, hoping thereby to have the sharing of the richest parts of all Africa with all the wealth of Carthage amongst themselves: For the State of Affairs of Greece by season of the continual Wars, and Quarrels of the Princes among themselves was but in a very weak and low condition, therefore they concluded they should not only reap much advantage, but be freed likewise from those pressing evils which at that time lay heavy upon them. Ophellas at length (when he had made plentiful provision of all things necessary for the Expedition in hand) led forth his Army, having with him above Ten thousand Foot, Ant. Ch. 306. and Six hundred Horse, and a Hundred Chariots, and above Three hundred Men-drivers and Soldiers to manage them, besides Extraordinaries and followers of the Camp to the number o Ten thousand more; many of which drew their Wives and Children with their stuff and Baggage along with them, so that they looked like to a Colony going to be planted. Having therefore march'd Eighteen days journey, and in them gone About 360. . P. 754. Three thousand Furlongs, they came to a City call'd Automolus, and there Encamp'd; thence marching forward, they came to a mountain shelving down on both sides with steep and sharp Rocks, having a deep Valley in the midst, out of which rose a soft stone spiring up like unto a sharp Rock, at the Foot of which was a wide Cave overshadow'd with Ivy and Leaves of the Yew tree, in which is reported, Queen Lamia, a Lady of ad∣mirable Lamias Cave. Beauty formerly dwelt; but for her Cruelty, they say her face was afterwards transform'd into the shape of a Beast; for it's reported that All her Chil¦dren (they say) were kill'd by Juno because they were got by Iupiter. being bereav'd of all her Children, she took it so grievously, that she envy'd all other women that had Children, and commanded the poor Infants to be pluck't out of their mothers Arms, and forthwith murther'd. And therefore even to this day the Tale of this woman is fresh among Children, and with the Name of Lamia they are presently put into a very great fright. Moreover, being given much to Drunkeness, she let every one do what they pleas'd, without any inquiry after men's manners; and because she never seriously minded what was done in her Province, it was believ'd that she was blind. And therefore there's a Ant. Ch. 306. Fable told by some that she put her Eyes into a little purse, excusing her drunken Sottishness by such an invented Tale, as if that was the reason she saw nothing. That she was in Africa one brings in Euripides for a witness, for so he says To whom is that most hateful Name unknown? Or of th' African Lamia the spawn? But Ophellas removing again. Travel'd with great toil and labour through a dry and thirsty Country full of wild Beasts; for they did not only want Water, but Bread and other Provision, so that the whole Army was in danger to perish. These Sandy Deserts near the Syrtes were pester'd with noisom Serpents and all sorts of hurtful beasts, and it being for the most part deadly to be bitten by these venomous creatures, many were brought into a sad condition; out of the reach both of friends help, and remedy from Medicines. For some of the Serpents were of the same colour with the Earth, so that none could see them before they were hurt, so that many treading upon them were stung to death. At last after two months miserable travel with much ado they carne to Agathocles his Camp, where they pitcht their Camps at a small distance one from another; on the other hand the Carthaginians hearing that they were come up to him, were in a great Consternation, seeing the great forces that were making against them.
Agathocles hearing of his approach, went to meet him, and advis'd him by all means to have a care of his Army after so tedious and hard a Journey, and to see them well refresh'd. He himself lay quiet a few days, observing every thing that was done in the neighbouring Camp, at length taking his opportunity when the greater part of Ophellas his Army were gone a forraging into the Country, and taking notice that Ophellas never suspected any thing of what he was in contriving, he suddainly call'd his Army together, and before them accus'd Ophellas, for that being call'd for as an Assistant, in this War, he went about Ant. Ch. 306 to betray him; and having incens'd the multitude, drew out his whole Army in Bat∣talion against him and his Cyrenians. Ophellas growing amaz'd at this unexpected altera∣tion, put nevertheless himself and the men he had with him, in a posture of defence: but the Enemy being too quick for him, and he too weak for them, he was there slain upon the place. Agathocles persuaded the rest that were left, to lay down their Arms; then telling them what great things he would do for them, he got the whole Army to himself. And thus Ophellas by indulging his Ambition, and being over credulous came to this fatal Catastrophe: In the mean time Bomilcar at Carthage was waiting for an oppor∣tunity Bomilcar s∣p to b  of Cr∣thage, , an is put to a. P. 755. to put in execution what he had a long time been hammering in his brain in order to gain the Soveraign power and authority. And although he had several times fit occasions offer'd him for that purpose, yet always some light and inconsiderable cause or other intervening, put a stop to his design. For some superstitious persons many times are preparing to act great and remarkable pieces of Wickedness, and yet always chuse rather to delay, than act, to put off, than execute the thing; which even then Ant. Ch. 306 came to pass. For concluding he had a fair opportunity offer'd him, the better to effect his purpose, he sent away the most eminent Persons of the Citizens that were about him, in an Expedition against the Numidians, that he might have none of the Nobi∣lity at hand to oppose him; but then checkt by his own Fears, he durst not reveal to any his design of gaining the Principality, and so he let the matter fall again. At length it fell out that he attempted to set up himself at the very same time that Ophellas was cut off by Agathocles; and neither of them knew what was done in one another's Camp. For Aga∣thocles knew nothing of the Ambition of the other, or of the Tumult and Disorder that was in the City, which he might at that time have easily subdu'd: For if Bomilcar had been surpriz'd and taken in the very Fact, he would have chosen rather to have join'd with Agathocles, than to have given up himself to be punish'd by the Citizens: Neither did the Carthaginians know any thing of Agathocles his falling upon Ophellas; for they might easily have overcome him by joining with Ophellas. But I suppose both sides were well enough content to be ignorant, although they were things of great weight and con∣cern, and contrived by them that were near one to another. For Agathocles being plotting to cut off a Person that was his Friend and Associate, minded not to enquire after any thing that was in doing with the Enemy: And Bomil∣car on the other side, contriving how to overturn the Liberties of his Country, cared not what was in agitation in Agathocles his Camp, whose purpose was now not so much to con∣quer Ant. Ch. 306 an Enemy, as to subdue his own Fellow-Citizens. Matters being thus, here some may find fault with History, seeing many things of divers Natures falling out at one and the same time, and that Writers are forc'd to break in with new Matter of another na∣ture, and to divide between things done at the same instant, that the Truths related may delight the more. But to Answer this, the History that is deny'd this liberty; al∣though it afterwards represents the things done, yet it Postpones the true pleasure of the thing at too great a distance from the first Relation. Bomilcar therefore picking out a select number of Men in the Neopo. New City (as it's call'd) not far distant from the Old Carthage, dismist all the rest; then having call'd togther Five hundred of the Citizens, who were ∣ privy to his Design, and about a Thousand Merce∣nary Soldiers, he declar'd himself sole Monarch of the Carthaginians. Then he divided his Troops into Five Bodies, and set upon the City, killing all that he met in the High-ways; upon which, an incredible Terror and Amazement possest the whole City; At first, the Carthaginians suspected that the Town was betray'd, and that the Enemy had broke in by that means. But when the Truth was known, the young Men Marshall'd themselves, and made against the Tyrant; who hasten'd into the Forum, killing all he met in the Streets, and slaughtering great numbers of naked and unarm'd Citizens. But Ant. Ch. 306. the Carthaginians mounting the tops of the Houses that were round about  Market-place, cast down showers of Darts from thence, so that the Conspirators (the place be∣ing altogether expos'd to the Shot) were gall'd most grievously. Whereupon in a  Body they forc'd their way through the narrow Passes, and got into the New City, be∣ing ply'd and wounded with Darts and Arrows all along as they came under the Hou∣ses.
Then possessing themselves of a Hill, (the whole City being now in Arms) the Carthaginians drew up their Camp in the face of the Rebels. At length they sent some P. 756. of the Ancientest and Gravest of their Citizens to them, and remitted what was past, and so all things were peaceably compos'd. Towards all the rest indeed they perform'd their Articles, and (because of the Cloud that hung over the City,) pass'd by the Crimes committed; but without any regard had to their Oaths, they most ignomi∣niously tormented Bomilcar, and put him to death. And thus the Carthaginians, when their Common-wealth was near upon the point of expiring, recover'd their Ancient Form of Government. In the mean time Agathocles loaded all his Transport-Ships with Spoils, and such of the Agathocles sends Spoils to Syracuse, most lost in a Storm. Cyreneans as he found not fit and serviceable for the War, he put on board, and sent them to Syracuse: But a fierce Tempest overtook them, in which some of the Ships were lost, and others were cast upon the Pithecusian Islands bordering upon Italy, so that very few arriv'd at Syracuse. In Italy the Roman Consuls assisted the Marsilians (who were sorely prest by the Sam∣nites,) Affairs of Italy. and were Conquerors, killing great numbers of the Enemy upon the place. Then they march'd through the Country of the Umbri, and invaded Hetruria, then in War with them, and took a Castle call'd Caprium by Storm. But the Inhabitants sending their Ambassadors to Treat upon Terms of Peace, they made Peace with the Tarquinians for Forty Years: But with the rest of the Hetrurians only for one Year. CHAP. III. Demetrius frees all the Grecian Cities; takes the Pireum at Athens. Demetrius Phalerius flies to Ptolemy. Honours given to Demetrius in Athens. He sails to Cyprus; his Acts there; Besieges Salamis. His great Engines. Ptolemy sails to Cyprus. Sea Fight between Ptolemy and Demetrius, wherein Ptolemy is routed. Antigonus takes the Title of King, and the like do several other Captains. Agathocles his Acts at Utica in Africk: Ty'd pris'ners to a great Engine. The sorts of People in Africa. Xenodocus routed in Sicily by Agathocles his Cap∣tains. Agathocles his Acts in Sicily. What was done by Archagathus in Afri∣ca. Maschala inhabited by some Greeks that came from Troy. Apes, their Custom among the Pithecusce. The Carthaginians draw out Thirty thousand Men out of Carthage Misfortunes to Agathocles his Captains in Africa. The Ar∣my block'd up and almost starv'd: Agathocles beats the Carthaginians at Sea near Syracuse. His Captain Leptines harasses the Agrigentines. Agathocles Feasts the Syracusians. His jocund Temper. His Cruelty. Routed in Africa. Carthagi∣nian Camp burnt. The misfortune afterward to both Armies by one Cause. Agatho∣cles in Chains by his own Men. Steals out of Africa. The Soldiers kill his Two Sons. They make Peace with the Carthaginians. Agathocles his exceeding Cru∣elty at Aegista; and afterwards at Syracuse. AT the end of the Year, Anaxicrates was Created Chief Governor of Athens, and Olymp. 118. 2. Ant. Ch. 305. Appius Claudius, and Lucius Volutius Consuls at Rome. At this time Demetrius the Son of Antigonus being furnish'd with Two strong Armies, one by Land, and the other by Sea, and provided of Weapons and all other necessaries for the War, set forth from Ephesus with full Orders and Instructions to set all the Grecian Cities at liberty, and in the first place to free Athens, that was then held by a Garison of Cassander's. To this pur∣pose he arriv'd at the Pireum with his Fleet; and upon his first arrival caus'd the Edict to Demetrius set, all the Cities in Greece free. be proclaim'd, and then assaulted the Pyreum on every side. But Dionysius the Governor of the Fort, Mynichia, and Demetrius Phalerius, whom Cassander had made President of the City, with a strong Body of Men beat off the Enemy from the Walls; But some of Antigonus's Men forc'd their way near the Shoar, and scal'd and got over the Walls; whereupon many within came in to them as their Assistants, and in this manner was the Pyrcum taken. Dionysius the Governor fled into Mynichia, and Demetrius Phalerius into the City. The next day he with some others was sent by the City to Demetrius, and
after he had treated with him concerning the Liberty of the City, and his own preser∣vation, Demetrius Phalerius flies into Aegypt. he prevail'd so far as to be dismiss'd with a safe Conduct, and so without any further Care or Concern for Athens, he fled to Thebes, and thence to Ptolemy into Egypt, And thus he who had Govern'd the City for the space of Ten Years, was in this manner thrust out of his Country. The People of Athens being hereupon restor'd to their Liber∣ty, Ant. Ch. 305. decreed publick Honours to them that were the Authors of their Deliverance. De∣metrius forthwith brings up his Engines and Battering Rams, and Besieges Munychia both P. 757. by Sea and Land. But the Dionysians made a stout resistance, and by the advantage and difficulty of the heighth of the places to be Assaulted, beat off the Demetrians (for Mu∣nychia is not only strong by Nature, but by Art also, defended by high Walls) though Demetrius indeed far exceeded the other in number of Men, and Warlike preparations, At length, after the Assault had continu'd for the space of Two Days together, many of those within being wounded and kill'd by the Shot from the Engines, so as that there were not Men enough left to defend the Place, the Garison Soldiers began to Flag. In the mean time the Demetrians who Assaulted by turns, and mutually reliev'd one another with fresh Supplies, having clear'd the Wall by their Shot, broke into Munychia, and so forcing the Soldiers within to lay down their Arms, they took the Governor prisoner. Having dis∣patcht this Business in a few Days time, Demetrius demolish'd Munychia, and entirely re∣stor'd the People to their Liberty, and entred with them into a League of Peace and A∣mity. Ant. Ch. 305. The Athenians therefore made a Decree (which was written by Stratocles) that Golden Statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be set up and mounted upon a Chariot, next to Harmodius and Two Brothers that kill'd the Tyrant Hy∣parchus in Athens. Olymp. 66. Thucid. Hist. Honours of De∣metrius in Athens. Aristogiton; and that they should be both Adorn'd with Crowns of Gold of Two hundred Talents weight apiece; and that an Altar should be erected in Honour of them, call'd the Saviour's Altar; And in further Honour to them, to the Ten Tribes of Athens they added Two more, call'd the Antigonian and Demetrian. And thus the People of Athens, after they had been stripp'd out of all their Liberties by the Lamian War, after Fifteen Years were restor'd to their Ancient Laws and Government. Ma∣gera was still under the curb of a Garison; but Demetrius likewise took this City, and re∣stor'd the People to their former Privileges; therefore he was highly Honour'd and richly presented by the Inhabitants upon this Account. Moreover, when the Athenian Ambassador, who was sent to Antigonus, presented to him the Decree, he understand∣ing that they both wanted Corn for necessary Provision, and Timber for building of Ships, sent them a hundred and fifty Every Me∣dimna. 18 Gallons Medimna's of Wheat, and as much Timber as would build a hundred Ships. Then he withdrew the Garison out of Imbrus, and restor'd the City to the Inhabitants. Afterwards he writ to his Son Demetrius, and order'd him to call a Senate of Members chosen out of all the Confederate Citys, in order to Consult con∣cerning what might be most conducing to the publick Good of all Greece: And that he himself with all speed should transport Forces into Cyprus, and there fight Ptolemy's Cap∣tains. In Obedience to his Father's Commands, without any further delay, he put over first into Caria, and mov'd the Rhodians to make War against Ptolemy, who were slack Ant. Ch. 30. Demetrius: Voyage into Cyprus. and slow in the matter, willing rather to be Neuters, and keep in with all sides; hence first grew the Heart-burnings between them and Antigonus. Thence he sail'd into Cilicia, and furnishing himself there with Shipping and Men, he pass'd over into Cyprus with Fif∣teen thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and a Fleet consisting of an Hundred and ten Ships of Three tire of Oars apiece, of singular swiftness, and Fifty three not so swift as the other, but men of War as they were; besides Transport Ships of all sorts, answer able to so great a multitude of Men and Horses; Being landed, he first encamp'd near the Shoar not far from Carpasia, and drawing up his Ships to land, fenc'd them with a deep Trench and Ramparts; and then he set upon the Cities next at hand, and took Urania and Carpasia by Storm; and leaving a sufficient Guard to defend his Trenches about the Fleet, he march'd to Salamis. Menelaus, appointed by Ptolemy chief Commander of the Isle, being then at Salamis, Ptolemy's Brother. and seeing the Enemy within forty Furlongs of the City, drew out of the Garisons ad∣joining, to the Number of Twelve thousand Foot, and Eight hundred Horse, and went out to meet him; and fought a while; but not being able to endure the Enemy's Charge, fled, and Demetrius pursuing him even to the Gates of the City, took to the Number of Ant. Ch. 305. Three thousand of his Men, and kill'd a Thousand upon the Place. The Prisoners he P. 758. Pardon'd, and distributed them among his own Men: But finding they were ever ready to fly over again to Menelaus, because their Wealth was in Ptolemy's hands in Aegypt, he Shipp'd them all away to Antigonus his Father.
Antigonus at that time was building a City in the Upper Syria near the River Orontes, call'd by his own name Antigonia, laying out great Sums of Money upon it, and taking in within the Walls seventy Furlongs of Ground. For the Place it self was very oppor∣tune to lie as a Yoke both upon Babylon and the Upper Provinces, and likewise upon the Lower, with the other Provinces, as far down as to Aegypt. But this City continu'd not long; for Seleucus raz'd it, and transplanted the Inhabitants to another, built by himself, call'd Seleucia, after his own Name. But we shall give an Account of these things when we come to the Time proper for them. But Menelaus, after he was thus routed in Cyprus, drew in all his Engines within the Walls, and lin'd all the Bulwarks and Battlements with Soldiers, and prepar'd for Fight∣ing, observing at the same time that Demetrius was doing the like. He dispatch'd likewise a Messenger to Ptolemy, to tell him what had happen'd, and to desire more help, in re∣gard the Affairs of Cyprus were in a very low and dangerous Condition. Demetrius seeing the City was in no contemptible Condition, and that it was furnish'd with a great Number of Soldiers for its Defence, was resolv'd to prepare Engines of an Extraordinary Bigness, and all sorts of Battering Rams, and other Instruments of War, Demetrius his Engines. that might in any sort terrify the Besieg'd. He sent likewise for Workmen out of Asia, and for Iron, Timber, and every thing else that was necessary to be made use of in the Ant. Ch. 305. Works he design'd. And now every thing being ready at hand, he built an Engine, which he call'd Helepotis, from taking of Cities, Forty five Cubits broad on every side, and Ninety in height, drawn with four strong Wheels, Eight Cubits high; he made like∣wise two exceeding great Battering Rams, and Galleries to support them. He put seve∣ral great shot of Massy-Stones in the lowest Story of the Helepolis, the greatest of which weighed three Talents; In the middle were plac'd very great Machines to shoot Darts and Arrows; In the highest Part were those that were less, and a great store of Stone-shot, and above Two hundred Men, who knew the manner of managing all these De∣vices to the best advantage. Bringing up therefore his Engines to the Walls of the City, by showers of shot, he there swept off the Turrets and Battlements; and batter'd down the Walls by his Rams: But the Besieg'd made such obstinate Resistance, and opposing Engines to Engines, that the Issue for some days was very doubtful, and Toil, Labour, and Wounds were the mutual Lot and Portion of each Party. At length the Wall tumbled down, and the City was e∣ven upon the Point of being taken by Storm: But Night coming on, both sides drew off. Then Menelaus having a diligent Eye for the Security of the City, lest it should be taken by some fresh Stratagem, got a great deal of dry Stuff and Matter together, and cast it in the Night from off the Walls upon the Engines, together with many light Firebrands, Ant Ch. 305. and burnt the Principal of them. Upon the mounting up of the Flame the Demetrians came in to quench the Fire; but it was so quick and furious, that the Engines were totally Consum'd, and most of the Men that were in them. However, Demetrius, though he was for the present disappointed in his Design, yet de∣sisted not in the least, but urg'd on the Siege still both by Sea and Land, supposing that Time at last would Crown him with Victory. But Ptolemy having receiv'd Intelligence how his Forces were routed, sets Sail from Aegypt, with an Army well furnish'd both for Sea Land; and arriving at Paphos in Cyprus, Ptolemy falls to Cyprus. P. 759. took Boats and went to Citium, Two hundred Furlongs from Salamis. His whole Fleet consisted of an Hundred and forty Men of War. Long Ships, the biggest whereof was of Five Tire of Oars, and the least of Four; and these were attended with Two hundred Ships of Bur∣den, carrying no less than Ten thousand Soldiers. From thence Ptolemy dispatch'd away by Land, some Messengers to Menelaus, to bid him with all speed to send him (if possi∣bly he could) those Ships that were then in the Port of Salamis, which were Sixty Sail. For he was in hopes, that with this Addition, having made his Navy Two hundred Sail, (if he should come to a Sea Fight) he should be Victorious. But Demetrius foreseeing what might be in contriving, left part of his Army to carry on the Siege, and Mans all his Vessels with the best of his Soldiers; and places his Engines to shoot Stones, Arrows, Ant Ch. 3. and Darts of three Spans in length, upon the Forecastles of his Ships. Then with his Fleet, Top and Top-Gallant, ready prepar'd for Battel, he sail'd about to the City, and cast Anchor about a Dart's Cast from the Mouth of the Harbour, and there lay all Night, both to prevent that Fleet in the Port from joining with the other, and likewise waiting the coming up of the Enemy, being himself then prepar'd to fight him. On the other hand, Potlemy sets sail for Salamis; and in regard he had with him in his Sea Fiht be∣tween Ptolemy and Demetri∣us. Fleet a great Number of Tenders, his Navy seem'd to be exceeding great: Demetrius hearing of the Enemy's approach, left Antisthenes, the Admiral, with Ten Ships of Five
Tire of Oars, to keep in the Fleet that was in the Harbour. And commanded the Horse to keep near the Sea-side, to be ready to relieve those that should swim to Land, in case any Misfortune should happen. He himself drew up his Fleet in a Line of Battel, and made towards the Enemy, having not above a Hundred and Eight Sail, with those taken in the Forts that were Deserted. The greatest of which Ships were of Seven Tire of Oars, but the most of them were of Five. In the Left Wing were Seven Phaenician Gallies of Seven Tire of Oars, and Thirty Athenian Vessels of Four Tire of Oars, com∣manded by Medius as Admiral. To support these, he drew up Ten Gallies of Six Tire of Ant. Ch. 305. Oars, and as many of Five, conceiving it Prudence chiefly to guard that Wing where he himself intended to Engage. In the middle Battel he plac'd the Least Ships, under the Command of Themisus, the Samian, and Marsyas, the Writer of the Affairs of Macedon. The Right Wing was commanded by Hegesippus of Halicarnassus, and Pleisthias of Coos, who was Lord High Admiral of the whole Fleet. Ptolemy at the first, made with all the Sail he could in the Night time towards Salamis, in hopes to enter the Port before the Enemy: But at break of Day spying the Enemy's Fleet not far off ready Drawn-up, he likewise forthwith prepar'd for Battel: And for this purpose ordered his Transport-Ships to lie off at Sea, at a great distance, and drew up the rest in a Line: He himself commanded in the Left Wing, where were the great∣est of his Ships ready to defend him. The Fleets being thus drawn up, both sides (ac∣cording to ancient Custom) call'd (by their Priests) upon their Gods, and the whole Army follow'd the Noise and Cry of them that first began. But the Princes seeing now all (both Lives and Fortunes) ready to be laid at Stake, were both in no small concern. Deme∣trius now not a Quarter of a League distant from the Enemy, gave the Sign of Battel which was before agreed upon, and that was the lifting up of a Golden Target visible to the whole Fleet, one part after another. Ptolemy doing the same, presently the Fleets join'd, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and both Armies setting up a great shout, to it they went in a dreadful and terrible Manner. At first they made use of Bows, and P. 760. Engines to shoot Arrows, Stones, and Darts, by which many on both sides were grie∣vously Ant. Ch. 305. gall'd and wounded. When the Ships came side to side, and fell foul with great Violence one upon another; those upon the Decks fell to it with their Launces and Spears, and the Rowers (encou∣rag'd by them that call'd out to them) ply'd their Oars with extraordinary eagerness. And now the Vessels, with the Fierceness and Violence of the Charge, were so press'd upon each side, that some brush'd off the Oars one of another, so that they could neither Fly nor Pursue; and by this means disabled the Soldiers on board from making a vigo∣rous Defence, by putting a Check to the Force wherewith they might otherwise have born down upon their Enemy; others so forc'd with the Beaks of their Ships upon one ano∣ther's Poops, that they  Row'd a-Stern from time to time to repeat their strokes. In the mean time, they upon the Hatches mutually wounded one another, every one having his Mark near and plain before him. Some of the Captains of the Vessels struck the Broad-sides of their Adversaries Ships with that Violence, that the Beaks stuck fast in them, where∣upon they boarded the Enemy's Ships, giving and receiving Wounds and Blows on either side: Some catching hold upon the sides of Ships, when they miss'd Footing, in their at∣tempts to board the other, tumbled Headlong into the Sea, and were forthwith run thrô with the Lances of them that were next at hand Some who prevail'd in the boarding of their Enemy, kill'd some upon their first Entrance, and drave all the rest in rucks one upon another, and flung them over-board. In fine, various and sudden were the Turns and Changes of Fortune in this Battel; while they that were worsted now, were pre∣sently Ant. Ch. 305. after Conquerors by the height of their Ships over-topping their Adversaries; and then the Conquerors again brought into Streights, by being driven into ill Stations, and by other unaccountable Accidents, which frequently happen in these Cases. For in Land-Fights Valour apparently carries the Day, when no unusual Misfortune intervenes: But in Sea-Fights there are many and various Accidents often fall out, which sometimes on a sudden ruine them, whose Valour otherwise would certainly and most justly have brought them off Victorious. Of all the rest, Demetrius placing himself upon the Stern of his Gally of Seven Tire of Oars, behav'd himself with most Gallantry: For when he was surrounded with Throngs of Enemies on every side, he so bestirr'd himself, that he strew'd the Decks with them; some by Darts at a Distance, and others by his Lance Hand to Hand: Showers of Darts and other Weapons it's true were cast at him, but some he nim∣bly declin'd, and others he receiv'd on his Target and other defensive Arms that he then wore. In this Conflict there were Three that stuck close to him as his Assistants, where∣of one was run through and Slain with a Lance, and the other two were both wounded.
But at length, Demetrius repuls'd his Enemies, and put the Right Wing to a total Rout, and forthwith those that were next to them. On the other hand, Ptolemy who had with him the greatest Ships, and the best Sol∣diers, easily broke that Party that oppos'd him, and put them to flight, sinking some of Ant. Ch. 305. their Ships, and taking others with the Men in them, and then returning from the Pur∣suit, thought to have done the like with the rest: But when he came, he found his Left Wing totally routed by Demetrius, and him in hot pursuit of them; upon which he made back to Citium. But Demetrius now being Conqueror, committed his Men of War to Neon and Burichus, with Orders to pursue the Enemy, and to take up such as they found Swimming for their Lives. He himself with his own Ships richly adorn'd, and those that were taken of the Enemies, tow'd along after small Skiffs, return'd to his own Camp and Port whence he set out. Mean while, about the very time of the Fight at Sea, Menelaus, Governor of Salamis, sent out to the Aid of Ptolemy the Sixty Ships compleatly Man'd and Arm'd, under the Command of Menetius, who Engaging with those Ships in the Mouth of the Harbour, P. 671. that were set to keep him in, Charg'd through them; whereupon they fled for Safety to the Army that was at Land. But when the Menetians were in open Sea, and perceiv'd that they came too late, they return'd back to Salamis. This being the Issue of this Fight there were taken above a Hundred Transport Ships, wherein there were almost Eight Thousand Soldiers: Of Ships of War he took Forty, with the Men in them, and of those that were bilg'd in the Fight, about Fourscore; which being almost full of Water in the Hold, they hawl'd to Land under the Camp near the City. Demetrius had Twenty of his own Ships much damnify'd in this Fight, which yet being Refitted and Rigg'd up again, prov'd Serviceable as before. Afterwards, Ptolemy seeing no good to be done in Cyprus, return'd in Aegypt. But Demetrius having taken in all the Towns and Cities of the Island, distributed the Gari∣son Soldiers among his own Companies, to the Number of Sixteen thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse: And put Messengers on board the Greatest Ship in the Fleet, and Ant. Ch. 305. sent them to his Father, with an Account of the Victory he had gain'd. As soon as Antigonus receiv'd the News, he was so transported with the greatness of the Victory, as that he put a Diadem upon his Head, and from that time assum'd the Stile and Title of a King, and allow'd Demetrius to do the same. And Ptolemy also, not Antigonus takes the Title of a King. at all willing to hang the Head at his late ill Success, took the Crown and Title of a King to himself likewise, and in all his Letters from that time forward wrote himself King: And by their Example, other Governors of Provinces, as Seleucus, who had lately subdu'd the Upper Provinces; and Lysimachus and Cassander, who held the Provinces first allotted them, all proclaim'd themselves Kings. Having now spoken sufficient concerning these Affairs, we shall proceed to give a di∣stinct Account of things further done in Africa and Sicily. Agathocles, when he heard that the Governors of the Provinces before-mentioned had taken upon them the Dignity of Crown'd Heads, judging himself no way inferior to them, either as to the Strength and Power of their Arms, Largeness of his Dominions, or Memorable Actions, took upon him likewise the Name and Title of a King: But yet did not think fit to wear a Diadem: For from the very time of his first aspiring to the Principality he wore a Crown after the manner of a Priest, which he never laid aside all the time he was in Contest for the Tyranny. Some say, that he always wore this, because he wanted Hair. And now he made it his business to do something worthy of the honourable Title he had assum'd, and there∣fore he led his Army against the Rebellious Uticans, and surprising them on the sudden Ant. Ch. 305. Utica. took Three hundred of them as they were abroad in the Fields. At the first he par∣don'd them; and requir'd the Surrender of the City: But those within refusing so to do; he built an Engine, and hang'd up all the Prisoners upon it, living as they were, and so brought it up to the Walls. The Uticans, though they pity'd the miserable Crea∣tures, yet they valu'd more their Common Liberty, and therefore lin'd the Walls, and resolv'd to abide a Siege. Whereupon, Agathocles furnish'd his Engine with shot, Slin∣gers and Darters; and plying them with shot from his Machine, began the Siege, and so terrify'd them, that he even cauteriz'd the Spirits of the Besieg'd. Those that were up∣on the Walls at first, scrupled to use their Darts and Arrows, having their own Citizens plac'd before them as their Marks, amongst whom were some of the Chief Nobility: But the Enemy still pressing on with more violence, they were forc'd to endeavour to beat off them, that were plac'd in the Engine: And here it happen'd that the Uticans fell
into a suddain and unexpected misfortune through an inevitable necessity. For the Greeks exposing the Prisoners they took abroad in the Fields, to be Marks to their own fellow Citizens, they were constrain'd either to fall into the Enemies hands, by sparing their Townsmen, or unmercifully to kill a great number of miserable Creatures in defending of the City; as in truth it happen'd. For while they repuls'd the Enemy with all sorts P. 762. Ant. Ch. 305. of Darts and Arrows, and other Weapons, the same time as they wounded and gall'd them that manag'd the Engine, at the same time they wounded the Citizens that hung at it, shooting some through, and fastning others with their Darts and Arrows as with Nails, to that part of the Machine towards which the Body happen'd to move, so that their Ignominy and Misfortune resembled that of the Cross. And thus some suffer'd (as For∣tune order'd it) by the hands of their near Relations and Friends; Extremity and Ne∣cessity not allowing any Consideration of natural Relation. Agathocles perceiving the Townsmen to defie all danger, and throw off all Regard and Affection to their Countrymen, begirt the City round, and made a violent Assault upon a part of the Wall where it was weakest, and there broke through into the City; upon which, some fled into their Houses, and others into the Temples: Agathocles being en∣rag'd, fill'd all places with Blood and Slaughter: Some were kill'd in heat of Fight, others that were taken pris'ners were hang'd up afterwards; and those that fled to the Temples and Altars were altogether frustrated of their hopes. After he had rifl'd and plunder'd the Town, he left a Garrison in it, and march'd to the Cittadel call'd the Horse-Castle, naturally defended by a Lough adjoyning to it: But he took it by Storm after a close Siege, and a sharp Fight with the Inhabitants upon the Water with his Gallies. Thus having subu'd the Cities, he brought most of the Sea Coasts, and those that inhabited Ant. Ch. 305. in the heart of the Country, under his own Power; except the Numidians, part of whom made Peace with him, and the rest were in continual expectation to fight it out to the last. Africa was at that time divided into four sorts of Inhabitants, That is to say, The Poeni, Sorts of People in Africa who inhabited Carthage. The Libyan Poeni who had many Cities upon the Tracts lying to the Sea Shoar; who being conjoyn'd in Affinity by Marriages with the Carthaginians, were call'd by this Name that imported the Denomination of both People. The most Ancient Inhabitants, and most numerous of all the rest were call'd Africans, who hated the Carthaginians to the death, by reason of the severity of their Government. The last are the Numidians, who hold a vast Tract of Lybia as far as to the very Desarts. But Agathocles, tho' he was now, by the help of his Confederates, and the Valour of his own Army, Conqueror over the Carthaginians, yet being much concern'd for the Affairs of Sicily, he built some open Vessels, and Skiffs, row'd with Fifty Oars apiece, and put on board Two thousand Soldiers, and loos'd from Africa with his whole Fleet towards Sicily, leaving his Son Archagathus Chief Commander and Governor of Ly∣bia. While these things were acting Xenodocus General of the Agrigentines having freed Xenodocus routed in Sici∣ly. Ant. Ch. 305. many of the Cities, and rais'd the hopes of the Sicilians that they should all be restor'd to their Ancient Liberties throughout the whole Island, led out his Forces against Agatho∣cles his Captains, having with him above Ten thousand Foot, and almost a Thousand Horse. Leptines and Demophilus on the other hand, having got together as great an Army as possibly they could out of Syracuse, and the neighbouring Garrisons, encamp'd against him with Eight thousand and Two hundred Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse. At length there was a sharp Engagement between the two Armies, in which Xenodocus was routed, and lost Fifteen hundred of his Men, and was forc'd to fly to Agrigentum. The Agri∣gentines weaken'd by this loss, left off their Honourable Design, and frustrated the hopes wherewith they had fill'd the Hearts of the Confederates. Presently after the Battle, Aga∣thocles landed at Selinunt in Sicily, and shortly forc'd the Heracleots, who had regain'd their Liberty, to stoop again to his Government: Thence marching into another part of the Island he brought under the Thermites, (whose City was held by a Carthaginian Gar∣rison) and receiv'd Hostages of them. Then he took Cephaloedium, and made Leptines P. 763. Governor. Then marching up into the heart of the Country, he attempted to have en∣ter'd Centorippa in the night by the help of a Faction he had in the City: But the Trea∣chery being discover'd the Garrison Soldiers fell in upon him and drave him out of the Town, with the loss of above Five hundred of his Men. After this, some of the Apollo∣niats sent to him, and promis'd to deliver up their City; whereupon he forthwith made thither. But the Traitors being apprehended and punished, he made nothing of it the Ant. Ch. 305. first Day; but the next, after many hardships, and the loss of many of his Men, he at length with much ado gain'd the place; and putting multitudes of the Apelloniats to the
Sword, he gave the Town up to the plunder of his Soldiers. While Agathocles was thus imploy'd, Dinocrates the Captain of the Exiles reviv'd the prosecution of the former de∣sign of the Agrigentines, and declar'd himself Protector of the Common Liberty, and got together great numbers who came flocking in to him from all parts. Some out of a na∣tural love of Liberty, and others out of fear of Agathocles, were at his Devotion. Ha∣ving Agathocles  in Sici∣ly. therefore now an Army of Twenty thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse (who were all accustom'd to the hadships and toils of Exiles) he took the Field, and dar'd Agathocles to a Battel. But Agathocles being much inferior in number, made a running Fight of it; but Dinocrates still pressing close at his heels, often gain'd several advantages without D. Archagathus in Africa. without any difficulty. From this time forward things began to go backwards with Agathocles, not only in Sicily, but also in Africa. For Archagathus left General there, after his Father was gone, sent a part of the Army into the Upper Countries under the Command of Eumachus, and at first was successful; for Eumachus took the great City Tocas, and subdu'd many of the neighbouring Numidians. Then he took another Town Ant. Ch. 305. call'd Phellina, and subdu'd the bordering Inhabitants call'd Asphodelodians, who are as black as the Aethiopians. He gain'd likewise Maschala, an exceeding large City, anci∣ently inhabited by the Greeks, that planted there in their return from Troy, as we have before related in the Third Book. Afterwards he brought under the Citadel call'd the Troy. Horse-Castle, formerly taken by Agathocles: The last Town he gain'd was Acris, a Free City, the Plunder of which he gave to his Soldiers, and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves; and so loaden with spoil return'd to Archagathus to the Camp. His Name being now up for a brave and valiant Man, he undertook another Expedi∣tion into the Higher Africa; and passing by the places he had before lately taken, he inconsiderately broke into the City call'd Mittines: But the Barbarians coming upon him in a full Body in the Streets, they so far prevail'd, that unexpectedly they drave him out of the Town again, with the loss of a great number of his Men. Thence he march'd away over an high Mountain, Two hundred Furlongs in length, full of Wild Cats; there no kind of Birds bred, either in Trees, Holes, or elsewhere, because of the gree∣dy nature of these Beasts. Having pass'd over these Mountains, he enter'd into a Coun∣try abounding with Apes, and came to Three Cities in the Greek Language call'd Pithecusae. i. e. The Cities of Apes. P. 764. Ant. Ch. 305. Apes. Pithecusae: But their Customs are far different from ours; for these Apes are as familiar in the Houses as the Inhabitants themselves, and are worshipt as Gods, as the Aegypti∣ans do Dogs. These Creatures come and take Meat out of the Cellars and Butteries, when ever they are hungry, without any disturbance; and Parents use to name their Children after these Apes, as we do after the Gods; whoever kills any of them he's sure to die as a notorious Atheist: And therefore it's a common Proverb amongst some of * See Erasmus Adag. (Simiae Sanguinem pro∣fudisse. p. 492 referring to this place. Where this Proverb is ap∣plied to those that die a vio∣lent death. The Carthagi∣nians draw out Thirty thou∣sand Men out of Carthage. them, If a Man carry himself haughtily and proudly, to say, Thou hast drunk the Blood of an Ape. Eumachus took one of these Cities by Storm, and raz'd it to the ground; the other two submitted: But receiving Intelligence that the bordering Barbarians were co∣ming against him with a great Army, he hasted away as fast as he could towards the Sea Coasts. To this very time all things succeeded in Lybia according to Archagathus his hearts desire. But afterwards the Senate of Carthage upon more mature deliberation order'd their Forces to be divided into Three Bodies, and to march out of the City, one to the Towns upon the Sea Coasts, another into the heart of the Country, and the third into the upper Africa. For by this means they suppos'd they should free the City both from the Siege and the inconveniencies through scarcity of Provision at one and the same time. For being that all had flockt to Carthage from every place round, the City was in very great want, having now spent and eaten up all their Provision, so that they had nothing left to subsist upon; they knew likewise that there was no danger that the City should Ant. Ch. 305. be taken by force, because it lay so close to the Sea, and was so well guarded by the strength of the Walls, so that it was then even unaccessible: besides, they concluded that if they had considerable Armies in the Field ready to assist their Confederats upon occasion they would remain firm and constant in their Alliance. And that which was of more weight than all the rest, they hop't that by this means the Enemy would be forc'd to divide their Forces, and be gone to other places far distant from Carthage. All which good Councel was afterwards crown'd with success in all these particulars. For sending Thirty thousand Soldiers out of the City, there was not only Provision sufficient for the Merchants that were left, but a glut and overplus more than they had occasion to use; and those Consederats who before out of fear were forc'd to join with the Enemy, now recollecting themselves, return'd to them as their old friends and Allies. Hereupon Ar∣chagathus perceiving that the Carthaginians Armies were now in every corner of Africa,
divided likewise his Army; part of which he sent to the Sea Coasts, half of the rest he deliver'd to Eschrion, and the other half he led himself, leaving a sufficient Garrison at Tunis. While great Armies were thus marching to and fro all over the Country, and every one expecting a suddain Revolution at hand, all were in a fear and amazment in expectation of what would be the Event. Ant. Ch. 305. Hanno who commanded that part of the Forces that march'd up into the heart of the Country, laid an Ambuscado for Eschrion, and surprizing him on the suddain, cut off above Four thousand of his Foot and Two hundred of his Horse, amongst whom was the Eschrion ba∣ten by the Car∣thaginians. About 60 miles Eumachus Eaten by the Carthaginians General himself. Of the rest part of them were taken Prisoners, and the remainder escap'd to Archagathus who was Five hundred Furlongs from the place. Imilcon General in the Higher Africa first posses'd himself of a City near to Eumachus, whose Army was over-loaden with spoils taken out of several Cities. But the Grecians notwithstanding drew up in Battalia, and offer'd the Carthaginian General Battle; whereupon he left a part of the Army ready drawn up in the Town, with this Order, that as soon as they saw him fly, they should sally out upon the pursuers. Marching therefore out with half of the Army, he ingag'd the Enemy almost close under their Camp, and presently fled as if he had been in a great fright; whereupon Eumachus his men, proud of their Victory, pursu'd them in disorder, and in that confusion follow'd them close at the heels; and presently on a suddain issu'd out from another part of the City, the Body before drawn up in the P. 765. Town, and at one word of Command set up a great shout, which struck the pursuers in amaze and astonishment; and being the Barbarians fell upon the other that were in Ant. Ch. 305. disorder, and surpris'd beside, the Grecians presently fled: but the Enemy having blockt up the passage to their Camp, the Eumachians were forc'd to turn aside to the next Hill, where they wanted Water; which being set round by the Carthaginians, they almost all there perish'd, some by Thirst and others by the Sword; for of Eight thousand Foot, Thirty only escap'd, and of Eight hundred Horse only Forty. Archagathus therefore being thus distress'd, left Tunis, and recall'd the rest of the Soldiers Archagathus and his Army near . (he had sent abroad) from all parts; and sent Messengers into Sicily to give an account to his Father of what had happen'd, and to intreat him to hasten over with assistance with all speed. Besides these misfortunes other inconveniences and mischiefs overtook the Grecians; for all their Confederates (except a very few) forsook them: And all their Enemies join'd together, and Incampt just in their teeth and were ready to swallow them up. For Imilco had blockt up all the Passes and secur'd the Country from all inroads of the Enemy for a Hundred Furlongs distant; and on the other side Atarbas had plac'd his Camp Forty Furlongs from Tunis; so that the Greeks hem'd in both by Sea and Land were near starv'd for want of Provision; and nothing but Terror and Amazment fill'd every place. While they were in this sad and dreadful condition, Agathocles re∣ceiving Ant. Ch. 305 intelligence of the destruction of his Men in Africa, had prepar'd Seventeen Men of War for the assistance of Archagathus. But his Affairs in Sicily growing every day worse and worse, and the Number of the Exiles with Dinocrates increasing more and more, he left the managment of the War in the Island to Leptines and his Captains; and he himself having Mann'd his Ships, waited only for an opportunity how to get out, for that Thirty Carthaginian Ships lay in the mouth of the Harbour-But at a time after when Eighteen Ships came in to his assistance from Hetruria, who had pass'd by the Car∣thaginians in the night into the Harbour, he took that occasion, and by a stratagem de∣luded the Enemy; for he charg'd part of his Fleet to lie still for some time, while he by making out of the Port should draw off the Carthaginians to pursue him. But therefore he goes with seventeen Sail with all the wind he could make, whom the Enemies Fleet forthwith pursu'd: But Agathocles as soon as he saw that the Hetrurians were got out of the Harbour, presently Tackt about and fell upon the Barbarians; upon which the Agathocles his Victory at Sea. Carthaginians surpriz'd with the unexpectedness of the thing, and now surrounded with their Enemies Gallies, in a great terror made away and sled; the Grecians then took Five of their Ships together with the Men in them; and the Carthaginian Admiral (seeing the Ship he was in was upon the point of being taken) kill'd himself, preferring death Ant. Ch. 305. before Captivity, which then (as he thought) was just at hand. But he took no right measures at that time; for the Ship Thy the help of a happy Gale of Wind got off with the loss of the little Trinket Sail. hus Agathocles who never in the least hop'd to overcome the Carthaginians at Sea, unexpectedly beat them in a Sea fight, and being thenceforth Master of the Port, he secur'd the Passage for the benefit of the Merchants; so that the Syracusians having Provision brought in from all parts, instead of their former P. 66. scarcity of every thing necessary, presently abounded in the plenty of all things.
Agathocles lifted up with this success, sent Leptimes away to spoll and harrass the Enemies Countries, and especially the Agrigentines: For Xenodocus was in disgrace amongst his fellow Citizens, and blacken'd by his Adversaries upon the account of his late overthrow, so that he was troubl'd with Mutinies and Seditions: Therefore he commanded Leptines to make it his business to draw him out to fight, if he could possibly; for that it was a very easie thing to vanquish an Army that was in Divisions and Mutinies among them∣selves, and that had been beaten but a little before; which afterwards hapned accordingly. For Leptines making an inroad into the Territories of the Agrigentines harrass'd and spoil'd all before them: Xenodocus looking upon himself too weak, lay quiet and still at first; but Leptines Routs the Agrigen∣tines. Ant. Ch. 305. being call'd a Coward by the Citizens, he march'd out with an Army near as many as the Enemy, but far inferior to them for Courage and Resolution; because the Citizens had liv'd altogether in ease and idleness, and the other had been us'd to lie in the open field, and continually inur'd to all manner of hardships. A Battle therefore being fought between them, those with Leptines presently put the Agrigentines to flight, and pursu'd them even to the Walls of Agrigentum: There were kill'd of those thus Routed about Five hundred Foot and Fifty Horse. The Agrigentines being grievously incens'd with these losses one after another, summon'd Xenodocus to his Trial, as the occasion of Two Overthrows and slaughters of the Citizens; who fearing the severity of the Sentence he was like to fall under, fled to Gela. Agathocles having conquer'd his Enemies both at Sea and Land in a few days time, Agathocles Feasts. sacrific'd to the Gods and entertain'd his friends with sumptuous Feasts, and Royal Banquettings. In the time of his feasting and quaffing he laid aside all his Ensigns of Royalty, and Majesty, and appear'd as one of the meanest among them; and this he did in the first place to gain upon the good will of the People, which he sought thus to purchase: And in the second, that by giving every Man free liberty in their Cups to say what they pleas'd of him, he might the better learn how every one stood affected towards him. For by the force of Wine Truth often appears from behind the Hanging. He was naturally of a jocund and jesting Temper, and would not sometimes lose his Jest Ant. Ch. 305. even in publick Assemblies, but would jeer the very Senators, and mock some of them by his Apish imitations, in so much as he would often set the People a laughing, as if they had seen some Jugler or Stageplaier. For he would go alone to the publick His jocund Temper. Assemblies, attended only by the common People, much differing from the practice of Dionysius the Tyrant; for he was so fearful of every body, that he would let the Hair of his Head and Beard grow to excess, that the principal parts of his Body might not be at the mercy of a Razor: And when ever he wanted shaving, or polling, he burnt off the Hair; every one may hereby see, that the only guard for Tyranny is Diffidence. Moreover, at this time of Revelling Agathocles took up a great Golden Bowl, and vaunted that he never left off the Potters Trade, before he had made Cups and Bowls exactly of that shape. For he did not deny, but rather glory in his Trade, as a Foil that set off with more lustre that high state and dignity to which his own Valour had advanc'd him from a mean and contemptible Calling. Once when he besieg'd one of the Considerable Cities, the Soldiers from the Walls call'd out to him, O  Potter!  Ant. Ch. 305. Sweep-Chimney! When wilt thou pay thy Soldiers? To whom he answer'd, When I have taken and raz'd this Place. When he had found out by the Craft of his carousing and festival Jollity who were his Enemies, he invited them another time by themselves, together with Five hundred other His Cruelty. Syracusians, who were Men of brave and undaunted Spirits; and when they were toge∣ther, he surrounded them with his mercenary Soldiers, and murther'd them every Man: For he was terribly afraid, lest when he was gone into Africa, they should recall Dinocrates and the Refugees, and abrogate his Government. Having thus settled Affairs, in order to the establishing himself in the Principality, he P. 767. looses from Syracuse: When he landed in Africa, he found there in the Camp nothing but Want and Desperation; therefore judging it most for his Advantage to fight, he made it his Business to encourage the Soldiers to engage the Enemy, and thereupon draws them ail out in Battalia, and offers the Barbarians Battel. The remainder of the Foot then with him were at the most not above Six thousand Grecians, and as many Celts, Sam∣nites, and Hetrurians, and almost Ten thousand Africans of those that stay'd with him: These Africans are a treacherous sort of Men, ever upon any Occasion running over from one Party to another. Besides these, there were with him Fifteen hundred Horse, and above Six thousand African Carriages: But the Carthaginians though they had the Advantage of a high Ground, and of difficult access, yet they were not willing to ven∣ture all at once with Men that were desperate, but by lying still in their Camp (where
they had plenty of Provision) and by protracting of Time, they hop'd to starve the Enemy, and so be Masters of their Camp without fighting. Agathocles therefore not being able to draw the Enemy forth to a Battel in the open Field, and being necessitated by his present Circumstances to attempt something, and Ant. Ch. 305. enter upon some desperate Action, marches up with his whole Army close to the Ene∣my's Camp: Thereupon the Carthaginians make out against him; and though they had the advantage of Ground, and far exceeded him in number of Men, yet Agathocles (prest hard on every side) for some time resolutely bore up against them: But his Mer∣cenaries Agathocles routed in Afri∣ca. and some others at length giving Ground, he was forc'd to retreat to his Camp. The Barbarians pursu'd them close; but to gain the Good-will and Favour of the Africans, they past by them without doing any execution: But the Greeks (whom they knew by their Arms) they kill'd all along till they had driven the rest into their Camp. There were slain of Agathocles his Men at that time Three thousand. The next night a sudden and unexpected Disaster fell upon both the Armies: For the Carthaginians, when they were sacrificing the most eminent and considerable Persons among their Prisoners, in Gratitude to their Gods for the Victory they had gain'd, the Flame rising high that enwrapt the Bodies of the sacrific'd Captives, a fierce Wind on a Carthaginian Camp burns. sudden carry'd the Flame to the Sacred Tabernacle near the Altar, where it catch'd and burnt it down to the Ground; thence it proceeded to the General's Pavilion, and the Officers Tents next adjoining: Upon which arose a mighty Consternation, and Astonish∣ment fill'd the whole Camp, while some endeavouring to quench the Fire, others stri∣ving to carry away Arms and rich Furniture, were consumed by the Flames. The Ant. Ch. 305 Tents were made of Reeds and Straw; and therefore the Fire (through the height of the Wind) rag'd the more; so that that by its quickness, it prevented all help and assi∣stance that the Soldiers could any ways contribute. The whole Camp being presently in a Flame, many in strait and narrow Passes were intercepted by the Fire, and burnt to death. And thus they presently paid for their Cruelty to the Captives, suffering the like Punishment as a Retaliation of their Impiety. And others who tumultuously with woful Cries got out of the Camp, were pursu'd with another and greater Misfortune: For those Africans that were in Agathocles his Army, to the number of Five thousand, deserted the Grecians, and were flying to the Barbarians. When those that went out to scout, saw Their farther Misfortune those Deserters make towards the Carthaginians Camp, thinking the whole Grecian Army were at hand ready to fall upon them, they forthwith gave Intelligence to their own Party, that the Enemy's whole Army approach'd: Which being nois'd abroad, Con∣fusion and Dread of the Enemy's being just in the midst of them, ran through the whole Camp: Whereupon every one plac'd his own Safety in the Swiftness of his Heels; and P. 768. in regard no Word of Command was given by any of the Officers, nor any Order kept among the Soldiers, the Run-aways fell down one upon another; and some of them through the Darkness of the Night, and others out of excess of Fear, fell a fighting with their own Men, not knowing who they were. The Mistake still continuing and en∣creasing, Ant. Ch. 305. a great Slaughter was made; and some were kill'd hand to hand, and others running away with the loss of their Arms, in the height of a surprizing Fear, in their hast, fell down steep and craggy Rocks, and were broken in pieces; about Five thousand of them being destroy'd, the rest at length got to Carthage. The Citizens within the Town (deceiv'd by the Report of their own Men,) believ'd they were routed, and that the greatest part of the Army was cut off; in this fright they open'd the Gates, and receiv'd them with great Terror and Amazement into the Town, fearing lest the Enemy should likewise break in at the Heels of them. And though when it was full Day, they came to understand the Truth of the matter, yet they could scarce allay the Fears they had been in, as if the Evils were still even at their Doors. About the same time, (through a vain Fear and foolish Imagination) Agathocles fell into a Misfortune something of the same kind For the African Deserters, after the burning of the Carthaginian Camp, and the Hurly-burly and Uproar that follow'd there∣upon, Misfortune to Agathocles his Camp. durst not march forward, but made their way back to the place from whence they came; whom some of the Greeks espying to make towards them, they took them to be the Carthaginian Army, and thereupon gave Intelligence to Agathocles, that the Ant. Ch. 305. Enemy was near at hand. Upon which, by the King's Order, they cry'd out, Arms! Arms! and forthwith the Soldiers came pouring out in great Tumult and Confusion out of the Camp: And besides all this, when they saw the Flame in the Enemy's Camp to mount up into the Air, and heard the Shouts and Cries of the Carthaginians, they were the more confirm'd in their Opinion, that the Barbarians were making towards them with their whole Army.
But Excess of Fear leaving no room for due and serious Consideration, Horror and Amazement fill'd the whole Camp, and all of them took to their Heels: And the Afri∣cans being presently mix'd among them, (the Night causing the Mistake) every one oppos'd him that he met, as an Enemy, and being all the Night long dispers'd here and there, and wandering up and down in a Panick Fear, there perish'd of them above Four thousand: The rest (with much ado at length coming to understand the Mistake) re∣turn'd safe to their Camp. And in this manner both Armies deceiv'd by the Vanity of War, (as the common Proverb is) fell into miserable Disasters. After which Missor∣tune, being now deserted by the Africans, and having not sufficient Forces lest to con∣tend with the Carthaginians, he resolv'd to leave Africa: But he thought it impossible to transport the Soldiers with him, because he both wanted Shipping, and heard that the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea, and lay to intercept his Passage: And he concluded, the Barbarians (whose Forces far exceeded his) would never make Peace with him; but rather cut off every Man of them that first set footing upon Africa, to deterr all others for the future from the like Attempt. He determin'd therefore to slip away privately Ant. Ch. 305. with a few, and take along with him his younger Son Heraclides; for he fear'd lest his Son Archagathus, being a daring Man, and one that had been too familiar with his Stepmother, would plot something against his Life: But Archagathus smelling out his Design, resolv'd to discover the Matter to those Captains and Officers as should be able to defeat him in his Contivance, and to that purpose strictly observ'd his Motions: For he look'd upon it as a base and unworthy Thing, that he who had undergone a good part of the Toils and Hazards of the War for the sake of his Father and Brother, should be now left alone as a Prey to the Enemy, without all Hopes of Deliverance. He inform'd therefore some of the Captains and most considerable Officers of the intended Departure of Agathocles and his Companions the next night: Whereupon all the Body forthwith made up to him, P. 769. and not ony put a stop to his Voyage, but acquainted the common Soldiers how the Plot was laid; who being both griev'd and enrag'd together, laid hold on him and bound him, and so committed him to custody. An Anarchy following hereupon, there was no∣thing Agathocles in Bonds by his own Men. but Tumult and Confusion throughout all the Camp: And when Night came on, a Rumour was spread over the Camp, that the Enemy was just falling in amongst them: Upon which, all were so possess'd with a Panick Fear, that having none to Command them, every one was preparing to get away; at which very time, they that had the Cu∣stody of the Prince, (in as great a Consternation as the rest,) thought that some or Ant. Ch. 305. other call'd them forth; who thereupon came out with Agathocles in his Chains along with them; at which fight, the whole Army were so affected with Pity and Compassion, that they cry'd out, Unloose him, let him go. Being freed from his Chains, he presently after with a small Attendance stole away, He steals out of Africa. and took Shipping about At the setting of the Pleiades or Seven Stars. the beginning of October, in the Night in Winter-time, and away he got. And thus to preserve himself, forsook his Children; whom the Soldiers presently, upon the News of their Father's Flight, knock'd on the Head; and then chose Captains from among themselves, and made Peace with the Carthaginians upon these His 2 Sons kill'd by the Soldiers. Conditions, viz. That the Greeks should receive Three hundred Talents, and should restore all the Towns they then held, and that all that would, might take up Arms Peace made with the Car∣thaginians. with the Carthaginians, and receive the usual Pay. That the rest should be transported to Sicily, and should have Selinunt for their Habitation. The greatest part of the Sol∣diers, who were faithful to what they had agreed, had all as faithfully perform'd to them: But those Cities and Towns that held out in Hopes and Expectations of Relief from Agathocles, were all taken by force of Arms; whose several Governors the Cartha∣ginians crucifi'd, and the rest they bound in Chains, and employ'd them to Till, and Repair by their own Labours, those Parts of the Country that they had before wasted and destroy'd. And thus the Carthaginians, after they had been harrass'd and vext with a Four Years War, recover'd their former Peace and Liberty. Ant. Ch. 305. In this Expedition of Agathocles into Africa, any one may observe most remarkable Accidents, and the Divine Providence in the Punishment inflicted upon his Sons. For being routed in Sicily, he lost the greatest part of his Army: A little time after he over∣came the Conquerors with a very inconsiderable Body of Men in Africa. In Sicily, being thrown out of all the Cities, he was coop'd up by a close Siege within the Walls of Syracuse: In Africa, he gain'd all the Towns, except Carthage, and closely besieg'd the Carthaginians in that City; by which, Fortune seem'd to make it her Business, to let eve∣ry one see what Power she had to retrieve those Things that seem'd to be in a desperate Condition. But after that Agathocles, in the height of his Prosperity, had murder'd Opellas, against all the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality; God made it manifestly ap∣parent
that for that piece of Wickedness acted upon that Man, whatever happen'd to him afterwards was order'd and dispens'd by his own hand. For the very Month and Day of the Month that he kill'd Ophellas, and brought over to him all his Army, the very Moral ∣. same Day and Month he again lost both his Sons and his Army. And that which is more especially to be observ'd, was, That God, as a just Law-giver, inflicted on him a double Ant Ch 305. Punishment; for he who had most wickedly destroy'd his Friend, was depriv'd of two Sons together, even by the Hands of those that came along with Ophellas. This Remark ought not to offend those, who slight and despise such Providences. As for Agathocles, as soon as he landed in Sicily, by a hasty flight out of Africa, he Agathocles  Aegista sent for part of his Forces, and march'd to the Consederate City of the Aegestines: And being in want of Money, exacted the greatest part of the Estates of those that were rich, in which Place were Ten thousand Inhabitants. This many of them took very heinously, and met together in private Cabals: But he finding out, that the  were plotting against him, he brought most dreadful Calamity upon the City: For draw∣ing out all the Poor out of the Town, he cut all their Throats upon the Bank of the Ri∣ver Scamander: And all those who seem'd to be richer than the rest, he put to several P. 770. Tortures, to force them to confess how much Money they had: For some he broke upon the Wheel; others he bound to his Engines of Battery, and shot them away like Stones. And of others, he cut out the Ankle-bones of their Feet, and by his cruel and unmerci∣ful Dealing, put them to most horrible Torments. He invented likewise another sort of Ant. Ch. 305. Punishment not much unlike the Phalerian Bull; for he made a Bed of Brs exactly after the shape of a Man, wherein were several Openings and hollow Places on every side: Those that he intended to torment, he put into this Bed, and then put fire under it, and burnt them to Death. In this only this Engine differ'd from the Bull. That those that pe∣rish'd, and were consum'd in those strait and narrow Holes, were expos'd to the view of every one. He would likewise break in pieces the Ankle-Bones of some of the rich Wo∣men with Iron Pincers, and cut off the Breasts of others; and would sometimes lay a weight of Tiles upon the Loins of Women with Child, till he forc'd the Child to leap, as it were, forcibly out of the Womb. While the Tyrant was in this manner endeavouring to find out all the Wealth every Body had, and the whole City was in Terror and Asto∣nishment, some burnt themselves and their Houses together, and others hang'd themselves. And thus Aegesta, in one black and doleful Day, had the Prime and Flower of her Youth cut off. But the young Women and Children the Tyrant transported into Italy, and sold them to the Brutii: And that the very Name of the Place should be extinguish'd and forgotten, he call'd it Diclis, and granted it for an Habitation to such Runagates as came over to him. When he heard of the Murder of his Sons, he was so enrag'd at them he had left be∣hind His Cruelty a Syracuse. him in Africa, that he sent some of his Friends to his Brother Antandrus at Syracuse, with Oders, that he should cut the Throats of all the Kindred and Relations of those that went over in the Carthaginian Expedition: Who thereupon executing what he was Ant. Ch. . commanded, committed such Slaughters and Murders, as were never at any time before: For he not only hurried away to Destruction young Men in the prime of their Age, as Brothers, Fathers, and Children; but even Grandfathers and Great-Grandfathers, if they happen'd then to be living, tho' they had one Foot even in the Grave, and could nei∣ther see nor hear through extremity of old Age: Nay, even Infants carri'd in Arms, that were not sensible of any Harm design'd them before they felt it: They dragg'd away likewise to Execution, Women, whether they were Servants or Kindred to them in Africa, and whoever else that (by their Death) might be occasion of Grief and Sorrow to them: So that while a vast number of Persons of all Ages and Sexes were hal'd away to Execu∣tion at the Sea-shore, where the Butchers stood ready for them, Tears, earnest Intreaties upon their Knees, and wo Lamentations appear'd every where, both from them that were butcher'd, and from others; who so far compassionated the sad Condition of their Neighbours, that their Hearts were as full of Grief, as theirs who were just ready to die. And that which was the most grievous of all was, That after so great a Slaughrer, and that the lses lay cast forth upon the Shoar, neither Kinsman nor Friend durst bury them, lest any of them should be thought Related to them that were dead. The Mul∣titude of them that were murder'd upon the Shoar was such, that the Sea was did with od a long way off, which presented to the Eye at a great distance the Horridness of that barbarous Cruelty.
CHAP. IV. Antigonus his March into Egypt. A Tempest near Raphia, where he lost some of his Ships. He returns into Syria. Dinocrates prevails in Sicily. Agathocles is willing to resign his Government; but Dinocrates stands off. What was done in Italy. Antigonus his War with the Rhodians. Rhodes besieg'd by Demetrius. Agathocles routs Dinocrates his great Army with a few Men. His Cruelty to those that submitted upon Terms, where he butchers Seven thousand. Dinocrates in Favour with Agathocles, and betrays all the Confederates. What was done in Italy. THE Year following Corybus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Quintus Martius Olymp. 118. 3. Ant. Ch. 304. and Publius Cornelius were created Consuls at Rome. About that time King Antigo∣nus buri'd his youngest Son with Royal Pomp and Splendour; and calling home Deme∣trius out of Cyprus, commanded his whole Army to meet at his new City Antigonia, for he purpos'd to march from thence into Aegypt: Wherefore leading the Foot himself, he pass'd through Coelo-Syria, having an Army of Fourscore thousand Foot, and above Eight Antigonus his March into Aegypt. Ant. Ch. 304. P. 771. thousand Horse, and Fourscore and three Elephants: He made Demetrius Admiral of his Fleet, giving him order to keep close to the Shoar in sight of the Land-Army, having in all a Hundred and fifty fighting Ships, and a Hundred more of Burden, wherein was an infinite store of Arms of all sorts: And when the Pilots told him, That they were to stay till the setting of the Seven Stars, which would be the About the begin  of April. Eighth Day from thence, he con∣demn'd them for being too Timorous. Coming to Gaza, and purposing to fall upon Ptolemy before he was provided for him, he commanded his Soldiers to take with them Ten Days Victual; and getting together Camels out of Arabia, he loaded on them a Hun∣dred and thirty thousand Bushels of Wheat, and infinite store of Hay upon other Beasts 13 Myriads of Medimnas, e∣very Medimna 18 Galions. of Carriage; and carrying his Munition on Carts, went through the Desart, not without some Trouble to the Army; for that they met with sundry Fens and dirty Places by the way, especially about the Place call'd Barathra. Demetrius loosing from Gaza in the dead of Night, was for many Days together becalm'd; so that the lighter Ships were fain to tow the Ships of Burden after them with Ropes. But after this, and as soon as the Seven Stars were set, a Northerly Wind arose, and fell upon them, with which many of the Ships with four Tire of Oars apiece were driven on shoar near to the City Rhaphia, where was no commodious Landing for them: But of those which carry'd the Artillery, some of Tempest. them were sunk, and the rest recover'd Gaza again. Yet some of the best of them bare up, and came under the Promontory of Cassius: That Foreland is not far distant from the River Nile, but is no place fit for Shipping; especially if any Tempest be, there is no coming near it: Wherefore every Ship dropping two Anchors apiece, two Furlongs off from Land, were fain to ride it out in a huge Sea in the midst of a Thousand Dangers; for the Fury of the Waves was such, that the great Danger was, lest both Men and Ships should sink down together; and because there was no fit Landing place, and likewise for Ant. Ch. 304. that the Shoar was guarded by the Enemy, the Vessels could neither make to Land, nor any swim out without extream Hazard: But that which was most grievous, was, That they had spent all their fresh Water, and were Reduc'd to that extremity of Want, that had the Tempest lasted but one day longer, they must all necessarily have perish'd for very Thirst. But in this great Extremity of theirs, and when they expected nothing but Death, the Storm ceas'd; Antigonus with his Army coming to the place, there encamp'd, and the weather-beaten Men came ashoar and refresh'd themselves in the Camp, and waited for the Ships that were separated from them by the Storm. Nevertheless there were lost in this Tempest Three Ships of Five Tires of Oars apiece, out of which some Men escap'd alive to Land. For hence Antigonus remov'd, and sate down with his Ar∣my Two Furlongs off from the River Nile. But Ptolemy having Mann'd all the Bank of the River with strong Garisons, sent some in River-Boats, with Commands, that going as near the further Bank as safely they could, they should there proclaim, That if any of Antigonus his Army would come to him, he would give him, if a common Soldier Two Pounds, i. e. 6l. 5s. of ours. Two Minas, if a Captain a Talent. No sooner was this Proclamation made, but a Multitude of Antigonus his Men, which serv'd him for Pay, grew very desirous to be gone; yea, and some of his Captains too, for that and some other Reasons, had a mind to go also. But when Antigonus perceiv'd, that a multitude of his Men were flying away from him,
he dispos'd Archers and Slingers, and other Engines of War upon the Shore, to keep them from flying over the Water in Boats; and some he lighted on that ran away, and Ant. Ch. 304. those he put to horrible Torments, to deter others from the like. Antigonus gathering together his Ships that came in after the Tempest, though late to him, went to a Place call'd Pseudostomon, thinking there to have Landed some of his Men: But he found a strong Garison, and was beaten off with Bows and Slings, and other En∣gines P. 772. of War: The Night therefore drawing on, he went his way, giving Order to the Masters of every Ship, to follow the Admiral's Lanthorn, and to make to the Mouth of the River Nile, which is called Phagneticum: But the next Morning, finding that many of his Ships had lost their way, he was forc'd to come to Anchor there, and to send away the swiftest Ships he had to seek them out. The time thus spent and protracted, Ptolemy being advertis'd of the approach of the Enemy, came in speedily to the Relief of his Men, and rang'd his Army all along the Shore. Whereupon, Demetrius finding no possibility of Landing here neither, and being inform'd that the Country adjoining was naturally fenc'd with Fens and Moorish Grounds, set sail and return'd. But as he was going, the Wind struck up to the North, and with a mighty Tempest drove three of his Ships of Four Tire of Oars, and some others of his Transport Ships upon the Shore, all which came into Ptolemy's hand; the rest with much ado recover'd Antigonus his Camp. Now Ptolemy had plac'd strong Garisons at every one of the Mouths of the River Nile, and had an infinite Number of River-Boats every Ant. Ch. 304. where ready, stor'd with Darts and Slings, and Men which knew well how to use them, which greatly vex'd and troubled Antigonus: For the Mouth of the River at Pelusium be∣ing strongly guarded by Ptolemy, he could make no use of his Ships at all; and for the Land Forces, they were not able to do any thing, because of the height of the River; and that which was worse, with his long Lying, both Food for Men, and Fodder for Cattle began to grow low. Wherefore Antigonus seeing his Army to hang the Head, Antigonus re∣turns into Syria. call'd them all together, and propounded it to the Captains, Whether of the two were best, to stay and Fight it out now, or to return into Syria for the present, and to return again better provided, and when the Waters should be lower? And when every Man's Voice was to be gone, he had his Soldiers truss up their Trinkets, and so with his Navy keeping still along the Shore by them, he return'd into Syria. Ptolemy growing glad at heart that the Enemy was thus gone, offer'd Sacrifice to his Gods for this great Deliverance; and made withal a most magnificent Feast for his No∣bles, and wrote away Letters to Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Cassander, of his prosperous Suc∣cess, informing them likewise, how a Multitude of Antigonus his Men had fled over to him. This was 19 Years from the Death of Alex∣der. And now having rescu'd as it were Aegypt a second time, and gotten it by his Sword, judging therefore he might lawfully reckon it as his own, he return'd to Alexandria. While these things thus pass'd in Aegypt, See Aelian. Var. Hister L 9. C. 13. the Fatness of this Man. Ant. Ch. 304. Dionysius, the Tyrant of Heraclca in Pontus, dy'd, having reign'd Thirty two Years: And his Sons Zathras and Clearchus succeeding him reign'd Seventeen years. In the mean time, Agathocles visited all the Cities in Sicily that were under his Com∣mand, filling them with Garisons, and poling them for Money: For the Man was in a terrible Fright, lest when he should fall under a Cloud, they should recover their Liberty by Force of Arms. About that time, Pasiphilus, the General, hearing of the Death of Agathocles his Sons, Dinocrates prevails in Si∣cily. and the rout of his Forces in Lybia, had the Tyrant in Contempt: And falling off to Di∣nocrates, join'd in Confederacy with him; and being possess'd of the Cities which were before committed to his Care and Trust, he entic'd and drew off the Army (then un∣der his Command) from the Tyrant, by fair Promises, and hopes of mighty things. Agathocles therefore being now every where disappointed and frustrated of his Hopes, was so far dejected, that he sent an Agent to Dinocrates, and offer'd to make Peace with P. 773. him upon these Conditions, viz. That he would lay down his Sovereignty, and restore Sy∣racuse to the Citizens; and that Dinocrates should be no longer in Exile, so that he would deliver up two Castles, Tharma and Cepaloedium, together with their adjoining Territories, to Agathocles. Here some may justly admire how it came to pass, that Agathocles, who was at all other times, and in all other things Resolute and Obstinate, and never in the least discourag'd when his Condition was most Desperate, should be now so dastardly, as to be willing to give up all into the Enemy's hands, without striking a stroke for the obtaining and compassing of which he had fought so many and great Battels: And that which is Ant. Ch. 304. the strangest of all, was, that he who was yet Lord of Syracuse, and of many other Ci∣ties, and had a considerable Navy at Sea, and an Army at Land, should become so Weak∣headed, as not to remember any thing of that which hapned to Dionysius; for when he
was reduc'd to most miserable Streights, and to that degree of fear of those Mischiefs that hung over his Head, as that he was altogether hopeless of retaining his Principality, and was upon the very Point of mounting his Horse, and lying away from Syracuse; Heloris, one of the ancientest of his Noblemen (to put a stop to his Carreer) said to him, The Sepulchre of a King is honourable. And the like to this is what his Father-in-Law, Mega∣cles, said to him, that He who is depriv'd of a Kingdom, should part with it so, as if forc'd from between his very Thighs, and not as one making a voluntary Abdication. By which serious admonitions, Dionysius was so encourag'd, that he went through all courageously, though they seem'd never so terrible; and afterwards mightily enlarg'd his Dominion; and continu'd in this height of Prosperity till he was old, leaving the greatest Principa∣lity in Europe to his Children. But Agathocles not in the least incourag'd by any of these Considerations, nor consi∣dering the vanity of Humane Confidence and Expectations by what he had learnt by his own Experience, set to Sale so great a Principality for a trifle: But yet the Proposals took no effect; for though Agathocles would willingly have had them confirm'd, yet the Am∣bition of Dinocrates rejected them; for he affected an absolute Monarchy, and therefore Ant. Ch 304. Dinocrates stnds of from Ant with Agatho∣cles. hated the Syracusian Democracy, and was better pleas'd with the Command (as General of the Army) which he then enjoy'd: For he had at that time under his Command above Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, and many of the largest and chiefest Cities; so, that though he was call'd only General of the Exiles, yet in truth he had the Majesty and Authority of a King; the chief and absolute Power of every thing being in his hands; for if he return'd to Syracuse, he concluded he must of necessity be no more than a private Man, and be reputed but one of the many (for Liberty loves Equa∣lity) and subject to be undermin'd and degraded by the suffrage of every Demagogue in the publick Assemblies; for the common People are ever Enemies to those that are rising Men, and speak their Minds most freely. And therefore a Man may justly say, that Aga∣thocles voluntarily Lower'd his Sails; and that Dinocrates was the only cause of what ever Good was done by this Prince at any time afterwards. For Agathecles often sent Agents to him to Sollicite and Treat about the Conditions of Peace, still insisting upon having the Two Castles for his Subsistence, and he as often contriv'd some specious pretence or another, to dash and break all in pieces; sometimes requiring that he should depart wholly out of Sicily, and at others, that he should give up his Children as Hostages. Agathocles therefore smelling out his Design, sent Agents to the Exiles to accuse Dino∣crates of the Project he was carrying on, to obstruct the Restitution of their ancient Li∣berties. Ant. Ch. 304. He sent likewise an Ambassador to the Carthaginians, and made Peace with them upon the following Conditions, viz. That all the Cities the Carthaginians formerly enjoy'd, should be forthwith surrender'd to them: For which he receiv'd of the Carthaginians Three P. 774. hundred Talents of Gold, according to the Account and Value of Silver: But as Timaeus says, a Hundred and Fifty Talents, and Two hundred Thousand Every Me∣di is 18 ns, and Eight Gallons make a Bushel; so that 200 Thousand Me∣dimnas make 500 Thousand  is. Medimnas of Wheat. Thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time. In Italy the Samnites took Sora and Atia, (two Confederate Cities of the Romans) by Storm, and sold all the Captives for Slaves: Upon which, the Consuls broke in with mighty Forces into Japygia, and sate down before the City Sylvia, a Garison of the Sam∣nites, which the Romans took by Assault after a few days Siege, and carry'd away above Five thousand Prisoners, and abundance of rich Spoil and Booty. Then they harrass'd the Country of the Samnites, cutting down all the Trees, and making havock and spoil where-ever they came. For Rome having for many years been in contest with this Nation for the supream Command, hop'd at length, that the Enemy being strip'd out of all they had all over the Country, would be forcd to sloop to the Stronger; and to that end they continu'd Spoiling and Wasting the Country Five Months together, within which time they burnt down to the Ground almost all the Towns, and rooted up every Plant and Tree, and whatever other thing that might yield any Fruit for Daily Food. After this the Anagnite, or Anagnini in aly, a City of the Herni∣cori. Aeginetes proclaim'd War for the Injuries done them, and took Frutinum. Olymp. 118. 4. Ant. Ch. 303. Antigonus at War with Rhodes. Fr by Assault, and Sold the Territories belonging to it. After the End of this Year, Xenippus Govern'd at Athens, and Lucius Posthumius, and Tiberius Minucius, bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. About this time the Rhedians were at War with Antigonus upon the accounts following. The City of Rhodes was very strong in Shipping, and the best Govern'd of any City among the Greeks, and therefore all the Kings and Petty Princes strove which should gain the greatest Interest in the Citizens, every one endeavouring to have her for their Confederate. But foreseeing afar off, what would be most for her Advantage, she secretly made Peace with all, but would not med∣dle
with any of the Wars wherein the Princes were ingag'd one against another; so that she was courted and richly presented by every one of them, and grew exceeding rich by the injoyment of a long Peace. For she became so potent, that in the Pyrattick War. Ant. Ch. 303. undertaken for the Common good of all Greece, she scowr'd the Seas and freed them from Pyrats at her own charge. Alexander the most potent Prince of any that is recorded, honour'd this City above all others; for there he laid up his last Will concerning the disposal of his whole King∣dom, and honouring her in other respects, advanc'd her to the state of a Royal City. The Rhodians thus in amity with all the Princes, kept themselves (with all the Art they could) from giving any just offence by outward appearance; though in their hearts they most favour'd Ptolemy: for they were most inricht by the Merchants which traded thence into Aegypt; and the whole City was maintain'd and supported by the Wealth of that Kingdom: which being understood by Antigonus, he did all he could to draw them off from siding with Ptolemy: And therefore at first when he was ingag'd in a War against Ptolemy for the Island of Cyprus, he sent Ambassadors thither to sollicit them them to send Aid and shipping to Demetrius; which they denying, he commanded one his Admirals to sail away with his Fleet against them, and intercept and rifle all the Ships that made out of the Port at Rhodes for Aegypt. But the Rhodians beating the Admiral, he charg'd them to be the Aggressors and beginners of an unjust War, and threatn'd to besiege their City with the strength of his whole Army: upon which the Rhodians decreed him great Honours; and sent Ambassadors to him to intreat him that he would not force them to ingage in a War against Ptolemy, contrary to the League they had made with him: But the King hereat growing more inrag'd, sent Demetrius with the Army and all manner of Engines, for a Siege against them, who were thereupon so terrifi'd with the mighty power of the King, that at first they signifi'd to Demetrius by their Ambassa∣dors that they would assist Antigonus against Ptolemy: But afterwards when he requir'd a P. 775. Hundred of the Nobility for Hostages, and that his Fleet might be admitted into the Har∣bour; they concluded that he design'd to surprize the City, and therefore they prepar'd for War. Demetrius on the other hand Rendesvouz'd all his Fleet in the Port at Elorymna, and put all in readiness for an Expedition to Rhodes. He had with him Two hundred Men of War of several dimensions; a Hundred and seventy Ships of burthen, in which were carri'd about Forty thousand Soldiers, together with Horse and Auxiliaries from the Pirats, Besides there were on Board abundance of all sorts of Darts, Arrows, and other Engines, fit for the carrying on of an Assault. And along with all these there follow'd almost a Thousand Vessels, belonging to private Men, full of Wares and Merchandize. And whereas the Country of the Rhodians had been free from all devastations for many years together, a vast multitude of men that had inricht themselves by the losses of others in the War, flockt thither from all places. Demetrius therefore drawing up his Fleet in a line of Battle, as ready prepar'd for a Sea sight, commanded his Men of War Ant. Ch. 303. (which carri'd Engines upon their Fore Castles to cast Darts and Arrows of three spans long) to sail before: and the Transport Ships and such as had Horses on board, they that row'd in lesser Vessels tow'd after them by Cable Ropes. In the Rear came the Pirats Vessels, and a numerous Company (as is before said) of Merchants Ships loaden with Corn and other Provisions; so that all the Sea between them and the Island and opposite shoar seem'd to be cover'd over with Ships, which struck a great Terror and Amazement into those that had the prospect from the City. For the Rhodian Soldiers who were plac'd upon the Walls there, waited for the Enemies ap∣proach: the old Men and Women likewise had a prospect of them from the tops of their Houses; (for the City was in its situation like a Theater) and all being amaz'd and terrifi'd with the greatness of the Fleet, and glittering of the Arms, were in no small perplexity; for all they had in this World was now lying at stake. Demetrius now at last arriv'd at the Island, and Landed his Men, and then encampt Rhodes bes by Demetrius. near the City, but not within the Cast of a Dart: which done he forthwith sent out some of the Pirats, and others fit for the purpose to spoil and pillage all before them, both by Sea and Land. He cut down also all the Trees of the Country next adjoining, and raz'd the Towns; and with the Timber and materials from thence he fortifi'd his Camp, drawing round it a treble Trench, and many great and strong Ramparts; so that by the misery and losses of the Enemy he effectually provided for his Armies security. Then by the labour of his whole Army and the Seamen that came along with him, in a few daies he took in with a Rampart of Earth all that part of Ground lying be∣tween
his Landing place and the City, and inlarg'd the Haven for the more com∣modious Ant. Ch. 300. riding of his Ships. In the mean time the Rhodians sent Ambassadors to him, intreating him he would not do any thing that might be irreparable: But when they perceiv'd he would not hearken to any Terms (laying aside all hopes of composing matters) they sent Messen∣gers to Ptolemy Lysimachus, and Cassander praying their assistance, because that War was made upon them upon their account. Both Inhabitants (that were not Free of the City) and Foreigners (lately come in) were admitted to take up Arms, if they thought fit, for defence of the place; the rest of the Rabble tha were useless they put forth out of the City, both to prevent scarcity of Provision, and lest any uneasie under the present Circumstances they were in, should betray the Town. Then taking an account of the number of them in Arms, they found there were of the Citizens Six thousand; of Inhabitants and strangers One thousand. They made likewise a Decree, that all Servants that had approv'd themselves honest and faithful in all hazards and dan∣gers, P. 776. should be bought off from their Masters and set free, and inroll'd into the number of the Citizens: Then a Proclamation was made, that whosoever di'd in the War should be buri'd at the publick charge, and that his Parents and Children should be maintain'd out of the City Treasury; that Portions should be given to the Daughters out of the publick stock, and that the Sons when they were grown up should be crown'd, and adorn'd in the Theater at the time of the Festivals of Bacchus with all sorts of Arms and Armour. With these promises all were presently excited to stand to it to the last and Ant. Ch. 303. indure the utmost extremity; and then they made it their business (as far as it was possible) to provide all other things that were necessary; for all being unanimous, the Rich brought in their Money, and the Smiths and other workmen earnestly set them∣selves to the making of Arms, and all were so intent upon their business, that every one strove to exceed each other. Some therefore imploi'd themselves in making Engines, to cast Darts, and shoot stones, and others in making and preparing other things; same repair'd the Walls where they were defective; and many loaded men with stones to carry to the Walls. They sent out likewise Three swift sailing Vessels against the Enemy, and the Merchants that brought them in Provision: These setting on them upon a sudden sunk many of the Merchant Ships, who were gone ashore to rob and spoil the Country, and burnt no few that were driven up to land; and what they receiv'd for the Redemption of Captives they brought with them back into the City: For the Rhodians had agreed with Demetrius what the value of Redemption on both sides should be; that is, for every Freeman a Thousand Drachma's, and for every Servant and Bond∣man, Five hundred. Demetrius being furnish'd with plenty of all things necessary for the making of Engines, began to make two, call'd Testudo's; the one against the Engines Ant. Ch. 303. that cast stones, and the other against those that shot Darts and Arrows; these they plac'd upon the Foredecks of two Transport Ships, which mov'd from place to place and were chain'd close together: He likewise made two Towers four stories high apiece, higher than those Turrets belonging to the Town in the Harbour; both which likewise were plac'd upon two Ships of equal height and joyn'd one to another, that both might be equally ballast when they were forc'd forward. He built likewise a Rampart upon a Fore footed piece of Timber nail'd together, to float upon the Water, in order to beat off the Enemy in any Attack they might make upon the Ships where the Engins were plac'd. At the same time while he was making these, he got together a Number of the strongest Water Boats and fenc'd them with Boards and Planks round; and made Loop-holes in the sides (to shut at pleasure) and in these he plac'd Engines (to shoot Darts and Arrows of three spans long at a great distance) together with such Soldiers as knew very well how to make use of them, and with them some Cretian Archers. Coming up therefore with his Ships within the Cast of a Dart, he sorely gall'd the Townsmen with his Darts and Arrows, being the Engines in the Ships were higher, than the Walls next to the Harbour. The Rhodians on the other hand understanding that Demetrius made it his main business to gain the Port, were as earnest in providing all things necessary for its defence: To this end they mounted two Engines upon a Rampart, and put on Board Three others upon two Transport Ships, and lay with them at the mouth of the little Harbour; and in these they put great Numbers of Engins for the shooting of Stones, Darts and Arrows of all sizes, that by the help of these they might repulse the Enemy, if he either attempted to land Men, or make up with his Engines. Besides all this they Ant. Ch. 303. had contriv'd convenient places and apartments in the Transport Ships which then lay in the Harbour, wherein to place their Engines and Darts as they had occasion. Both sides being now thus ready prepar'd, and Demetrius just upon the point of moving into
the Harbours with his Machines was prevented by a fierce and violent Storm that then arose. But being calm all the night afterwards, he Sails up secretly, and seises upon the highest Rampart of the great Harbour, and forthwith draws a Mud-wall about it, and fences it with stones and planks of Timber: Then he landed Four hundred of his Men, and plac'd them there with all sorts of Darts and Weapons; the Fort was * Five Plethras † Every Ple∣thra a handred foot. P. 777. distant from the Walls. As soon as it was light they came up with the Engines into the Port, with shouting and sound of Trumpet, then with their small shot which did ex∣ecution at a great distance, they beat off those that were building the Wall in the Port, and with their battering Engines broke in pieces the Enemies Machines, and shak'd the the Wall near the Rampart in one part, and batter'd it down in another. For it was but low and weak at that time; the Citizens stoutly defended themselves, and spent all that day in wounding and receiving wounds from their Enemies: but night drawing on, Demetrius tow'd his Ships Cables ti'd to smaller Vessels and got oft his Engines out of the reach of the Enemies Artillery. But the Rhodians took fire along with them, and in Boats fill'd with combustible matter pursu'd their Enemies, and coming up with the Engines put Ant. Ch. 303. fire to the matter in the Boats; but being presently beaten off by Darts and Arrows from the floating Rampart, they were forc'd to Tack about and so retire; but the Flame rag'd to that degree, that some few only having extinguish'd the fire return'd in the Boats; and the greatest part of them having had their Vessels burnt down to the Water, by swim∣ming only sav'd their lives. The next day Demetrius in the same manner made his Attack from the Sea, and ordered an Assault with shouting and sound of Trumpet should be made on every side from the Land, that he might strike the greater Terror into the Rhodians, while innumerable dangers, surrounded and distracted them on every hand; he continu'd thus assaulting the Town for the space of Eight daies together, shooting from his Engines upon the Rampart, stones of the weight of a Talent, and batter'd down the middle walls between the Towers, together with the Towers themselves: the Souldiers likewise possess'd them∣selves of part of the wall that fac'd the Harbours. Upon which the Rhodians all flockt to that place, and there they sharply fell to it, and ingag'd the Enemy; and over-powering them in number, with the slaughter of some of them, forc'd the rest to draw off. The uneasie rough and uneven passage to the place (by reason of many heaps of great and massy stones which were laid before the walls on the outside) was of great advantage to the besieg'd: many of the Enemies Vessels (in the midst of this hurly burly) mann'd with Soldiers comming up, the Rhodians presently tore off the Beaks of the Ships, and by combustible matter and Firebrands thrown in among them, burnt the Ships themselves. While the besieg'd were thus hurri'd and distracted in de∣fending Ant. Ch. 303 themselves; the Demetrians coming in with their Vessels on every side, set Scaling Ladders to the Walls, and prest on with the greater resolution, being assisted in all parts by the Soldiers at Land; who together with them in the Ships mutually repeated their shouts and acclamations. And now many boldly and resolutely in con∣tempt of danger press'd forward, and in great Bodies mounted the Walls; upon which follow'd a sharp Ingagement, the assailant's forcing on with great resolution from without, and the besieg'd with as much courage flocking together to defend themselves within. At length the Rhodians after a brave Resistance beat off the Assailants, killing some, and taking others Prisoners that were wounded, amongst whom were some of the chiefest Commanders. The Besiegers being thus baffl'd, Demetrius draws off his Engines into his own Port, and then sets upon repairing both them and his Ships. In the mean time the Rhodians bury their dead, and dedicated to their Gods their E∣nemies Arms and the Beaks of their Ships, and repair'd those parts of their walls, as were beaten down by the Engines. Demetrius however, after seven days time spent in refitting his battering Engines, and repairing his Shipping, having now all things in readiness, enters the Harbor again. For he made it his main business to be absolute Lord of this, and to intercept all Provision that might be brought in to the relief of the City; when he came within the cast of a Dart, he threw Firebrands (of which he had a great number) into the Rhodians Ships which lay scatter'd here and there, and shook and batter'd the Walls with his Engines, and wounded and gall'd with his Darts and Arrows whoever appear'd in view. The Assault thus continuing to the great terror and amazement of the Inhabitants, the Rho∣dian Pilots (in great fear and concern for the Shipping) extinguish'd the Firebrands; and the Magistrates of the City (whom they call Prytanes) seeing that the Port was now even upon the point of being taken, earnestly intreated all the Citizens, both high and
low without distinction, resolutely to put to their helping hands for the common preser∣vation and security of the whole City. Whereupon, many readily came in, and mann'd three of their strongest Vessels with the best of their Men, giving them Orders to do the utmost they could with the Beaks of their Ships to sink the Enemies Vessels that carry'd their Engines: Those thus sent out (though they were ply'd with showers of Darts and Arrows) yet by the violence of their Charge broke in pieces the The sting Rampart. Rampart that was fenc'd with , and so shatter'd their Ships with one stroke after another, that they fill'd them with Water, and dismounted two of their Engines; Whereupon the Demetrians towing back the Third with Cables, the Rhodians encourag'd by their Success, prest on still with more Boldness than Prudence; and therefore being pierc'd and shatter'd by Ant. Ch. 303. the Beaks of many great Ships that surrounded them, Execestus the Admiral, and the Cap∣tain of the Gallies, and some others (being ill wounded) were taken prisoners; the rest by ing got to their own Men; only one Ship was taken by the Demetrians, and the rest escap'd the danger. After this conflict, Demetrius made another Engine, which was thrice as big as the former, both in height and breadth. And now being just upon ing into Port, arose a violent South Wind, which burst out of a Cloud on the suddain, and sun the Ships which were advancing, and overturn'd the Engine. Upon which, the R taking the advantage of the present opportunity, at the very nick of time flung opn their Gates, and made a Sally upon them that enter'd the Port: upon which there was a sharp Dispute for a long time together, and being that Demetrians could not come up to the assistance of his Men, by reason of the Storm, the Rhodians still fell upon 'em with fresh Parties one after another, so that the Demetrians, to the number of Four hundred, were forc'd to throw down their Arms and submit. After this Victory gain'd by the Rhodians, there arriv'd to their aid and assistance a Hundred and fifty G, and Five hundred Men sent by Ptolemy, amongst whom were some Rhodi∣ans that were Soldiers under the King's Pay. And thus stood matters in the Siege at Rhodes at that time. In S  not being able to compose Matters with Dinocrates and the Exiles, march'd one with what Forces he had against them, looking upon it absolutely necessary Ant. Ch. 303 to hazard his Person, and resolutely to fight it out, and gain all or lose all: He had not with him above Five thousand Foot and Eight hundred Horse. Dinocrates with the Exiles seeing the Enemy to come boldly on, went out with as much earnestness and resolution to fight them, for that he was far superior to the Agathocleans Agathocles routs Dino∣crates. in number; being above Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse. Both Armies fate down one against another at a place call'd Gorgius: At length they drew up in Battalia, and fell to it; and the Fight was very sharp for a while, by rea∣son of the heat and resolution of both parties: But after a little time some deserted Di∣nocrates (to the number of Two thousand,) and went over to the Tyrant, which was the ruine of the Exiles. For the Agathocleans were thereupon much more encourag'd and heart∣en'd; but those with Dinocrates were as much amaz'd and dejected, and thinking there were many more went off than did, they all took to their heels. Agathocles pursu'd them a little way, but then call'd off his Men from the Slaughter; and sent to the bro∣ken Troops proposals, that all differences being at length laid aside, every one should have free liberty to return into their own Country: For they found by experience, that they were never able to overcome him by force of Arms, being even now routed when they P. 779. had an Army far Superior to his in number: The Horse indeed all escap'd to the Castle of Ambicas; and some of the Foot the Night following got away: The greatest part Ant. Ch. 303. possess'd themselves of a Hill, but despairing to prevail by force of Arms, (and desirous to return to their Kindred, Friends, Estates and Country,) made Peace with Agathocles. Having therefore plighted his Faith to them, and thereupon all of them being come down from the Hill (which was a natural Fortification) he first disarm'd them, then hemm'd them in with his Forces, and put them every Man to the Sword, to the num∣ber of Seven thousand (as Timaeus says,) but as others have writ, Four thousand. For this Tyrant never in the least valu'd either his Word or Oath, and increas'd his Power not so much by the greatness of his Forces, as by the weakness of his Subjects, fearing more his Confederates than his Enemies. Having thus cut off his Enemy's Army, he receiv'd the rest of the Exiles into his Protection, and receiving Dinocrates into Grace Dinocrates in favour with Agathocles. and Favour, made him General of part of the Army, and intrusted him ever after in his most weighty Affairs. At which every Man may justly wonder, that he who was so jealous and suspicious of every one, as that he would never confide in any, should to the last maintain a firm friendship only with Dinocrates, who having thus betray'd his Confede∣rates, seiz'd upon Pasiphilus at Gela, and there murther'd him, and deliver'd up all the
Castles and Cities to Agathocles, bringing all his Enemies under his Feet in Two years Ant. Ch. 303 time. In Italy the Romans subdu'd the Palinians, and took their Country from 'em, and some Italy. that were Students at Rome they made free of the City. Afterwards the Consuls march'd out against the Samnites, who had wasted and harrass'd Phaleria, and in a Battel routed them; wherein they took Twenty Standards, and Two thousand Prisoners: And after they had taken the City Bola by Assault, presently appears Caius Gellius General of the Samnites with Six thousand Men; upon which there was then another sharp engage∣ment, in which Gellius himself was taken, and many of the other Samnites slain and taken prisoners. The Consuls being thus successful, recover'd Sora Harpina and Serenia, Cities of their Allies, which had been before taken from them. CHAP, V. The Siege of Rhodes continu'd: The Acts of the Sea Captains of the Rhodians. Peace made with the Rhodians. The Acts of Agathocles in the Lipari Islands. The Acts of Demetrius in Greece. The War between the Tarentines and Lucanians. The Acts of Cleonymus the Spartan. Cassander sends to Antigo∣nus to make Peace, who refuses. Lysimachus joins with Cassander, and so does Ptolemy and Seleucus against Antigonus: He marches against Lysimachus. Demetrius's further Acts in Greece. The Armies of Cassander and Demetrius. Demetrius leaves Greece and goes with his Army to his Father in Asia, after Peace made with Cassander. The misfortunes of Pleistarchus at Sea. Ptolemy besieges Sidon, but returns to Aegypt upon a false Report. Seleucus marches from Babylon with a great Army. AFter the former Year had run its course, Pherecles was made chief Governor of Olymp. 119. 1. Ant. Ch. 3. Athens, and Publius Sempronius and Publius Sulpicius were invested with the Consu∣lar Dignity at Rome: At the same time was solemniz'd the Hundred and nineteenth Olym∣piad, in which Andromenes the Corinthian bore away the Prize. About this time Demetri∣us, who lay still before Rhodes, seeing things did not succeed as to his attempts made at S of Rhodes. The City taken. Sea, resolv'd to Assault the City by Land. To that end he made preparation of Plen∣ty of all sort of Timber, and fram'd the Engine call'd Helepolis, far bigger than any of the former. Its Basis was four square; every side was almost in length Fifty Cubits, made up of four square pieces of Timber, bound together by Plates of Iron. In the middle part he plac'd strong Planks of Timber a Cubit distance one from ano∣ther, for those that forc'd the Engine forward, to stand upon. The whole was mov'd upon Eight strong and large Wheels; whose Felloes were Two Cubit thick, co∣ver'd with strong Iron Plates: Thwart over the Spokes were contriv'd Instruments to turn the En∣gine. P. 780. Antistpta's to turn about the Engine in a trice when ever they pleas'd. At every corner of the Ma∣chine were Pillars rais'd, little less than a hundred Cubits high, every one of an equal length, so compacted together, as that the whole Machine was Nine Stories high. In the first were Three and forty Beds, and in the highest Nine: The three sides of the Engine were lin'd on the outside with Iron Plates fastn'd with Nails, to prevent all damage from Fire that might be shot or cast from the City. In every Story at the Front were made Loop-holes, proportionable, and in shape, to the nature of the Artillery that was thence to be discharged. To these were Shutters (fastn'd to the Engine) to draw up, for the better defence of them within that threw the Darts; for they were lin'd with Skins stuff'd with Wooll to deaden the force of the Stone-shot. Every Story was furnish'd with two Ant. Ch. 30. large Ladders, that whatever was necessary might be brought in to them, at one and the same time by one, while others were going down upon other occasions by the other, that so every thing might be dispatcht without tumult and confusion. There were chosen out of the whole Army the strongest Men (to the number of Three thousand and four hun∣dred) to move the Engine forward; of whom some from within, and others plac'd be∣hind, so forc'd it forward, that Art and Strength together much facilitated the motion. He mad also Artificial Co∣vers over Mens Heads, made of strong Timber covered over with raw S. Testudo's, by some to fill up Trenches and Ditches, and with others to bring up Battering Rams: He made likewise Galleries, through which they that were imploy'd might pass and repass with safety at their pleasure. By the help and assistance likewise
of the Seamen, he plain'd and laid even all the way along which the Engines were to be brought up, to the space of Four Furlongs, so that the breadth of the Work fac'd as much of the City-Wall as consisted of Six Divisions between the Turrets, and of Seven of the Turrets themselves The multitude of Artificers and Workmen that were got together, were no less than Thirty thousand Men. Every thing therefore (through multitude of hands) being perfected and compleated sooner than could be imagin'd, Demetrius became a Terror to the Rhodians; for not only the greatness of the Engines, and the multitude of Men, but the Valour and Diligence of the King in carrying on of Sieges amaz'd them: Ant. Ch. 302. for he was extraordinary ingenious in invention, and contriv'd many things beyond all the Art and Industry of the Artificers; whence he got the Name of Poliorches . Poliorches: for he was so fierce and violent in his Assaults, that no Wall seem'd to be so strong as to be a suffici∣ent Defence to the Besieg'd against him. And besides, he was so Tall and Beautiful, that he look'd like a Demy God; insomuch as those who came to him but as Guests and Stran∣gers, and saw his Gracely Meen cloath'd with Royal Majesty, they were struck with Admiration, and would often attend upon him in his Expeditions, meerly to have the sa∣tisfaction in looking at him. Moreover, he was of an high and noble Spirit, that scorn'd not only to stoop to the common sort, but even to Princes themselves. And that which was most strange and peculiar only to himself was, in times of Peace he was given to Drukenness and Banqueting, to Dancing and Rioting; and would imitate even the Man∣ners of Bacchus himself, such (as is fabulously reported) he us'd to practise when he was upon Earth: But in times of War he was very active and serious, insomuch as he went beyond all the rest, both as to his Head and Hand, when any thing was to be done. For in his time, and by his contrivance, were made the greatest Darts, and such sort of Engines as far exceeded all other Nations in the World: And after this Siege and his Fa∣ther's Death, he launch'd forth the greatest Ships that ever were before seen. In the mean time the Rhodians perceiving how the Enemy's Works went on, built another Wall with∣in, answerable to that which was now presently to be Assaulted; and to this purpose they us'd the Stones that Wall'd in the Theater, and pull'd down some neighbouring Houses, and some Temples for the same purpose, vowing to the Gods to build larger and fairer, Ant. Ch. 302. P. 781. The Acts of the Rhodian Sea-Captains. if the City were preserv'd. They sent out likewise Nine Ships, and commanded the Cap∣tains that infesting every part, and surprizing what Ships they could, they should sink some of those they took, and bring in others into the City Harbour. These Captains divided their Squadron into three parts; Damophilus with the Ships which the Rhodians call'd Guard Ships Phalacidae sail'd to Carpathus, an Island be∣tween Rhodes and Creete now Scarpanto. Carpathus, were surprizing many of Demetrius's Fleet, he sunk some, and burnt others that were drawn up upon the Shoar, making choice of such Prisoners as might be most useful and serviceable; and many Ships that were carrying Corn and other Fruits out of the Island, he brought away with him into his own Country. Menedemus who commanded three small   . Gallies betwixt two and three Tire of Oars, made for Patara and Lycia, and there found a Ship at Anchor, and burnt her; all her Men being before gone off to Land: He took likewise many of the Enemies Transport Ships which carry'd Provisions to their Camp, and sent them to Rhodes: He took also a Ship of Four Tire of Oars coming out of Cilicia, which carry'd a Royal Robe, and other rich Furniture which Phila Demetrius his Wife had curiously wrought, and had sent as a Pre∣sent to her Husband. He order'd the Garments to be convey'd into Egypt, for they were Purple Robes fit for none to wear but Kings; but the Ship he took away with him, and sold all the Seamen he had taken both out of the Galley of four Tire of Oars, and other Vessels. Amyntas who commanded the other Ships sailed to the Islands, and Ant. Ch. 302. falling in with some of the Enemy, that were conveying away something of use for the Engines, he sunk some of the Ships, and brought in others to the City; in which were taken Eleven famous Artificers, most expert Artists in making of Darts and Engines. After this was call'd a General Assembly, wherein it was propos'd that the Statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be pull'd down; affirming, that it was a thing intolera∣ble that Enemies and Besiegers of the City should have the same Honours as those that were Friends and Benefactors: But the People were much incens'd at this motion, and and check'd them that propos'd it as those that did ill: and would not suffer any thing in diminution to the Honour of Antigonus, thereby, wisely consulting both their own Re∣putation and Advantage: For this greatness of Mind, and soundness of Judgment in a Democratical Government redounded amongst all to the praise of the Besieged, and softned and melted the Spirits of the Besiegers: For they that had set at liberty the Greek Cities, who had testify'd nothing of their good Will towards them as their Benefactors, now seem'd to go about to enslave that City, who had given a clear and evident Demonstration of the firmness and constancy of their Gratitude. This Resolution likewise might rea∣sonably
be concluded to be of singular Advantage to them in the worst of Fortune; for if the City were taken, the remembrance of their Kindness might plead and prevail for their Pardon: It's clear therefore that the Rhodians manifested singular Prudence in the Manage∣ment of this Affair. Demetrius had even now undermin'd the City, when a Deserter very opportunely came in and inform'd the City, that the Miners were approach'd almost within the Walls: Ant. Ch. 302. Upon which, the Rhodians drew a deep Trench all along the Wall that was now ready to be tumbled down, and forthwith fell to Countermining; and at length met the Ene∣my under Ground, and so prevented the Mine from proceeding any further: And while both Parties guarded the Mines, some of Demetrius his Soldiers with Money brib'd Athe∣nagoras, the Captain of the Guard for the Rhodians: He was a Milesian, sent thither by Ptolemy, and Captain of the Mercenaries, who having promis'd to betray the City, ap∣pointed a Day on which Demetrius should send some one of the chiefest of his Com∣manders, P. 782. who should enter in the Night through the Mines into the City, and find out a Place fit and convenient to receive the Soldiers. Athenagoras having now rais'd up the Hopes and Expectations of the Demetrians, discovers the whole Intrigue to the Senate. The King, according to the Compact, sends one of his Noblemen, Alexander a Macedo∣nian: But the Rhodians seiz'd him as soon as he peep'd up out of the Mine; but crown'd Athenagoras with a Crown of Gold, and for a Reward, gave him Five Talents of Silver; and then made it their Business to engage the rest of the Mercenaties and Strangers to be faithful to the People all the ways they could. However, Demetrius having now finish'd all his Engines, and plain'd and laid even every place under the Walls, brought up his The great Engine. Helepolis in the middle, and so order'd his Testudoes for filling up of Trenches and Ditches, (which were Eight in Number,) that he plac'd Four on each side of the Helepolis. To each of these was adjoin'd a Gallery, that they who went in and out might execute what was commanded without any Danger. He had likewise two other Testudoes that bore Battering Rams, far larger than the rest; for both of them were a Hundred and twenty Cubits long, strongly arm'd with Iron, and their Ant. Ch. 30 The Rams Heads. Heads resembled the Beak of a Ship, and were easily mov'd forward by the help of Wheels; but to do effectual Execution, they were forc'd on by a Thousand Men at least. Being ready to bring up his Engines to the Walls, he fill'd every Story in the Helepolis with as many Engines for shooting of Stones, Arrows, and Darts, as each would hold. Then he sent his Sea-Forces to the Haven and the Places adjoining, and order'd his Land-Army to the rest of the Wall where any approach could possibly be made. At length, at one Signal and Word of Command all set up a shout together, and with great Vio∣lence storm'd the City on every side: And at the very time that the Walls were shaking and trembling with the Strokes of the Battering Rams, and Stones shot from the Engines, in came Ambassadors from Cnidus, and intreated him to forbear all further Proceedings by force of Arms, and promis'd, that they would persuade the Rhodians to submit (as far as it was possible) to his Commands. The King hereupon remitted his Heat, and Am∣bassadors were sent from both sides, who banded Matters to and fro, but could not come to any Agreement. Whereupon he resolutely renew'd the Assault, and batter'd down one of the strongest Towers built of Four-square Stone, and so shook the whole space be∣tween Ant Ch. 302. the Towers, that the Besieg'd could not pass that way to the Bulwarks. But at this time, King Ptolemy sent a great Fleet with Provision to the Rhodians; in which were Three hundred thousand A Persian Measure, some∣thing larger than a Me∣dimna, which is 18 Gallons Artabans of Corn, Beans, and Pease: These making a straight course for Rhodes, Demetrius sent Shipping after them, in order to seize the Provi∣sion for the use of his own Camp: But the Ptolemeans, (hoising up all their Sails,) by the favour of a fair Gale of Wind arriv'd safe at their Port, and so those that were sent after them by Demetrius, return'd as they went. Cassander likewise sent Ten thousand Me∣dimnas of Barly to the Rhodians, and Lysimachus Forty thousand of Wheat, and as much of Barly. The Town thus supply'd with Plenty of Provision, their languishing Spirits now re∣viv'd; and thereupon judging it much to their Advantage if they could ruine the Ene∣mies Engines, they got together abundance of Fire-balls, and other Engines for shooting of Fire, and plac'd them and all their other Artillery upon the Walls; and the next Night, about the second Watch, on a sudden they play'd continually upon the Enemies Guard with their Shot of Arrows, Darts, Stones, and other Weapons; and making use also of all sorts of Fire-Engines, they grievously wounded and galled all that came flocking into that Part: Hereupon the Demetrians (who were altogether surpriz'd by so sudden and unexpected an Attack) being mightily concern'd for their Engines and their other Works,
ran all in a Body together to defend them. The Night being very dark, no Moon ap∣pearing, P. 783. Firebrands flying about with great violence, gave Light to the Night; and Darts and Stones from the Engines to shoot Darts and Arrows. Catapults and Engines to shoot great Stones. Ant. Ch. 302. Ballistas (not discern'd when they were shot) wounded and gall'd many of the Combatants, who could not see how to avoid them. And now at this very time some of the Iron Plates fell off from the great Engine, and the Firebrands had the good Fortune to fall upon that part that was bare: Upon which Demetrius was in a great Fright lest the Engine should be totally consum'd as the Fire en∣creas'd; and therefore endeavour'd to prevent it with all the speed possible, and to quench the raging Flame by the Water before prepar'd, and ready in the Apartments of the En∣gine for such Accidents. At length he call'd together by sound of Trumpet those that were to move the Engines, and by their Help, brought them off out of the reach of the Darts. When it was day, he order'd the Boys and Pages in the Army to gather all the Darts and Arrows shot by the Rhodians; because he had a desire by numbering of these, to make a Conjecture how the Citizens were furnish'd and provided. These Boys performing what they were commanded, there were in number of Fire-brands and other Vehicles for Fire of several sizes, above Eight Hundred, of Darts no fewer than Fifteen hundred This vast number of Darts, Arrows, Firebrands, and Balls, shot in in so little a portion of the Night, caus'd him to admire the Store and Provision of the City in their Ammunition; and likewise their great Charge and Expence in providing them. Then he set about repairing of his Engines, burying the Dead, and curing those that were Wounded: During which time, the Citizens (having a Respite from the Assaults and Batteries of the Engines) built a third Wall in the shape of an Half-Moon, which compass'd in all that part of the Wall that lay most open and obnoxious to the Enemies Batteries: And besides this, they drew a deep Trench round that part of the Wall which Ant. Ch. 302. was ready to fall, that the King might not enter on a sudden at the first Push. They sent out likewise some Ships (that were swift Sailers) under the Command of Amyntas; who made over to the Continent in Asia, and there set upon some Privateers that were Commission'd by Demetrius: They had three open Vessels, and were reputed the stout∣est Men the King had in his Fleet. After a short Fight, the Rhodians took both the Ships and Men together, among whom were Timocles, the chief of the Pirates: They fell like∣wise upon some Merchant Ships, and took some light Vessels loaden with Corn, and with these and the Pirates open Vessels they secretly pass'd by the Enemy, and got into Rhodes. Demetrius having repair'd his Machines, brings them up again to the Walls, and with showers of Darts and Arrows forc'd the Besieg'd off from the Bulwarks, and battering the Place adjoining with his Rams, beat down two Spaces between the Towers. In the heat of this Action the Besieg'd with all their Might defended the middle Tower, and were continually press'd upon with strong Parties of fresh Men one after another, so that Aminias their chief Commander (couragiously behaving himself) was there slain, with many other of the common Soldiers. While these Things were doing, King Ptolemy sent to the Rhodians as much Corn and other Provision as he had done before; and Fifteen Hundred Soldiers besides, under the Command of Antigonus a Macedonian. About the same time there came to Demetrius above Fifty Ambassadors from Athens, and other Cities of Greece, all solliciting the King to compose Matters, and strike up a Peace with the Rhodians: Whereupon there was a Ant. Ch. 302. Cessation of Arms, and many Harangues were now made to the People, and then again to Demetrius, but they could not agree upon any Terms; and therefore the Ambassadors went away without effecting any thing. Demetrius afterwards was contriving to make an Attack upon the City in the Night, at that part of the Wall that was fallen down; to this end he pick'd out the best of his Sol∣diers, P. 784. and some others fit for the Purpose, in all to the number of Fifteen Hundred, whom he commanded to approach the Walls secretly about the second Watch. He him∣self stood ready with the rest of the Army, and gave Orders to the Officers of every Re∣giment, upon a Signal given to set up a Shout, and forthwith to make an Assault upon the City both by Sea and Land; who all executed his Commands accordingly; and presently one Party made to the Ruines, and killing the Watch at the Trench, broke into the City, and possess'd themselves of all the Places round the Theatre. The Rhodians seeing all the City in an Uproar upon the knowledge of what had happen'd, commanded them that guarded the Port and the Walls, every one to keep their several Posts, and endea∣vour to beat off the Enemy that attempted to enter. They in the Town with the stoutest of the Citizens, and those Soldiers then lately come from Alexandria, set upon Ant. Ch. 302. them that were broke in within the Walls: But as soon as it was Day, Demetrius lifted up
the Standard. Signal, at which both they that had made an Attack upon the Port, and those round the Walls, set up a Shout all together, to encourage their Men that had enter'd, and were about the Theatre. The poor Women and Children throughout the whole City were in terrible Frights and Lamentations, as if the Town had been then certainly taken by Storm. However, a sharp Encounter there was between them that had enter'd within the Walls and the Rhodians; and though many fell on both sides, yet neither of them at first gave the least Ground: But after a while, when many more of the Rhodians came flocking in, resolv'd to endure the greatest Extremity, as now to fight for their Country, and for all that was dear to them in the World, the King's Party were overborn; and Alcimus and Mantias, the Commanders of the Party, (after many Wounds receiv'd,) were there slain; most of the rest were either kill'd upon the Spot, or taken Prisoners; but some few made their escape, and got to the King. Many likewise of the Rhodians were slain at the same time, amongst whom was Damotetis,  , Pre or Chief Magi∣strate. President of the Council, a Man most Renown'd for his Valour. Demetrius (although he judg'd, that Fortune had, as it were, wrung the City out of his Hands, yet) prepar'd for another Assault; But his Father writing to him to make Peace with the Rhodians upon such Terms and Conditions as he could get, he watch'd for the most convenient opportunity, which might afford him a Ant. Ch. 302. colourable Pretence for an Agreement and Composure of Matters between them. Pto∣lemy likewise, though he had before writ to the Rhodians to acquaint them that he in∣tended to send them a great quantity of Corn, and Three thousand Men, yet afterwards advising them to Treat and Agree with Antigonus upon any reasonable Conditions, they all inclin'd to Peace. At the same time likewise the Aetolian Commonwealth sent Ambas∣sadors to Negociate a Pacification. The Rhodians therefore at length struck up a Peace with Peace made with the Rho∣dians. Demetrius upon the Conditions following; viz. That the City should Govern accord∣ing to their own Laws, and should be without a Garison: That they should Enjoy their own Estates and Revenues: That they should join with Antigonus in his Wars against all Persons, except Ptolemy: And that they should deliver a Hundred Citizens for Ho∣stages, such as Demetrius should make Choice of, except such as were Magistrates. And thus the Rhodians (after a whole Year's Siege) put an end to the War, honouring those with just Rewards, who had approv'd themselves honest and faithful to their Country; and such Slaves as had behav'd themselves stoutly and valiantly, they set free, and enroll'd them as Members of the City: They set up likewise the Statues of the Kings, Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, and of some others inferiour to them, yet who had contribu∣ted much to the Preservation of the Place. But that they might express their Gratitude Ant. Ch. 302. and Thankfulness to Ptolemy above all the rest, they sent some of their Priests to consult the Oracles of Ammon, whether they should worship Ptolemy as a God, or no: And be∣ing answer'd, That they should; they consecrated to him a Four-square Grove in their P. 785. City; building on every side thereof a Gallery of a Furlong in length, and call'd it Pto∣lemeum, or Ptolemy's Gallery. They repair'd also the Theatre, and the Parts of the Walls that were thrown down, and made them, and all the other Places that had been ruin'd, far more Beautiful and Glorious than they were before. Demetrius having ratifi'd the Peace with the Rhodians, (according to his Father's Com∣mands,) loos'd from thence with his whole Army, and passing by the Islands, he arriv'd at Aulis in Boeotia, minding with all speed to set the Grecians at Liberty; for Cassander and Polysperchon grown bold through the absence of the Enemy, had not long before wasted and harrass'd many Parts of Greece. And first of all he freed the City of the Calcideans from a Garison of the Boeotians, and forc'd the Boeotians (out of fear of him) to fall off from their League with Cassander. Afterwards confederating with the Aetolians, he pre∣par'd to make War upon Polysperchon and Cassander. During these Transactions, Eumelus, the King of Bospherus Cimmerius, having now reign'd Vid. antea Olymp. 17. 3. how he di'd. Ant. Ch. 302. Six Years, ended his Days; after whom succeeded Sparticus his Son, who reign'd Twen∣ty Years. Having now given an Account of the Affairs of Greece and Asia, we shall pass over to other Parts of the World. In Sicily, Agathocles on a sudden, and without any Provocation, invaded the Inhabitants Agathocles robs the Lipa∣rians. of the Lipari Islands, being then in full and perfect Peace and Security, and exacted from them Fifty Talents of Silver. At which time, many thought that 'twas then spoken from a Divine Spirit, when 'twas said, That God would remarkably pursue him for his Wickedness: The Liparians then desir'd him, that he would give some time to make up the Money that was short, declaring that to that time they never made use of the Dedicated Treasure:
But Agathocles forc'd him to give him the Money that was in the In the Pry∣taneum. Sacred Treasury. Upon some of which was stamp'd the Image of Aeolus, and upon others Vulcan; and when he had got it, he set sail and away he went: But there arose a Storm that broke in pieces Eleven of the Ships that carry'd the Money: Which gave occasion to many to conclude, that Aeolus (who is said to have Command of the Winds in those Parts) executed Ven∣geance upon him at his first setting forth. And that Vulcan at his latter end punish'd the Tyrant in his own Country, according to the just Desert of his Wickedness, burning him alive with hot Coals: For it was one and the same Justice and Divine Will that forbore and pass'd over those that sav'd and preserv'd their Parents at the Foot of Mount Aetna; and that exerted his Power in punishing those that had impiously prophan'd the Deity. But what is now said concerning the Return and Misfortunes of Agathocles, shall be fur∣ther Ant. Ch. 302. confirm'd when we come to the Time proper for that Relation; but now we must apply our selves to what was done in those Parts of Italy that lay bordering one upon another. The Romans and Samnites, after a War of Two and twenty Years and Six Months continuance, by their mutual Ambassadors at length made Peace one with another. But Sempronius, one of the Consuls, broke into the Country of the Aequi, and took Forty Towns in Forty Days time at the most; and bringing the whole Country into absolute Subjection to the Roman Yoke, return'd home, and most worthily and gloriously triumph'd. But the Romans enter into a League with the Marsi, Peligni, and Marrycini. When the former Year was ended, Leostratus was chosen Chief Magistrate of Athens for this succeeding, and Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius were created consuls at Rome. Olymp. 119. 2. Ant. Ch. 301. In the time of whose Governments, Demetrius resolv'd to make War upon Cassander, and to restore Liberty to the Grecians; and above all other Concerns, to put the Affairs of Demetrius  the Cities in Greece at Liberty. Greece into a good and happy Condition; because he hop'd by the Liberty granted, there∣by both to advance his own Reputation, as also to break those Captains of Cassander's as were join'd with Prepalaus, and that by falling upon Cassander, he should gain the Sove∣reign Power to himself. The City of Sicyon was then held by a Garison of Ptolemy the King, of which, Philip, a brave and gallant Man, was Governor; upon this Place Deme∣trius P. 786. made a sudden Attack in the Night, and broke in within the Walls; whereupon the Garison Soldiers presently hurri'd into the Castle. Demetrius being now possess'd of the Town, posted himself between the Houses and the Cittadel; and being just upon the point of bringing up his Engines, they within were so terrify'd, that they surrender'd up∣on Terms, and then sail'd away into Aegypt. Afterwards having prevail'd with the Si∣cyons to remove and settle themselves within the Castle, he laid that part of the City that adjoin'd to the Haven even to the Ground, which was a Place before every way strongly fortify'd: Then joining with the Inhabitants, and helping them to build In the Citta∣del. Houses, and re∣storing them to their former Liberty, he was honour'd by these he had thus oblig'd as a Demi-God; for they call'd the City Demetriades, and appointed Sacrifices, Festivals and Sports, with other Honours, to be Yearly celebrated and offer'd in Memory of him as the Builder of their City. But Time and Turns of Fortune put an end to these Solem∣nities. The Sicyons therefore being fix'd in a far better Place than they were before, have continu'd there from that very time to this day: For the Site of the Citadel is large and Plain, compass'd in on every side with inaccessible Rocks, so as no Engine can pos∣sibly approach or come near it: It's furnish'd likewise with plenty of Water, by which the Inhabitants greatly inrich their Gardens and Orchards: And therefore all approv'd the Wisdom and ingenious Contrivance of the King, that had provided for them every Ant. Ch. 301. thing conducing to their Pleasure in time of Peace, and to their Protection and Security in time of War. Having settled all Things at Sicyon, he march'd thence with his whole Army to Corinth, which Prepalaus, Cassander's General, then held with a strong Garison; where being presently let in by the Citizens in the Night, (through a little Sally-Port.) he gain'd the City, together with the Havens-The Soldiers in Garison hereupon fled, some of them into the Palace. Sisyphium, (as it's call'd,) others into the Cittadel: Whereupon the Engines being brought up to the Fortifications, after much much Toil and Labour he took Sisyphium by Storm: The Besieg'd had (before he enter'd) all fled to them that were in the Cittadel; but he so terrify'd them also, that he forc'd them to surrender; for this King in Assaults was not to be resisted; and in inventing of Engines for the assaulting of Places, was extraordinary Ingenious.
And now altho' he restor'd the Corinthians to their Liberty, yet he put a Garison into the Acro Corin∣tho. Citadel; because the Citizens desir'd to continue under the Antigonus his Protection, who had as∣sum'd the Title of King, as is said before. Ant. Ch. 301. King's Protection, until he had subdu'd Cassander: And so Prepelaus having thus poorly lost Corinth, went to Cassander. Then Demetrius march'd into Achaia, and took Buta by Assault; and within a few days after, he had Scyrus deliver'd up to him, and expell'd the Garison thence: Moving forward, he freed all the rest of the Cities of Achaia. Then encamping at Aegeum, he lay with his Army round the Walls; and upon a Parly with Strombichus the Governour, demanded the Surrender of the Town: But he not only refus'd, but rail'd against Deme∣trius from the Walls, and gave him base Language; whereupon the King brought up the Engines, batter'd down the Wall, and took the City by Storm; and there crucify'd Strombicus (who was plac'd there as Governour by Polysperchon) and about Fourscore more that were his inveterate Enemies) before the Walls of the Town. And from among the Prisoners he pickt out 2000 Mercenaries, and intermixt them amongst his own Regiments. After the taking of this City, they who held the neighbouring Forts and Castles, thought it to no purpose to oppose the King; and therefore all surrendred their Garisons. And all the Governours of Cities (seeing that Cassander and Polysperchon sent them no Assi∣stance, and that Demetrius with a potent Army, and with Engines (the greatest that P. 787. ever came into the Field) was ready to fall upon them, surrender'd all up to him. And thus stood the Affairs of Demetrius. In Italy the Tarentines (being at War with the Lucanians and the Romans) sent Ambassa∣dors The War be∣tween the Lu∣canians and Tarentines. Ant. Ch. 301. Cleonymus the Spartan. to Sparta desiring Aid, and that Cleonymus might be sent them for their General. The Lacedaemonians readily granted the General that was desir'd; and the Tarentines sent Ships and Money, wherewith Cleonymus rais'd Five thousand Men, and muster'd them at Tenarus in Laconia; and thence by a short Cut sail'd to Tarentum, where he hir'd as many Mercenaries as the former, and listed some of the Citizens: In the whole he rais'd above Twenty thousand Foot and two thousand Horse. He join'd to his Army likewise many Greeks of Italy, together with the Messapians; whereupon the Lucanians being terrify'd with the greatness of his Army, made Peace with the Tarentines: Only the Metapontians stood off; and therefore he requir'd the Lucanians to join with him in spoiling and ha∣rassing their Country; and accordingly making use of a fit Opportunity, he broke in upon them, and put them into a terrible fright: And tho' he enter'dinto the Metapon∣tum. City as a Friend, yet he trapann'd the Citizens out of Six thousand Talents of Silver, and up∣wards, and took away Two hundred young Ladies of the best Quality for Hostages; not so much to secure the Performance of the League, as to gratifie his own brutish Lusts; for he threw off his Laconick Habit, and gave up himself to all manner of Voluptuousness; and brought them into Bondage and Slavery, who had committed themselves to his Care and Protection. For tho' he had so great an Army, and so well provided, yet he did noting worthy the Name of a Spartan. He determin'd indeed to make an Expedition into Sicily, under colour to overturn the Tyranny of Agathocles, and to restore the Sicilians to Ant. Ch. 301 their ancient Laws and Liberties; but omitting that for the present, he sail'd to Corcyra, and having taken the City, got there a vast Treasure, and Garison'd the Place, designing to make use of that as a Town and Citadel of War, and thence to manage all the Affairs of Greece. Forthwith Ambassadors came to him from Demetrius, Poliorches, and Cassan∣der severally, to sollicit him to join with them as Confederates; but he join'd with neither. Afterwards, hearing that the Tarentines and some others had deserted him, and revol∣ted, he left a sufficient Garison at Corcyra, and with the rest of his Forces sail'd in a great Heat into Italy, with a Resolution to execute exemplary Punishment upon those that had rebell'd. Arriving at the very Place where the Barbarians kept Guard, he took the City, and after he had sold the Men for Slaves, he spoil'd and harass'd all the Country. He took also a Town call'd Triopius by Assault, and carry'd thence Three thousand Captives: But about this time the Barbarians got into a Body, and set upon his Camp in the night, and kill'd above two hundred of his Soldiers, and took about a Thousand Prisoners; and together with this Misfortune, at the very same time arose a violent Storm, and broke in pieces 20 of his Ships, as they lay at Anchor near to his Camp. Being plagu'd with these Losses and Misfortunes falling one upon the neck of another, Cleonymus sail'd back with his Forces to Corcyra. The former Year being now past, this Year Nicocles executed the Office of Lord Chan∣cellor Olymp. 119. 3. Ant. Ch. 300. Cassander sends to make Peace with An∣tigonus. of Athens, and Marcus Livius and Marcus Aemilius succeeded Consuls at Rome: At which time Cassander King of Macedon seeing the Armies of his Enemies to increase, and that the Storm was impending and ready to fall with all its weight upon him, was in a great Consternation concerning the Issue and Event: He sent therefore Ambassadors into Asia to Antigonus, to intreat him to be reconcil'd and strike up a Peace with him;
who fiercely and roughly answer'd, That he would own no Peace that should be made Antigonus his proud Answer. P. 788. with him, unless Cassander would deliver up all into his hands. At which Answer he was greatly terrify'd; and sent for Lysimachus out of Thrace, to venture all in a Common Lot both together: For ever in his greatest Straits his manner was to have recourse to him for Relief, both upon the account of his Valour, and for that his Kingdom border'd upon Macedonia. These two Kings therefore (consulting together how to manage their Affairs to the best Advantage of them both) sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy King of Aegypt, and to Seleucus Prince of the Higher Provinces, giving them an account of the proud Answer of Antigonus; telling them, That they were all in equal Danger by this War; for if Antigonus gain'd Macedonia, he would presently swallow up the rest; and that he had upon several occasions given a clear Discovery of his Covetousness and Ambition; and that he would have none to be Sharers with him in any Part of the Empire; and therefore that it was very fit and expedient, that they should all join together against him. Ant. Ch. 300. Ptolemy and Seleucus (judging what was said to be certainly true) readily came into the League, and rais'd numerous Forces to be assistant in the War. However, Cassander judged it not prudent to suffer the Enemy first to break in upon him, but that it was rather for his Advantage to be before-hand with them, and fall first upon them: To that end he deliver'd part of the Army to Lysimachus, and sent a General along with them; and he himself march'd with the rest into Thessaly, to fight with Demetrius and the other Grecians. Lysimachus with his Army pass'd over out of Europe into Asia, and set free the Inhabi∣tants of Lampsacus and Paros, who had sided with him upon their own accord: But ta∣king Lysimachus goes ver into Asia. Sigaeum by Assault, he put a Garison into it; and then committed Six thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse to the Charge of Prepelaus, and sent him to take in the Cities in Aeolia and Ionia: But he himself in the first place design'd to besiege Abydos, and carry'd along with him Darts, Battering Rams, and other Engines for that purpose. But a great number of Soldiers being sent by Sea from Demetrius for the defence of the City, he left off his Design; and having taken in Hellespont and Phrygia, he went on and besieg'd the City Synada, where the Antigonus King's Magazine lay, and at the same time drew over Docimus, a Commander of Antigonus his Party, to stand for the Common Cause; and by his help took both Synada and other Forts where the King's Treasures were laid up. In the mean time, Prepelaus, who was sent to make War upon Aeolia and Ionia, by the way took Adramittium, and besieg'd Ephesus; and so terrify'd the Inhabitants, that they submitted; and finding there the Hostages which the Rhodians had given, he sent them all Ant. Ch. 300. home again to their Friends, and did no hurt to any of the Ephesians in their Persons; but set on fire all the Ships which he found in their Harbour, because the Enemy Comman∣ded as yet all at Sea, and for that the Issue of the War was hitherto uncertain. Afterthis, he join'd to him the Teians and Coplohonians. But as for Erythrae and Clazomene, they had Succour sent unto them by Sea, and therefore he could not take them; but having wasted their Territories, he departed and went for Sardis; and there he drew over by fair Words Phoenix and Docimus, two of Antigonus his Captains, and took the City it self, all but the Antigonus marches a∣gainst Lysima∣chus. Antigonia. Castle into his Protection. As for the Castle, Philippus (a Friend of Antigonus's) kept, and would not betray the Trust which he had repos'd in him. Antigonus was at that time wholly taken up in making Sports and Feasts at Antigonia, and had proclaim'd great Prizes for such as would put in for them, and huge Wages to all cunning Artificers that could be gotten. But when he heard how Lysimachus was come into Asia, and by what Multitudes his Sol∣diers revolted to him, he brake off his Sports, and yet disburs'd among the Wrestlers and Ar∣tificers P. 789. no less than Two hundred Talents; and then taking his Army with him, march'd away out of Syria, and by long Journies hastned to meet the Enemy. As soon as he came to Tarsus in Cilicia, he there, out of the Monies which he took with him out of the City of Quindi, gave his Army Three Months Pay before-hand; and besides this, brought Three thousand Talents along with him, to the end he might not be to seek for Money, if need should be. Then passing the Taurus, he hasted into Cappadoci, and reduc'd such as in the Ant. Ch. 300. Upper Phrygia and Lacaonia had revolted from him; and so these serv'd him in the Wars as they did before. Then Lysimachus hearing of the Enemy's approach, fell to consult with his Council in this imminent Danger, what was fittest to be done; and their Advice was, by no means to ha∣zard a Battel till Seleucus came down from the Upper Provinces; but to possess himself of the surest Places, and to Intrench himself in the strongest manner that possibly he could, with Ramparts, Palissadoes, and Stakes, and there expect the coming of the Enemy. Lysi∣machus having heard this Advice, put it seriously in Execution: And Antigonus, on the other side, as soon as he came near his Camp, drew out in Battalia, and provok'd  to fight;
but seeing he would not, he went and kept all the Passages by which any Victual might come unto the Camp: Whereupon, Lysimachus fearing lest he should fall into the hands of the E∣nemy forwant of Provision, remov'd by Night, and having march'd Four hundred Furlongs came to Doryleum, and there Encamp'd; for that in those Parts there was stoe of Corn, and other Provisions in abundance, having a River at the back of him as a Defence to his Camp. Wherefore having rais'd a Work, and inclos'd it with an exceeding deep Trench, and Palli∣sado'd it with three Rows of Stakes, he made all, as he thought, sure: But Antigonus finding the Enemy gone, pursu'd after him with all speed; and coming near to the Place where he lay, entrench'd, and seeing no disposition in him to fight, he presently fell to work, and drew another Trench round about his Camp to besiege him there; and to that purpose caus'd Darts, Arrows, and Catapults, to be brought thither to him: And though many Skirmishes were Ant. Ch. 300. made about the Trenches, because Lysimachus his Men endeavour'd by their Darts and Ar∣rows to drive the Enemy from their Works, yet Antigonus his Party had still the better of it in every Encounter. For in time, Antigonus his Works came to be almost finish'd; but Ly∣simachus his Provision began to fail; who therefore taking the Advantage of a tempestuous Night, made away with his Army, and through Mountainous Countries came to his Winter-Quarters. But when Antigonus the next Morning saw that the Enemy was gone, he also march'd after him through the Champain Country; but by reason there fell great store of Rain and the Ways were Foul and Deep, he lost many of his Carriages, and some of his Men also in that Journey; and the whole Army was in great distress: Wherefore both to spare his Army, and because the Winter Quarter came on, he gave off his pursuit; and casting a∣bout for the fittest Places, he distributed his Army into Winter-Quarters: But receiving in∣telligence that Seleucus was marching down from the Higher Provinces with a numerous Ar∣my, he sent one of his Friends into Greece to Demetrius, Commanding him with all speed to come to him with his Forces. For he was in an extraordinary Fright, lest all the Kings joining together should force him to fight (and so lay all at stake) before the Forces out of Europe could join him. Lysimachus in the like manner sent his Army to be quartered in the Country of Salmonia, P. 790. having made large Provision for them out of Heraclea, for that he had alliance with them of that City: For he had marry'd Amestris, the Daughter of Oxyartes, Niece to the late King Darius (whom Alexander gave to Craterus to be his Wife) and now at this time Governess of Ant. Ch. 300. the City. And thus stood the Affairs of Asia at that time. But as to the Affairs of Greece, Demetrius being at Athens, greatly desir'd to be initiated Demetrius initiated. into the Sacred Mysteries of Ceres at Eleusina: But in regard the time appointed by the Law, and commonly spent by the Athenians in performing the Ceremonies of this Solem∣nity, was very long and tedious, he intreated the People that (in return of his former kindness to them) they would alter their ancient Custom, which they agreed unto: Whereupon, he committed his Person unarm'd into the Hands of the Priests; and so be∣ing His Acts in Greece. initiated before the Legal Day, he departed from Athens; and then rendezvous'd both his Fleet and Land-Army at Chalcis in Baeotia; but hearing that Cassander had block'd up all the Passes, he look'd upon it not feasible to go by Land into Thessaly, and therefore sail'd with the Army into the Haven of Larissa, and there landed his Men, upon which the City was forthwith surrender'd to him; but the Citadel he took by Force of Arms, and bound all the Soldiers of the Garison in Chains, and so committed them close Prisoners, and restor'd the Larisseans to their ancient Laws and Liberties: Then he took in Prona and Pteleum. Cassander had commanded the Inhabitants of Cities in Thessaly. Dion and Or∣chomenon to remove and settle at Thebes; but Demetrius put a stop to this Transplanting of the Cities. Cassander, when he saw that every thing went as Demetrius would have it, strengthned the Garisons in Phera and Thebes; and rendezvous'd his Forces in the Face of the Demetrians: His whole Army consisted of Nine and twenty thousand Foot, and Two Armies of De∣metrius and Cassander. thousand Horse. Those who follow'd Demetrius amounted to Fifteen hundred Horse, at least Eight thousand Macedonian Foot, and Fifteen thousand Mercenaries; and out of the Cities of Greece Five and twenty thousand; besides several Regiments of Light-arm'd Men, Ant Ch. 300 and a disorderly Rabble of fordid Fellows out of all Nations, to the Number of Eight thousand at the least, such as are us'd to follow Camps, only to Rob and Plunder where-ever they come: So that the whole Land-Army consisted of Six and Fifty thousand Men. The Armies had now lay'n one over against the other many days, and though they were drawn up in Battalia on both sides, yet neither attempted to sight, solicitously ex∣pecting to hear how things went in Asia. At that time, Demetrius enter'd with part of his Army into the City of Pherea, being invited thither by the Inhabitants; and took the Citadel, and dismiss'd all Cassander's Soldiers, upon the Terms agreed upon, and re∣stor'd the Phereans to their former Liberties. While these Things were acting in T,
the Messengers from Antigonus came to Demetrius, who deliver'd his Father's Commands, and order'd him to transport his Forces over into Asia, with all the speed imaginable. Whereupon, he looking upon it as a thing of absolute Necessity to obey his Father, forthwith struck up a Peace with Cassander, upon Condition, that his Father would ap∣prove Demetrius makes Peace with Cassan∣der. of it; not in the least doubting, but that he would make all void, who he knew had resolv'd to put an end to the War, by no other ways than by force of Arms. Howe∣ver he was willing to manage his Business so, as that his leaving of Greece should look with a fair Face, and not resemble a Flight: For among other things, he took care to have it inserted into the Articles of Peace, That all the Greek Cities, both in Greece and Asia, should enjoy their ancient Laws and Liberties. At length, having got Ships together to P. 791. Ant. Ch. 300. Demetrius gos to his Fa∣ther. transport his Army and the Carriages, he set sail with his whole Fleet, and steering a right Course through the Islands, (of the Aegean Sea) came to Ephesus, and there landing his Army, Encamp'd before it, and reduc'd it to its former Obedience, and suffer'd the Ga∣rison which Prepalaus had put there, safely to depart: Then putting a strong Garison of his own into the Castle there, march'd away with the rest of his Army as far as the Hel∣lespont, where he reduc'd the Lampsacenians and Parians, and other revolted Cities to his Subjection: And from thence going to the Mouth of Pentus, Encamp'd near the Temple of the Chalcedentans, and there fortisy'd; which done, he left there Three thousand Foot, and Thirty Sail of good Ships to keep the Port, and sent the rest of his Army to Quar∣ter for that Winter in several Places thereabouts. About this time, Mithridates, who was subject to Antigonus, being suspected of fa∣vouring Cassander's Party, was slain at Cius, in the Country of Mysia; of which, and of Arthinas he had been Prince Thirty five years. His Son, call'd also Mithridates, succee∣ded him in his Principality, and added to his Dominions Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, and held them Thirty six years. In these days Cassander, after the departure of Demetrius, recover'd all the Cities lying upon the Sea Coasts, and sent Pleistarchus into Asia, with an Army of Twelve thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse to assist Lysimachus. But Pleistarchus coming to the Mouth Ant. Ch. 300. of Pontus, found that Streight kept by the Enemy: And thereupon, despairing of any Passage that way, went to Odessus, which lies between Apollonia and Galatia, over against The Misfortunes of Pleistarchus Cassander's General at Sea. Heraclea, where a Part of Lysimachus his Army lay: But having not Shipping enough for the Transportation of all his Forces at that Place, he divided his Army into three Parts: The first part that set out, landed safely at Heraclea: The second was defeated by the Enemy's Ships which lay to keep the Streight at Pontus: The third, wherein Pleistarchus himself was, was so overset by a violent Tempest, that the greatest part of the Ships, and Men in them perish'd: And among the rest the Ship wherein he was, being a Ves∣sel of Six Tire of Oars; and of all the Men in her, which could not be less than Five hun∣dred, only Three and thirty escap'd, of whom Pleistarchus himself was one, who getting upon a Plank of the Ship when it split, was cast on Shore half dead; yet being a little re∣cover'd, was carry'd to Heraclea, and there growing strong again, went to Lysunachus in his Winter Quarters, having lost the greatest part of his Army by the way. About the same time, Ptolemy coming with an excellently well-appointed Army out of Aegypt, reduc'd all the Cities of Caelosyria to his Obedience; but when he lay in Siege be∣fore Sidon, there came a false Rumour to his Ear, that a Battel had been sought, wherein Lysimachus and Seleucus were routed and fled to Heraclea, and that Antigonus thereupon was hasting into Syria with his Victorious Army. Ptolemy giving overlight credit to this Report, made a Truce with the Sidonians for five Months, and putting Garisons into other Cities which he had taken in those Parts, return'd into Aegypt. While these things thus pass'd, Two thousand Autariats, and about Eight hundred Ly∣cians and Pamphilians of Lysunachus his Soldiers, fled over to Antigonus out of their Winter-Quarters, and Antigonus entertain'd them very courteously, furnishing them with such Pay, as they said Lysimachus ow'd them, and gave them also for a Reward large Sums of Money over and above. About the same time also, Seleucus, with a great Army came down out of the Upper Provinces into Cappadocia, and Winter'd his Army in Tents which he brought ready made Seleucus. P. 792. for them. His Army consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, and about Twelve thousand Horse, (reck'ning in with them his Archers on Horseback) and Four hundred and four∣score Elephants, and an Hundred Iron Chariots: Thus these Kings join'd their Forces, resolving the next Summer to decide the Controversie by the Sword. But we shall give an Account of the Wars among these Princes in the Beginning of the next Book, accord∣ing as we first design'd. FINIS.
THE FRAGMENTS OF Diodorus Siculus. OUT OF Some of his BOOKS that are Lost. LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in Pater-Noster-Row: 1699.
To the READER. THE last Twenty Books of Diodorus Siculus are entirely lost, (except some Ecclogues or Fragments in Photius his Bibliotheca and others, recover'd by Hoes Chelius, and published by Laurentius Rhodomannus,) which contain'd an Account of Affairs for the space of 244 Years, or there abouts; i. e. from the End of the 119th Olympiad, (when Antigonus and Demetrius Polior∣cetes were routed by Ptolemeus Lagus and the other Confederates, An. M. 3650.) to the End of the 180th Olympiad, at which time Julius Caesar made his first Expedi∣tion into Britain, which was in the 693d Year of the City, as Eutropius accounts, Lib. 6. The Reader is desired to observe, That these being but Fragments, or Pieces of Diodo∣rus, recover'd out of the Rubbish (as it were) of Antiquity, the Relations are often broken, and new Matter sometimes begun that has no Coherence with what went before. Where they are broken, they are Noted generally thus,—The new Matter is easily discern'd by Observation. A Fragment out of the Sixth Book of the Bibliotheca of Diodorus Siculus, taken out of Eusebius Pamphilus, Book II. Evang. Preparation. THese therefore are the most remarkable Things that are recorded among the Atlan∣tides concerning the Gods; and they say, the Grecians use the same Rites and Cere∣monies. The same things Diodorus says in the 3d Book of his History: And the same Diodorus confirms the same Theology in his 6th Book, from the History of Euemerus the Messenian, where these are his words—The Ancients therefore held two Opi∣nions (which are brought down to Posterity) concerning the Gods: Some they say are Immortal and Incorruptible, as the Sun, Moon, and rest of the Stars; and likewise the Winds, and other Things of the like Nature, for none of these have either Beginning, or End. But there are others, they say, that are Earthly Gods, but for their good Deeds to the benefit of Mankind, have attain'd to the highest pitch of Honour and Glory; and such were Hercules, Dionysius or Bacchus Aristaeus, and such like. Of these Terrestrial Gods, many and various Stories are related by Historians, and Poets. Mythologists. Among the Historians, Euemerus has compos'd a Sacred History, and written peculiarly of these Deities. Among the Mythologists or Poets, Homer, Hesiod, Orpheus, and others of that kind, have seign'd most prodigious Stories of the Gods. We shall endeavour in short to run over what has been writ by both, observing a Mean. Euemerus, a special Friend of King Cassander, being forc'd to undertake some great and weighty Affairs, and long and tedious Voyages for the King, they say, was driven far away through the Ocean, South∣ward; and loosing from Arabia Faelix, after many days sail, arriv'd at certain Islands situa∣ted in the midst of the Ocean; the greatest of which was one call'd Panchaia, in which he saw the Panchaians very zealous and eminent for Religion, who ador'd the Gods with magnificent and pompous Sacrifices, and rich Gifts both of Gold and Silver. They say moreover, that the Island is consecrated to the Gods, and that there were many other Things in it that were admirable, both for their Antiquity and Excellency of Workman∣ship; of which, we have given a particular Account in the precedent Books. That there is likewise in it, upon the top of an high Mountain, a Temple dedicated to Jupiter Try∣phylius, built by him when he convers'd here with Men, and govern'd the whole World; in which Temple there is a Golden Pillar, whereon are distinctly describ'd in Panchaian Letters, the Acts of Coelum, Heaven. Ʋranus, Saturn, and Jupiter. Afterwards he says, That the first King was Ʋranus, a just and good Man, and very skilful in Astrology: And that he was the first that ador'd the Heavenly Gods, and therefore was call'd In Greek, signifies Hea∣ven. Ʋranus: And that he begat on his Wife Vesta two Sons, Pan and Saturn, and two Daughters, Rhea and Ceres. He says moreover, that Saturn reign'd after Ʋranus, and marry'd Rhea, and begat Jupi∣ter, Juno, and Neptune; and that Jupiter succeeding Saturn, marry'd Juno, Ceres, and Themis: Of the first of which he begat the Curetes, Proserpina of the second, and Miner∣va
of the third; and that afterwards coming to Babylon, he was Belus his Guest. And that from thence arriving at the Island Panchaia, he erected an Altar to Ʋranus his Grand∣father; and then passing through Syria, he came to Prince Cassius, from whom the Moun∣tain Mun: Cassius. was call'd Mount Cassius. Then travelling into Cilicia, he overcame Cilix, the Lord of the Country; and having at last pass'd through several other Nations, was highly ho∣nour'd by all, and stil'd a God. When he had deliver'd these and such-like Things con∣cerning the Gods, as of mortal Men, he subjoins this; Let this therefore suffice in refe∣rence to Euemerus, who writ the Sacred History. And as to what the Greeks sabulously report concerning the Gods, we shall endeavour to give as succinct an Account as we can, tracing the Steps of Homer, Hesiod, and Orpheus. George Monachus, or the Monk, who writ in Greek a Chronical History: Out of the History of Diodorus, concerning the Corinthian Kingdom. HAving given an Account of these Things, it remains we should now speak of Co∣rinth and Sicyon, how they were planted and inhabited by the Doreans; for almost all the Nations in Peloponnesus, except the Arcadians, were removed from their ancient Seats at the time of the return of the Heraclidae; who leaving out Corinth in the Division, sent Messengers to Aletes, and gave him the said Province, together with the neighbour∣ing Territory. This Man became very famous, and enlarg'd Corinth, where he reign'd 38 years. After his Death, the eldest and next of Kin ever succeeded in the Kingdom, down to the Reign of Cypsellus, 427 years after the return of the Heraclidae. The first that reign'd at Corinth after Aletes was Ixion, who held the Kingdom 38 years. After whom, Agesilaus reign'd 37 years; and after them, Prumnes 35 years, and his Son Bacches as long, who was the most famous and renown'd of any of his Ancestors, so that those that reign'd after him were not call'd Heraclidae, but Bacchidae. After Bacches, Agelas enjoy'd the Throne 30 years; Eudamus 25; Aristomedes 35, who after his Death left behind him a Son call'd Telestes, a little Child, who was depriv'd of his Father's Kingdom by Agemon, his Uncle and Guardian, who reign'd 16 years: After him, Alexander came to the Crown, and enjoy'd it 25 years, and was then kill'd by Telestes, who had been before depriv'd of the Kingdom of his Ancestors, which he now regain'd, and possess'd it 12 years, and then was murder'd by some of his own Kindred, and Automenes reign'd in his stead One year; after which, the Bacchidae, the Posterity of Hercules, enjoy'd the Kingdom for above 200 years, and all govern'd together with equal Authority; but every year they created one among them∣selves Prytanis, who had the Power of a Monarch for 90 years, till the time of the Reign of Cypsellus, who put an end to that sort of Government. These therefore are the Kings of Corinth. Bacches reign'd 35 years. The same George of the Original of the Romans; A Fragment out of the 7th Book of Diodorus Siculus. SOme Writers have erroniously held, that Romulus, who built Rome, was the Son of Aeneas: But this cannot possibly be true, since there were many Kings that reign'd in course between Aeneas and Romulus; the City being built the 2d Year of the 7th Olym∣piad, which was above 430 years after the Trojan War. For Aeneas gain'd the Kingdom of the Latines 3 years after the Destruction of Troy, and reign'd only 3 years, and after his Death was ador'd as a God. Ascanius, his Son, succeeded him, and built Alba, call'd at this day Longa. He gave the City this Name from the River which was then call'd Alba, and now Tiber: But Fabius, who writ an History of the Roman Affairs, speaks other∣wise of the naming of this City. For he tells a Story, how Aeneas was foretold by the Oracle, that a Four-footed Beast should shew him the way to the Place where a new City should be built; which came thus to pass: Being about to sacrifice a Alba is White. White Sow then big with Young, made her escape, and ran away to a Hill, whither she was pursu'd, and there she brought forth 30 Pigs. Aeneas wondring at the Accident, and calling to mind the Answer of the Oracle, forthwith went about to settle Inhabitants in the Place; but being warn'd by a Vision in the Night to desist, and not to build till after 30 years then next ensuing, he left off his Design till the number of Years was compleated.
The Eclogs or Fragments of Diodorus Siculus, out of the 21st, 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th, and 26th Books that are now lost. Out of the 21st Book. 1. ALL Vice is to be avoided by every Wise Man, but especially Covetousness. For this (through hopes and desire of Gain) prompts many to acts of Injustice, and so becomes the occasion of the greatest Mischiefs to Mankind. For being  Olymp. 119. 4. Ant. Ch. 299. in the . very highest Sphere of Wickedness, it involves not only mean Men, but even Kings themselves in extream Calamities, For Antigonus King of Asia, as an Example of this Truth, out of his insatiable desire, beginning a War against Four other Kings (who join'd against him) viz. Ptolemy Lagus King of Aegypt, Seleucus King of Babylon, Ly∣simachus of Thrace, and Cassander the Son of Antipater King of Macedonia, perish'd in Bat∣tle At Issus: in Phrygia. Plut. in Pyrrhus Anian. lib. 7. being shot through the Body with Multitudes of Darts and Arrows, (tho' after∣wards Bury'd in a Royal manner) and his Son Demetrius, with his Mother Stratonice (who were then in Cilicia) were forc'd to sail away with all the Wealth they had to Salamis in Cyprus, that remaining still in the hands of Demetrius. 2. Agathocles King of Sicily, burnt all the Macedonian Fleet, and so freed Corcyra when Agathocles frees Corcyra. it was Besieg'd by Cassander, both by Sea and Land, and very near and likely to be ta∣ken. Oh the many uncertainties of War! For Folly and Fraud many times effect as great things as true Valour and Courage. 3. Agathocles being return'd to the rest of his Army from Corcyra, when he heard that the Ligurians and Tyrrhenians (who were his Mercenary Soldiers) had assisted those Agathocles King of Sicily puts 2000 Mer∣cenaries to the Sword. who kill'd his Son Archagathus in his absence, put them all to the Sword, to the number of Two thousand: Upon which Account the Brutii deserting him, he resolv'd to Be∣siege their City call'd Aetini, Peo∣ple of Sicily. Agathocles takes Crotona in Italy. Aethas. But the Barbarians in great numbers falling upon him sud∣dainly in the Night, cut off Four thousand of his Men, and so he return'd to Syracuse. 4. Agathocles rigg'd out a great Fleet, and sail'd into Italy; and having a design to march his Army to Crotona, he sent a Messenger before to Menedemus, King of Crotona (who was his particular Friend) not to be afraid of his Motion; which was meerly to deceive him; and purposing to Besiege the Place, he gave out that he was sending away his Daughter Lanassa with a Royal Fleet to Epirus to Marry her: And by this Fraud he came upon them when they were unprovided, and never suspected him. Thereupon, applying himself with all earnestness to the Siege, he block'd up the Place by a Wall drawn from Sea to Sea. And having by his Mines and Batteries ruin'd the greatest House of the Town, the Crotoneans out of fear open'd their Gates and receiv'd his Army into the Ci∣ty, who breaking in like a Flood, first rifl'd all the Houses, and then put all the Men to the Sword. He likewise made a League with the neighbouring Barbarians, the Japygians, and Peucetians, furnishing them with Ships for Piracy, and shar'd with them in the Rob∣bery. At length having pt a Garison into Crotona, he sail'd back to Syracuse. 5. Diallus the Athenian Writer compos'd a General History in Twenty six Books. And Psaon of Platea anothr in Thirty Books. 6. In the War against the Hetruscians, Gauls and Samnites, and their Confederates, the Romans destroy'd (wen Fabius was Consul) an Hundred thousand Men, as Daris re∣lates. 7. Antipater out of Envy, kill'd his own Mother. Alexander his Brother was likewise Olymp. 121. Ant. Ch. 296. kill'd by Demetrius, whom Alexander had sent for to his assistance. Antipater the Murthe∣rer of his Mother was aso serv'd the same Sauce by Demetrius, unwilling to have a part∣ner in the Kingdom. 8. Agathocles rais'd an Army and sail'd over into Italy with 30000 Foot and Agathocles again invades Italy. 2000 Horse. And ving the Command of the Fleet to Stilpo, he order'd him to wast and spoil the Cuntry of the Brutii: While he was harassing the Sea-coasts, he lost many of his Ships in a Storm. But Agathocles, by the help of his battering Engines took the City Hipponium: which so terrify'd the Brutii, that they sent Ambassadors to treat with him upon ter of Peace: Upon which he put in a Garrison and carry'd away with im Six hundred ostages, and return'd to Syracuse. But the Brutii made slight of their
Oath, and with the whole power of the City, fell upon the Garison and flew every His Garison all Mrdred. Man, and afterwards recover'd their Hostages, and freed themselves from the Yoke of A∣gathocles. Lenity is to be prefer'd before Revenge. 9. Most Generals of Armies when they are brought into Straits and Difficulties, (out of Fear) do generally humour the Multitude. 10. When the Thebans made a Second defection, Demetrius batter'd down their Walls, and took the City by Storm, and put only Ten Men to Death, who were the Ring-leaders Demetrius takes Thebes. of the Rebellion. 11. Agathocles sent his Son Agathocles to Demetrius to enter into a League with him, Offensive and Defensive. The King kindly receiv'd the young Man, and bestow'd on him a Royal Robe, and many other Rich and Princely gifts: And sent along with him Oxythemes his special Friend, under colour to confirm the League, but in truth to be a Spy in Sicily. 12. King Agathocles after a long Peace between him and the Carthaginians, at length Agathocles Riggs a Fleet against Car∣thage. Rigg'd out a great Fleet. For he design'd to transport an Army into Lybia, and with his Navy to hinder the Exportation of all Corn and Provision, from Sardinia, and Sicily to the Carthaginians, who by the last War had gain'd the Dominion of the Sea, and thereby had secur'd their Countrey from Invasions. And tho' Agathocles had a well furnish'd Fleet, to the number of Two hundred Gallies of four and six Tire of Oars, yet he fail'd in his design, by reason of what shortly happen'd. For there was one Menon an Agestone, a beautiful Captive then Servant to the King, who for some time conform'd himself to a strict compliance to the Kings humour, so that he was taken into the number of his  His Catamite. Menon, his Catamie. beloved and intimate Friends. But because of the ruin of his Country and the dis∣honourable abuse of his own Person, he bore a secret hatred to the King, and watch'd an opportunity to be reveng'd. The King because he was old, intrusted Archagathus with the Command of the Army: he was the Son of Archagathus who was kill'd in Lybia, and so was King Agathocles's Granchild, he was a Man of a strong Body, and of a brave and generous Spirit, far above all the rest of his Family. When he was Encamp'd with the Army near Aetna, the King had a desire to promote his Son Agathocles to be his Successor in the Kingdom, and to that end recommended the young Man to the Syra∣cusians, and declar'd his purpose and design to have him Succeed. Afterwards he sent him to the Camp, with Letters to Archagathus, which order'd him to deliver up the Command of all the Forces both by Sea and Land to his Son; Upon which Archaga∣thus perceiving that the Kingdom was design'd for another, contriv'd the destruction of them both: And to that end sent a Messenger to Menon of Aegista, who perswaded him to poyson the King: Archaga∣thus The son of A∣gathocles Murder'd. He himself celebrating a Sacrifice in a certain Island, where Agathocles then lay with the Fleet, Invited him to the Festival; and in the Night (when he was dead drunk) cut his throat, and threw his Body into the Sea, which being af∣terward cast up by the Violence of the Waves, was known by the Inhabitants, and car∣ry'd to Syracuse. And whereas it was the King's Custom always after Supper to pick his Teeth with a Quill, now rising from the Table, he call'd to Menon for his Tooth∣picker: Who having dipt the end of it in Poyson, deliver'd it to the King; who ne∣ver suspecting any thing, ply'd all his Teeth with that care and earnestness, that none of his Guns scap'd the touch of the Poyson. Upon ths the Kingbegan by little and The manner of his Death. little to be very ill, which was succeeded by violent Torments in his Body every Day. Then an incurable putrefaction and rottenness cover'd hs Gums and Teeth, and now drawing near to his end, he call'd a Senate, where he complain'd of the wickedness of Archagathus, and incited the People to take revenge of him for his Villanies, declaring that he would forthwith restore them to their Democracy. Afterwards when he was in the very height of his Extremity, Oxythemes (that had been there a little before, sent by King Demetrius) hurri'd him to the Funeral Pile, and urnt him while he was yet alive, and not able to speak by reason of the foulness and filthness of his Mouth through the Poyson. And thus Agathocles for the many Slaughters and Murders of his Reign, and Olymp. 123. 4. A. M. 3798. His Life is noto∣rious. vide Ju∣stin lib. 22. 23. his end other∣wise relad. Cruelties towards his own Subjects, and Impieties against the ods came to an end, such as he justly deserv'd for his former wickednesses, after he hd Reign'd Twenty eight Years, and liv'd Seventy two, as Timeus the Syracusian relates, and Callias another Syra∣cusian (who writ Two and twenty Books) and Antander likewise the Brother of Aga∣thocles an Historian. The Syracusians having now Regain'd ther Democratical Govern∣ment Consiscated all the Goods and Estate of Agathocles, and boke down all his Statues. Menon in the mean time (who had Plotted and Executed the Tason) was at the Camp with Archagathus, having fled thither from Syracuse: And now beginning to look very big upon it (as being the Man that had ruin'd the Monarchy) e secretly Murthers Ar∣chagathus,
and with fair Words, and winning Carriage brought over the Army to his In∣terest, and determined to force Syracuse to Obedience, and gain the Principality. Here∣upon the Syracusians created Hicetas General against Menon, he continu'd the War for some time: Menon all along seeking to avoid Fighting, and could by no means be brought to ingage. But when the Carthaginians join'd with Menon (by which he became far stronger than the Syracusians) they were forc'd to agree with the Carthaginians, and deliver Four hundred Hostages for further Security of the Peace, and to restore all the Exiles. However, when the Mercenary Soldiers were deny'd their right to give their Votes for the choosing of the Magistrates, the City was presently in an uproar: And both Syracusians and Mercenaries ran to their Arms: But some of the better sort inter∣pos'd, and by much Intercession prevail'd with both parties to agree upon this Conditi∣on, That the Soldiers should depart out of Sicily by such a time, and take all their Goods along with them: Hereupon the Foreign Soldiers March'd away from Syracuse, and came to Messina, where they were receiv'd into the City as Friends and Confederates, The Mercena∣ries murder the Messinians in the Night. and being kindly entertain'd in their Houses, in the Night they Massacred all their Hosts, and Marrying their Wives, Seiz'd upon the City, which they call'd Mamertina from Mars, which in their own Campania. Country Language they call Mamers. 13. For they that are not Members of the Democratical Government, are not admit∣ted by the Tribune of the People to give their Suffrage amongst them that are. 14. It's a commendable thing to be ever Terrible to an Enemy, and always kind and courteous to a Friend. 15. Since that at that time, when you knew not what was best or fittest to be done, you were catcht with fair and enticeing Words: And now when you see Calamity up∣on the Country indeed, you are taught another Lesson. For to be Ignorant sometimes of things that may fall out in this Life, is natural to Mankind: But to be deceiv'd twice in the same thing, argues a Man to be a Fool. And the oftner we are so deceiv'd, the greater punishment we deserve. Some of the Citizens are grown to that height of Covetousness that they would fain raise up the glory of their Families by the ruin of their Country. For they that have so wickedly acted in assisting others, pray! how have they been us'd by them. 16. Offences are to be forgiven, and Peace to be kept for the time to come. 17. Not they that offend; but they that repent not of their offences, ought to be se∣verely punish'd. 18. Mercy and Kindness amongst Men, is more Ancient than Wrath and Revenge. 19. It's a commendable and desireable thing to lay aside all Animosities. and instead thereof to return to Friendship and Amity. For when a Man is reduc'd to Poverty and Straits, he presently (at the first Nod as it were) runs to his Friends. 20. Covetousness being naturally Ingrafted into Men, no Man can be wholly free from this Vice. Pride, and a Tyrant's Robes ought to be left at home. For he that en∣ters into a free City, ought to conform himself to the Laws of the Place. He that is of a Princely Family, and comes to a Kingdom by Hereditary descent, is desirous likewise to succeed in the Glory and Reputation of his Ancestors. For it's a Base and Disho∣nourable thing to carry the Name of Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles, and yet in Actions to imitate A filthy ugly fellow kill'd by Achilles for his saucines by a box on the Ear. Hom. 2. lib. Iliad. Thersites. For the more honour and reputation any Person has gain'd, so much the more the regard and respect will he have for them who were the Instruments of his Advancement and happy Successes. Therefore what may be honourably and deservedly obtain'd, should not be us'd unjustly and disgracefully, when it is enjoy'd. It is therefore (Gentlemen) a commendable thing, by the example of other Mens Harms and Mistakes, Wisely to provide for our own Security. 21. It does not become any Man to have more regard to Strangers, than his own kin∣dred, and to be more fearful to exasperate an Enemy, than careful to preserve the good Will and Opinion of his Allies. Out of the 22d Book. 1. IT'S the natural Property of the Epirots not only to fight for their Country, but to run all hazards likewise for the Defence of their Friends and Allies. 2. Decius the Roman Tribune Governor of Rhegium, to revenge his Country of King About the 125, or 126. Olym∣piad. Ant. Ch. 278. Pyrrhus, kill'd all the Inhabitants save the Women, whom he sold for Slaves, and seized upon all the Goods and Estates of them that were slain. These were Campanians,
who acted the same Cruelty here as the Mamertines did when they Massacred all the Messi∣nians. Decius puts all the Rhegians to death. Afterwards, because he made not an equal distribution of the Prey, and Plunder taken from those miserable People, he was Banish'd Rhegium by his own Country men the Campanians. The Mamertines themselves assisted in this Butchery: And with the Money that was left hir'd him to be their Captain, and Chief Commander. Afterwards a distemper falling into his Eyes, he advis'd with a skilful Physitian, who to revenge the Injuries and Cruelties done to his Country, prescrib'd an application of Cantharides which wholly depriv'd him of his sight: And the Physitian himself took Care to withdraw from Decius made blind by Can∣tharides. Messina. In Sicily, in the mean time there were these Princes, Hicetas at Syracuse, Phin∣tias at Agrigentam, Tyndarus at Tauromenium, and some others in the lesser Cities. Phintias and Hicetas were at War one with another, and sought a Battle at Hibleum in which Hicetas Petty Princes in Sicily, at War one with ano∣ther. was Conqueror. Afterwards making several Incursions one upon another, and Robbing and Spoiling every where, the Country by this means lay untill'd. Hicetas puff'd up with his Victory, ingag'd with the Carthaginians at the River Teria, where he was beaten with the loss of a great number of his Men. At that time Phintias built Phintia, and planted there the Geleons who were driven out of their Country. It is Scituated at the Sea-side: For both the Houses and Walls of Gela being utterly demolish'd; after he had wall'd Phin∣tia and made a stately Market place, and built Temples for the Service of the Gods, he Transplanted the People of Gela thither. When he had committed the Murther, he was hated by all the Cities under his Government, who drave out all the Garisons, among whom the first were the Agyrineans. 3. King Ptolemy was Kill'd by the Gaus, and the whole Macedonian Army utterly de∣stroy'd Olymp. 129. 3. 4. Ant. Ch. 360. and cut off. 4. A Cadmean Victory is a Proverb, meant when the Conquerors have lost abundance of Men, and the Conquer'd are little the worse, because of the largeness of their Empire. 5. Phintias the Builder of Phintia, and Tyrant of Agrigentum, in a Dream had a re∣presentation pointing out to him his own Death. He thought he saw, as he was Hunt∣ing the Bore, that a Sow fiercely made up upon him, and struck him on the side with her Teeth, which so pierc'd him that he Dy'd. 6. Hicetas after he had Reign'd nine Years at Syracuse, was depriv'd of his Kingdom by Thynion the Son of Mameus. 7. Thynion and Softratus the Successors of Hicetas, sent again for King Pyrrus into Sicily. 8. The Mamertines who treacherously Murder'd the Messinians, having entred into a League with the Carthaginians, in a Senate decreed to hinder Pyrrhus from Landing in The War be∣tween the Ro∣mans and Pyrrhus, bgan the 124 Olym. 4. Ant. Ch. 279. Sicily. But Tyndarion, Tyrant of Tauromenia sided with him, and was ready to receive into the City those Forces that joyn'd with him. 9. The Carthaginians entred into a League with the Romans, and took a-board 500 Men into their own Ships, and Sail'd over to Rhegium, and began to assault the Place, but at length rais'd their Siege, and having set on fire all the Timber and other Materials, there prepar'd for Shipping, they made to Sea, and there lay to observe the motion of Pyrrhus. When Thynio had the Command of the * Island, and Sostratus lorded it over the Syracu∣sians, having each an Army of 10000 Men, they broke out into War one against a∣nother, This Island was part of the City Syracuse. but being tyr'd out, they both sent Ambassadors to Pyrrhus. 11. Pyrrhus Warr'd in Italy 2 Years and 4 Months, and whilst he was preparing for his departure, the Carthaginians closely besieg'd the Syracusians both by Sea and Land. They had a Fleet of 100 Sail that lay in the great Haven; and a Land Army of 50000 Men that Encamp'd near the Walls, and with these they penn'd up the Syracusians, with∣in the City, and Wasting and Harrassing the Country round about, they even turn'd it into a desolate Wilderness. The Syracusians therefore wearied out with the War, depend∣ed only upon Pyrrhus, in regard he had Marry'd Lanassa the Daughter of Agathocles, of whom he had begotten Alexander: Upon which account they sent every Day one Messen∣ger after another to him; whereupon Shipping his Men, Elephants and other Provisions, he loos'd from Tarentum, and arriv'd the 10th Day at Locris: Thence he Sail'd after his Landing in Slly, to Tauromenium; and there being joyn'd with Tyndario Prince of that Pyhus comes into Sicily. City, and Inforc'd by him with more Soldiers, he made from thence and came to Cata∣na, where being Magnificently receiv'd by the Inhabitants, and loaden with golden Crowns, he landed his Men, with which he March'd straight towards Syracuse: His Marches to Sy∣racuse. Fleet ready prepar'd for an Engagement, Sailing with him all along upon the Coast. When he came near to Syracuse the Carthaginians (because they had sent away 30 of their Vessels for necessary Provisions) durst not venture a Battle with those that remain'd, so that Pyrrhus came to Syracuse without any opposition: The Part of the . Island being kept by Thynio and the rest of the City by the Syracusians and Sosistrates. For he had under his
Command Agrigentum, and many other Cities, and above 10000 Soldiers. And having then reconcil'd Thynio and Sosistratas, and the Syracusians, and brought them all to a right understanding among themselves, he was thereupon highly Esteem'd and Applauded. The King receiv'd Weapons, Engines, and other Furniture and Provisions which was in the City, and 120 Deck'd Ships, and 20 open Vessels * But the Palace belonged to Enne∣res. Something here wanting, for it seems to have no cohe∣rence with what is prece∣dent or subse∣quent. The whole Navy therefore (with those he brought along with him) consisted of 200 Sail. Whilst he was thus imploy'd, Ambassadors came from the Leontines (sent to him from Heraclidas the Governor) with promise to deliver up the City into his hands, with the Garisons and 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse. There were then many others at Syracuse, who promis'd to deliver up their Cities to Pyrrhus, and to join with him in the War: He receiv'd them all Graciously, and sent them back to their several Countries, hoping now shortly to be Lord of Lybia. 12 The Port of Corinth is call'd Lechoeum. 13. Brennus King of the Gauls made an inroad into Macedonia with an Hundred and forty thousand Targateers, and Ten thousand Horse, and with a great multitude of other foreign Rabble, and many Merchants, together with Two thousand Carts and Carriages. He made great havock and slaughter with a design to ruine them utterly; at last he broke About  ∣cond Olymp 125. Ant. Ch 279. Vid. Justin. lib. 24. C. 6, 7, 8. The Gauls make an in∣road into Ma∣cedonia. into Greece, and fully propos'd to rifle the Temple at Delphos. By frequent Engagements he lost A Myriad is Ten thousand. Brennus kill. himself. The Gauls all perish. The Acts of Pyrrhus in Sicily. Myriads of his Men, and he himself receiv'd Three desperate wounds. Being near his end, he call'd his Army together, and made a Speech to the Gauls, and advis'd them to kill both him and all the rest of the wounded Men, and to burn all their Carriages, and return home with all speed, and make Cichorius their King. Brennus at length after he had swill'd down abundance of Wine, ran himself through the Body. Cichorius (as soon as he had buried Brennus) knock'd all the wounded Men on the Head, that were like to be starv'd with Hunger, and perish by the Cold, to the number of Twenty thou∣sand, and return'd with the rest the same way they came: But the Grecians that lay in am∣bush in the strait and narrow passages, cut off all their Rear, and took all their Bag and Baggage; marching forward to Thermopilae, they left there behind them Twenty thousand more for want of Food: at length as they were passing through the Country of the Dardanians, they all perish'd, and not one Man return'd to his own Country. 14. But Pyrrhus when he had settled all things in Syracuse and Leontinum, march'd with his Army towards Agrigentum, and while he was in his March, he was told by some that came off Shipboard, that they had driven out the Carthaginian Garison, that Phintias might not Govern them, and promis'd they would deliver the City into his hands, and join with him as Confederates in the War. Having therefore receiv'd the Forces, he marcht straight to Agrigentum, and receiv'd the City and Soldiers from Sosistratus, to the number of 8000 Foot and 800 Horse, nothing inferior to the Epirots. And now he took into his protection 30 Cities which were under the Command of Sosistratus. Af∣terwards he sent to Syracuse for the Engines of Battery, and all the Arms and Darts, and when they were brought to him, he marched into the Territories of the Carthagi∣nians, having an Army with him of 30000 Foot and 1500 Horse, and some Elephants. And First he took in Heraclea a Carthaginian Garison: Then Azones, after they of Selinunte came in to the King, with the Halicyens Aegestines, and many other Cities. Aeryx at that time had in it a very strong Carthaginian Garison, and was beside naturally fortify'd and difficult to approach. Pyrrhus was resolv'd to storm this place, and to that end brought his battering Rams to the Walls: After a strong defence made for a long time, the King desirous to make his Name Famous (in imitation of Hercules) was the first that entred within the Walls, and fought with that Courage and Resolution, that he dispatcht all those Carthaginians that came within his reach; at length Succours coming in to him, he Aeryx taken by Storm by Pyrrhus. took the Town by Storm; then leaving there a strong Carrison he march'd to Eginera, a very strong place, and pleasantly situated near Panormus. They of Eginera surren∣dred the City; and thence he forthwith made for Panormus, which had the best Harbor of any City in Sicily, from whence this City was so call'd; He took it likewise by Storm. Then taking in the Fort at Ercte, he gain'd all that belong'd to the Carthaginians, except Panormus ta∣ken by Sm. Lilibeum. This City was built by the Carthaginians after Dionysius the Tyrant had ru∣in'd Motya. For those that were left alive after that slaughter, the Carthaginians setled in Lilibeum. Just as Pyrrhus was ready to besiege this place, a great Army landed there out of Africa, having the advantage of being Masters at Sea, and brought with them abundance of Corn, and an innumerable number of Engines and Weapons of War. And because the greatest part of the City lay near to the Sea, they were most careful to guard that part towards the main Land, and to that end rais'd many Bulwarks and high Tow∣ers, il. bum  and drew a large Trench to prevent an approach on that side. Then they sent Am∣bassadors
to the King to treat upon terms of Peace, and to offer him a great sum of Money; But the King refusing the Money, they desir'd that he would permit the Car∣thaginians to keep only Lilybeum. But the Confederates that were then assembled in Senate, and the Representatives of the several Cities, sent to him, and earnestly intreated him, he would not upon any terms whatsoever permit the Barbarians to have any footing in Sicily, but drive the Carthaginians wholly out of the Island; and limit their Power at Sea. Upon this the King encampt near the Walls; and at first made several Assaults one upon the neck of another; But the Carthaginians being well furnish'd both with Men and other necessaries, beat him off. For they had so vast a number of Engines that cast Darts and Stones, that the Wall could scarcely contain them: which being all ply'd against the Assailants, they were so gall'd and cut off, that Pyrrhus was forc'd to draw off his Men. Then he began to contrive other Engines (besides those he had from Syracuse) and did all he could to undermine the Walls. But the Carthaginians making a stout re∣sistance, and the place being all of Rock, he was now out of all hopes to take it by force, and therefore (after Two Months lying before it) he rais'd his Siege. And now he de∣sign'd to bend his Force elsewhere, and to that end to furnish himself with a great Fleet, in order to be Master of the Sea. and to Transport a great Army into Africa. 15. When the Mamertines in Messina grew strong, they fortify'd many Castles, and put Garrisons into them. And came presently with an Army (they had order'd to be in readiness) to the relief of Messina. But Hiero leaving the Enemies Country took Myla by Storm, and brought under his Command 1500 Soldiers, and then march'd towards Myla and Amesalus ta∣taken by Storm by Hiero. Amesalus (which lies between the Centoripines and the Agyreans) and tho' it was a strong Place and had many Soldiers in it, yet he took it by Assault and raz'd it to the ground, but he pardon'd all the Garrison'd Soldiers, and joyn'd them to his own Army. The Territory he gave to the Or Centuri∣pians. vid. postea. Centorippines and the Agyreans. Afterwards Hiero (having a great Army) march'd against the Mamertines, and wan Alesa; and being readily receiv'd of the Abacaenes and Tyndarites, he gain'd their Cities also; and so penn'd up the Ma∣mertines into a strait and narrow corner. For on that side towards the Sicilian Sea, he was Agyreans the City Agu∣rius. Lord of Tauromenium a City near Messina, and towards the Hetrurian Sea, he command∣ed the Tyndarites. And now making an incursion into the Territories of Messina, he en∣camp'd at the River Lotanus, having with him in his Army 10000 Foot and 1500 Horse. The Mamertines encamp'd over against him with 8000 Foot and but Seems to be mistaken. 40. Horse, under the Command of Cios, who call'd the Augures together to consult the issue of the Battle by the view of the Sacrifices; who answer'd, That by the Intralls the Gods foretold that he must lodge that Night in the Enemies Camp: Upon this he was Transported with Joy to think he should be Master of the King's Camp. Hereupon he forthwith at∣tempted to pass the River with his Forces drawn up in Battalia. Hiero on the other side, Commands 200 Exiles of Messina (who were stout and noted Men for their Valour, with whom he join'd 400 others of his best Soldiers) to compass an Hill call'd Thorax there near at hand, and so to come round upon the back of the Enemy, and he himself in order of Battle met them in the Front. Whereupon the Armies Engag'd both Horse and Foot (the King having gain'd a Rising Ground near the River much to his advan∣tage) The issue was doubtful for some time: but they that were order'd to the Hill, on a sudden fell upon the Mamertines, who (being but raw Men and tir'd out) were ea∣sily vanquish'd. At length, being hemm'd in on every side, they took to their Heels: But The Mamer∣tines routed by Hiero King of Syracuse. the Syracusians pursu'd them so close with their whole Army, that they cut them off every Man, save the General, who fighting with great Valour, at length fainted by the many wounds he receiv'd, and was taken prisoner, and brought half dead into the King's Camp, and committed to the care of the Chirurgeons; thus being brought to spend the Night according to the prediction of the Augures in the Enemies Camp. When the King was very earnest to have Cion being Cur'd, some came to the King with Horses they had taken in the Fight; Upon which, when Cion saw his Son's Horse among the rest, he concluded he was kill'd; whereupon he was so Transported with Passion, that he tore in pieces all the Bands and Ligatures of his Wounds, that by his own death he might Honour his Sons. The Mamertines hearing that both their General Cion and their whole Army was destroy'd, resolv'd to go and humble themselves to the King, as Suppliants. However, Fortune suffer'd not the Mamertines to be altogether lost and undone. For it hapned that at that time Hannibal the Carthaginian General lay at the Island Lipara, who as soon as he heard of this slaughter, went to the King with all speed, seemingly to con∣gratulate his Victory, but in truth by some stratagem to circumvent him. And the King trusting to the Carthaginian's word, lay still. But Hannibal going to Messina, and find∣ing
the Mamertines ready to deliver up their City he diswaded them, and making a League with them, put Mistaken I co,  before Fol. Precedent. 40 Soldiers more into the City. Thus the Mamertines (e∣ven now in despair by reason of their great slaughter) were by this means secur'd from present danger. As for Hiero (being thus cheated by the Carthaginian General, and so dis∣courag'd from besieging of Messina) he return'd to Syracuse after his many Successes. After∣wards when the Carthaginians as well as Hiero had thus lost Messina, they had an interview, and upon second thoughts entred into a Confederacy, to besiege the City with their joint Forces. Out of the 23d BOOK. Fragm. 1. SIcily is one of the bravest Islands in the World, conducing much by its power to the gaining and increase of a larger Dominion. 2. Hanno the Son of Hannibal, as soon as he arriv'd in Sicily, Rendezvouz'd his Forces Olymp. 129. 1. Ant. Ch. 262. The bginning of the first Punick War. at Lilibeum, and thence March'd as far as Selinunte, where he left his Army Encamp'd near the City; but he himself went forward to Agrigentum, and fortifi'd the Citadel. Then he brought over the People to the Interest of the Carthaginians, and so engag'd them to be their Confederates. After he return'd to his Camp, Ambassadors came to him from Hiero, to consult concerning the publick Good of Sicily: for they had made a League and Agreement one with another to make War upon the Romans, if they would not forthwith withdraw all their Forces out of Sicily. In execution of which they both March'd with their Armies to Messina: Where Hiero Encamp'd in the Hill call'd Chal∣chidicus: The Carthaginians lay with theirs near the * Monuments, and possess'd them∣selves Call'd , Cubiles or Lodging places. Appius Cla∣dius sent into Sicily. Messina be∣sieg'd by the Carthaginians and Hiero. of the Arsenal call'd Pelotias, and both presently laid close Siege to Messina. As soon as the News was brought to Rome, they sent away Appias Cladius, one of the Consuls, with a great Army, who came to Rhegium with all speed; and from thence sent Am∣bassadors to Hiero and the Carthaginians to raise their Siege, and promis'd in a general Assembly not to make any Incursion into the Territories of Hiero. To which Hiero an∣swer'd that the Mamertines for their razing and ruining of Gela and Camarina, and their cruelty and wickedness in getting the possession of Messina were most justly Besieg'd: And that it did not become the Romans who are so cry'd up in every place for their Justice and Faithfulness, to protect such bloody Villains, who had contemptuously broken all the Tyes and Bonds of Faith and Truth amongst Men. And if notwithstanding, they begin a War in the defence of such notoriously wicked Men, it will be evident and apparent to all Man-kind, That succour to them that are in destress, is but a meer pretence to cover their Covetousness, whereas in truth their Aim is to gain Sicily. 3. The Romans at first bore four square shields, but afterwards, when they observ'd the Tyrrheneans to carry brazen shields, they got the like, and Conquer'd them. 4. When the Consul Landed at Messina; Hiero suspecting that the Carthaginians had made way for him, fled himself to Syracuse. The Carthaginians being at length subdu'd, the Consul besieg'd Aegista, and after the loss of a great number of his Men return'd to Messina. 5. When both Consuls arriv'd in Sicily, they besieg'd the City Adranita, and took it by storm. And while they were besieging the * Centorippians, and lay Encamp'd at the bra∣zen Or Centurip∣pians, their Town call'd Centuripinum The People now call'd Centoru∣ans. Peace made be∣tween Hiero and the Ro∣mans. Olymp. 129. Ant. Ch. 261. A Dracma is 7 pence farthing Halls or Palaces; first Ambassadors came from them of Laessina: Afterwards other Cities that were terrify'd with the Roman Armies, sent Ambassadors for terms of Peace, with promise to deliver up all their Towns into the hands of the Romans to the number of 67. From all which places they March'd to Syracuse to besiege Hiero, who seeing the un∣easiness of the Syracusians at this preparation against them, sent Ambassadors to the Consuls to Negotiate for Peace. Who readily agreed to the Conditions, designing chiefly the War against the Carthaginians. A Peace therefore was concluded for 14 Years: And the Romans were to receive 140000 * Drachmas. And after he had releas'd all the Pri∣soners to them, they agreed that Syracuse and all the Cities under his Jurisdiction, viz. Aera, Leontinum, Megara, Aelora, Neatina, and Tauromenum should remain in the hands of Hiero In the mean time Hannibal was come as far as Xiphonia to the Aid of the King; but hearing what was done, March'd back. 6. The Romans after they had besieg'd the Towns call'd Adrones, and Macella for a long time together, at length rais'd their Sieges without effecting any thing.
7. The Aegestines who were the first brought under the power of the Carthaginians, re∣volted to the Romans. The Alieneans did the like. But they took Hlarius Tyritus and Ascelu by force. The Tyndars seeing themselves deserted (through Fear) design'd to deliver up themselves as the rest had done: but the Carthaginians suspecting their design, took the chiefest of the Citizens for Hostages, and carry'd them and the Corn and Wine, and all the rest of the Provision that was in the Town to Lilibeum. ‖ Philemon the Comedian writ 97 . Olymp. 129 4. Ant. Ch. 259. Comedies; he liv'd 99. ‖. The Romans that besieg'd Agrigentum, and that made the Trenches, and cast up the Works, were 100000. At length, after a stout resistance the Carthaginians deliver'd up Agrigentum to the Romans. 8. After the siege of Agrigentum, Hanno the Elder brought over a great Army out of Africa into Sicily, of 50000 Foot, and 6000 Horse, and 60 Elephants. Philinus the Hi∣storian of Agrigentum sets forth this Expedition. Hanno with all these Forces March'd from Lilybeum to Heraclea. About this time some came and offered to deliver up Erbesus. Hnno in Prosecution of the War lost in two Battles 3000 Foot, and 200 Horse, and 4000.—that were taken Prisoners. In the mean time, 30 of his Elephants dy'd, and 3 were wounded. 9. There was likewise the City Entellina—Hanno therefore by his prudent ma∣nagement by one Stratagem, cut off both his open and secret Enemies at onetime. And after they had lain thus before it for the space of 6 Months, Agrigentum was at length de∣liver'd up to them; and they carry'd away above 24000 as Slaves. But the Ro∣mans lost 30000 Foot, and 540 Horse. But the Carthaginians Fin'd Hanno in 6000 Pieces of Gold, and took away his Commission, and sent Amilcar General into Sicily, in , what value. his Room. The Romans then Besieg'd Mystratus, and for that purpose devis'd many Engines: But after 7 Months time they rais'd their Siege, with the loss of a great number of their Men. But Amilcar fought with the Romans at Thermas, and routed them, killing 6000 upon the place; and it was not far from, but the whole Army—The Castle Mazaron was likewise taken by the Romans. Then Camarina was betray'd into the hands of Amilcar the Carthaginian, and not long after Enna in the same manner. There he Wall'd in Drapanum upon the Pro∣montory, Dra∣panum near Erix. Drapanum, and made it a Town of defence, and after he had Transplanted the Inhabitants of Eryx thither, he raz'd the City to the Ground, except that part which surrounded the Temple. But the Romans took Mystratus, now Besieg'd the 3d time, and levell'd it to the Ground, and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves. The Consul afterwards March'd to Camarina, and laid Siege to it, but could not reduce it. But at length by the help of some Engines of Battery and other Instruments of War, sent to him from Hiero, he wan the Place, and sold most of the Camarineans for Slaves. Presently after, he be∣came Master of Enna by Treachery, where he put the Garison to the Sword, save some that made their escape out of the Town and fled to their Confederates. Thence he March'd to Satana, and took it by Storm. Then placing Garisons in other Cities, he made for cus, a Castle belonging to the Agrigentines, which was also betray'd and deliver'd up to him, and there he plac'd a Garison. About this time Erbesus was deserted by its Inhabitants.—But the River Alycus, and the last of all the other.— 10. A prudent Man ought either to resolve to Conquer, or else to submit to those that are Stronger than he. 11. All men in time of Adversity are apt to be more Religious, and more frequent in Devotion than at other times: But in times of Prosperity and Success, they make slight of the Gods as so many Fables and Romances. And when they are again brought into Troubles, then they run again to their natural Shelter.— 12. It's much more easie to get the advantage of an Enemy when a Man will be ad∣vis'd, and be willing upon all occasions to rectifie his own mistakes. And it often hap∣pens that they who are carry'd away to the same— Many are stirr'd up to Virtue through the Credit and Reputation that attend upon them, that employ themselves in good and commendable studies, and exercises.— For not being able to bear, as an over heavy burden the Successes of Fortune heap'd upon him, he depriv'd himself of most of the glory of his Actions, and involv'd his Coun∣try in great Calamities—Moreover, when the Romans had Transported a great Ar∣my into Africa, under the Command of Attilias the Consul, they at first prevail'd over the Carthaginians, and took many of their Towns and Castles, and destroy'd great num∣bers of their Soldiers: But as soon as An. M. 3694. This was Atti∣lius Regulus, that was routed and taken, with 15000 Men, and 30000 slain. Eutrop. Urb. Condit. 477. Ch. 255. lib. 2. Olym. 131. 2. Ant. Ch. 255. Panthippus the Spartan (whom they had hir'd to be their General) came out of Greece, the Carthaginians totally routed the Romans, and de∣stroy'd a numerous Army. Afterwards they Fought several Sea-Fights, wherein the Romans lost many Ships, and abundance of Men, to the number of 100000.—The honour he had gain'd before, highly aggravated the disgrace and contempt; and by
his own Example, he instructed others to carry humbly and modestly when they are in the greatest Power and Authority. And that which stung him most, was that he was made the Scorn, and brought into the power of those whom he had before proudly tram∣pled upon in disdain: And now had depriv'd himself of all Pity and Commiseration, commonly shew'd to Men in Misery and Distress.— For those that before were Conquerors in all, he now altogether Conquer'd: And those that before (through the slaughter made amongst them) expected nothing but utter Destruction. Now, (by the greatness of the Victory by them on the other hand obtain'd) he caus'd to slight and contemn their Enemies.—For its no wonder if the Prudence and Experience of a General effect those things which seem to others impossible: for all things are easie and possible to Ingenuity and Diligence, supported by skill, acquir'd by Experience.—For as the Body is the servant of the Soul, so great Armies are go∣vern'd by the Prudence of their Generals.—The Senate ordering all things for the publick good.—Philistus then writ his History.—But the Romans who had pass'd over into Africa, and fought with the Carthaginians a Battle at Sea, and beaten them, and taken 24 of their Ships, after they had taken aboard those Romans that were A Spwrack of the Romans. left of the Land Army, (as they were Sailing to Sicily) were all Shipwrackt near Camerina, and lost 340 Men of War, besides Vessels for Transporting of Horses, and other Transport Ships to the number of 300: So that all the Coasts from Camerina to Pachynum, were fill'd with the Carcasses of Men and Horses, and Wrecks of Ships. Hiero courteously entertain'd those that escap'd, and supplying them with Meat and Drink, Cloaths and other necessaries, convey'd them safe to Messina. Carthalo the Carthaginian after the Shipwrack, of the Romans, Besieg'd Agrigentum, took it and burnt the Town, and demolish'd the Walls; and those that were left, fled to Olympius. The Romans after the Shipwarck E∣quipp'd out another Fleet of 250 Sail, and came to Cephaledium, which was deli∣ver'd up to them by Treachery. Thence they March'd to Drapanus, and began to Be∣siege it, but upon Succours brought in by Carthalo, they drew off, and Sail'd to Panormus: There they cast Anchor in the Harbour even under the Walls, and landed their Army, and then drew a Wall and Trench round the City. And the Country being very wooddy, even up to the City Gates, they had the advantage to raise Mounts and Bulwarks all along from Sea to Sea. Then the Romans by continual assaults and batteries beat down the Walls, and entring the outward Forts, put many to the Sword, the rest fled into the old City, and sent out Commissioners to the Consul to treat for the sparing of their lives. The Conditions were agreed unto; That every Person that paid 2 Minas for his head, should be free: Hereupon the Romans entred, and 40000 were set free for the Ransom agreed upon, the rest to the number of 30000 were sold for Slaves, together with the Spoils. But they of Jetina, drave out the Carthaginian Garison and deliver'd up the Town to the Romans: The like did the Seluntines, Petrineans, Enaterineans and Tyndarites. Then the Consuls leaving a Garison in Panormus March'd away to Messina. The Year follow∣ing the Romans design'd another Descent into Lybia, but being prevented from landing by the Carthaginians they return'd to Panormus. Thence in their return to Re, by a∣nother Tempest they lost 150 Ships of War, besides Transport Ships with all their Loading and Provision. About this time the Governour of Therme being abroad about some necessary occasions, was taken Prisoner by the Roman Army: and during his Confinement he Treated by Messengers with the General to open the Gates of the City to him in the Night if he might be releas'd: The time was agreed upon, and he was order'd to be discharg'd, and 1000 Men were sent thither in the Night, who came there at the time appointed, whereupon he open'd the Gates, and the chiefest Persons of Quality only entred, giving a strict charge to the Guard, to shut the Gates and suffer none other to enter; and this they did to the end that none but themselves might have the plunder and pillage of the City; but they were all presently knock'd on the Head, a just reward for their Covetousness. But at another time Therme and Lipara were given up into the hands of the Romans. Yet they fail'd of their purpose at the Castle of Er, tho' they besieg'd it with 40000 Foot, and 1000 Horse.— Asdrubal the Carthaginian General being ill spoken of by his Soldiers for not sighting, March'd away with the whole Army, and came to Panormus through the straits of Se∣linuntia, and passing over the River near the Town, he Encamp'd close to the Walls without Fortifying himself, in Contempt of the Enemy. And now again plenty of Wine being brought into the Camp by the Merchants, the Celte made themselves drunk, and Olymp. 132. 1. Ant Ch 249. Caecilius routs the Carthgi∣nians. while they were roaring and tearing and filling all places with disorder and confusion,  Long Ships-. Cae∣cilius the Consul broke in upon them, and totally routed them, and sent 60 Elephants then taken in the Fight, to Rome, which were the admiration of the Romans.
Out of the 24th BOOK. Eclog. 1. THE Carthaginians, after they had raz'd the City Selinunte, transplanted the Citizens to Lilybeum. But the Rmans sail'd with 240 long Gallies, and 60 Lilbeum resig'd by the Romans. round Vessels, and all other sorts of Shipping to Panormus, and thence to Lilybeum, which now they began to besiege; and fortify'd themselves by a Trench drawn all along from Sea to Sea. Then they prepar'd them . Engines to cast Stones, battering Rams and Call'd by the Romans, Te∣studines. En∣gines not only to batter, but pluck the Stones by violence out of the Walls, and all other things necessary for the raising of Mounts and Bulwarks. Then they fill'd 15 of their round Vessels with Stones, and cast them into the Mouth of the Harbour to choak it up. The Roman Army amounted to the number of 110000 Men, of whom 60000 Foot and 700 Horse were order'd to carry on the Siege. But 4000 Men with Corn and Provi∣sion were sent from Carthage to the Besieged, which greatly heartned them and Adherbal. Atarbus their Governor. When the Romans understood that Relief was got into the City, they fill'd up the Mouth of the Harbour a second time, and made a Bomb with Anchors and great Pieces of Timber; but the Wind which then blew high, and the violent Surges of the Sea, broke all asunder. The Romans likewise made another . Engine to cast mighty Stones; but the Carthaginians rais'd another Wall within, and the Romans fill'd up the City Trench with Earth, which was 60 Cubits broad, and 40 deep. And whilst a Skir∣mish was fought on that side of the Walls towards the Sea, the Rmans plac'd an Ambush on the other side, and the Soldiers within making Sallies out of the Town to help them that were engag'd at the Sea-side, those that lay in Ambush (having Scaling-Ladders ready mounted) gain'd the first Wall; which being known, the Carthaginian Com∣mander fell furiously upon them, and kill'd 10000 upon the Place, and put the rest to flight, and burnt all the Roman Engines, battering Rams, Instruments to cast Stones, and all their Works and Fortifications. After this, the Carthaginians seeing that their Horse was of no use to them in the strait and narrow Passages, sent them away to Drapanum. Then presently came in strong Recruits to the Carthaginians; but the Romans (by the burning of their Engines, and through want of Provision, and the breaking out of the Plague amongst them,) were reduc'd to great Straits, (for only the Romans and their Confederates eat Flesh,) and so a great Distemper seiz'd them, that in a very few days there dy'd 10000, so that they were very earnest to breast up the Siege; but Hiero, King of Syracuse, sent them a great quantity of Corn, which again encourag'd them to con∣tinue. Afterwards the Romans chose another Consul, and gave the Command of the Army to Claudius the Consul, the Son of Appius, who taking charge of the Army, stop'd up the Mouth of the Port as his Predecessor had done, but the Sea bore down and car∣ry'd all away again. Moreover Claudius thinking himself able to do great Things, fur∣nish'd out 210 of the best Ships, and arriv'd at Drapanum, and there engag'd with the Carthaginians in a Sea-fight, and was beaten, and lost 117 of his Ships, and 20000 Men. There never happen'd so great a Fight at Sea, and so absolute a Victory, either among Th Romans beaten at Sea by the Cartha∣ginians. the Carthaginians, or any other about these times; and that which was more to be ad∣mir'd was, That tho' the Carthaginians were in so great Danger, and had only 90 Sail, yet they lost not one Man, and had but a very few wounded.—With 30 Sail, Note: Not one Man lost in a great Sea-fight. which intercepted the Corn and Provision belonging to the Romans, and carry'd it to Drapanum, and taking thence what remain'd that was useful, they came to Lilybeum, and loaded the Besieg'd with all kind of Provision. And now Carthalo the General came from Carthage with 70 long Ships or Men of War, and as many loaden with Corn, who also set upon the Romans and sunk some of their Vessels, and carry'd off four others that lay at Anchor. But after he heard that the Roman Fleet was set forth from Syracuse, ha∣ving call'd a Council of War, he went out to Sea against them with 220 Sail of the best Ships he had. When the Fleets came in sight one of another near the Coasts of Gela, the Romans (struck with a Pannick Fear) attack'd about and hasted to Phintiades, lea∣ving all their Transport Ships loaden with Provision, and other Vessels, behind them. But the Carthaginians making a swift Pursuit after them, there happened a fierce Engagement; In which, the Carthaginians sunk 50 of their great Men of War, and 60 other long Gal∣lies, The Romans beaten again at Sea. and disabled 13. After the Fight, the Carthaginians sail'd to the River Alycus, and there took care of their wounded Men. In the mean time, Junius the Consul not know∣ing what was done, loos'd from Messina with 36 long Gallies and many Ships of Burden, and having pass'd Pachynus, and gain'd the Port of Phintiades, upon Intelligence of what had happen'd he was amaz'd; and the Carthaginians making up upon him with their whole Navy, he burnt 12 of the most useless of his own Ships, and sail'd with the rest to∣wards
Syracuse, hoping to be secur'd by Hiero. But near Camarina a Storm arose, which drave him upon the Shallows and Rocks, the Winds being very fierce and boistrous: But the Carthaginians having recover'd Pachynus, anchor'd in a safe and secure Harbour. The Romans being thus distress'd, lost all their Transport Sips of Corn and Provision, and A Storm upon the Romans, who lost 105 Gallies, and all their Transport-Ships. 105 long Gallies, so that there were only two that escap'd, and most of their Men pe∣rish'd. Junius with those two, and those Men that were preserv'd, came to the Camp at Now call'd Marsala. Lilybeum: He surpriz'd Erix in the night, and wall'd Aegothalus, which is now call'd Acellus, and put in there a Garrison of 800 Men. But when Carthalo had intelligence, that the Places about Eryx were possess'd by the Enemy, he wasted thither a considerable Body of Men in the night, and assaulted the Garrison of Agothalus and took the Castle, and so succeeding in his Design; some he put to the Sword, and the rest fled to Eryx, where was a Garrison of 3000 Men. In the first Sea-fight the Romans lost 35000 Men, and as many were taken Prisoners. 11. In the Territory of Catana there was a Castle call'd Italium, which was assaulted by Barcas the Carthaginian.—For the Counsels and Stratagems of the Commanders being communicated to their Friends, were discover'd by some Deserters to the Enemy, which terrifi'd the Soldiers, and possess'd them with an expectation of some imminent Danger. But Barcas arriving there in the night, landed his Men, and was the first that led them to Eryx (which was 30 Stages distant) and took the City, and put most of them to the Sword, and those that surviv'd he remov'd to Now call'd Trapano. Drapanum.—Always and in every Concern it's known by Experience, that the Observance of good Rule and Or∣der has produc'd many good and great Effects.— 12. But Calatinus the Consul sail'd into Sicily with 300 long Gallies, and other Shipping, to the number of 1000 in the whole, and cast Anchor at the Mart-Town of the Eryceans. Hanno likewise arriv'd Hieronesus, Polyb. l. 1. one of the Lypari Islands near Sicily, dedi∣cated to Aeolus and Vulcan. in the Sacred Island from Carthage with 250 long Gallies, and other Ships of Burden; thence he came to Eryx.—The Romans fell on, and a sharp and obstinate Engagement there was on both sides, in which the Carthaginians lost 117 Ships, and among those 20 with all their Men. But the Romans—80, 30 . for their own Charge and Expence, and 50 to divide for Spoil, and 6000 Prisoners, (as Philinus re∣ports,) but as others 4040; the rest of the Fleet got safe with a fair Wind to Carthage.—For Valour signifi'd nothing, when the Fleet was so dispers'd, that it had no body to fly unto, but was by the Sea (as it were) deliver'd up into the hands of the Enemy. So * . that after the War had continu'd between the Romans and the Carthaginians for the space of 24 years, and Lilybeum had been besieg'd 10 years, a Peace was concluded. The end of the first Punick War, Olymp. 134. Ant. Ch. 240. Out of the 25th BOOK. 1. EPicurus the Philosopher, in his Book call'd Maximus, saith, That a Righteous Life is void of all Trouble and Disturbance; but an Unrighteous, nothing but Trouble and Sorrow. * . It contains much Matter in brief and certain Sentences, tending greatly to the Reforma∣tion of the Manners and Lives of Men: For Injustice is the greatest of all Evils, invol∣ving not only private Men, but (that we may sum up all at once) Nations, Kings and Kingdoms, in most miserable Calamities.—For the Spaniards gall them of the Ba∣leary Islands, Africans, Carthaginians, and Ligureans, join'd with them of Carthage. And This was the great Rebellion in Africk a∣gainst Car∣thage, and Matho and Spendius, which War continu'd three year. Vid. Po∣lyb. l. 1. the Slaves, whose Parents were Grecians, on one side, who also rebell'd.—Then it was perfectly learnt by Experience, how far the Diligence of an expert Commander excell'd the blind and heady Vulgar, and the rash and ignorant Conduct of a rude Com∣mon Soldier.—So excellent a thing is Modesty in Commanding, that it enjoins no∣thing beyond the Power of Men.—But after their departure out of Sicily, the Carthaginian Mercenaries rose up in Arms against them for these Reasons.—They were unreasonable and excessive in their Demands for the Horses and Men which they had lost in Sicily.—And they were in War one with another 4 Years, and as many Months. But at length they were put to Death by Barcas the General, who had likewise perform'd notable Service in Sicily against the Romans. 2. But Amilcar the Carthaginian General in a short time enlarg'd the Bounds of his Country; for he advanc'd with his Fleet as far as to the Pillars of Hercules and the Now Cadiz or Cales, in the Streights. Gades. This City is a Colony of the Phenicians, lying in the farthest Corner of the Earth on the Sea side, and hath an Haven. Having subdu'd the Iberians and the Tartesians with Istolo∣tius Tarseites, of Tarseium; A City near Hercules Pillars in the Streights, now not in being.
the General of the Celtae, and his Brother, he put most of them to the Sword, amongst Amilcar over∣comes Indortes the Prince of he Celtae. These Celtae a People of Spain. Indortes Cru∣cify'd. whom were the Two Brothers, and several other Honourable Persons: And he receiv'd into his own Army 3000 of them that were prisoners. But Endorts got again together 50000 Men, but fled before he engag'd, and betook himself to an high Hill: where being beset and blockt up by Amilcar, he fled away again in the night, and most of his Ar∣my were cut off. Indortes himself at length fell into the Enemies hands, and Amilcar put out his Eies, and then with many Scoffs and Scorns Crucify'd him. But he dis∣charg'd above 10000 other prisoners, and took in many Cities, some by fir Promises and persuasions: and others by force. Then Asdrubal the Son of Amilcar being sent by his Fa∣ther-in-law to Carthage against the Numidians (who had rebell'd against the Carthagini∣ans) kill'd 8000, and took 2000 prisoners: The rest were subdu'd and brought under Tribute. In the mean time Amilcar having gain'd many Cities in Spain, built a very large Town, which from its situation he call'd Acra Leuca; having afterwards besieg'd the City Acra Leuca now St. Leu∣car. probable. r. Helice, he sent away the greatest part of his Army, and Elephants into their Winter Quarters to the City he had lately built, and continu'd with the rest at the Siege. But Orisso the King (under pretence of coming in as a Friend to join with A∣milcar) sucour'd the Besieg'd, and forc'd Amilcar to fly and raise his Siege; his Sons now not in be∣ing. and Friends he order'd for their safety, to take one way by themselves, and he himself pass'd another, and being hotly pursu'd by the King, in taking a great River he was forc'd off his Horse by the violence of the Stream, and so drowned: But Hanniball and Asdruball his Sons got safe to Acra Leuca, or the White Citadell,——And tho' Amil∣car Amilcar drown'd in Spain. dy'd many Ages before our time, yet History has left an Epitaph and Commemo∣ration of his due praise. But Asdrubal his Son-in-law as soon as he heard of his Father∣in law's death, forthwith marched away, and came to Acra with above 100 Elephants. Being chosen General by the Army, and the Carthaginians, he pickt out 50000 Foot of old experienc'd Soldiers, 6000 Horse, and 200 Elephants. In the first place he ruin'd and broke in pieces King Orisso, then he put to the Sword all that were the occasion of Amil∣car's Gr. flight, and got possession of Twelve Cities: and at length all the Cities of Spain. And having now celebrated a new Marriage, and taken the Daughter of the King of Spain to Wife, he was invested with full Power in the Government, by all the Spaniards. He afterwards built a City by the Sea-side which he call'd Carthage, and after this another, and aspir'd to exceed Amilcar in Power and Greatness. He had in his Army 60000 Asdrubal As∣sassinated in Spain. Foot, 8000 Horse, and 200 Elephants. But at length he was assassinated by one of his own Houshold, having been General Nine Years. 3. The Celtae with the Gauls entring into a War against the Romans, rais'd an Army Olymp. 138. 4. Ant. Ch. 223. A War between the Celtae and the Romans. of 200000 Men; and in the First Battle were victorious; and likewise in the Second, wherein one of the Roman Consuls were kill'd: tho' the Romans had an Army of 70000 Foot and 7000 Horse. However, tho' they were worsted in the Two First Battles, yet in the Third they gain'd a signal Victory, killing 40000 upon the place, and taking the rest prisoners—So that the greatest of their Kings cut his own Throat: but the other was taken alive. After this brave Exploit, Aemilius being made Consul, wasted the Country of the Gauls and Celtae, and took in many Cities and Castles, and filled the Ci∣ty of Rome with Spoils. 4. Hiero King of Syracuse supply'd the Romans with Corn in the Celtick War, and was paid for it when the War was ended. 5. The Army wanting a General after Asdrubal was slain, the Charthaginians unani∣mously Hanniball. chose Hannibal the Eldest Son of Amilcar to be their General—While the Ci∣ty Seguntum was Besieg'd by Hanniball, the Citizens got together all the Riches in the The beginning of the Second Punick War which conti∣nued 17 Years. Olymp. 1140. 3. Ant. Ch. 216. Seguntum ta∣ken in Spain. Temples, and all the Silver and Gold in the Houses, nay, till it came to the Jewels in the Womens Ears, and laid them on an heap, and melted them down, mixing Brass and Lead with the Gold and Silver to make them useless and invaluable: and having so done, they all valiantly made a Sally, and fought it out to the last Man, and all dy'd upon the place, not without a great slaughter first made of their Enemies. The Mothers like∣wise first kill'd their own Children, and then stifled themselves by the smoak of the Fur∣naces. And so Hanniball gain'd the Town without any benefit of Plunder: whom when the Romans demanded to be brought to Trial for his breach of the League, and could not prevail, they began the War call'd the Hannibal War.
Out of the 26th BOOK. Eclog. 1. THere was never any Poet or Historian, or any Learned Man of what Sci∣ence Plin. lib. 35. C. 8. Praxitiles. Plin. lib. 36. C. 5. Plin. 35. 10. Appelles and Parrasius. soever, that could please all their Readers in every thing. Neither can any thing that is mortal, tho' it attain its end and design, gain the general appro∣bation of all, so as to be wholly free from Exception and Censure. For neither * Phi∣dias who was so admir'd for his Ivory Images: Nor * Praxiles that excellent Stone-cut∣ter: Nor Appelles or Parrasius, who attain'd to the highest pitch of Art and Skill in Limning and Painting, could ever reach to that degree of Happiness, as to exhibit any piece of their several Arts, that was not in some respect capable of Censure. For who was a more Famous Poet than Homer; or an Orator than Demosthenes? Who more Just than Aristides and Solon? yet join'd as a Flaw to all their Excellencies there is an Ora∣tion that carps at them, and makes them as if they were all ignorant Fellows. For in∣deed being but Men, altho' they attained to eminent Perfection in their several Accom∣plishments, yet through Human Frailty, they fail'd and mistook in many things. How∣ever, some Men there are who discover both their Envy and Folly, who wilfully omit to give an account of what is commendable and praise-worthy; but where they have any colour to find fault, there they fix, and are unwilling ever to leave it, endeavouring by blackning another, to set forth the more their own Worth and Excellencies; not considering that every Art and peculiar Accomplishment is more to be judg'd of by en∣quiry into the thing it self, than by making conclusions from the partial and peevish Pas∣sion of another, But any would admire this industrious Folly of Detraction, whereby a person by blackening another, in truth loses his own Reputation.—There are some things that by . The folly of Nature. a blind instinct, are naturally hurtful, as Frost, and Snow burn and blast the fairest and most pleasant Fruits; and the resplendent Whiteness of the Snow so dazles the Eyes, that it almost deprives them of their Sight: and so some Men that have neither Wit nor Will to do any thing that is commendable themselves, yet have Malice and Folly enough naturally, to judge and condemn the Actions of others: But it is the part of a prudent and understanding Man, always to attribute due praise to them, who by their Industry have prosecuted virtuous Designs: And where any have not been so successful as they desir'd, not to taunt at the infirmity of Hu∣mane Nature; But so much of these envious Men. 2. For as a brave Champion after he has spent much time in anointing himself, at length descends into the Lists—Having gain'd great Experience and an Habit. 3. Menodotus the Corinthian writ the Affairs of Greece in 14 Books. And Sosilus the A People in the Island of Corcyra., or Corfu. What a Lagin is. Ilian the Acts of Hannibal in Seven. 4. Among the Romans a Legion consists of 5000 Men. 5. Men naturally flock to them that are in prosperity, but insult over those that are brought into Distress.—For the Soul presently to undergo a meer contrary Change, which is in its own nature unchangeable. 6. The City of Rhodes being ruin'd by a great Earthquake, Hiero the Syracusian be∣stow'd Earthquake: in Rhodes. Six Talents of Silver towards the repairing of the Walls, and Silver Cauldrons of great value, besides Money: And let them have Corn to Transport free from Cu∣stom. 7. That which is now call'd Philopolis, was heretofore call'd Phiotis of Thebes, over all Thessaly. 8, For sost Beds, constant delicate Fare, and the use of all sorts of precious Oint∣ments, unfitted them for toil and hardship.—For both their Bodies and Minds were habituated to Effeminacy and Luxuriousness.—For Men naturally can hardly brook Toil and Pains, and low Diet; but delight in Idleness and Luxury. For Hannibal with much Toil and Care gain'd Cities both from the Romans and Brutians, and took Crotona, and Besieg'd Rhegium. For from Hercules Pillars in the West to Croto∣na, he over-ran all the Roman Territories.
Fragments out of the Books of Diodorus the Sicilian [that are lost] as they are in Photius his Bibliotheca. Out of the 31st BOOK. 1. VVHile these things were doing, Ambassadors came to Rome from Rhodes, to beg pardon for what they had done. For in the War against Perseus they had seem'd to favour the King, and to break their League with the Romans. But not being able to accomplish any thing for which they were sent, they were greatly dejected, and solicited with Tears the great and principal Men of the City: Whereupon being introduc'd into the Senate by Antonius, one of the Tribunes of the People, Philophron was the first that open'd the matter, and business of their Embassy. And after him Astimedes; when they had made many Arguments and apt Discourses to prevail with the Senate, and at last according to the . Sung the Swans Song. Proverb, had with the Swan concluded their mournful Dit∣ty, they receiv'd an answer which presently freed from their fears: However they were sharply reprov'd, and fin'd for their Offences. So that it is evident how the most noble among the Romans (by whom the greatest Affairs are manag'd) strive which shall be most generous, and upon that account gain most Honour and Reputation. For in the Admi∣nistration of publick Affairs elsewhere, one envies another. But the Romans praise and commend one another. So that while all endeavour to advance the publick Good, great and glorious things are Atchiev'd: but as to others, while they aim only at their own vain Glory, and envy the Successes one of another, they ruin their Country. 2. At length Aemilius took Perseus the last King of Macedonia, who had often enter'd Olymp. 154. 1. The miserable condition of Perseus King of Macedon. into a League with the Romans, and as often appear'd in the Field with great Armies against them. And after the Victory Aemilius Triumph'd gloriously. And tho' Perseus was brought into so great miseries and calamities, as that the ruins and destructions which he suffer'd, can scarce be parallel'd by any Romance, yet was he not willing to part with his Life. For before the Senate had determin'd any thing relating to his punishment, One of the City Praetors. one of the chief Officers of the City cast both him and his Children into the Goal Albi∣nus. This Prison is a deep Dungeon of the bigness of a Chamber, capable of 9 Beds at the most: Dark and full of all sorts of filth and nastiness, by reason of the multitude of Men Condemn'd for capital Offences, that from time to time were thrust down there; and generally most of such Malefactors were put into this Place. So that many being shut up together in so strait a place, those miserable Creatures were even turn'd into Beasts: And in regard the Meat, Drink, and other necessaries which were brought them, were jumbled together into one Chaos and heap of Confusion, there arose thence such a stench that none that came near, were able to endure. In a most miserable Condition Perseus continu'd here for the space of 7 Days, insomuch that he begg'd relief, and some share of the Food of those strangers in Prison, who had only a stinted allowance. They out of compassion to this miserable Man, with great humanity and tears in their Eyes, gave him part of that small pittance they had, and withall offer'd him a Sword and a Rope, to use which of them he would at his pleasure, for the putting an end to his Life, Yet nothing seems so sweet as Life, even to the miserable; tho' they suffer what is equivalent to death it self in the mean time. To conclude, he had certainly ended his days in this extream misery, if Marcus Aemilius President of the Court (out of respect to the dignity of his Person, mov'd by the natural and innate humanity of the Romans) had not with some indignation mov'd the Senate on his behalf, putting them in mind, that tho' they fear'd not Men, yet they should bear some awe and reverence to  of . Nemesis, who will take vengeance on them that use their power with Pride and Insolency. Upon this he was committed to a more moderate Confinement, and while he was seeding himself with fresh hopes, he ended his days agreeable to the former misfortunes of his Life: for after he had liv'd 2 Years in this   The death of Ps.  the Cappado∣cian Kings. fond love of Life, having displeas'd his barbarous Keepers they would not suffer him to sleep, and so he dy'd. 3. The Kings of Cappadocia say that they came from Cyrus King of Persia. They af∣firm likewise that they are descended from one of those Seven Persians that kill'd Magus. And they drew down their Pedegree from Cyrus thus: That Atossa was the Sister of Cambyses, and Daughter of Cyrus: That Gallus was the Son of Atossa and Pharnaces King of Cappadocia, Smerdis the Son of Gallus, and Artames the Son of Smerdis, and Artames had issue Anaphas (a brave and valian: Man) who was the Father of one of th Seven Persians. In this manner there∣fore Cr.
do they make out their Consanguinity both to Cyrus and to Anaphas, who it's said For ; Valour, o∣thers say it should be ; Cowardice. was of so stout a Spirit, that before he would pay Tribute to the Persians, he abdicated his Government of Capadocia. After his death Anaphas his Son Reign'd in his stead, who dy∣ing, left his two Sons, Ditamus and Arimneus, and that Ditamus took upon him the Govern∣ment, (a Warlike Prince, and in all respects accomplish'd for the Kingdom) who joining Battle with the Persians, and behaving himself with great Gallantry and Resolution, was kill'd in the Fight, and his Son Ariamnes succeeded him in the Kingdom. To whom were born two Sons, Ariarathes and Holophernes: And after he had Reign'd 50 Years, he dy∣ed Holofernes. having done nothing memorable, and the Elder of his Sons Ariarathes succeeded him, who it's said bore so great and tender a Love to his Brother, that he advanc'd him to the highest degree of Honour and Preferment. And sent him to join with the Persians in the War against the Aegyptians, who after return'd loaden with many and large marks of Ho∣nour conferr'd upon him by Ochus, for his Valour, and dy'd in his own Country, leaving behind him two Sons, Ariarathes and Arysses. And that his Brother the King of Cappado∣cia (Gr. having no legal Issue. having no legal Issue) adopted Ariarathes his Brother's Eldest Son. About this time Alexander the Macedonian King ruin'd the Persian Empire, and presently after dy'd. But Perdiccas who had the chief Command, sent Eumenes as General into Cappadocia, who subdu'd and kill'd Ariarathes and brought Cappadocia and all the bordering Territories into the the power of the Macedonians. But Ariarathes, the adopted Son of the former King, despairing for the present to regain the Kingdom, with a few followers fled into Armenia. But Eumenes and Berdiccas both dying not long after, and Antigonus and Seleucus imbroil'd in War one with another, Ariarathes with the help of Arcloathus King of Armenia (who furnish'd him with forces) routed and kill'd Amyntas the Macedonian General, and pre∣sently drave all the Macedonians out of the Country, and recover'd his Kingdom. He had 3 Sons, the Eldest of which, Ariamnes succeeded him, who join'd in affinity with Anti∣ochus Theos, and Married his Eldest Son Ariarathes to Stratonice, Antiochus his Daughter. And for the great love he had to him above all his Children, e set the Diadem upon his Head, and made him Co-parther with him in the Kingdom: and after the death of his Father he reign'd alone. Then he dying, Ariarathes his Son, of a very tender Age, suc∣ceeded. He Marry'd Antiochide (the Daughter of Antiochus the great) a very subtile Wo∣man: Who because she bore no Children, to make up that defect, contriv'd (unknown to her Husband) a suppositious Birth, as if she had Born two Sons, which were call'd Ari∣arathes and Holofernes. But not long after, she conceiv'd in reality, and unexpectedly was deliver'd of two Daughters and one Son call'd Mithridates. Upon this she acquainted her Husband with the Imposture, and so wrought with him that she prevail'd with him to send away the Eldest of the two Sons with a small Sum of Money to Rome, and the other into Ionia, lest they should challenge the Kingdom from him that was lawful Heir to the Crown; who after he came to Man's Estate (its said) was call'd Ariarathes, and was Educated in all the learning of Greece, and was a Person accomplish'd with all manner of Virtuous Endowments. That the Father (who was wonderfully belov'd by the Son) strove all he could to repay his Son's love again: And their mutual endear'd affections one towards another went so far, that the Father would have given up the whole Kingdom into the Hands of the Son, but the Son on the other side told him, he could not possibly accept of so great an advantage from living Parents. After therefore his Father dy'd he succeeded, spending the rest of his life very virtuously and in the study of Philosophy: So that Cappadocia which was be∣fore little known to the Grecians, was now a desireable place of Residence for all learned Men: He renew'd the League of Peace and Friendship with the Romans. And in this manner is the Pedegree of those that have hitherto reign'd in Cappadocia, brought down from Cyrus. 4. For Statues are made of such Romans as are of noble Families, in near resemblance of the Persons, and according to the whole proportion of their Bodies. For all their life long, they have some, who observe their Mien and Deportment, and the special re∣marks of every part exactly. Likewise every Mans Ancestor . stands in that Habit, and in those Ornaments, (and is so clearly represented) that every one knows the Person as soon as he looks upon him, and to what degree of Honour every one was advanc'd, and what Share and Interest they had in the Commonwealth. 5. Rather Ful∣vius. Olymp. 156, 4. Ant. Ch. 151. Memmius was sent General with an Army into Spain. But the Lusitanians. now Portugals. Lusitanians just upon his Landing, fell upon him, and routed him, and cut off most of his Army. When this success of the Iberians was nois'd abroad, the Araucians (who look'd upon them∣selves to be far better Soldiers than the Iberians) slighted and contemn'd the Enemy, and upon this ground and confidence, chiefly it was that in their general Council they determi∣ned to make War upon the Romans. * Araucians, now of Aurang
Out of the 32d. BOOK. Fragment 1. ALexander fled out of the Fight with 500 Men to a City in Arabia, call'd This was Alex∣ander Epi∣phanes King of Syria, and this Battle was with Ptolo∣metor, near Antioch. Olymp. 158. 3. Ant. Ch. 144. See Mac. 1. Mac. 10. c. Joseph. lib. 13. c. 8. Abas, to Diocles the Prince there; with whom he had before entrusted his Son Antiochus, a Child of very tender Age. Afterwards the Chief Commanders who were about Heliades (and had been with Alexander) plotting to assassinate Alexander, sent away some Messengers privately from among themselves, promising secretly to Murder him. Demetrius consenting to what they propos'd, they became both Traitors and Mur∣derers of their Prince. We might be justly condemn'd if we should pass in silence that which happen'd before the death of Alexander, tho' for the strangeness of the thing it be scarce credible. King Alexander a little before these times, consulted with the Oracle in Silicia, where they say is the Temple of Apollo of Sarpedon: and it is reported that the Ora∣cle made Answer, that he should take heed of that place which should bring forth a God of two shapes. This Divine Hint was then taken for a Riddle: but after the King was dead, the Truth was discover'd in this manner. For in Abas a City of Arabia dwelt one Diophantus a Macedonian. This Man Marry'd an Arabian Woman, by whom he had a Strange Sto∣ries of Herma∣phrodites. Heraides be∣came a Man. Son, call'd after his own Name, and a Daughter call'd Heraides: His Son dy'd while he was young: But he gave a Portion to his Daughter when she was grown up, and Marry'd her to one Semiades, who, after he had liv'd with his Bride one year, undertook a long Journey: In the mean time (it is reported) that Heraides fell into a strange and wonderful distemper, such as is scarce credible. For she had a vehement Inflammation, and a great Swelling at the bottom of her Belly, which increas'd to that degree, that it brought her into a violent Feaver. The Physitians conceiv'd that it was an Ulcer about the neck of the Matrix; Refrigerating Medicines and Plaisters therefore were apply'd to bring down and cool those hot burning Tumors; upon the Seventh day the Humour burst, and out started from the Privy Parts of Heraides, a Man's Yard with the Testicles compleat. This hapned when neither Physitian nor any other Stranger was present, but only the Mother and Two Servants: who with the strangeness of the thing, were struck into a Maze. However, they made it their Care and Business to cure her, and kept all private to themselves. And when she was recover'd, she still wore a Womans Habit, and manag'd the Affairs of the House as Wives use to do. But those who were privy to what had hapned, suspected her to be an Hermaphrodite. And so, tho' formerly in car∣nal Embraces with her Husband, there might be no natural copulation, yet she had been seen frequently to have the carnal knowledge of Women. In the mean time while all things were kept secret, Semiades returns and demands his Wife, (as was very fit and rea∣sonable.) And being continually urgent and pressing for the society of his Wife, the Fa∣ther refus'd, and yet was asham'd to declare the reason, which occasion'd great dissenti∣on, so far as that the Husband resolv'd to sue the Father for his Wife: So that this won∣der was expos'd to the publick view, like a Play upon the Stage, by the means of a cri∣minal Accusation. The Person contended for was present in Court when the Matter was Banded to and fro, on either parties behalf; Upon which, the Judges were in doubt whe∣ther the Power and Authority of the Husband over the Wife, should be preferr'd be∣fore that of the Father over the Daughter. At length, when they were ready to give Sen∣tence that the Wife should abide with her Husband, she discover'd the truth of the whole matter, and with great boldness and assurance of Mind threw off her feign'd Habit, and discover'd her self to be a Man to all that were there present, and in a surly manner ut∣ter'd these words. Can any compel one Man to Marry another? Upon which all were a∣maz'd, and set up a shout of Admiration at the strangeness of the thing. Heraides being now discover'd, afterwards (as is reported) chang'd her Womans Attire and put on the Habit of a young Man. And it's likewise said, that the Physitians when they saw those parts of the Woman, judg'd that the nature of the Male lay hid in the Womb of the Female (in a place in shape like an Egg) and that in the thin skarf or skin, that wrap'd about the Yard, was an unusual hole, through which the Urine pass'd. And that there∣fore they declar'd that the place first being pierc'd and made like an hollow pipe, should be turn'd into a green Wound, and at length brought to a Scab, and when the Yard was reduc'd to it's proper shape, that sutable Remedies should be apply'd for the cure of the Patient. Heraides was afterwards call'd Diophantus, and serv'd in the King's Camp in a Re∣giment of Horse, and then resided with the King at Abas. At that time therefore was Alexander's Camp. the meaning of the Oracle understood, which was before dark and obscure; when the
King came to Abbas, where this Hermaphrodite was Born. It's reported that Semiades at length (through love he bore to her) upon the account of their former familiarity (and through shame of his unnatural Marriage) was able to bear up no longer, but after he had left all his Goods to Diophantus, and made him his Heir, broke his Heart and died. So she that had been a Woman, carry'd it with the courage of a Man, and he that was ever a Man, appear'd to be more pusillanimous than any Woman. The like to this fell out about 30 Years after in the City of In Pelopon∣nesus. Epidaurus. There was a young Maid in Epidaurus (as the report goes) an Orphan, whose name was Callo. This Maid had no passage in her privy parts, but about the Pecten there was a place like an issue through which the Urine pass'd ever from the time of her Birth. When she came to a mature Age, she was Married to one of the Citizens with whom she liv'd two Years, and tho' she was not capable of natural Embraces as a Woman, yet she was forc'd to endure those that were preternatural, or besides nature. But afterwards a Tumor arose near the Pecten which put her to exceeding torment, so that many Physitians were sent for to con∣sult together, and all despair'd of Curing her: But an Apothecary undertook the Cure, and made an incision in the place, whence came forth a Mans Yard with Testicles, but so∣lid without any passage. And when all were amaz'd at the strangeness of the thing, the Apothecary suppli'd the parts with what was deficient. First he made an incision into the end of the Yard, and pierc'd it even to the Uretor, and thrusting down a small sil∣ver Probe. Instrument, brought away the Urin and other excrementitious humours: But the place where the Issue was, he first turn'd into a green Wound, and then heal'd it up. Having perform'd this extraordinary Cure, he demanded a double reward; For he said he had undertaken to Cure a sick Woman, and had now set right a young Man. Callo hereupon laid aside her Wheel and other effeminate Imployments, and took upon her the Name of Callon, adding only the last Letter N to her former Name. Some say, that be∣fore her Transformation, she was the Priestess of Ceres, and because she shew'd to Men those things that were not to be seen, this judgment fell upon her for her Prophaness. They report that at Naples and several other places the like hath happen'd; not that the two Sexes of Man and Woman are really form'd by Nature in two several shapes (for that is impossible) but that Nature is deceiv'd in fashioning the Members of the Body to the a∣mazement and deceit of—the beholders. We have therefore judg'd these strange Events which are brought down to us both by Writings and Traditions, worthy to be taken notice of, in respect both of their pleasure and profit to the readers. For many looking upon such things as these, as Monsters in Nature, are thereby infected with a kind of Superstition: Not only private Men but whole Cities and Nations. For it's reported that a little before the beginning of the Martian War, there dwelt an Italian near Rome, who having Marry'd such a one (as is before describ'd) complain'd to the Senate, upon which, they out of a fond Superstition, and perswaded thereunto by the Truscan Augures, order'd the Hermaphrodite to be burnt. And thus (they say) this poor Creature was most unjustly doom'd to destruction; and was ignorantly judg'd a Monster, because she had some resemblance of both Sexes. And not long after there happen'd the like at Athens; where the thing not being understood, (they say) the Man was burnt alive. Some there are that tell idle stories how that there are Hyaene (for so they call such as are both Men and Women) who have Carnal copulation one with another, according to each Sex by turns every other Year: When in truth there is no such thing. For although both Sexes have a peculiar and distinct nature without participation one with another, yet by a false formation the inconsiderate spectator may be impos'd upon. For to the Female (which is naturally such) is join'd some∣thing like unto a Mans Yard, and so on the other hand to the natural Male, something like to the privy parts of a Woman. The same reason holds in all kind of living Creatures, there being many and various sorts of prodigious Births; but such as never receive any nourishment, nor can ever come to any perfection. But what hath been said, may suffice for the reforming this superstition. Frag. 2. They say that the Walls of Carthage were 40 Cubits high, and 22 broad But tho' they were so, yet the Roman Valour and Engines were too strong for all their Defences and Fortifications, for the City was taken and raz'd to the ground. Frag. 3. Manasses (called Masinissa by the Latines) who Reign'd in Africk, and was always a Friend to the Roman, lived Ninety years in strength, and firm health, and left Ten Sons behind him when he dy'd, whom he committed to the Care and Guar∣dianship of the Romans. He was of a strong Body, and from a Child inur'd to hardship: Olymp. 158. Ant. Ch. 146. Massinissa hit strength. in what ever business he was engag'd, he would keep close to it all the day immovea∣ble; he would never rise from his seat till night, spending the whole day in laborious Pro∣jects
and Contrivances. When he was once on Horseback he would ride continually night and day, and never be weary. A great instance of the health and strength of his Body, was, That when he was almost 90 years of age, he had a Son but 4 years old, yet of a very strong Body. He was so extraordinarily given to Husbandry, that he left to every one of his Sons 10000 Every Ple∣thrum is an hundred Foot: some make it the same with an Acre. Plethras of Land, Adorn'd with all manner of delight∣ful Improvements, and Instruments necessary for that purpose. He Reign'd with great commendation 60 years. Fragment 4, Nicomedes after he had routed his Father Prusias, and forc'd him to fly to the Temple of Jupiter for shelter, there kill'd him, and by that wicked and bloody Mur∣ther got possession of the Kingdom of Bythinia. Fragment 5, The Portugals. Lusitanians at first not having an expert General, were easily van∣quish'd by the Romans; but after Viriathus became their General, they did them much mischief. He was of them that inhabited the Sea-coasts, a Shepheard upon the Moun∣tains from his Childhood; By nature of an healthful Constitution, in strength and agility of Body far exceeding all the Iberians. For he had inur'd himself to a sparing Diet, much Labour and Toil, and to no more sleep than was absolutely necessary. He likewise con∣tinually carry'd Iron weapons, and was famous for his Conflicts both with wild Beasts and Robbers, and at length was made General; upon which a whole drove of Thieves and Rogues on the sudden flock'd about him. Being very successful in many Battles, he was not only admir'd for his other Excellencies, but likewise for his Military Conduct. Besides, in distribution of the spoils he was very just, allotting to every Man proportiona∣ble to his Merits and Deserts. Still proceeding and prospering he approv'd himself to be a Prince, rather than a Thief and a Robber. He fought several Battles with the Olymp. 158. 4. Ant. Ch. 143. Romans and came off Conqueror, insomuch as he routed Vitilius the Roman General, broke his Army and took him prisoner, and then put him to death. And many other brave Exploits he perform'd, till Fabius was appointed to go out as General against him, and from that time he began to decline. But not long after rallying his Men, and bravely managing the matter against Fabius, he forc'd him to Terms dishonourable to the Ro∣man Name, But Coepio who was afterwards General against Viriathus, slighted all the former Conditions as of no effect, and often routed Viriathus, whom (now being re∣duc'd to those straits, as that he su'd for terms of Peace) he caus'd to be treacherously assassinated by some of his own Servants: and striking a Terror into Tantalus his Succes∣sor, and all his Army, he impos'd what Terms and Conditions he pleas'd upon them, and in the conclusion gave them the City and Land about for their Habitation. Out of the 34th. Book. Fragm. 1. KIng * Antiochus Besieg'd Jerusalem. But the Jews stood it out for some time: But when all their Provision was spent, they were forc'd to send Antiochus Sedates. Olymp 126. 2. Strange stories of the Jews. Ambassadors to him, to treat upon Terms. Many of his Friends perswaded him to Storm the City, and to root out the whole Nation of the Jews; For that they only of all People, hated to Converse with any of another Nation, and treated them all as Enemies: And they suggested to him that their Ancestors were driven out of Aegypt, as impious and hateful to the Gods: For their Bodies being overspread, and infected with the Itch and Leprosie, (by way of expiation) they got them together, and as prophane and wicked wretches, expell'd them out of their Coasts: And that those who were thus expell'd, seated themselves about Jerusalem, and being after imbodyed into one Nation (call'd the Nation of the Jews) their hatred of all other Men descended with their Blood to Posterity. And therefore they made strange Laws, and quite different from other People: Never will Eat or Drink with any of another Nation, or wish them any prosperity. For said they, Antiochus surnam'd Epiphanes having subdu'd the Jews, entred into the Temple of God, into which none was to enter by their Law but the Priest; in which when he found the Image of a Man with a long Beard, carv'd in Stone sitting upon an Ass, he took it to be Moses who built Jerusalem, and settled the Nation, and establish'd by Law all their wicked Customs and Practices, abounding in hatred and enmity to all other Men. Antiochus therefore abhorring this their contrariety to all other People, us'd his utmost en∣deavour to abrogate their Laws. To that end he sacrific'd a great Swine at the Image of Moses, and at the Altar of God that stood in the outward Court, and sprinkled them with the blood of the Sacrifice. He commanded likewise that the Sacred Books, whereby they were taught to hate all other Nations, should be besprinkled with the Broth made of the Swines flesh: And he put out the Lamp (call'd by them Immortal) which was ever burn∣ing
in the Temple. Lastly he forc'd the high Priest and the other Jews to eat Swines flesh When Antiochus his Friends had debated and considered of these things, they were very earnest with him to root out the whole Nation, or at least that he would abrogate their Laws, and compel them to change their former manner of living and conversation. But the King being of a generous Spirit, and mild disposition receiv'd Hostages, and pardon'd the Jews: But demolish'd the Walls of Jerusalem, and took the Tribute that was due. 2. The Affairs of Sicily after the overthrow of—Carthage—having continu'd succes∣ful Olymp. 161. 2. Ant. Ch. 133. The Servile War in Sicily. and prosperous for the space of 60 Years; at length broke out the servile War upon the fol∣lowing occasions. The Sicilians (through the enjoyment of a long Peace) being grown very Rich, brought up abundance of Slaves; who being driven in Droves like so many Herds of Cattle from the several places where they were Bred and brought up, were stig∣matiz'd with certain Marks burnt into their Bodies: Those that were Young, they us'd for Shepherds, others for such services as they had occasion. But their Masters were very rigid and severe with them, and took no care to provide either necessary food, or raiment for them, insomuch as that most of them were forc'd to Rob and Steal, to get necessaries: So that all places were full of slaughters and murders, as if an Army of Thieves and Rob∣bers had been dispers'd all over the Island. The Governours of the Provinces (to say the truth) did what they could to suppress them: But because they durst not punish them, in regard their Masters (who had the sole Command and Power over their Servants) were Rich, and Men in Authority, every Governor in his several Province was forc'd to con∣nive at the thefts and rapines that were committed. For many of the Masters being Ro∣man Knights, and Judges of the accusations (brought before the Praetors) were a Terror even to the Governors themselves. The Slaves therefore being in this distress, and vilely beaten and scourg'd beyond all reason, were now resolv'd not to bear any longer. Therefore meeting together from time to time as they had opportunity, they consulted how to free themselves from the Yoke of Servitude they lay under, till at length they re∣ally executed what they had before agreed upon. There was a Syrian a Servant of Anti∣genes of Enna, born in the City of * Apanea a Magitian and Conjurer: He pretended to tell future Events (or Fortunes) discover'd to him as he said by the Gods in his Dreams, and impos'd upon many by this kind of practice. Then he proceeded further, and not only foretold things to come, reveal'd to him in Dreams, but pretended that he saw the Gods when he was awake, and they declar'd to him what was to come to pass. And tho' he thus juggled, and play'd the fool, yet by chance many things after∣wards prov'd true. And whereas those things which never happen'd, were by none cen∣sur'd, but those which did come to pass were every where applauded, he grew more and more into esteem. At length by some trick of Art or other, he would breath flames of Fire out at his Mouth as from a burning Lamp, and so would prophecy as if he had been at that time inspir'd by Apollo. For he put Fire with some combustible marter to feed it, into a Nut-shell or some such thing bor'd through on both sides, then putting it into his Mouth, and forcing his Breath, upon it there would issue out both sparks and flames of Fire. G: Before the defection, this Juggler boasted that the Goddess Syria had appear'd to him, and told him that he should Reign, and this he declar'd not only to others but often to his own Master. The thing being become a common jest and subject of laughter, Antige∣nes was so taken with this jest, and ridiculous conceit of the Man, he took Eunus (for so he was call'd) with him to Feasts and Repasts, and several questions being put to him concerning the Kingdom, he was ask'd how he would deal with every one that was there present at the Table: He readily went on with his story, and told them that he would be very kind to his Masters, and like a Conjurer using many monstrous Magical terms, and expressions, he set all the Guests a laughing, upon which some of them as a reward gave him large Messes from the Table, desiring him to remember their kindness when he came to his Kingdom: But all this jesting came at length really to end in the advancing of him to the Kingdom; and all those who at the Feasts by way of ridicule had been kind to him, he rewarded in earnest. But the beginning of the defection was in this manner, There was one Damophilus of Enna, a Man by reason of his Wealth, of a great Spirit, but of a proud and haughty di∣sposition. This Man above all measure was cruel and severe to his Servants; and his Wife Megallis strove to exceed her Husband in all kind of cruelty and inhumanity towards the Slaves. Upon this, they that had been thus cruelly us'd, were inrag'd like wild Beasts, and plotted together to rise in Arms and cut the Throats of their Masters. To this end they appli'd themselves to Eunus, and desir'd to know of him whether the Gods would succeed them in their design. He incouraging them declar'd that they should prosper in what they had in hand, using (according to his former manner) Conjuring
words and expressions, and charging them to be speedy in their Execution. Whereupon they forthwith rais'd a Body of 400 Slaves, and upon the first opportunity (oh a sudden) broke in Arm'd into the City Enna, led by their Captain Eunus, by his juggling tricks, flaming out Fire at his Mouth. Then entring the Houses, they made so great a slaughter, as that they spar'd not even the sucking Children, but pluckt them violently from their The cruelty of the Slaves. Mothers Breasts and dash'd them against the Ground: It cannot be express'd how vilely and filthily (for the satisfying of their Lusts) they us'd Mens Wives in the very presence of their Husbands. With these Villains join'd a multitude of Slaves that were in the City, and first executed their rage and cruelty upon their Masters, and then fell a mur∣dering others. In the mean time Eunus heard that Damophilus and his Wife were in some Orchards near the City, he sent therefore some of his rabble thither, who brought them with their Hands ty'd upon their Backs, loading them all along the Way as they past with scoffs and scorns; only they declar'd that they would be kind in every respect to his Daughter, for her pity and compassion towards the Servants, and her readiness always to be helpful to them. They that were sent for Damophilus and Megallis his Wife to the City, brought them into the Theatre, whither all the Rabble that made a defection flockt. There Da∣mophilus pleading earnestly for his Life, and moving many with what he said, Hermias and Zexis loaded him with many bitter accusations, and call'd him a Cheat and Dissembler; and not waiting what would be determin'd by the People concerning him, the one ran him through with a Sword, and the other cut of his Head with an Ax. Then they made Damophilus cruelly mur∣ther'd. Eunus King, not for his Valour or Skill in Martial affairs, but upon the account of his extraordinary Art in Juggling, and that he was the Head and Author of the Defection, and for that his Name seem'd to portend and to be a good Omen, that he would be Eunus, signi∣fying in Greek, kind. kind to his Subjects. Being therefore made General (with absolute Power) to order and dispose of all things as he pleas'd, an Assembly was call'd, and he put all the Prisoners to death except such as were skilful in making of Arms, whom he forth with set on Work; as for Megallis he delivered her up to the will of the Women Slaves, to take their revenge of Megallis murther'd her as they thought fit: Who after they had whipp'd and tormented her, threw her down a steep precipice. And Eunus himself kill'd his own Master Antigenes and Pytho. At length putting the Crown upon his Head, and grac'd with all the Ensigns of Royalty, he caus'd his Wife (who was a Syrian, and of the same City) to be own'd as Queen, and chose such as he judg'd to be most prudent to be of his privy Council. Amongst whom was one Achaeus by Name, and an Achaean by Nation, a wise Man and a good Soldier: Having therefore got together in the space of Three days above 6000 Men, Arm'd with what they could by any ways or means lay their Hands upon, and being join'd with o∣thers, who were all surnish'd either with Axes, Hatchets, Slings, Bills, or Stakes sharp∣pen'd and burnt at one End, or with Spits, he ravag'd and made spioil all over the Coun∣try. And being at length join'd with an infinite number of Slaves, they grew to that height and boldness as to engage in a War with the Roman Generals: And often in several Battles got the Victory, by overpowr'ing them with Number; having now with him a∣bove 10000 Men. In the mean time, one Cleon a Cilicean was the Author of another desection of the Slaves, and now all were in hopes that this unruly Rabble would fall together by the Another defecti∣on of the Slaves. Ears one with another, and so Sicily would be rid of them through the mutual slaughters and destructions amongst themselves. But contrary to all Mens hopes and expectations, they join'd Forces together; and Cleon was observant in every thing to the Commands of Eunus, and serv'd General under him as his Prince, having 5000 Men of his own Sold∣iers. Thirty days were now expir'd since the first beginning of this Rebellion: And presently after a Battle was fought with Lucius Hypsius (who coming from Rome Com∣manded 8000 Sicilians) in which Fight the Rebels got the day, who were then 20000, and in a very short time after, their Army increas'd to 200000 Men. And although they fought with the Romans themselves, yet they often came off Conquerors, and were very seldom beaten. This being nois'd abroad, a defection began at Rome by 150 Slaves that conspir'd against the Government. The like in Attica by 1000, the like at Delos and many other Places. But those in the several Places (who had intrusted their Concerns in their Hands) to prevent the mischief from growing further, made a quick dispatch, and fell upon them on the sudden, and put them all to death, and so those that re∣main'd and were ready to break out into Rebellion, were reduc'd to more sound and so∣ber thoughts. But in Sicily the disorders more and more increas'd: For Cities were taken, and Gr. Olymp. 162. Ant. Ch. 130. their Inhabitants made Slaves, and many Armies were cut off by the Rebells, until
such time as Rupilius the Roman General recover'd Tauromenium, after the Besieg'd had been reduc'd to that extremity of Famine (by a sharp and close Siege) as that they began to eat their own Children, and the Men their Wives; and at length Butcher'd one another for Food. There he took Comanus the Brother of Cleon, who was endeavouring to escape out of the City while it was besieg'd. At last Sarapion a Syrian, having betray'd the Cittadel, all the Fugitives fell into his hands, whom having first scourg'd, he afterwards cru∣cified. Thence he march'd to Enna, and by a long Siege reduc'd them into such straits, as that there was no hopes left to escape. Afterwards having slain Cleon their General (who had made a Sally out of the City and fought lik a Hero) he expos'd his Body to open view; and not long after this City likewise was betray'd into his Hands, which o∣therwise could never have been taken by force, by reason of the natural Strength of the Place. And as for Eunus, he like a Coward fled with 600 of his Guards to the tops of certain high Rocks, where those that were with him (foreseeing their inevitabe ruin, for Rupilius pursued them close) cut one anothers Throats. But Eunus the juggling King (out of fear) hid himself in some Caves, he had found out for that purpose; whence he was pluckt out with four others of his Gang, viz. his Cook, his Barber, he that rubb'd him in the Bath, and he that in the midst of his Cups was his Jester. To conclude he was thrown into the Goal, and there eaten up of Lice, and so ended his days at * Morganti∣na by a death worthy the former wickedness of his Life. Rupilius afterwards with a In Sicily. small body of Men, (marching all over Sicily) presently clear'd the Country of Theeves and Robbers. This Eunus King of the Robbers call'd himself Antiochus, and all his fol∣lowers Syrians. Out of the 36th. BOOK. ABout the time that Marius in a great Battle routed Bocchus and Jugurtha, the African Olymp. 168. 4. Ant. Ch. 193. Kings, and slew many thousands of the Africans, and afterwards took Jugurtha himself (deliver'd up to him by Bocchus, to gain favour and pardon from the Romans for his making War upon them,) the Romans themselves were in great perplexity by reason of the many losses they had sustain'd by the Cimbrians, who then ravag'd and harrass'd all the Countrey of New France. Gall. And in further aggravation of what they suffer'd, at the very same time came some out of Sicily, who gave an account of many thousand Slaves that were there risen up in Arms. Whereupon the whole Roman Commonwealth was in such straits, Rebellion in Sicily, Olymp. 161. 2. Ant. Ch. 133. that they knew not which way to turn themselves, having lost 60000 Men in Gall, in the War against the Cimbrians, and they had not then Soldiers sufficient for a new Expedi∣tion. And besides, (before the Rebellion of the Slaves in Sicily) there were Defections that disturb'd—the State in Italy; but they were short and inconsiderable, as if God had appointed these for Omens and Presages of the great Rebellion in Sicily. The first rising was at In Campania in Italy Nine Miles from the Sea. Minutius a Roman Knight head of a Re∣bellion of the Slaves in Italy. 1309l. 10. Sterling Nusiaeria, where 30. Servants entred into a Conspiracy, but they were presently executed. The second was at Capua where 200 were got up in Arms, but they were likewise in a short time supprest. The third hapned after a strange manner, which was thus, there was one Titus Minutius a Roman Knight, who had a very rich Man to his Father, he chanc'd to fall in Love with another Man's Servant who was very beautiful, and having enjoy'd her, he was the more wonderfully inflam'd, and even to Madness, in∣somuch as he would needs buy her of her Master; who being with much ado prevail'd with to part with her, the Lover at length bought her for Seven * Attick Talents, and li¦mited a certain time for the payment of the Money, to which time the greatness of his Fathers Estate procur'd him Credit: But now, when the day of payment was come, he had not the Money then ready, but pray'd forbearance for 30 days longer. That time be∣ing run up, the Creditor demanded then his Money, but the Lover knew not how to per∣form his Word, and yet his Love continu'd still as hot as ever. At length a wicked design came into his Head, which put him on to lay a trap for them that demanded the Money, and to that end to take upon him the state and dignity of a Monarch. To which purpose he bought 500 Arms of all sorts, and appointed a day for payment; and being trusted, withdrawing himself privately into a certain Field, he stirr'd up his own Slaves to a de∣fection to the number of 400; and putting on the Diadem and Purple, and assuming all the other Badges and Ensigns of Royalty, declar'd himself King, the deliverer of the Slaves. In the first place he caus'd all those who demanded the Money he had given for the young Woman to be scourg'd, and then cut off their Heads. Then he entred the
next Towns with his arm'd Slaves, and those that came readily to join with him, he furnish'd with Arms, and kill'd all that oppos'd him. Having in a short time got together above 700, he divided them into . Company con∣sisting of 100  of which the Captain was called a . Companies; and then Fortifying and Intrenching himself, he receiv'd all the Slaves that ran away from their Masters. The Rebellion be∣ing nois'd at Rome, the Senate (by the help of prudent advice) gave a stop to the mis∣chief, and happily supprest it. The care and management of the business for the reducing and punishing of the fugi∣tive Slaves was committed to Lucius Lucullus, who was the only General that was then in the City, who rais'd 600 Men in Rome, and with them the same day march'd to Capua, where he listed 4000 Foot, and 400 Horse. When Minutius heard with what speed Lu∣cullus was making towards him, he possess'd himself of a strong Hill, having with him 3500 Men. In the first Engagement the Fugitives by the advantage of the higher Ground got the better, afterwards Lucullus brib'd Apollonius Minutius his General, to betray his Confederates; withall promising him upon the security of the publick Faith, that he should have his pardon. Whereupon he set upon the Work, and seizing of Minutius, he (to avoid the punishment he fear'd for his Rebellion) ran himself through the Body; the rest were all presently cut off except Apellonius: And these were Prologues to that great Defection in Sicily, whose beginning was thus occasion'd: In the expedition of Marius a∣gainst the Cimbrians, the Senate had given a Commission to raise Men out of the Coun∣tries beyond the Seas; to which end Marius sent Ambassadors to Nicomedes King of Bi∣thynia to help him with some Men. But he return'd answer that most of the Bithynians were violently taken away for Slaves by the Publicans, and were dispers'd here and there through the Provinces. Upon which the Senate decreed, That no Freeman belonging to any of the Roman Allies should in any Province be forc'd to be Servants or Slaves, and that the Proconsuls should take care to see them all set free. In pursuance of this Order Licinius Nerva then Praetor in Sicily (having first consulted with the Judges) manumitted so many, as that in a few days above 800 were set at Liberty. So that all the Slaves in Sicily were hereby presently incourag'd, and grew high Crested in hopes of liberty. The Magistrates therefore address'd themselves to the Praetor or Proconsul, and desir'd him to forbear making any more free. Hereupon he (whether brib'd or to curry favour) laid aside the former determination of the Judges, and with checks and foul words, sent them that came to him to be made free back to their Masters. Upon this the Servants enter'd into a Conspiracy; and after they came from Syracuse, and were got together at the grove of Palicum, they consulted concerning their intended Rebellion. This boldness of the Slaves began to make a noise in many places of the Island: Amongst others 30 Servants of two rich Brothers in the Countrey of the Anycillians were the first that appear'd for their liberty, whose Leader was one Varius. These in the first place kill'd their Masters, when they were asleep in their Beds. Then away they went to the next Towns, and Varius the be∣ginner of ano∣ther defection in Sicily. stirr'd up all the Servants and Slaves there to appear for the gaining of their liberty, of whom came in flocking to them in that one Night, to the number of 120 and upwards. Upon this they possess'd themselves of a place naturally strong of it self, which they en∣deavour'd to make stronger by art and labour, where 80 more well armed came in to them. Licinius Nerva hastens out against them with a purpose to put a stop to their Ravages, but all his labour was in vain. Seeing therefore that the Place was not to be taken by force, he sought how to gain it by Treachery: For he had private Correspon∣dence with one Caius Titinius sirnam'd Gadaeus, whom he wrought upon to be the Instru∣ment of accomplishing his design, promising him safety and protection. This Man had been condemn'd to dye two Years before, but had made an escape, and had Robb'd and Murther'd many Freemen in that Province, but never in the least injur'd any Servant. Titinius with a great Body of Slaves came to this Fort where the Rebels had posted them∣selves, as if he design'd to join with them in making War upon the Romans: Who being willingly and kindly receiv'd by them, and for his Valour made their General, he at length betray'd the Fort, upon which some of the Rebels were kill'd in Fight, and the lest out of fear of what they should suffer, if they were taken Prisoners, threw themselves down headlong from the top of the Rock. And in this manner was the first rising of the Slaves supprest. But the Soldiers were no sooner got to their Quarters, but news was brought that a∣bout 80 Slaves had caus'd a Tumult to be rais'd, and had cut the Throat of Publius Cloni¦us a Roman Knight, and that now their number was much increas'd. And to aggravate the matter the Praetor being ill advis'd, had disbanded most of his Army, by reason whereof he was so slow, that he gave time to the Rebels the more to strengthen them∣selves. However he march'd out against them, with those he then had. As soon as
he pass'd the River Alba he turn'd aside from the Fugitives, who were then lodg'd upon Mount Caprianus, and arrived at Heraclea. Upon this, a Report being spread of the Cowardice of the General as if he durst not attack them, very many Slaves were encou∣raged to join in the Defection: Many therefore flocking in (furnishing themselves as well as they could for a Battel) there were above 800 in Seven days time that took up Arms. And presently after they amounted to 2000. But the General at Heraclea being inform'd that their number was increasing, sent Marcus Titinius as chief Commander a∣gainst them, inforcing him with 600 Men out of the Forts at Enna. This Titinius fought the Rebels, who (having the advantage both of Place and Number) routed him and kill'd many of his Men, and the rest threw away their Arms, and with much difficulty saved themselves by flight. By this means the Runagades on a sudden got such a great number of Arms, that they were more firmly resolved to persist in their Rebellion, so that now most of the Slaves were in Arms. The Defection every day increasing, the Number amounted in a short time so high, as none ever suspected it could, insomuch that within a few Days they were above 6000; who having now call'd a Council of War, and debated Matters in reference to the Management of Affairs, in the first place they chose a King call'd Salvius, a Fortune-teller, and one that in the Womens Sports and Shews with his Pipes, acted the Part of a Fool and Madman. But having now gain'd a Kingdom, he wav'd living in Cities, as being the Nurseries of Sloth and Effeminateness. After, he divided the Army into three Bodies; over each of which he appointed a Cap∣tain, and order'd them to make Inroads up and down in the Country, and at a certain Time and Place all to join again in one Body. By these Depredations they were so full of Horses and other Cattel, that in a short time they had above 2000 Horse, and no less than 20000 Foot, but Men very Raw and Ignorant in Martial Affairs. Among other attempts they fell upon Morgantina with great Fury (which was a strong and well-for∣tify'd City) and made many fierce and continual Assaults upon it. The Roman General marching out in the Night as if he would relieve the City (ha∣ving with him about 10000 Men out of Italy and Sicily) surpriz'd the Rebels (busily employ'd in the Siege) on a sudden; and breaking into their Camp, found but slender Guards but a great number of Prisoners, and abundance of Plunder of all sorts, and with great ease made himself Master of all, and when he had rifled the Camp he march'd a∣way towards Morgantina: But the Rebels turning back upon him with great Fury, and having the advantage of the higher Ground, soon routed him, and put all his Army to flight. Whereupon the Rebells King commanded Proclamation to be made, That none should be kill'd who threw away their Arms: Upon which most cast them away and fled. By this means Salvius both recover'd what he had lost in his Camp, and gain'd a glorious Victory and much Spoil; but there were not kill'd of the Italians and Sicilians above 600 (which was occasion'd by the Moderation of the King) but 4000 were taken Priso∣ners. Upon this Victory many coming in flocking to Salvius, his Army became double to what it was before, and he was now absolute Master of the Field, so that he again sat down before Morgantina, and proclaim'd Liberty to all the Servants that were there. But their Masters promising the same to them, if they would be Faithful and join with them in the Defence of the Place, they chose rather to accept of what was offer'd by their Masters, and fought with that Resolution, that they forced the Enemy to raise their Siege. But the General afterwards making void all that was promised (as to manumitting of the Servants) occasion'd many to run away to the Rebels. After this all the Slaves and Ser∣vants Olymp. 169. 1. Ant. Ch. 103. Florus lib. 3. c. 19. in the Territories of Aegista Lilybaeum were likewise infected with this Itch of Re∣bellion, whose Leader was one Athenio, a Valiant Man and a Cilicean. This Man having the Charge and Management of the Concerns of two rich Brothers, and being an Excellent Astrologer; He first wrought upon those to join with him, over whom he had some sort of Command, to the Number of 200; afterwards those that were bordering round a∣bout, so that in Five days time there were got together above 1000 who made him King, and plac'd the Diadem upon his Head. This Man resolv'd to order Matters and Affairs so as never any did before him: For he receiv'd not all promiscuously that came in to him, but only such as were of strong and healthful Bodies to bear Arms; the rest he forc'd to continue in the Stations they were in, and every one in his place diligently to apply himself to the Duty incumbent upon him. By which means those that were with him had plentiful Provision. He pretended that by the Stars the Gods foretold, That he should gain the whole Kingdom of Sicily: And therefore he was to spare spoiling of the Coun∣try, destruction of the Cattel and Fruits of the Earth, as being all his own. At length having now got together above 10000 Men, he was so daring as to besiege Lilybeum, a City for strength look'd upon to be impregnable. But finding it a vain thing to proceed, he de∣sisted
from his Design, pretending he did it by Command from the Gods, by whom he was told, That if they continu'd the Siege, they would certainly fall into some sudden Misfortune. Accordingly, while he was preparing to draw off from the City, a Fleet of Moors entred the Harbour, who were sent to the Assistance of them of Lilybeum, under the Com∣mand of one call'd Gomon, who in the Night surprizing Athenio's Army, (now marching off and leaving the Siege) kill'd a great number of them, and wounded as many, and so got into the Town. This was the occasion that his former Prediction was highly admir'd and cry'd up by the Rebells. At the same time great Disorders, . A Proverb, for all Kinds of Miseries. and all sorts of Calamities overspread all Sicily. For not only Servants but Freemen that were reduc'd to Poverty, committed all sorts of Ra∣pines and acts of Wickedness: For they shamefully kill'd all before them, whether Bond or Free, that none might be left to tell Tales; so that they that were in the Cities scarce enjoy'd any thing that was their own, though it were with them within the Walls: But as for that which was without, all was swallow'd up and violently seiz'd on, as a Prey taken from a Common Enemy. Many other things against all the Laws of Humanity were impudently committed by many throughout all Sicily. Salvius likewise, he who had besieg'd Morgantina, after he had harrass'd all the Coun∣try, as far as to the Territories of Leontium, there mustered his Army, consisting of a∣bove 30000 Fighting Men. Then Sacrificing to the Heroes of Italy, he Dedicated one of the Royal Purple Robes, in gratitude for his Victories. And now he caus'd himself to be proclaim'd King, and was call'd by the Rebells Or Trophon, rather an anci∣ent Soothsayer, who liv'd in a Cave, into which whosoe∣ver descended, he never laught afterwards. Tryphon; having a design to pos∣sess himself of Tricala, and there to build a Palace, he sent to Athenio, and as King com∣manded him as General to repair to him. Every Man then thought that Athenio would endeavour to gain the Sovereignty for himself, and by that means the Rebels would be divided, and so a speedy period would be put to the War. But Fortune so order'd the Matter, that the Armies of the Fugitives being thus increas'd, the two Generals were Unanimous, and agreed very well one with another. For Tryphon march'd speedily with his Army to Tricala, and Athenio came thither to him with 3000 Men, in every thing ob∣serving the Commands of Tryphon as his King. Athenio had sent the rest abroad to harrass and spoil the Country, and to bring over as many as they could to join with them in the Defection. But not long after, Tryphon suspected that Athenio had a design to sup∣plant him, and therefore he caus'd him to be seiz'd betime. The The Castle at Tricala. Castle that was well fortify'd before, he made more strong, and adorn'd it likewise with many stately Build∣ings. After which (they say) it was call'd . Tricala, because it was Remarkable and Fa∣mous for three things, First for Springs of excellent sweet Water. Secondly for Vine∣yards, and Olive yards, and rich Lands for Tillage. And Thirdly, That it was a Place impregnable, built upon an high and inaccessible Rock. After he had drawn a Line of eight Stages round about it for the building of a City, and had compass'd it in with a deep Trench, he made it the Seat-Royal, being a Place abounding in Plenty and Fatness of all things necessary for Man's Life. He likewise built there a stately Palace and a Market-place, capable to receive a vast Number of Men. He chose likewise a competent Num∣ber of the most prudent Men to be of his Council, and made use of them for Admini∣stration of Justice. Moreover, whenever he sate in the Courts of Justice, he put on a The Roman Toga Praetex∣ta, which was White. long Gown edg'd with Purple, and a The Coat was the Roman Tu∣nick, Embroi∣dred with large Studs of Gold or Purple, called Nails, and the Garment Tu∣nica laticle∣via. Olymp. 169. 3. Ant. Ch. 102. Coat pouder'd with large Studds of Purple. Lastly, He appointed Lictors with Rods and Axes to go before him, and took care that all other Ensigns and Badges of Royalty should be observed. At length Lucius Licinius Lucullus was chosen General by the Senate at Rome to go against the Rebels, who had with him 14000 Romans and Italians, 1800 Bithynians, Thessalians, and Acharnans; and out of Lucania 600 under the Command of one Cleptius, an Expert and Valiant Soldier, and 600 from other Places, in the whole amounting to 17000. With this Army he entred Sicily. Upon this Tryphon releas'd Athenio, and advis'd with him how to manage the War against the Romans. Tryphon was of Opinion, that it was the safest way to continue in Tricala, and there expect the Enemy: But Athenio advis'd rather to draw out and fight in the open Field, than to suffer themselves to be besieg'd; whose Counsel prevailing, they march'd out and Encamp'd near Scirthaea, with no fewer than 40000 Men, twelve Furlongs distant from the Roman Camp. At first the Armies em∣ploy'd themselves every day in light Skirmishes; but at length they Engag'd, and while Victory seem'd to incline sometime to one side, and sometime to another, and many fell on both sides. Athenio came on with 200 choice Horse, and cover'd the Ground round about him with the Bodies of his Enemies. But being wounded in both his Knees, and
then receiving a Third, he was wholly disabled for Fight, which so discouraged the Re∣bels, that they fled outright. Athenio lay conceal'd, as if he were Dead, and feign'd himself so till Night came, and then stole away. The Romans having now gain'd a glo∣rious Victory, forc'd Tryphoh himself to take to his heels, and in the pursuit kill'd at least 20000 Men. The rest by the advantage of the Night got to Tricala, though the Gene∣ral might easily have cut them all off, if he would have continu'd the Pursuit. Upon this rout they were now all so discourag'd, that it was mov'd amongst them that they should return to their Masters, and submit themselves wholly to their Power and Pleasure: But those who advis'd to stand it out to the last, and not to give up their Lives to the Lusts of their Enemies, prevail'd above the other. Nine days after the Roman General besieg'd Tricala, but after several slaughters on both sides he was forc'd to draw off and leave the Place. Upon this the Rebels got heart, and the General on the other side (either through Sloath and Negligence, or Corrupted by Bribes) minded nothing to the Discharge of his Duty, for which afterwards he gave an account to the Romans. Neither did Caius Servilius, who succeeded Lucullus, do any thing worth remembring, and therefore he was brought to Judgment (as Lucullus was be∣fore) and banish'd. In the mean time Tryphon dy'd, and Athenio enjoy'd the Kingdom. And what with taking of Cities, and wasting and spoiling the Country (without Con∣troul or any Opposition from Servilius) he got together a great deal of rich Booty and Plunder. But the year after Caius Marius being chosen at Rome the Fifth time Consul, and with him Marcus A∣quilius. Caius Aquillius; Aquillius was made General against the Rebels, and his Va∣lour so far advanc'd his Success, that he wholly overcame them in a great Battel: And like an Heroe fought Hand to Hand with Athenio the King of the Rebels, and kill'd him, but receiv'd himself a wound in the Head. And now he resolv'd to prosecute the War against the rest that remain'd who were about 10000, who though they fled to their Defences, (as not being able to stand before him) yet Aquillius slacken'd not his Resolution in the least, but pursu'd his design till he had wholly broke them. There remain'd now only 1000 led by Satyrus, whom at first he determin'd to reduce by Force: But when they made their Submission by their Commissioners, for the present he remitted their Faults, but after they were brought Prisoners to Rome he order'd them to fight with wild Beasts, where it's reported that they ended their Lives with great gallantry and noble∣ness of Mind, for they scorn'd to fight with Beasts, but thrust one another through at the publick Altars: And after all were dead, Satyrus being the last, with an Heroick Spi∣rit kill'd himself. And this was the Tragical End of the Servants War, after it had conti∣nu'd almost Four years. Out of the same BOOK. Eclog. 2. ONE Battaces, Priest of the Goddess This Rhea is said to be the Mother of the Gods. Rhea (they say) came to Rome from Pesinunte a City of Phrygia; who declar'd he came thither by the Com¦mand of the Goddess; and told the Magistrates and Senate, that their Temple was pro∣phan'd, and that a publick Expiation ought to be made in the name of the Romans. His Habit and other Ornaments of his Body was very strange, and altogether unusual at Rome; for he wore a Crown or Mitre of a vast Bigness, and a Flower'd Gown imbroi∣der'd with Gold, representing the State and Dignity of a King. After he had spoken to the People from the Bench, and instructed them in the Matters of Religion, he was ho∣nour'd with publick Entertainments, and large Gifts and Presents: But he was forbid to wear a Crown by Aulus Pompeius a Tribune of the People. However, being brought by another Tribune to the Desk, and being ask'd how the Expiatory Sacrifices should be made; his Answers were stuff'd with nothing but Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies. At length things were so manag'd that he was driven out by Pompeius his Faction, with many Scorns and Affronts; upon which he went to his Inn and never after appear'd a∣broad: But only told them, that not only he was disgrac'd, but the Goddess was re∣proach'd and dishonour'd. Presently after Pompeius fell into an high Feaver, and then a . Cynanchino Morbo, Or a Dog's Disease. Quinsie which took away his Speech, and he dy'd the Third day. Upon which it was the common Discourse and Sentiment amongst the ordinary sort, that he was thus punish'd by a Divine Hand, for his prophane and impious abuse of the Goddess and her Priest. For the Romans are addicted to Superstition much above many other Nations: And therefore Battaces being honour'd with many Presents, and Liberty granted to him to wear his Sacred Vestments, with all their Ornaments, the day he had design'd for his departure, he was conducted by multitudes both of Men and Women out of the City.
Out of the same Book. Eclog. 3. IT was a Custom amongst the Roman Soldiers, That if any Commander of an Army fought a Battle and kill'd above 6000 of the Enemy, he was term'd . Emperor, which is the same with . King among the Grecians. Fragment, Lib. 37. Ecloga Prima. THE Marsian War took its name from the Authors of the Defection, tho' the Itali∣ans The Confederate War of the Marsi. Olymp. 172. 2. Ant. Ch. 89. generally made this War upon the Romans. It's said the first occasion of this arose from the profuseness and luxury the Romans were fall'n into, who were formerly fru∣gal and sparing in their way of living. This alteration caus'd great Heart-burnings be∣tween the Commonalty and the Senate. For when the Senate prevail'd with the Italians to supply the City with Provisions, and upon their frequent Addresses had promis'd to en∣franchise them, and make them Freemen of Rome, and to ratify it by a Law, and the Ita∣lians saw nothing perform'd that was promis'd; these were the sparks that at length broke forth into a flame at the time when Lucius Martius, Philippus and Julius Cae∣sar Gr. 170. Olymp. Others say 172. Sextus Julius were Consuls in the 117th Olympiad. Many were the Slaughters, Sieges, and Sacking of Towns on both sides during this War, Victory hovering sometimes here and sometimes there, as uncertain where to fall, giving no assurance to either party, which of them she favour'd. But at length after the shedding of much Blood, the Romans (with much ado) got the better, and regain'd their former Power and Sovereignty. There were engag'd against them in this War the Samnites, the Asculans, Lucanans, Picentians, them of Still being 14 Miles from Naples. Nola, and other Cities and Nati∣ons. Amongst which was Cortinium in Italy a City of the Peligni, now call'd Pi∣enza under the Duke of Flo∣rence. Cortinum a large and famous City greatly frequented, in which the Italians had a little before planted a Colony. Here were all things necessary for the support and defence of so great a City, and the maintenance of the Government; par∣ticularly a large Market-place and Court-House, with a vast Treasure, and plentiful Pro∣visions of all sorts. They had likewise a Senate consisting of 500 Men. Out of which were chosen those reputed fit to execute the highest places of Magistracy, and to man∣age the weighty Affairs of the Commonwealth. These therefore they entrusted with the management of the War, and put the absolute power of the disposing of all their con∣cerns into the hands of the Senators, who made a Law that Two Consuls should be chosen every year, and Twelve Generals. At which time Quintus Pompoedius Silo a Mar∣sian, (a Man of chiefest quality in his Country,) and Caius Aponius Motulus (famous for his noble Acts above the rest of his own Nation.) were chosen Consuls. They di∣vided all Italy into Two Parts, and took either of their equal shares for the executing of their Consular Authority. They allotted the Region or Tract from the Cercoli (so call'd) to the Adriatick Sea, which lay to the North and West to Pompaedius, to six of the Ge∣nerals. The rest which lay to the South and East the Italians assign'd to Motulus, with as many more of the Military Officers. Having put all things into this good Order, and (to sum up all) having order'd all things according to the ancient Model of the Ro∣man Government, they set themselves more intently and earnestly to the prosecuting of the War, and call'd the City it self Italy. And they were so successful, that they came off Conquerors for the most part, till Cneius Pompeius was made Consul and General, Pompey. who with Sylla (deputed by Cato the other Consul) often routed them, and reduc'd them to those straits, that at length their Power was broken in pieces. However they An Isthmus in Italy call'd Calabria. still continu'd the War, but were often worsted by Caius Cossinius General in * Japygia. Being therefore distress'd and harass'd with so many and great mischiefs one upon the neck of another (and the Marsians and other Nations falling to the Romans) they for∣sook their new City, and transplanted themselves to Aesernia a City of the Samnites, un∣der the conduct of Five Generals; of whom they made Quintus Pompoedius Chief, for his Valour and prudent management of the War, who with the consent of all the other Captains, rais'd a great Army, which with the old Soldiers amounted to the number of 30000. And besides, he got together at least 20000 Foot, and 1000 Horse of manu∣mitted Slaves, and Arm'd them as well as the time would allow. And coming to an En∣gagement with the Romans, whose General was Mamercus; he kill'd a few of them, but lost above 6000 of his own Men.
About the same time Metellus took the famous City Venusia in Apulia, which had in it a great number of Soldiers, and carry'd away above 3000 prisoners. And now the Romans prevail'd every day more and more against their Enemies: So that the Italians sent Ambassadors to Mithridates King of Pontus (who had then a brave and well ap∣pointed Army) to intreat him to march into Italy with his Army to oppose the Romans, by which means (they told him) that their Power would be easily broken: Mithridates answer'd, that he would march into Italy as soon as he had subdu'd Asia, in order to which he was then engag'd. The Rebels therefore being now frustrated in their hopes of Assistance, and of supplies of Money, were greatly discourag'd. For there were but a few of the Samnites remaining: and the Sabellians kept themselves close within Nola, and the like did Lamponius and Cleptius, who commanded those that were left of the Lu∣canians. The Marsian War being now almost at an end, there arose again a great Sedition in Rome, by reason of the contentious Ambition of many of the Roman Nobility, every one striving which should be General in the Expedition against Mithridates, stirr'd up there∣unto with the Greatness of the Rewards and Riches to be reap'd by that War. For Caius Julius, and Caius Marius who had been Six times Consul, oppos'd one another, and the People on that occasion were divided, some for one and some for the other. There were likewise other disturbances about the same time. For Sylla the Consul went from Rome to the Forces that lay near unto Nola, and so terrify'd many of the bordering Ter∣ritories, with their Cities, that he forc'd them to the obedience of the Romans. But when Sylla was engag'd in the War in Asia against Mithridates, and Rome was fill'd with slaugh∣ters and intestine broils, Marcus Aponius and Tiberius Cleptius Generals of those Italians that were left continuing in Brutia (not being able to take the strong City Aesias, after a long time they had lain before it) left part of their Army to maintain the Siege, and with the rest fiercely assaulted Rhegium, in hopes that if they gain'd this place, they might with ease transport their Army into Sicily, and so become Masters of the richest Island under the Sun. But Caius Urbanus the Governor of Rhegium so terrify'd the Italiots with the greatness of his Army, and his vast preparations, that they drew off from the Siege, and so the Rhegians were delivered. And afterwards when the Civil Wars broke forth between Marius and Sylla, part of them sided with Marius and the rest with Scylla, and most of them were kill'd in the War, and those that surviv'd all joyn'd with the Conqueror Scylla. And thus ended the Marsian War, and the greatest home-bred Sedition of any that was ever before among the Romans. Eclog. 2. And now that the Marsian War was at an end, a Second great Sedition was rais'd The War be∣tween Sylia and Marius. Olymp. 174. Ant. Ch. 80. Or rather Aphroditus. Beautiful. in Rome, stirr'd up by Sylla, and Caius Marius a young Man, the Son of Marius who had been Seven times Consul. In this Commotion many thousands of Men perish'd: At length Sylla prevail'd, and being created Dictator, he call'd himself Epaphroditus; which vain glo∣rious Title did not altogether deceive him, for he prosper'd all his life long, and dy'd a natural death after all his Victories. But Marius, altho' he behav'd himself with great Gal∣lantry in the War against Sylla, being at length routed, fled with 15000 Men to Proe∣neste, where he was Besieg'd a long time; at length all having forsaken him, and seeing no way how to escape, he earnestly intreated one of his faithful Servants to afford him his helping hand for the extricating him out of the present dangers and mischiefs that sur∣rounded him. After much persuasion the Servant at one stroke put an end to his Ma∣sters Life, and then immediately kill'd himself. And so at length ended this Civil War. However, some relicks of it still gave Scylla disturbance for some time till those that pur∣su'd it, with some others, were suppress'd. But after these were all ruin'd and destroy'd, there broke out such a flame of Discord The War be∣tween Caesar and Pompey, which conti∣nu'd Four years, Olymp. 182. Ant. Ch. 47. between Julius Caesar and Pompey who (for the great and eminent Services he had done for the Romans, partly by the Conduct of Sylla, and partly by his own Valour) was sirnam'd the Great, that the Romans were again involv'd in intestine Slaughters and Butcheries. And as soon as Pompey had lost all his Army in a great Battle, he himself was afterwards Murther'd near Alexandria: and the unbounded power of the Consuls, being at length restrain'd and limited, fell wholly into the hands of Caesar himself, and so ended the Sedition. But when he was murther'd, another Civil War broke forth against Brutus and Cassius his Murtherers, which was manag'd by the Consuls Lepidus Antonius, and Octavius Augu∣stus. When this War was ended by dint of Sword, and the deaths of Cassius and Brutus, not long after the secret and private grudges and quarrels between Augustus and Anthony for the Supream Power, broke out into an open War: And after much Blood spilt on
both sides, Augustus gain'd the Empire, which he held during his Life, having now wav'd Augustus Emperor. his Consular Power and Dignity. Out of the 38th. BOOK. CINNA and Marius, calling together a Council of the Chiefest of the Officers This was long before in time, and therefore comes in here with relation to some other Matter before related, but now lost. For this Sedition was in 173. Olymp. Ant. Ch. 86 consulted what ways and methods were best to take for the better settling and con∣firming of the Peace. At length they resolv'd to put to death the greatest persons of qua∣lity that were their Enemies, and who were most capable to make a disturbance and over∣turn all their Affairs, that so the Factious Party being purg'd out from among them, they and their Friends might Govern all things for the future with more security, according to their own Will and Pleasure. Upon this forthwith all regard to former Leagues and Articles were wholly laid aside: Persons were proscrib'd and butcher'd in every place, without being heard. At that time Quintus Lutatus Catullus who had had a glorious Tri∣umph for his Victory over the Danes. Cimbri, and had more than an ordinary share in the Af∣fections of the People, was accus'd by a Tribune of the People for a Capital Offence, who fearing the imminent hazard of the Calumny, made his application to Marius, to in∣treat him to interpose for his deliverance (for he had been his Friend formerly, but through some suspicion he then had of him he was become his Enemy;) But he an∣swer'd him thus, Dy you must. Upon this, Catullus perceiving there was no hopes of his preservation, studied how to dye without disgrace; to which end he destroy'd himself by a strange and unusual way: For he shut himself up in a House new plaister'd, and caus'd a Fire to be kindled, by the smoak of which, and the moist vapours from the Lime, he was there stifled to death. Out of the 40th BOOK. WE being about to write of the War against the Jews, we take it to be part of our Province, before we proceed further; First, in short to Declare the Ori∣ginal The Nation of the Jews. of this Nation, and their Laws. In Ancient times there hapned a great Plague in Aegypt, and many ascrib'd the cause of it to GOD, who was offended with them. For there being multitudes of Strangers of several Nations who inhabited there, who us'd their Foreign Rites and Ceremonies in the Administration of the Publick Sacrifices, the Ancient manner of worshipping of the Gods, us'd by the Ancestors of the Aegypti∣ans, was quite lost and forgotten. Hence it was that the natural Inhabitants concluded, that unless all the Strangers were driven out, they should never be freed from their Mi∣series. Upon which they were all expell'd, and the most Valiant and Noble among them, under the Conduct of skilful Commanders (as some relate) after many great hardships came into Greece and other places, of whom amongst other Leaders, the most famous and remarkable were Danaus and Cadinus. But the greatest part of the People came into that Country, which is now call'd Judea, not far from Aegypt, and at that time altogether Desart and uninhabited. The Leader of this Colony was one Moses, a very wise and valiant Man, who after he had possess'd himself of the Country, amongst other Cities built that now most Famous City Jerusalem; and the Temple there, which is so great∣ly Reverenc'd among them. He then instituted the manner of GOD's Worship, and the Holy Rites and Ceremonies: and made Laws for the Government of the Common-wealth, and reduc'd them into a methodical Order. He divided the People into Twelve Tribes, as the most perfect number, as he conceiv'd; because answering the Twelve Months, which make up the whole Year: But he made no Representation or Image of the Gods, because he judg'd nothing of an Human Shape was applicable to GOD: But that this Heaven, which compass'd the Earth round, only was GOD, and that all things were in its power. But he so order'd the Rites and Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, and the manner and Rule of their Conversations, as that they should be whol∣ly different from all other Nations. For (by reason of the Expulsion of his People) he commanded a most inhumane and unsociable Conversation. He pickt out likewise the greatest Persons of quality who were best able to Rule and Govern the People (then embodied into one Nation,) and them he created Priests; whose Duty and Office was continually to attend the Temple, and employ themselves in the publick Worship and
Service of God. He constituted them likewise to be Judges for the decision of the most weighty Causes, and committed to their Care the keeping and preservation of the Laws. Therefore they say that the Jews never had any King: but that the Care and Authori∣ty of Governing the People was always given to him, who excell'd the rest of the Priests in Prudence and Virtue, whom they call the Chief Priest: and him they always took to be the Messenger, and Interpreter to them of the Mind and Commands of GOD. And they say that he in all their Publick Assemblies and other Meetings, declares what he has in Command, and that upon that account the Jews are so observant, that forthwith they prostrate themselves upon the ground, and Adore him as the High Priest, and Inter∣preter to them of the Oracles of GOD. But in the close of the Laws this is subjoin'd, Moses the Or who heard these thing from God. Messenger of God thus saith to the Jews. This Law-giver likewise laid down ma∣ny prudent and excellent Rules and Instructions for Martial Affairs, and inur'd the Youth to endure hardship and difficulties, and to exercise Patience in all Miseries and Distres∣ses. Moreover, he undertook many Wars against the neighbouring Nations, and gain'd many large Territories by force of Arms, and gave them as an Inheritance to his Coun∣trymen, in such manner, as that every one shar'd alike, saving the Priests who had a lar∣ger proportion than the rest, that having more, they might continualy attend upon the publick Worship of GOD without distraction. Neither was it lawful for any Man to sell his Inheritance allotted him, lest by the Covetousness of them that buy, others should become poor, and so the Nation should be depopulated. He order'd likewise the Inha∣bitants to be careful in the Educating of their Children, who are brought up with very little Cost and Charge, and by that means the Jewish Nation was always populous. Lastly, as to their Marriages and Funerals, he appointed them Laws much different from all other People. But under the Empires that have risen up in these latter Ages, especially in the Fourth Monarchy of the Persians, and in the time of the Macedonian Empire, which overturn'd the former: (through mixture with Foreign Nations) many of the Ancient Laws and Customs among the Jews, have been chang'd and grown obsolete.
Henry Valesius HIS FRAGMENTS OUT OF The 6th, 21st, 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th, 26th, 34th, 36th, and 37th lost Books OF Diodorus Siculus, By him Published in the Year MDCXXXIV. Now Translated, and Compar'd with the Greek. LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in Pater-Noster-Row: 1699.
To the READER. THese Fragments of Diodorus the Sicilian, were first Collected by Constantine the Seventh, one of the Eastern Emperors, the Son of Leo the Sixth. He began to Reign about the Year of our Lord 911. He got together from all parts, Books of all sorts of Learning, in order to make up a compleat Library. Out of the several Authors he Collected such Observations as were most remarkable, and Marshall'd each of them that concern'd one and the same sub∣ject, under their several and proper Heads. The Heads or common Places of his Historical Collections were Fifty three in Number; and made up a Hundred and Six Volumns. For every Head, he divided into two Books; in the first of which was contain'd what was said of that particular subject by the most Ancient Authors, or such as writ Universal Histories from the begining of Time: In the second are Collections out of those Authors that writ of the Acts and Affairs past, in the time of the Cae∣sars. That common Place wherein are these Fragments of Diodorus, is one of the Fifty three, and is Titled thus, viz. . Of Virtues and Vices. It was brought out of Cyprus to Paris by Nicholas Fabricius, not long before the Fragments were Pub∣lish'd by Valesius, as appears in his Epistle dedicated to Fabricius himself, and in that to the Reader. The rest of the Fifty three Heads of this Emperor, are lost, save only one, which is Intituled thus, viz. Of Embassies, divided into two Volumns. The De Legati∣onibus. first publish'd by Fulvius Ursinus, where Collections are again made out of Diodorus the Sicilian, and the other by David Hoeschelius. This account of the preservation of these Fragments, and how they came to light, I conceiv'd was needful to satisfie the Reader, to the end he may be assur'd, he is not impos'd upon by any thing in this Kind that is Fictitious and Spurious. Fragments out of the History of Diodorus the Sicilian, publish'd by Henry Valesius. The 6th Book. CAstor and Pollux, who were also call'd Dioscuri, are said to be Eminent above others for Valour, and remarkable in their Assistance in the Expedition with the Argonauts, Castor and Pollux, two of the Captains, with the Argo∣nauts An. M. 2714. in the time of Abi∣melech. and afforded considerable help to them that were but otherwise very weak; and to speak all in sum, they gain'd in all places exceeding honour and reputation for their Valour, Justice, Piety and Martial skill and discipline, and were ready in all hazards with them that were most forward, and therefore for the eminency of their Valour, were re∣puted the Sons of Jupiter, and after their deaths, were honour'd with Divine honours. Epopeus King of Sicyon, challenging the Gods to a Combat, to that end destroy'd their Temples and Altars. 3 Sicyphus is said for craft and subtilty to excel all others, and by looking into the intrals of Beasts, declar'd future Events. 4 King of Elis. Salmoneus was Proud and Prophane, contemn'd the Gods, and preferr'd his own, above the acts of Jupiter himself, and therefore out of an A brazen Bridge, over which he drave a Chariot to imitate Thun∣der. Virg. Ened. Lib. 6. Engine which sent forth a mighty sound, he us'd to Thunder, and never offer'd any Sacrifices, or observ'd any solemn Festivals to the Gods. 5 Tyro (they say) was Salmeneus his Daughter, who was so call'd from her Beauty and Comeliness of her Person. 6 Admetus for his Justice and Piety, was so approv'd and belov'd of the Gods, that when Apollo fell into the displeasure of Jupiter, he was order'd to be a Servant to Ad∣metus. They say likewise, that Alcestes the Daughter of Pelias, who was the only Daughter that was Innocent, as to the Murther of her Father, for her Piety was Marry'd to Admetus. 7 Melampus was belov'd by Apollo, for his eminent Virtues and Piety.
8. When Troy was entred and taken, Aeneas with some other of the Citizens posses∣sed Aeneas, An. M. 2764. Helv, in time of Ebzan, 7 Jud. 12. 9. The destruction of Troy. Ush. Ann. says in 2820, in the time of Jeptha was next before Eb∣zan, before Ch. 1184. 408 Years be∣fore the first Olymp. Romulus Sil∣vius. himself of part of the City, and defended it bravely and valiantly against the assaults of the Enemy. When the Greeks upon the terms made, agreed that each of them should carry away with them as much of their Goods as they could, all of them but Aeneas, took away Gold and Silver, and what ever else of such kind was esteem'd pretious and valu∣able; but he carry'd away only his old Father upon his shoulders: At which the Grecians did so admire, that they gave him liberty to make choice of what part of his Wealth, and his houshold Goods he pleas'd; upon which, taking only his houshold Gods; the Virtue and Piety of the Man caus'd them to admire much more than before; for they perceiv'd that in the height of his dangers and troubles, his chiefest care was to discharge his duty to his Father, and his due and pious regards to the Gods: And therefore they say that both he, and the rest of the Trojans that remain'd, had liberty given them, with all assurance of safe passage to go from Troy, to what place soever they pleas'd. 9. Romulus Silvius was exceeding Proud all the days of his Life, and a contemner of the Gods. When Jupiter thundred, he us'd to Command his Soldiers upon a sign given, all at once to strike upon their shields with their Swords, and vaunted that it was a greater noise than the other, and therefore he was struck dead with a Thunder-bolt. 10. About this time, one Malachus became King of the City Cuma, by ingratiating Malachus. himself with the common People, and accusing and calumniating great Men: For after∣wards putting to death, the richest of the Citizens, he seiz'd their Estates, and with the Wealth thus got, hir'd strong Guards, and struck a Dread and Terror into all the Cumeans. 11. Such was the eminent Virtue of Lycurgus, that once when he came to Delphos, the O∣racle Lycurgus, be∣fore Ch. 884. In the time of Jehu. saluted him with these Verses. Seek in the Fragments of Sentences. While the Lacedemonians observ'd the Laws of Lycurgus, from a mean and low con∣dition, they grew very Potent, and held the Sovereignty of Greece for above 400 Years: But when by degrees they slighted and disregarded one Law after another, and fell to Sloath and Voluptuousness, and began to heap up Money and Wealth, they lost their sovereign Authority. 12. Whereas the Eleans were full of strong and youthful Men, and had a well go∣vern'd Commonwealth, the Lacedemonians jealous of the increase of their power, en∣deavour'd Eleans. all they: could to make them Sacred, that so being at Peace, they might gain no experience in matters of War; to that end, with the consent of all the Grecians they devoted them to Jupiter, and therefore neither when Xerxes broke into Greece, were they compell'd to raise any Soldiers, but as the Priests of Jupiter, and overseers of the Games were free: Nor in the Civil Wars of the Greeks did any molest them, all endea∣vouring to preserve their Country as a City Sacred and Inviolable: But in after times, the Eleans betook themselves to Arms of their own accord. The two Brothers, Romulus and Remus being thus expos'd in a Cradle, when they Romulus Remus. grew up to Mens Estate, far excell'd their equals in strength and comeliness of their Persons; and secur'd all the Shepherds and their flocks, by freeing them from the Theeves, that us'd to make a prey of them, killing some in their attempts upon the flocks, and taking others alive: And besides the honour they wan by their Valour, they were greatly belov'd by the neighbouring Shepherds, both for their familiar converse, and their civil and courteous behaviour to all that made their addresses to them. The security Polychares. Eucephnus. This was one of the occasions of the first Messe∣nian War. See Sir Walter Rawley's His of the World. Lib. 2. 1 part, Cap. 27. Sect. 4 Began the 9. Olympiad. 2. end d 14 Olymp. 5 be∣gan and ended in the time of Hezekiah Before Christ, 741. Justin, lib. 3. Paus. lib. 4. c. 4. therefore of them all, being lodg'd in them, most submitted to them of their own ac∣cord, and were observant to their Commands, and went wheresoever they were or∣dered by them. Polychares the Messenian, a Man of noble Birth, and very rich, entred into a strict band of familiarity and friendship with Eucephnus the Spartan, who taking upon him the care and protection of the Flocks and Shepherds, began to covet what they had, but his trea∣chery was soon discovered; for having sold some Oxen together with the Herdsmen themselves, to foreign Merchants, and pretending that Robbers carry'd them away by force, it came to pass that the Merchants Sailing by the Coasts of Pelopponnesus towards Sicily, by a sudden Storm, were cast upon the Land. Hereupon the Herdsmen taking advantage of the Night, got off Shipboard, and being well acquainted with the Place, fled and made their escapes, and when they came to Messena, declar'd the whole business to their Master, whereupon Polychares hid the Herdsmen, and sent for Eucephnus from Ldemon; who, when he came, swore, and impudently stood to it, that the Shepherds and bedsmen were some of them forcibly carried away by Robbers, and the rest were kill'd, upon which Polychares forthwith brought forth the Herdsmen: At which Eucephnus was amaz'd, and thus plainly convicted of falshood, presently began to beg pardon,
and promis'd to restore all the Cattle, and us'd many words to regain his Favour. Poly∣chares therefore out of regard to the Sacred ties of Friendship, conceal'd the Fact, and sent his Son with Eucephnus to Lacedaemon to recover the Cattle: But Eucephnus disregard∣ful of his Promises, murther'd the Young man that was sent along with him to Sparta. Polychares enrag'd at this bloody Act, requir'd the Spartans to deliver up the Murtherer But the Lacedaemonians, not willing to comply with his Demands, sent the Son of Eu∣cephnus with Letters to Messena, wherein Polychares was order'd to come to Sparta, and there to abide the Judgment of the Ephori and the Kings, concerning the Matters where∣of he complain'd; but Polychares by way of  Instead of () Not obtaining Justice as some say. Vid. Notes upon Paus. L. 4. c. 4. Archias. Actaeon. This was a lit∣tle before the first Messenian War. Ant. Ch. 741. So Petavius de Rac. Tempor. c. 12. Retaliation, kill'd the Son of Eucephnus, and drove away a Prey of Cattle out of the Countrey of Sparta. 15. Archias the Corinthian falling in Love with Actaeon, first courted the Youth with Presents and fair Promises; but being not able to prevail by reason of the Honesty of the Boy's Father, and the Sobriety and Modesty of the Young man himself, he got a Com∣pany of his Friends together, resolved to do that by Force which he could not obtain by Intreaty and fair Means: Having therefore made himself drunk with those he had brought along with him, he was hurried on to that degree by his Love-passion, that he broke forceably into the House of Melissus, and took away the Boy by force; but his Father with his Houshold Servants laying hold of his Son to detain him, and both parties earnest∣ly striving to get him one from the other, the poor Child among them was pull'd in pieces, so that the sufferings of the Child, and the manner of it, occasion'd both Grief and Admiration, at one and the same time: For the Youth came to the like end with him Actaeon was torn in pieces by his own Dogs. Agathocles. that bore the same Name, both of them being destroy'd much in the same manner by those that came in to their assistance. 16. Agathocles to whom was committed the care of building of a Temple to Minerva, laid out the Money out of his own Purse; but he pick'd out the best and largest of the Stones, and built for himself a sumptuous and stately House: But the Power of the God∣dess made it self evident, in destroying Agathocles with a Thunderbolt, and burning his House; and the Geomorians confiscated his Goods, although his Heirs made it clear and evident that he had not imbezill'd any of the Sacred Treasure. They consecrated like∣wise the Carcass of his House, and made it a Place inaccessable, which is now call'd Em∣brontaeum. 17. Pompilius King of Rome, liv'd peaceably all his Days, and some say he was a hearer Numa Pom∣pilius. Ant. Ch. 712. 15 Tear of Hezek. Deioces. of Pythagoras, and that he had his Laws concerning Religion from him, and many other things which much advanc'd his Reputation, and therefore though he was a Stranger, he was sent for to take upon him the Crown. 18. Deioces King of the Medes, when all sorts of Wickedness abounded, was eminent for Justice and all other Virtues. 19. The Sybarites were addicted to Gluttony and Voluptuousness, and such was their Siberites. strife and study to be Luxurious, that they lov'd the Ionians and Thuscans above all other Strangers, because those among the Greeks, and these among the Barbarians, were most Luxurious and Effeminate. It's said; that Mindyrides was the most Voluptuous of any of the Sybarites; for when Clisthenes King of Sicyon was Victor in the Race with Chariots drawn with four Horses, and had proclaim'd by the Cryer, That whosoever would Marry his Daughter (a most beautiful Lady) should come to Sicyon at a certain Day appointed, this Mindyrides loos'd from Sibaris in a Vessel of above Fifty Oars on a side, and furnish'd Myndirites. it with Rowers out of his own Family, of whom some were Fishermen, and the rest were Or Faulkners. Fowlers; and when he came into the Haven at Sicyon, that he not only far surpass'd all his Rivals for State and Grandeur, but likewise the King himself, although the whole City for Vain-glory most profusely contributed their Wealth to Clisthenes: And being after his arrival presently entertain'd at Supper, and ask'd by one who should sit next to him, by the Voice of an Herald he caus'd it to be proclaim'd, That he would sit next to the Bride, or by himself alone. 20. Hippomenes, Archon of Athens, when his *Daughter had play'd the Whore, pu∣nish'd Hippomenes. Her name was Limone. See Ovid. Epist. in Ibis. Sola{que} Limo∣ne paenam ne senserit illam; Et tua dente ferox, viscera carpit equus. Time of Heze. 6th Year. her after a most cruel and inhumane Manner; for he shut her up in a Stable with a Horse for some days kept without Meat, which through want of Food at length eat up the miserable and unfortunate Lady. 21. Arcesilaus King of Cyrene being grievously afflicted with many pressing Calamities, consulted the Oracle at Delphos; to whom Apollo answer'd, That the Gods were angry for that none of the succeeding Kings since Battus govern'd so Justly and Righteously as he did, for he reign'd mildly and gently, content only with the Name of a King; and that which was most commendable of all was that he carefully kept and maintain'd the Worship of the Gods; but his Successors always (ever since have reign'd Tyrannically, and
converted the publick Treasure to their own private Use, and neglected the Service of Arcesilaus. the Gods. 22. Demonax of Mantinea, was the Arbitrator to allay the Sedition among the Cyreni∣ans, Demonax. a Person in great Honour and Esteem for his Wisdom and Justice. When he arriv'd * A City in Ar∣cadia. at Cyrene all their differences were referr'd to him, and he reconcil'd the Cities one to a∣nother: upon these Terms and Conditions— 23. Lucius Tarquinius King of the Romans, being carefully educated from a Child, and Lucius Tar∣quinius. much addicted to the Liberal Sciences, was much admir'd for his virtuous Qualifications by all; and therefore when he attain'd to Man's Estate, he was in great favour and much esteem with Ancus Martius then King of Rome, and together with the King, order'd and manag'd many of the weighty Affairs of the Kingdom. Being very Rich himself he liberally sup∣ply'd the wants of others, and was Courteous and Obliging to all, and therefore cry'd up greatly for his Wisdom. 24. Solon was the Son of Execestides; heb was an Athenian, and his Ancestors Inhabitants of the Island Salamis, for Wisdom and Learning he far excell'd all of his time; being Vir∣tuously Solon. Before Christ 622. In the time of Josias King of Judah. inclin'd from his Youth, he apply'd himself to the Study of the best Arts and Sciences: And having long inur'd himself to all sorts of Learning, he became the Great Master and Champion of every Virtue. For being under the care of the best Tutors from a Child, when he grew up to Man's estate he associated with such as were esteem'd the greatest Philo∣sophers; upon the account of which Converse, he was esteem'd one of the Seven Wise Men, and was not only preferr'd before all the rest, but likewise before all others that were Eminent for their Wisdom. He was in great honour for making of Laws, and admir'd by all for his singular Prndence in his private Discourses and Answers, and giving of Coun∣sel and Advice. When the Athenians grew Ionians in their Manners, and became in a high degree Luxurious and Effeminate, Solon by degrees gain'd them to the love of Virtue and Honourable Actions: For Hermodus and Aristogo, principled and instructed by his Laws and Discipline, overturn'd the Tyranny of Pisistratus. 25. There was one Myso of Malea living i a Town call'd Chenae, who lay most com∣monly Myso. in the Fields, obscure, unknown almost to every body, upon the Expelling of Pe∣riander the Corinthian for his Tyranny and Cruelty, was taken into the Society of one of the Seven Wise Men. 26. Chilo liv'd according to his Doctrine, which is a thing rare to be found: For we may see many Philosophers in our Age, who talk at a great rate, yet their Manners and Chilo, Wise Man. Course of Life are Filthy and Abominable, who look and speak like grave and wise Men, yet by their actions give themselves the Lye. But Chilo, besides his virtuous Life all his Days, conceiv'd and utter'd many excellent things worthy of Remark. 27. Pittacus of Mytelene was a Man not only to be admired for his Wisdom, but was such Pittacus, Wise Man. Flourished about the 42 Olym∣piad. a Citizen as Lesbos never before produc'd the like, nor ever like to be (as I think) any such after him▪ till it produce plenty of sweet Wine. For he was an excellent Law-maker, and Civil and Courteous towards all his Fellow-Citizens in all their Meetings and publick As∣semblies, and freed his Country from three most grievous Calamities, Tyranny, Sedition, and War. He was a most prudent and courteous Man, ever ready to excuse other * Which will never be. Men's faults; and therefore seem'd to be a Person perfectly Virtuous in every respect; for in making of Laws he was Prudent and Politick, Faithful to his Word, Valiant in War, and one that scorn'd corrupt Lucre and Gain. 28. The Prieneans say, That Bias having redeem'd from the hands of Robbers some Cap∣tive Messenian Virgins, Persons of considerable Quality, he took them into his own House, Bias, Wise Man. and honourably entertain'd them as his own Daughters: And when their Relations and Kinsdolk came to Perene to seek after them, he restor'd them to their Friends without taking any thing either for their Dyet or Redemption, but on the contrary presented them with many Gifts out of his own Estate: And therefore the Ladies lov'd him as their own Father both for his noble Entertainment, and the largeness of his Bounty; so that when they return'd home they were still mindful of his Kindness to them: And therefore when the Fishermen of Messenac drew up with their Nets nothing but a Brazen Tripode, whereon was inscrib'd these Words. . To the Wisest, they procur'd it to be given to Bias. He was the most Rhetorical and Eloquent Man in his time; but far different from all others in the use he made of his Eloquence; for he was not Mercenary, or aim'd at Gain, but us'd it for the Relief of Men indistress, which is rare now to be found. 29. Cyrus the Son of Cambysis and Mandana Nephew to Astyagis King of the Medes, for Va∣lour, Cyrus. Prudence, and other Virtues, excell'd all others in the age wherein he liv'd: for his Father gave him Royal Education, encouraging him to every thing that was high and brave: And even while he was a Boy he gave evident Tokens of his attempting great
things at one time or other; his Virtue and Valour appearing now before hand so evi∣dently while he was but a Child. 30. Astyages King of the Medes, being beaten in a Battle, and forc'd to a dishonourable Astyages. Flight, was enrag'd at his Soldiers, and disbanded all his Officers, and plac'd others in their rooms; but as for those that were the occasion of the flight, he pickt 'em out of all his Troops, and put 'em to death, thinking by this Example to make the rest more care∣ful in the discharge of their Duty when they came to fight. For he was naturally cruel and implacable: but his Soldiers were so far from being terrify'd by his Severity, that in hatred of his Cruelty and Inhumanity, every one of them were ready to revolt, and to that end began to meet together in great companies, and talk Treason, stirring up one another to revenge the deaths of their fellow Soldiers. 31. Cyrus (they say) was not only valiant against an Enemy, but mild and gentle towards Cyrus. his Subjects, therefore the Persians call him their Father. 32. One Adrastus a Phrygian by casting a Dart at a Boar in Hunting, accidentally kill'd Adrastus. Atys the Son of Croesus the King of Lydia, and tho' he slew him against his Will, yet he said that he himself who kill'd him was not worthy to live, and therefore intreated Croe∣sus not to spare him, but forthwith to cut his Throat at his Son's Sepulchre. Craesus in∣deed at the first was in a rage at Adrastus for the death of his Son, and threatned to burn him alive: but when he perceiv'd that the young Man did not seek to avoid punishment, but rather voluntarily offer'd his Life as a Sacrifice to the dead; his Anger was appeas'd, and he pardon'd him, complaining of his own misfortune, and not of any purpose or design in the young Man: However, Adrastus went privately to Atys his Sepulchre and there kill'd himself. 33. Croesus King of Lydia pretending to send Eurybatus the Ephesian to Delphos, sent him in Croesus. truth with a great Sum of Money into Peloponnesus to hire Soldiers; but Eurybatus fled to Cyrus King of Persia, and discover'd to him all Craesus his designs: and therefore this Treachery of Eurybatus was so remarkable among the Grecians, that when they would upbraid any Man with a base Action, they call him Eurybatus. 34. Cyrus believing that Croesus was a Religious Man, because a sudden storm of Rain from Heaven extinguish'd the Fire in the Pile whereon he was burnt, and calling to mind the saying of Solon; carry'd Croesus along with him, using him with all Honour and Respect, and made him one of his Privy Council, conceiving him to be a prudent Man, who had familiarly convers'd with so many and such eminent Persons for Wisdom. 35. Servius Tullius King of Rome Reign'd 44 years, and out of his own virtuous dispositi∣on Servius Tul∣lius. order'd many things for the good of the Commonwealth. 36. When Thericles was chief Magistrate at Athens in the 61 Olympiad, Pythagoras the Phi∣losopher Olymp. 61. Pythagoras. flourish'd, having attain'd to the highest pitch of Wisdom; a Man worthy to have his Memory Eterniz'd, if ever any other Philosopher deserv'd it; he was born a Samos, tho' some say at Tyrrhenum. His Speeches were utter'd with so much Grace, and force of persuasion that almost the whole City daily gaz'd upon him, as if some God had been before them, and a great concourse of People came from all parts to hear him. And he was not only eminently eloquent, but very sober and grave, and was a wonderful Example for young Men to imitate in the course of their Lives in that respect: and all that he convers'd with he dissuaded from vain Pomp and Luxury; all the Inhabitants of that Country (through plenty and fulness of all things among them) being given to effeminacy and filthiness both of Body and Mind. This Pythagoras when he heard that Pherycides, once his Master, was very sick in the Island Delos, he forthwith sail'd out of Italy thither, where after he had for some time cherish'd the Old Man, and had us'd his utmost endeavour to restore him to health, at length, through Old Age and the violence of his distemper he dy'd, and Pythagoras care∣fully bury'd him; and so having perform'd the Office and Duty of a Son, as to a Father, he return'd into Italy. 37. The Pythagoreans (if any of their Society fall into decay) divide and contribute The Pythago∣rians. Love and Kindness one to another. proportions of their Goods to him that is so in want, as if he were their Brother; and this they do, not only as to them that are daily conversant with them, but likewise to all others of the same Sect and Profession wherever they be. And therefore one Clineas of Tarentum when he understood that Prorus a Cyrenian and a Pythagorean, by some misfortune or other had lost all his Estate, and was become exceeding poor, he past over out of Italy to Cyrene with a considerable sum of Money, and made up the loss of his Patrimo∣ny, tho' he had never seen him before, but only understood by hear-say, that he was a Pythagorian. And it's reported that many others have done the like And they have not only supply'd their Companions with Monies in their wants, but have hazarded their
Persons with them in the most dangerous times. For in the Reign of Dionysius the Ty∣rant it's reported that one Phintias a Pythagorean, when by the contrivance of the Tyrant he was to be led to execution, desir'd of Dionysius but a few days to settle his Houshould Affairs, and promis'd that in the mean time he would leave one of his friends to suffer in his stead, if he return'd not. Dionysius hereupon wondring whether any such friend could be found, who would be willing to be cast into Goal for his friend, Phintias presently call'd for one of his Scholars call'd Damon a Pythagorean, who forthwith with∣out Phintias and Damon wil∣ling to dye one for another. any budging became his Hostage to dye in his room. Many there were that commended this singular demonstration of Love and Kindness to his Friend, others condemn'd it as a foolish and rash Act. But at the day appointed all the People flock'd together very earnest to see whether he that left his pledge would perform his word. But the day drawing near to an end, every body began to despair, and Damon was led forth to execution, and then on a sudden at the very last moment of the day, Phintias came running in. This wonderful Friendship and Kindness one for another was admir'd by all; and Dionysius pardon'd the condemn'd Person, and desir'd that he himself might be taken into the Society. 38. The Pythagoreans had a great Art in improving their Memories, and to that end employ'd their utmost Care and Diligence. For the first thing they did constantly af∣ter they rose out of their Beds in a Morning, was to recollect and call to mind every thing they had done the day before from the Morning to the Evening, and if they had time and leisure they would go back to examine the Actions of the Second, Third and Fourth day, and sometimes further, conceiving it very helpful and advantagious for the improving of Memory, and increase of Knowledge. 39. These Philosophers inur'd themselves to abstinence by this means. They prepare all sorts of Delicacies and Rarities, such as Tables are furnish'd with at Solemn Feasts, af∣ter they have gaz'd upon them for a considerable time, on purpose to whet their Appe∣tite, which naturally desires in such cases to be gratify'd, on a sudden the Table is or∣der'd to be whip'd-away, and they themselves thereupon withdrew without tasting any of the Dainties. 40. Pythagoras commanded his Disciples to forbear taking an Oath as much as they Oath. could, but when they had once taken it, to be careful to keep it. Having likewise re∣gard to what was convenient, even in the Acts of Venus, he advis'd to abstain from Wo∣men in Summer time, and to be moderate and sparing in Winter: for he look'd upon all carnal Copulation to be hurtful; but if it were frequent (he said) it impair'd the strength and was destructive. He advis'd likewise, that the Sacrificers should not make their Addresses to the Gods in rich and gaudy Habits, but only in white and clean Robes, and should not only bring before them Bodies free from gross and outward wickednesses, but pure and undefiled Souls. Commanding these and many such like things, and stirring Men up to Sobriety, Valour and Constancy, and all other Virtues, he was Ador'd by the Crotonians as if he had been a God. 41. One Cylo of Crotonia, the most wealthy and eminent Man of all the Citizens, de∣siring to be receiv'd into the Society of the Pythagoreans, was rejected, because he was Cylo. naturally a fierce and stubborn Man, Seditious and Ambitious. At which he was so en∣rag'd, that he gat together a number of Factious Persons against the Pythagoreans, and be∣gan to rail and do all the mischief he could against them. 42 Lysis the Pythagorean going to Thebes in Baeotia, became Tutor to Epaminondas, Lysis. and instructed him in all the ways of Virtue, and by reason of his excellent Endowments adopted him to be his Son; And Epaminondas from those sparks of Knowledge, he had gain'd from the Pythagorean Philosophy, excell'd not only the Thebans, but all the rest of the Grecians of his time in Patience, Frugality, and all other Virtues. 43. To write the Lives of Persons in former Ages is indeed a difficult and troublesome task to the Historians, but very profitable to others for their direction in the course of their Lives. For this kind of History, by recording good and bad Actions, doth grace the Memory of the Good, and fix a Stain upon the name of the Wicked, by sharing out Praise and Disgrace to each of them according as they do deserve it. For Praise is as a certain Reward of Virtue without Cost; and Disgrace is the punishment of Vice without a Wound. And therefore it's very fit all should understand, that according to the course of Life Men lead here, such will be the account and remembrance of them afterward; when they are dead, so that they need not employ all their Thoughts upon Marble Mo∣ments, which are set up only in a little corner, and decay'd and gone in process of
time; but rather apply their Minds to Learning, and other virtuous Qualifications, which would make their Names famous over all the World. For time, which consumes all other things, preserves these to perpetual Generations, and the elder they grow, the more fresh and flourishing it presents them: for they that are gone long ago, are still in every Man's Mouth, as if they were now at this very day alive. 44. Cambyses was naturally furious and even a Mad-man, and the more fierce and in∣solent Cambyses. upon the account of his large Dominion. Cambyses the Persian puft up with the success of his Arms, after the taking of Memphis and Pelusium, insolently demolish'd the Sepulchre of Amasis, an Ancient King of Aegypt; Cambyses. and finding his Body embalm'd with odoriferous Spices, basely and inhumanly cudgel'd it and abus'd it with all manner of Contempt, and after order'd it to be burnt to Ashes. For being the Aegyptians never burn their dead Bodies, he thought by this means he re∣veng'd himself sufficiently of the Man that was dead long before. Cambyses when he prepar'd for his Expedition against the Aethiopians, sent part of his Army against the Ammonians; and commanded his Officers to rob the Temple of Cambyses. Jupiter Ammon, and set it on fire, and make all the Inhabitants round Captives. 45. Certain Lydians flying away to avoid the Tyrannical Government of Oroetes, the Polycrates. Governor of the Province fled to Samus with a vast Treasure of Gold, and humbly Ad∣dress'd themselves to Polycrates for relief: who at first courteously Entertain'd them; but not long after cut all their Throats, and robb'd them of their Money. 46 Thessalus the Son of Pisistratus a Wise and Prudent Man, voluntarily abdicated the Sovereignty, and acted only as a private Man, contented only to share in the common Rights and Liberties with the rest of the Citizens, for which he was in high Esteem and Reputation. But his Brothers Hipparchus and Hippias, being rigid and cruel, Rul'd Tyrannically over their Citizens. After they had for some time grievously opprest the Athenians, Hipparchus falling in Love with a beautiful Boy, plung'd himself into perilous circum∣stances. For Harmodius and Aristogiton join'd in a Conspiracy against the Tyrant, in order to free their Country from Slavery; but Aristogiton was the chief Man for a brave and resolute Spirit, in induring all sorts of Torments with patience and constancy, who in the most perilous times, carefully preserv'd two things especially, Faithfulness to his to his Friends, and just Revenge for his Enemies. 47 Zeno of Elis, being seiz'd upon for a Conspiracy against Nearchus, who tyranni∣cally Zeno and Ne∣archus. This is cited in Valesius his Notes upon Ammianus Marcellin. lib. 14. c. 9 p. 46. The new Edition. opprest the Country, was put upon the Rack. When the Tyrant askt him, who were his fellow Conspirators; I would to God (said he) I had as much Command of the rest of my Body, as I have of my Tongue. Hereupon the Tyrant scruing him up, and tormenting him the more, Zeno for some time couragiously endur'd the tormenting Rack, but afterwards to free himself, and be reveng'd on the Tyrant, he had this contrivance. The Rack being extended to the ut∣most, he feign'd as if he could no longer bear it, and therefore cry'd out to release him, and he would discover all, the Rack being thereupon loos'd, he desir'd the Tyrant would come to him himself, for he had many things to discover, which requir'd Secresie: Upon which he came readily to him, and put his Face close to Zeno's Ear, upon which he took fast hold of the Tyrants Ear with his Teeth; whereupon the Guard came running in, and racking him to the utmost they could to force him to leave his hold, he fastned his Teeth the more fiercely, so that the Guard not being able to baffle the resolution of the Man, they were forc'd to intreat him to let go; and by this trick, he was releas'd from his torments, with a revenge upon the Tyrant. 48. Sextus the Son of Lucinius Tarquinius, King of the Romans, took a Journey to the Sextus Tar∣quinius. Lucretia. Olymp. 66. 3. An. Mn. 3436 Ant. Ch. 512. Tmpore Drij Hystaspis. City Coilatia, and there Lodg'd at the House of Lucius Tarquinius the King's Nephew, whose Wife was call'd Lucretia, a most beautiful Lady and renown'd for her Chastity. Sextus rose up in the Night and broke down her Chamber Door, when she was in Bed, and attempted to force her, (her Husband at that time being in the Camp at Ardea) and with his drawn Sword in his Hand, threatn'd to kill her, unless she yielded, and told her he had a Slave ready, whom he would lay naked in Bed with her, and kill them both, that it might be said, she was justly kill'd in the act of Adultery, and that he had done it in revenge of the injury done to his Kinsman. And therefore it was better for her quiet∣ly to gratifie him in what he desir'd, promising her likewise many great and rich re∣wards, and to Marry her, and so from a private Condition, she should be advanc'd to the State and Dignity of a Queen. Lucretia amaz'd with the strangeness and suddenness of the thing, and fearful lest it should be thought she was kill'd really for an act of Adulte∣ry,
was quiet at that time. The next day when Sextus was gone, she presently sent for all her Servants and Houshold, and desir'd they would not suffer the Wickedness of the Man to go unpunish'd, who had violated all the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality: And that for her self (she said) it was not Honourable longer to survive the violation of her Chastity: and having said this, she stabb'd her self into the Breast with a Dagger, and so breath'd her last. 49. Hippocrates King of Gela, after his Victory over the Syracusians, when he En∣campt Hippocrates. near the Temple of Jupiter, took the Chief Priests, and some of the principal Citizens of Syracuse, who had spoil'd the Temple of the Consecrated golden Vessels, and carry'd away other things, especially Jupiter's Cloak, which was made of Massy and Solid Gold, sharply rebuk'd them as sacrilegious Persons, and commanded them forthwith to return to the City. He himself toucht none of the things devoted, both to buoy up the Credit and Reputation of his own Name, as likewise judging it unfit for him, who had undertaken so great a War, to act so high a piece of Impiety against the Gods. Besides, he conceiv'd by this means he should stir up the People against the Go∣vernors of Syracuse, who rul'd the Commonwealth with rigour, beyond all bounds of moderation and Equity. 50. Thero of Argeum, for Wealth and Nobility of Birth, and his courteous Carriage, Thero. towards the meanest Man, was not only highly honour'd among the Citizens, but even among all the Sicilians. 51. Cimon the Son of Miltiades, when his Father dy'd in the Common Goal, because he was not able to pay the Fine impos'd upon him, gave up himself into Custody, to a∣bide in Prison for his Fathers Mulct, that he might have the Body of his Parent to bury it. 52. Cimen was very Eminent, when he was a Civil Magistrate, and afterwards be∣came a famous General in the Wars and perform'd such Actions by his Valour, as are worthy of an everlasting Remembrance. 53. Those at Thermopyle dy'd fighting couragiously, whose Valour, &c.—Which are publish'd in the 11th Book of Diodorus his History, P. 9. What after follows in the Ma∣nuscript, because they are extant in Diodorus his History, I have purposely omitted, 12 Folio's. Out of the 21st Book. 1. Antigonus, from a private Man advanc'd to the State and Dignity of a King, was the most potent Prince of any in his time, but not contented with his Condition, without the least colour of Right, was prompted by his Ambition to grasp at the Dominions of other Princes, and by that means At the Battle of Issus O∣lymp. 119. 4. Bfore Ch. 302. Plut. in De∣metrius. both lost his own, and his Life Cimon. together. 2. When Agathocles heard how the Ligurians and Tyrrhenians had mutinously fallen upon his Son Agatharchus, in his absence, for their Pay, he put them all to the Sword, to the number almost of 2000. 3. The Thracians who had taken in a Battle Agathocles, the Son of King Lysimachus, sent him back to his Father with several gifts; by this means hoping, in case of mis∣fortunes, to shelter themselves under his protection, and hereby likewise to induce him freely to restore their Territory, which he then possest. For they were out of all hopes of Victory, seeing so many potent Kings, Confederates with Lysimachus. 4. Dromichoetes King of Thrace, having taken Lysimachus Prisoner, us'd him with all kind of Civility; and kissed and embrac'd him, calling him his Father, and brought him with his Children into the City Helis. And when the Thracians came in a Body to∣gether, and crying out demanded, that the Captive King should be brought forth, and put to death, for that it was but just and equal that they that had adventur'd their lives, should dispose as they thought fit of the Captives; Dromichoetes making a Speech against putting the King to death, told the Soldiers that it was for the publick good to preserve the King: For if they kill'd him forthwith, some others would take possession of his Kingdom, who perhaps might become more formidable to them, than Lysimachus: But on the other Hand, if they preserv'd him, that favour might work so much, as in gra∣titude to gain a favourable respect to the Thracians, and to procure without running any hazard a Restitution of all those Forts and Castles, that formerly belong'd to the Thracians. The Army then agreeing to what he said; he brought forth all the Friends and Servants of Lysimachus, that he could find amongst the Captives, and deliver'd them to him. Af∣terwards
when he offer'd a solemn Sacrifice to the Gods, he invited Lysimachus and all his Friends, with the Chief Officers and Commanders of the Thracians to Supper: And having prepar'd Two Apartments, he cover'd the Beds whereon Lysimachus and his Friends were to sit, with rich Carpets, part of the spoils taken in the Battle; but for him∣self and the rest of the Thracians, the Coverings were but poor and mean. He prepar'd likewise Two sorts of Suppers; That for Lysimachus and his Friends, consist'd of all sorts of Rarities and noble Dishes, set upon Silver Tables: But for the Thracians he order'd Herbs and Flesh meanly Drest, to be set upon a Table uncover'd, in wooden Platters. To conclude, the first were serv'd with Wine in Gold and Silver Bowls: But for himself and his Thracians, he order'd Cups of Wood and Horn, after the manner of the Getes: Afterwards in the height of the Feast, he fill'd up the greatest Horn with Wine, and calling Lysimachus Father, askt him whether of the two seem'd to him more Princely, a Thracian, or a Macedonian Supper? When Lysimachus answer'd a Macedonian—See the rest in the Fragments of Sentences. 5. King Demetrius, after he had forc'd the rest of the Cities to a submission, carri'd himself nobly towards the Baetians: For besides the 14 Persons that were the Heads of the defection, he pardon'd all the rest. 6. Agatharcus was Valorous and Couragious, above his Age For he was very young. 7 Timaeus was a bitter Censurer of former Historians, yet in other parts of his Histo∣ry, Timaeus. very careful to declare the Truth, but his hatred of Agathocles was such, that he forg'd many things in relation to his actions; for being Banish'd by Agathocles out of the Island, he could not be reveng'd of the Tyrant while he liv'd: but after his death he loaded him with Reproaches in his History, to make his Memory odious to all Posterity. For besides the Vices this King was really guilty of, he imputed many others to him, in∣vented of his own Head, and always lessen'd his prosperous successes, and aggravated his misfortunes which were really casual, and turn'd them upon himself, as the cause of them through his own miscarriages. For whereas all know that Agathocles was a pru∣dent and expert Soldier and Commander, and was Bold and Couragious in the greatest Difficulties, he all along in his History is continually calling him a weak headed Coward. And yet who is there that is ignorant, that none were ever under meaner Circum∣stances, that afterwards attain'd to such a Degree of Sovereignty and Dominion? For his Poverty and mean Birth was such, that from his Childhood he was but a mean A Potters Son. Ar∣tificer: But afterwards by his Valour, he not only gain'd the Sovereign Power over all Sicily, but Conquer'd a great part of Italy and Africa. And any one may justly wonder at the Vanity of Timaeus, who almost in every Page extols the Valour of the Syracusians, and yet affirms him, who Conquer'd them, to be the greatest Coward of any Man li∣ving. From these contradictions and inconsistencies it's clear and manifest that out of a private Pique and Disgust he betray'd the Trust of a faithful Historian: And there∣fore his last five Books, wherein are set forth the acts of Agathocles, for very good reason, were never approv'd by any. 8. Callias likewise the Syracusian deserves as much to be Censur'd as the other, who being inrich'd and advanc'd by Agathocles, never leaves off praising him far above his Callias. desert, and so dishonouring History, which should be the Herauld of Truth. For whereas Agathocles in many things violated both the Laws of God and Man, he cryes him up as the most Pious and Righteous Man in the World. To conclude, as Agatho∣cles by force took away the Citizens Goods, and most injuriously bestow'd them upon this Writer; so this admirable Historiographer in way of requital, loads him in his Histo∣ry with Praises of all sorts and sizes. But in my opinion it were no difficult Task, by way of grateful Return, to repay favours receiv'd from Princes, by moderate and due Praises and Commendations. 9. After the * Mercenary Soldiers had agreed with the Syracusians, they Marched away, The Mamet∣tines. and were receiv'd by the Messenians, as Friends and Confederates: and being thus kindly entertain'd by the Citizens, in the Night they Murther'd all their Landlords, and took their Wives as their own, and possessed themselves of the City. 10 When Demetrius was a Prisoner at Pella, Lysimachus sent an Ambassador to Seleucus to Caution him, not to suffer him upon any Terms to get out of his Hands, being (as he Demetrius. said) an insatiably ambitious Man, and one continually plotting against all the Kings; and promis'd he would give him 2000 Talents, if he would put Demetrius to death: But Seleucus the King, sharply rebuk'd the Ambassadors, for perswading him not on∣ly to violate his Faith, but to commit so horrid a piece of Wickedness against one so near related to him: But he writ a Letter to his Son Antiochus, who was then in Media, to ask his Advice what should be done with Demetrius; for he had re∣solv'd
to release him and restore him hononourably to his Kingdom; but was willing likewise to have the Favour acknowledg'd by his Son Antiochus Soter. Antiochus, who had marry'd Stra∣tonices the Daughter of Demetrius, and had several Children by her. Out of the 22d BOOK. 1. WHen a Garrison was put into Rhegium by the Romans, Decius a Campanian, a co∣vetous and impudent Fellow, acted the Base and Treacherous Part of the Ma∣mertines; Decius. for as they were receiv'd as Friends by the Messenians, and seiz'd upon their City, and cut the Throats of all the Messenians their Landlords, in their own Houses, and marry'd their Wives, and possess'd themselves of the Estates of them they had murder'd; so the Campanian Soldiers to whom with Decius the Garrison of Rhegium was committed by the Romans, with the like Perfidiousness kill'd all the Rhegians, and dividing their Goods a∣mongst themselves, possess'd themselves of the City. But Decius the Governor after he had sold the Goods of these miserable People, and shared the Money he had treacherously rais'd, was expell'd from Rhegium by the Campanians, his Co-partners in this wicked Fact. But every one of these perfidious Villains at length met with their just Reward: For De∣cius being seiz'd with a grievous pain in his Eyes sent for an Eminent Physitian of Rhegium, who to revenge the Wrong done to his Country, anointed Decius his Eyes with Can∣tharides, and by this means having made him stark blind, forthwith fled out of Mes∣sena. 2. Phintias having tyrannically oppressed his Citizens, and put to death many of the Wealthy Men of the City, began to be hated by his Subjects for his Cruelty; and there∣fore Phintias. all being upon the point ready for a General Defection, and he himself reduc'd to great streights, on a sudden chang'd his former Course, and ruling more moderately, kept his Subjects within the bounds of their Duty and Obedience. 3. Ptolomy King of Macedonia, being indeed very Young, and altogether unexpert in Military Affairs, and naturally Rash and weak Headed, made no provision for any thing Ptolemy Ce∣raunus. Vid. Justin. lib. 17. & 25. Olymp 125. Ant. Ch. 279. Ush. Ann. Apollodorus. as he ought: And therefore when he was advis'd by his Friends to stay for the Auxiliary Forces who were not as yet come up to him, he disregarded their Council. 4. Apollodorus affecting the Sovereign Power, and minding to confirm the Conspirators in whhat they had undertaken, sent for a young Man, one of his Friends, under colour of coming to Sacrifice, and when he came he offer'd him up to the Gods, and gave his Intrails to be eaten by the Conspirators, and drunk to them in his Blood mixed with Wine. 5. The same Apollodorus arm'd some Gauls, and engag'd them with large Gifts, and made use of them for his Life-Guard, because they were naturally Cruel, and ready to Apollodorus King of Cassan∣dria in Mace∣donia. execute any Villany. He rais'd likewise a great Sum of Money, by Confiscating and ex∣posing to publick Sale the Goods of the Wealthy Citizens. He grew very potent in a short time, by increasing the Soldiers Pay, and distributing Money among the Poorer sort. Being wholly given up to Cruelty and Covetousness, he squeez'd Money from the Ci∣tizens, and forc'd both Men and Women with Racks and Torments to bring forth all their Gold and Silver; for he made use of one Calliphon a Sicilian for his adviser, an Arts ma∣ster in Tyranny, who had been long bred up a Courtier among many of the Tyrants in Sicily. 6. When Pyrrhus had plunder'd Aegeas, the Seat-Royal of the Kings of Macedonia, he left there a Garrison of Gauls, who being inform'd by some that there were great Trea∣sures Pyrrhus cited by Ush. An. 353. Before Christ 273. (according to ancient Custom) hid in the Sepulchres of the Kings, dug up all the Tombs, and divided the Wealth amongst themselves, but scattered abroad the Bones and Ashes of the Dead. However, Pyrrhus though he was rail'd at for this piece of Inhumanity, yet he punish'd not the Barbarians, because he made use of their assistance in his Wars.
Out of the 23d BOOK. 1. I Look upon it the Duty of an Historian diligently to observe the Stratagems and Management of Affairs by Generals on both sides: For by laying open and taxing of other Mens Faults the like Miscarriage may be prevented in them that come after, and on the other side, by commending of things that are done well, others are stirr'd up to Virtuous actions. For who can but utterly condemn the Pride, Folly, Madness and Insolency of Attilius Re∣gulus. Olymp. 131. 1. Ant. Ch. 254. First Punick War. Polyb. lib. 1. Attilius? Who not able to bear the weight of his prosperous Fortune, both lost his own Reputation, and brought many great Mischiefs and Calamities upon his Country. For when he might have struck up a Peace with the Carthaginians, Honourable and Advantageous to the Romans, but Base and Dishonourable to the other, and his Name might have been for ever renown'd amongst all Men for his Clemency and Humanity, he had no regard to any of these things: But proudly insulting over the Distresses of the Afflicted, stood upon such Terms as both provok'd the Gods to Anger, and forc'd the Conquered by reason of those unreasonable Conditions, to stand it out resolutely to the utmost Extremity; so that the face of Affairs was chang'd on a sudden, insomuch as the Carthaginians who but a little before were in great Terror and Amazement, by rea∣son of their late Rout, and despair'd of all Relief, gather'd Courage, and routed and cut off their Enemies Army; and upon this Misfortune, such was the Distress and Amaze∣ment of the City of Rome, that they who were before look'd upon to be the best Sol∣diers at Land in the World, durst not engage the Enemy in that kind any more; and therefore this was the longest War of any we read of in former times, and the matter was now to be decided by Sea Fights, in which a vast Number of Ships both of the Romans and their Confederates were destroy'd, and 100000 Men perish'd with those that were kill'd in Fights at Sea: And it's easie to believe how vast a Treasure must be ex∣pended, sufficient to maintain so great a Fleet for the continuance of a War for Fifteen Years. But he that was the Author and Occasion of so many Miseries, had himself no small share in the Calamity, since his present Dishonour and Disgrace did far over-bal∣lance his former Glory and Reputation; and by his Misfortune others are taught not to be proud in Prosperity. And that which was most cutting and grievous was, that he was now forced to endure the Scoffs and Scorns of those over whom he had before in∣sulted in the time of their Calamity; having justly debarred himself from that Pity and Commiseration which is wont to be shew'd towards them that are in affliction. But as for Xanthippus he not only delivered the Carthaginians from the present Evils that hung over them, but altogether chang'd the Scene of Affairs; for he utterly routed the Ro∣mans who were but even now Conquerors, and after a sad slaughter lifted up the Car∣thaginians to such a height of Prosperity, (who were expecting their last doom) that for the future they slighted and contemn'd their Enemy. The noise of this famous Action being spread almost all the World over, every one admir'd the Valour of this General. For it look'd like a Wonder to every body, that there should be such a sudden change of Affairs, by one Man only joining with the Car∣thaginians, and that they who were but lately closely besieg'd, should on a sudden besiege the Enemy: And that they who by their Valour were a little before Lords both of Sea and Land, should be now coop'd up in a small Town, expecting every day to be a Prey to their Enemies; but it's not to be wonder'd at, since the Prudence and Wisdom of the General overcame all difficulties. 2. Hamilear the Carthaginian, call'd Barca, and Hannibal his Son the great Carthaginian Generals, are reputed the greatest Captains of any that ever were either before or after them, and by their Victories greatly enlarg'd the Dominion of the Carthaginians. Out of the 24th BOOK. CLodius coming into Sicily, as soon as he had receiv'd the Charge of the Army, who Publius Clo∣dius. then straitly besieg'd Lilybaeum, call'd the Soldiers together, began bitterly to inveigh against the Consuls from whom he receiv'd the Legions, declaring they had negligently manag'd the War, giving themselves up to Wine, Luxury, and Voluptuousness, and that they were more really besieg'd than the Enemy: But this Man being naturally Hot and
Fiery, and something Crack-brain'd, acted many things Rashly and like a Mad-man. For in the first Place, imitating the indiscreet Actions of those he had before censur'd, he attempted to raise up a Mole in the Sea and block up the Haven, with so much the more Imprudence, as the Fault is the greater not to learn to do better, by seeing before the Mistakes and Miscarriages of another, than to run into an Error upon the first Attempt. Being likewise naturally Cruel and Severe in inflicting Punishment, after the manner of his Ancestors he was inexorable in punishing the Soldiers, and scourg'd the Roman Con∣federates with Rods. To conclude, He was so swell'd with Pride upon the account of the Nobility of his Birth, and the Renown of his Ancestors, that he despis'd every body else. 2. Hamilcar before he was chosen General was noted to be a Man of a magnanimous Spirit, and after he was advanc'd to that Honour he deceiv'd not their Expectation, but behav'd himself as a Noble Carthaginian, in every thing aiming at Fame and Renown and despising Dangers. He was both Prudent, Valiant, and Industrious, the Best King and the most Valiant General. 3. Hanno was naturally of an aspiring Spirit and thirsting after Glory, and having a Hanno. great Army that lay idle, hop'd by this Expedition both to Train and Exercise the Sol∣diers, and likewise to maintain them, and by that means to ease the City of a great Charge, and over and besides, to perform some considerable Service that might prove both Ho∣nourable and Profitable to the Common-wealth. 4. When Hanno had taken Hecatompy∣lus, a City in Thebes in Ae∣gypt. Hecatompylus, and the Elders of the City address'd them∣selves Hanno. to him, and begg'd and intreated him to shew them Pity and Compassion, being something Vain-glorious at this time he preferr'd Mercy before Severity, and took 3000 Hostages, and preserv'd the City and the Estates of the Citizens entire and untouch'd, for which he was highly honour'd by the poor People, and the Soldiers were splendidly and liberally Entertain'd by the Inhabitants with all manner of rich Provision. 5. But the * Mother of the Young Men grievously laid to heart the Death of her Hus∣band, The Wife of Attalus her Cruelty. and conceiving that through their Carlesness and Neglect he had lost his Life, she stirr'd up her Sons to use the Captives most Cruelly and Inhumanely, for they were thrust into a little close Room, and by reason of the straitness of the Place were forced to throng one upon another like Beasts, and after they had been kept without Meat for five Days * Bostar through vexation of Mind and Famine together dy'd. But Hamilcar being a Man of a great Spirit held out still, though he saw no hopes of Relief. But told her Gr. Bodostor. how careful he had been of her Husband, and intreated her with Tears to Compassion; but she was so far from being touch'd with the least sense of Humanity, that this cruel Woman shut up the Carkass with him for five Days together in that close Hole, and gave him meat only to keep him alive, that he might be the longer sensible of his miserable Condition. Hamilcar therefore now despiaring by intreating or begging to move her to Pity, began to call upon Jupiter, and cry out to the rest of the Gods, who took care of Mankind, to revenge him upon the Woman, and repay her with just and due Punish∣ment. However, in the midst of all these Torments he was kept alive, till through the Mercy of the Gods, or some good Fortune, he was wonderfully and unexpectedly delivered. For even when he was upon the Point of Death, through the stench of the dead Bo∣dy, and other Miseries he lay under, some of the meaner Servants belonging to the House told it some others abroad, who in indignation to such a piece of Cruelty and Wicked∣ness, forthwith inform'd the Tribunes of the People of this horrid Fact. Whereupon, when it was discover'd, the Magistrates sent for the Attillii, who for branding the Roman Name with such a dishonourable Mark of barbarous Cruelty, escap'd very narrowly be∣ing put to Death; but the Magistrates threatned the Attillii severely to punish them if they did not for the future use their Prisoners civilly, and take due care of them. They imputed most that was done to their Mother, and burning the Body of Bostar, sent the Ashes back to his own Country, and freed Amilcar from the Distress and Calamity he had groan'd under. Out of the 25th BOOK. THE Carthaginians who had been at War with the Romans for the possession of Si∣cily, now Four and Twenty Years, suffer'd not so much by that War as they did The War with the Mercenaries by th Cartha∣ginians. by their Mercenary Soldiers whom they had injur'd: For designing to defraud them of
their Pay, they were in a fair way of losing both their Sovereign Authority and their Country together, for the Mercenaries resented the Injury to that degree, that they forth∣with revolted, and brought the Carthaginians into miserable Distresses. 2. The Carthaginians sent a Trumpet to the Revolters, to desire liberty to bury them Mercenaries Cruelty. that were slain in the Battel. But Spondius, and the rest of the Captains of the Revol∣ters, with barbarous Cruelty, not only deny'd that, but warn'd them upon their Peril not to send any more Messengers to them upon any account whatsoever, for if they did, they should suffer the same Punishment. And they then made an Order, that every Carthaginian they took Prisoner should be put to Death in the same manner as they be∣fore mentioned were, and that their Confederates which should be taken should have their Hands cut off, and so sent back to Carthage. This Cruelty of Spondius was the rea∣son that Hamilcar was forc'd to cast off his former Lenity, and retaliate the same Cruelty upon the Prisoners taken by the Carthaginians: And therefore after he had first Rack'd and Tormented the Captives, he then cast them to the Elephants, who trod and tram∣pled them under-foot, so as they dy'd most miserably. 3. The Hippacrineans and Uticans revolted from the Carthaginians, and kill'd the Cartha∣ginian Uticans Re∣volt. Garrison, and threw them over the Walls, and would not suffer them to be bury'd, though it was desir'd by the Carthaginians. Hamilcar, Sirnam'd Barca, perform'd many great and excellent Services to the advan∣tage Hamilcar▪ Barca. of his Country, both against the Romans in Sicily, and in Africa against the Merce∣naries and the Lybians, who revolted from the Carthaginians, and streightly besieg'd Car∣thage it self. For in both these Wars he perform'd noble Actions with great Valour and Prudence, and therefore was highly honour'd by all the Citizens. But after the War was ended in Africa, he got together a Body of Lewd Fellow; and having enrich'd himself with the Spoils of his Enemies, and by his Actions gain'd a great Interest and the Love of the People, he prevail'd so far as that he was created Generalissimo of all Lybia for a little time. Out of the 26th BOOK. 1. HAnnibal was naturally of a warlike Spirit, and Train'd up in Martial Affairs from Hannibal. a Child; and having been for many years together in several Expeditions with the greatest Captains, he learnt a great deal of Experience in matters of War, so that being by Nature prompt to Feats of Arms, and improv'd likewise by daily Exercise for a long time in the Wars, he look'd very big upon it, in expectation of doing great things. 2. Minucius being overcome by Hannibal, it was evident by the Event that he ruin'd all by his Imprudence and Unskilfulness; but Fabius by his Valour and Policy preserv'd the Common-wealth. 3. Dorimarchus the Provincial Governor of the Aetolians committed a most impious Dorimarchus. Fact; for he robb'd the Famous Temple of Jupiter Dodonaeus, and afterwards burnt the whole except the Treasury. 4. Hannibal's Army having for a long time together glutted themselves with the Riches Hannibal. and Pleasures of Campania, became wholly degenerated; for their Luxury, Soft Beds, Oint∣ments, and all sorts of delicate Fare, took away their Courage, and made them unfit to endure hardship, and caus'd both their Bodies and Souls to degenerate into Effeminacy. 5. When Hannibal had spoken much against the cruelty and malice of the Romans, or rather their pride and arrogancy, he put to the Sword the Senators Sons, and their Re∣lations Hannibal (which he pickt out of the rest of the Captives,) in this manner revenging him∣self upon the Senate. 6. Hannibal being possess'd with an implacable Hatred against the Romans, pickt out from amongst the Captives such as he thought fittest for single Combat, and matcht them one with another, and commanded them to fight Brothers with Brothers, Fathers with Children, and Kinsmen with Kinsmen. In this barbarous Injunction, who cannot but justly abhor the cruelty of the Carthaginians, and admire the Piety, Patience and Con∣stancy of the Romans, in the midst of their most grievous Sufferings! For tho' they were tormented with Fire-Goads and cruel stripes, yet none would be brought to lift up their hands against their Friends and Relations, but all unmovable dy'd in the Anguish of their Sufferings, keeping themselves pure and unspotted from the Guilt of destroying one an∣other.
7. When Gelo and Hiero Kings of Sicily were dead in Syracuse, and Hieronymus, who was very raw and young, succeeded, the Kingdom was but ill supply'd with a Governour; for being flatter'd and sooth'd up by his Friends, he fell into Luxury, Debauchery, and Ty∣rannical Cruelty. For he Ravish'd many Men's Wives, Murther'd his Friends that ad∣vis'd him; confiscated the Goods of many without hearing them, and gave their Estates Hieronymus King of Syra∣cuse Murther'd by his Subjects. to the flattering Informers; which first stirr'd up the hatred of the People against him, then put them upon Plotting, which broke out at last and ended in his destruction; the common Lot of Tyrants in such cases. 8. When Hiero was kill'd, the Syracusians call'd a Senate, where it was decreed that all the Kindred of the Tyrant should be put to death, both Man and Woman, and that Hieronymus. none of his Race or Family should be left alive. 9. When the dead Body of Semprenius Gracchus was sent by Mago to Hannibal, the Sol∣diers seeing it lie upon the ground, cry'd out to have it cut in pieces, and to be hurl'd away piece by piece out of Slings. But Hannibal having an Object before his Eyes to in∣struct him in the uncertainty and unconstancy of Fortune, and honouring and admiring likewise the Valour of the Man, said it was an unworthy thing to wreak a Man's Anger upon a speechless Carcass; and afterwards celebrated his Funeral with all the marks of Honour and Respect, and civilly sent his Bones and Ashes in an Urn to the Roman Camp. 9. When Syracuse was taken, all the Citizens went forth to meet Marcellus with Olive-branches Marcellus. in their hands; and he told them he would spare all the Lives of those that were Freemen of the City, but all their Goods should be a prey for his Soldiers. 10. The Carthaginians after they had made an end of the Libyck War, severely punish'd Cruelty of the Carthagini∣ans. the Micatanian Numidians, with their Wives and Children; for they crucify'd all their Captives, insomuch as their posterity ever since remembring the Cruelty executed upon their Forefathers, are most implacable Enemies to the Carthaginians. 11. But the Valour of Hasdruball is not to be passed over in silence. For he was the Son of Amilcar Barca, the bravest Captain of his Age, who in the Sicilian War was the only General that often overcame the Romans, and having put an happy end to the Ci∣vil War, was the first that past over with an Army into Spain; and this Hasdrubal ap∣prov'd himself a Son not unworthy the Honour and Dignity of such a Father. For he was generally own'd to be the best Soldier, (next to Hannibal his Brother) of all the Carthaginian Commanders, and therefore he was left General of all the Forces in Spain by Hannibal, where he fought many Battles, and freeing his Army many times from the Straits they were in, he often ran himself into many great Dangers: and being at ength forc'd up into the heart of the Country, far from the Sea, upon the account of his Va∣lour he got together a mighty Army, and at last came unexpectedly into Italy. 12. Nabis King of Lacedemon Murthered Plps, the Son of curg the former King, Nabis. when he was but a very Child; for he was afraid when he was grown up to Man's Estate, he would seek to free and rescue his Country, upon the account of his being of the Blood-Royal. And for this reason he put to death the Nobility of Sparta, and hir'd the basest and most abject Fellows, wherever he could find 'em, to be his Life guard, and protect him in his Dominion: So that Robbers of Temples, Thieves, Highway-men, and Con∣demn'd Persons flock'd from all places to Sparta. For stepping up into the Throne by wickedness, he had no hopes to keep what he had so wickedly got, but only by the help of such Prophane and Impious Fellows. 13. The Cretians Rigg'd out Seven Ships for Piracy, and robb'd many Passengers at Cretian Py∣rats. Sea, whereupon the Merchants being altogether discourag'd, the Rhodians looking upon it to belong to them to redress this Mischief, proclaim'd War against the Cretians. 14. Pleminius was left Governor of Locris by Scipio; and being a pofliga wretch, he forc'd open the Treasury of Proserpina, and carry'd away all the Sacred Treasure. Pleminius robs Proserpina's Temple. The Locrians enrag'd at the Fact, Address'd themselves to the People of Rome, and in∣treated their Relief according to their usual Faith; whereupon, Two Military Tribunes seem much offended with the Impious Fact committed, and sharply rebuk'd Pleminius; not that they were really angry at what was done, but because they themselves had no part of the Money. But in a short time after, the Goddess paid them all home for their Impiety. For this was reported to be the most Famous Temple of all that were in Italy, and in all Ages before that time (through the care of the Inhabitants) had remain'd safe and unviolated. For at the time when Pyrrhus transported his Forces out of Sicily to Locris, and his Soldiers were pressing upon him for Pay, he was forc'd to make use of this Sacred Treasure: but in returning back (they say) he suffred much, his whole Fleet being dispers'd, shatter'd and torn in pieces by a ierce and violent Tempest, and
therefore Pyrrhus himself, out of a Religious Reverence to the Goddess, endeavour'd to pacify her, and restor'd every penny of the Money before he left the Country. But the Tribunes before mentioned pretending to abhorr the Sacrilege, sided with the Locrians, and rebuking Pleminius for his Crime, threatned severely to punish him. The Quarrel growing hotter and hotter, it came at length to blows, and the Tribunes threw Pliminius upon the ground, and bit off his Ears and Nose, and slic'd off both his Lips; but after∣wards Pliminius caus'd the Tribunes to be seiz'd, and whipp'd them to death with Rods. In the mean time the Senate and People of Rome, through a Religious awe of the Gods, were in great concern about this Sacrilegious Act; and upon this occasion the Enemies of Publius Scipio having got an opportunity to cast Durt upon him, accus'd him as if he had been the Adviser of Pliminius, and that he had done all by his Order and Command. Whereupon by a Decree of the Senate, two Tribunes of the People and an Aedilis were sent into Sicily with Orders to bring Scipio forthwith to Rome, if they found that the Sacrilege was committed by his Command or Connivance; but if they could not discover any such thing, that then they should suffer him to Transport the Forces over into Africa. While they were upon their Journey Scipio sent for Pliminius and cast him into Goal; and eve∣ry day with great care and diligence exercis'd the Soldiers; at which the Tribunes of the People did so admire, that they highly commended him. But Pliminius being brought bound to Rome, the Senate forthwith committed him to prison, and a short time after he dy'd there in custody. His Goods were all Devoted to Proserpina, and what they fell short to make satisfaction, was decreed by the Senate to be supply'd out of the publick Treasury, and that it should be death for any Soldier not to restore what Goods or Mo∣ney soever he had in his hand, that were taken out of the Treasury of Proserpina's Temple, and further decreed that the Locrians should be free. 15. Scipio when he saw Syphax among other prisoners led up to him in Chains, at the first fell a weeping, to consider the former Royal State and Dignity of the Person; resol∣ving therefore to use his fortunate success with moderation and humanity, Commanded that Syphax should be freed from his Chains, and gave up his Tent to him for the re∣ception of him and his Royal Family; and keeping him as a prisoner (yet with all the liberty imaginable) often courteously convers'd with him, and entertain'd him at his Table. 16. Sophonisba (who was first the Wife of Masinissa, and afterwards of Syphax, but be∣ing Sophonisba. taken prisoner was gain'd again by Masinissa) was a Woman of an admirable Beauty, and by her cunning tricks and charming devices could obtain whatever she pleas'd: and being confederated with the Carthaginians her Countrymen, ply'd her Husband every day to fall off from the Romans; which when Syphax was assur'd of, he acquainted Scipio with the design, and caution'd him to have a special care of that Woman; all which being con∣firm'd likewise by Laelius, Scipio commanded the Lady to be brought to him, which Ma∣sinissa refusing, he threatned him severely; at which Masinissa was so concern'd, that he order'd that some should be sent from Scipio to fetch her away: but in the mean time he went into his Tent, and forc'd Sophonisba to drink off a Cup of Poison. 17. Scipio through his Clemency and Compassion towards all the prisoners he took, for ever after was secure of Masinissa as a faithful and constant Confederate. 18. Hannibal call'd together his Confederates, and told them that he must of necessity pass over into Africa, and that he had provided shipping for all those that were willing to Hannibal's Cruelty. go along with him; Some agreed to the thing; but as to those that chose rather to con∣tinue in Italy, he compass'd round with his Army, and gave his Soldiers liberty to pick out as many of them as they pleas'd, to be their Captives; and the rest, to the number of Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse he put to the Sword, together with a vast number of Cattle. 19 Four thousand Horse of those that went over to Masinissa after the Rout of Syphax, Hannibal. deserted him and came in to Hannibal: But he enrag'd at them, encompass'd them round with his Army, and shot them all to death with Darts and Arrows, and divided their Horses amongst his Soldiers. 20. Scipio sent Ambassadors to Carthage, but the common People were on the point to have knock'd them all on the head: But the sober Men of the City preserv'd them from Scipio. that imminent danger, and got 'em a Ship-board, in order to send them back to Scipio's Camp: But those that were popular, and sided with the People in Carthage, order'd the Master of the Vessel, that when the Ship wherein the Ambassadors were, began to Sail, he should throw all over-board, which he perform'd accordingly. However, the Ambassadors swam to land and got safe to Scipio; But the Gods within a short time after, by a remarkable Instance; evidenc'd their Power to punish those that
design'd so wicked a Fact. For it happn'd about that time the Carthaginian Ambassa∣dors were returning from Rome, and were driven by a Storm into the midst of the Ro∣man Fleet, and brought to Scipio; and when all cry'd out to retaliate the wickdness of the other upon the Heads of the Ambassadors that were then taken, Scipio utterly refus'd, saying, That they themselves ought not to do that, for which they blam'd the Carthaginians. They were therefore all discharg'd, and came safe to Carthage, and highly extoll'd the Piety of the Romans. 21. Philip King of Macedon persuaded Dicaeardus the Aetolian, a daring Man, to act the Pirate at Sea, and to that end deliver'd to him Twenty Ships, with order to exact Tri∣bute Philip King of Macedon This was Phi∣lip the Father of Perseus the last King of Macedon. Philip King of Macedon. The same Phi∣lip. from the Islands, and assist the Cretians against Rhodes; Hereupon, according to his Orders, he robb'd and spoil'd the Merchants, and wasting the Islands, screw'd abundance of Money from them. 22. Philip the Macedonian King had with him one Heraclides a Tarrentine a wicked fellow, that in private was always buzzing him in the Ears with Calumnies and false Accusati∣ons against Philip's best Friends, and egg'd him on at length to that height of Impiety, that he put to death five of the Senators; so that King Philip's Affairs by degrees declin'd and went worse and worse: For undertaking Wars frivolously and unnecessarily, he was in danger to have lost his whole Kingdom to the Romans: for none of his Friends durst speak any more freely to him, or advise him, all fearing his stubborn and haughty Humour. He made War likewise upon the Dardanians without the least provocation gi∣ven him, and kill'd 10000 of them in a Battle. 23. This Philip King of Macedon, besides his rooted Covetousness, was so lifted up with his prosperous Successes, that he put his friends to death without any legal Trial or just Cause, and robb'd and spoil'd the Temples and Sepulchres. In like manner Antiochus at∣tempting to rob the Temple of Jupiter in Aelymais In Persia. See this Story in 1 Mac. c. 6. v. 1, 2, 3. there receiv'd a just Overthrow with the loss of his Life and Ruine of his whole Army; And both of them conceiting their Armies were Unconquerable, lost all in one Battle, and were forc'd to receive Laws impos'd upon them by others; and imputed their Misfortunes to their own Miscarriages, and acknowledg'd themselves beholding to the Humanity and Generosity of the Victors, for the pardon of their Offences; and according to the desert of their own wicked Actions, they saw their Kingdoms, through the Anger of the Gods, grievously plagu'd and aflicted. But the Romans then, and ever after, beginning no Wars but upon just and Ho∣nourable Terms, and having a Sacred Regard to their Leagues and Oaths, were always deservedly assisted in all their Councils and Designs by the Gods. 24. The same Philip being in extream want of Provision, continually wasted and spoil'd Philip King of Macedon. the Country of Attalus, up to the very Gates of Or Perga∣mus, one of the Seven Churches of Asia. of Pergamena. He ruin'd likewise the Temples in the Suburbs of Pergamus, especially Nicephorus that was exceeding Rich. Be∣sides several other sumptuous Fabricks; for out of hatred against Attalus, because he could not catch him, he executed his Rage upon these places. 25. Philip entring into Attica encamp'd at Cynosarges, and afterwards burnt Acadamia, demolisht the Sepulchres, and robb'd the Temples of the Gods, and gratifying his Rage and Philip. Fury, as if he had been only incens'd against the People of Athens, and not against the Gods themselves, as he was spoke ill of before, so he was now hated of all, and in a short time he was overtaken by the Vengeance of the Gods, for he was near being ruin'd by his own imprudence, but preserv'd by the Clemency of the Romans. 26. Philip discerning he was hated by almost all the Macedonians, for his kindness to Philip. Heraclides, put him in Prison. This Heraclides was a Tarrentine, a notorious wicked fellow, who from a mild and gentle Prince, chang'd Philip into a fierce and cruel Tyrant, and therefore * he was exceedingly hated by all the Grecians, as well as the Heraclides. Macedonians. 27. The Name and Fame of Hannibal, was nois'd over all the World, and there∣fore Hannibal. in every City and Town where ever he came, they came in great Multitudes to look at him. Ptolemy. 28. Ptolemy King of Aegypt, for some time Reign'd with great Commendation: But afterwards corrupted by Parasites, he began to have an evil Eye towards his Tutor Ush. An. 374. Before Ch. 202. Ush. An. 403. Aristomenes, for his freedom in telling him of his faults, who had all along manag'd eve∣ry thing with great prudence, and whose advice Philip had before follow'd as his Fa∣ther; but at length he sent him out of the World, by forcing him to drink off a Cup of Hemlock. Poyson. From that time growing more and more fierce, and raging, . making use of Tyrannical cruelty, and not of Regal Authority, he was hated by the Aegyptians, and not far off from the loss of his Kingdom. 29. Ther's a Temple not far off from Chalcis, call'd. Delium; * where a considerable
number of Roman Soldiers, that were securely walking up and down, to satisfie their Antiochus Magnus. Curiosity, were on a sudden cut off by Antiochus, in a time of Peace, and before any War was Proclaim'd. For which the King was greatly condemn'd and censur'd by the Grecians, as occasioning by this wicked Fact, a War with the Romans. And therefore Titus Flami∣nius. Titus Flaminius who was then at Corinth, call'd Gods and Men to Witness, that the King was the first that began the War. 30. Antiochus Winter'd at In Thessaly Demetrias, where he laid aside all care of Warlike Af∣fairs, Antiochus being then above Fifty Years of Age: But he fell in Love with a Of Chalcis, Daughter of Cleoptolemus Ush. An. 386 before Ch. 193. young Lady, and Married her, and set forth most magnificent Shews, and publick Games; by which means he not only weakned his own Body, and effeminated his Mind, but infeebled the Courage of his Army; and therefore his Soldiers, who had passed the Winter in Lux∣ury and Voluptuousness, after they were drawn out of their Winter Quarters, could neither endure hunger nor thirst, or any other hardship, but some of them fell Sick, and others straggled about here and there far from their Colours. 31. King Antiochus seeing the Cities of Thessaly inclining to the Romans, and the slow Antiochus Motion of the Forces he expected out of Asia, and the carelesness and sloath of the Ae∣tolians, continually framing and and pretending one excuse after another, was in great strait, and very uneasie; so that he was highly incens'd at those that advis'd him to be∣gin the War, when he was unprepar'd, and had no Confederates, but only the Aeto∣lians: But he greatly admir'd Hannibal for his Prudence; who diswaded him to the contrary, and therefore now repos'd all his Confidence in him; and whereas before he suspected him, e now made use of him as his most trusty Friend and Councellor. 32. Antiochus wholly discourag'd by his late Rout, determin'd to leave Europe, and Antiochus. only be on the Defensive part in Asia, and order'd all the Lysimachians to forsake the Lysimachia in the Helle∣spont. Ci∣ty, and pass over into Asia: For which every Body censur'd him as for a very im∣prudent Act, whereby without a stroak struck, he gave up into the Enemies hands, a City so advantageously scituated, as might have given a Stop to the Enemies passage out of Europe into Asia, as afterwards by experience was found true; for Scipio seizing upon Lysimachia thus deserted, made great advantage of it for the transporting of his Army. 33. Marcus Fulvius the Chief Justice, or Governor of a Province, or Chief Comman∣der in an Army. Praetor, was deservedly punish'd for his abuse of the Ro∣man Confederates in Liguria: For he disarm'd the Cinomani, who receiv'd him as a Friend, and an Allie, although he could find nothing against them; which thing com∣ing to the Consul's Ears, he ordered him to restore their Arms, and impos'd a Mulct upon him. 34. King Antiochus being in want of Money, and hearing there were vast Treasures Antiochus. 1 Mac. c▪ 6. r. 1, 2, 3. of Gold and Silver and other precious Jewels, of offerings made in the Temple of Jupiter Belus, in Elymais, resolv'd to rifle it. Coming therefore into the Province of Elymais, and pretending that the Inhabitants of that Place had rais'd a War against him; he robb'd the Temple, and got together a great Sum of Money, but in a short time after, the Gods executed vengeance upon him for his Sacrilege. 35. Philopemenes Governour of Achaia, was both an excellent Soldier and a Statesman, Philope∣menes. who all his Life long was of a blameless Conversation, and had been frequently Praetor; and having govern'd the Commonwealth for Forty Years together, much advanc▪d the affairs of Achaia, and was always affable and courteous to the meanest, and for his virtue was admir'd both by the Grècians and Romans, and yet came at last to an unfortunate End: but by a Divine Providence his unhappy Exit was recompens'd after his death with Divine Honours, for besides what was publickly decreed by the Achaians in honour of him, the Citizens built a Temple in remembrance of him, and appointed a Bull for a yearly Sacrifice to him, and ordered young Men to sing Hymns in praise and commen∣dation of his noble Acts. 36. Hannibal was the most expert General, and perform'd the greatest Enterprizes of any of the Carthaginians; he was never troubl'd with any Mutinies in his Army, but by his prudent Conduct, kept them in their duty and orderly discipline, tho' they differ'd as much one from another in their several humours, as they did in their various Languages. For whereas those of his own Nation were us'd commonly upon every slight occasion, to desert and fly to the Enemy, none under him durst ever attempt any such thing. And tho' he March'd from place to place with very great Armies, yet he never wanted either Money or Provision. And that which is most remarkable is, that the Foreigners and Mercenary Soldiers lov'd him as well, if not more, than they did who were his own Country Men. Keeping therefore his Army in exact discipline, he per∣form'd the greater and more renown'd Actions. For he made War upon the most po∣tent Nations, and wasted and harrass'd almost all Italy, for the space of Seventeen years.
He was, so Victorious in every Battle he Fought, and made such terrible Slaughters a∣mong them that were reputed the Lords of the World, that by reason of the Multi∣tudes that were cut off by him, none durst look him in the Face, to Engage him in Battle. He laid likewise many Cities in Ashes, which he took by Storm, and almost depopu∣lated Italy that was before full of People: all which as they were accomplish'd by the Strength and Wealth of his own fellow Citizens, so likewise by great numbers of Fo∣reign Auxiliaries and Confederates, those that by their Unanimousness were unconquer∣able, he overcame by Policy and Warlike Stratagems; and so made it evident, that as the Soal governs the Actions of the Body, so a General rules and directs all to a right end, in an Army. 37. P. Scipio, when he was but very young, perform'd great and wonderful things in Spain, beyond all Mens expectations, and having beaten the Carthaginians, deliver'd his Scipio. Country from imminent Perils, and compell'd Hannibal, who was not to be overcome by force of Arms, to leave Italy without fighting a stroke, and at last by his Valour and Military Conduct overcame Hannibal in a great Battle, and brought Carthage to stoop to the Roman Yoke. 38. Leocritus General of King Pharnaces, after he had often assaulted the City Pius, at Leocritus, Pharnaces his General. length forc'd the Mercenary Soldiers who defended the place, to surrender the Town upon Condition, That they should be safely conducted to what place soever they pleas'd to go; who when they were march'd out of the City, and brought on their way ac∣cording * Pius, rather Teios. Ush. An. 403. before Ch. 180. to the Capitulation, Leocritus (who was ordered by Pharnaces to put them all to the Sword, because they had formerly incens'd him) against the Faith of the Articles, as they were upon their march, fell upon them, and with Darts slew them every Man. 39. Seleucus having rais'd a great Army, and on his march to assist Pharnaces, was Seleucus. now ready to pass over Mount Taurus, but recollecting and calling to mind the League the Romans had made with his Father, by which it was not lawful— 40. But they who had committed such a notorious Wicked Fact, and had Murder'd Demetrius, escap'd not Divine Vengeance. For those who contriv'd the false Accusati∣ons Demetrius the Son of Phi∣lip King of Macedon, the Father of Per∣seus. See Livy, lib. 40. This Cruelty of the Father upon his Son by his Bro∣ther Perseus his Contri∣vance. Olymp. 149 Tiberius Gracchus. Paulus Aemi∣lius. from Rome, within a while after incurred the Displeasure of the King, and were put to Death; and for Philip himself, he was restless all the days of his Life, and so much troubled in Conscience for the Murder of so hopeful a Son, that he liv'd not two years after, but pin'd away with extremity of Grief. And Perseus, the Author and Contriver of the whole, being conquer'd by the Romans, and flying to Samothracia, by reason of the wickedness of the Fact executed by him in the Murder of his Brother, could find no sanctuary in that holy Temple. 41. Tiberius Gracchus being sent Lieutenant General into Spain, vigorously manag'd the War: for tho' he was very young, yet for Valour and Prudence he excell'd his equals in age, and gave such evident signs of doing great things, that he was admir'd by all. 42. Paulus Aemilius, the Consul and Patron of the Macedonians, was a Man Eminent for Nobleness of Birth, Prudence and Comliness of Person, and therefore all Marks of Honour were conferr'd upon him by the Romans his Countreymen. Every one eccho'd forth his Praise while he was alive, and after his Death his Fame and Renown, together with Profit and Advantage by his Valour procur'd to the Commonwealth, surviv'd him. 43. Antiochus now newly advanc'd to the Throne of Syria, began a new Course of Life unusual with other Kings and Princes. For first he would privately steal out of his Antiochus the Third. Palace unknown to any of his Attendants, and walk up and down in the City, calling one or another to him where he came as he thought fit; Then he took a Pride in being Familiar and drinking with Ordinary Fellows and Mean and Poor Travellers and Strangers; and if perchance he discern'd any young Men were met together at a set time to celebrate a Festival, he would presently clap himself down amongst them with his Cup in his Hand, and be one of the Quire; so that many were often so startled with the strangeness of the thing that they would run away, and others through fear struck into amaze, not able to say a Word. Lastly, he would lay aside his Royal Robes, and put on a Roman Called Te∣benna. Gown; and in imitation of the Candidates at Rome that were seeking for Preferments, would salute and hug every Ordinary Fellow he met in the Street, and sometime desiring they would make choice of him to be Aedile, and other times to be a Tribune of the People. Having at length obtain'd the Office he desir'd, he would seat himself upon an Ivory Tribunal, and after the Roman manner hear Causes, and was so earnest and diligent in the Decision of Controversies, both between Foreigners and Citizens, that the most
Prudent and Serious amongst them knew not what to think of him, what he aim'd at or design'd; for some gave a favourable Construction of it, others accounted it Folly, and some no other than downright Madness. 44. After Eumenes was way-laid, and news came to Pergamus that he was dead; Atta Eumenes At∣talus. Ush. An 412. lus something too rashly, hand over head, on a sudden Marry'd the Queen; but Eu∣menes returning a little time after, took no notice of it, but embrac'd his Brother, and carried with the same Respect towards him, as he did before. 45. Cotys, King of Thrace, was Valiant in War, and Prudent in his Counsels, and highly Cotys. to be commended for his Care and Diligence in all other Respects; besides all which he was of singular Temperance and Sobriety; and that which was most remarkable for his Honour and Commendation was, That he was altogether free from the Natural Vices of the Thracians. 46. Perseus having taken Chalestrus by Storm, put all that were able to bear Arms to Perseus. the Sword; and whereas Five hundred of the Garrison Soldiers got into a Fort, and Treated for their Lives, the King upon laying down their Arms gave them Quarter, and liberty to be gone. But when they were out of the Town, and on their way, ac¦cording to the Terms granted them, the Macedonians (whether of their own heads, or by order from the King is uncertain) pursued them and flew them every Man. 47. Charopus the Epiros and This is omit∣ted in the Greek. Son of that Charopus who in the War against Philip, sent . Charopus. a Guide to Titus Flaminius to direct him through the Strait and difficult Passes in the Mountains, by which means the Romans unexpectedly passing those places, possessed themselves of the Straits; this Charopus I say being bred up at Rome, upon the account of the good Services of his Grandfather to the Romans, had great Interest with the most Eminent Persons of Quality, and being a fellow of extraordinary Malice and Impudence, was ever and anon at Rome accusing and slandering the chiefest Persons of Quality in Epirus, so that by terrifying all that were in a Capacity to oppose him, he became as it were absolute Lord and Master of all Epirus. Phacion or Phacus, a Town in Thes∣saly. Cephalus therefore, and others that were oppressed by his Calumnies, were forc'd to Confederate with Perseus, and to that end, sent Messengers to him into Macedonia, and by them promis'd to deliver up Epirus into his hands. 48. King Eumenes being out of all hopes of taking Abdera which he he had then be∣sieg'd, Eumenes Pytho. dealt under-hand with one Pytho, a chief Man among the Abderites, who by his Servants and Freemen, to the number of 200, Guarded the strongest part of the City; this Man being corrupted with Bribes, and won with fair promises, let him in at the Gates, and so Eumenes gain'd the City. But Pytho receiving but a poor and mean Reward for his Treason, and seeing before his Eyes the utter Ruin and Destruction of his Country, repented of what he had done, and pin'd away for Grief. 49. When an Opportunity was put into the hand of Perseus, to cut off the whole Ar∣my, he loyter'd not far off, about Dius in Macedonia, careless and negligent in the very nick of time, wherein only by a Shout and sound of Trumpet, he might have surpriz'd and taken all the Enemies Forces, who were then shut up and inclos'd within steep and craggy Rocks: And as the King was Negligent, so the Macedonian Guards that were plac'd upon the tops of the Mountains, were in like manner as Careless in their Watch, in their several Posts. 50. Perseus looking upon all to be lost, and altogether discourag'd, commanded Nico his Lord Treasurer, to throw all the Money and Treasure at In Thessaly. Phacis into the Sea. He sent away likewise Andronicus the Squire of his Body to Thessalonica, with orders forthwith to burn his whole Fleet; who came accordingly to Thessalonica, but with a purpose to Act more prudently; for he forbore to execute his Orders, hoping by pre∣serving the Shipping, to ingratiate himself with the Romans. 51. Perseus in the mean time pulling down all the golden Statues at In Macedo∣nia. Dion, ordered all the Inhabitants with their Wives and Children to remove along with him to Cydoniats their Cruelty. Pydna, than which (a Man may justly say) nothing was more Imprudently done by Perseus, during this War. 52. At this time the The Inhabi∣tants of Cy∣donia, an Island near Lesbos. Cydoniates committed a most Impious Fact against all the Laws and Ush. An 418. before Ch. 169. Customs of Greece; for being receiv'd by the Apollonia, a City in Asia upon the Sea Coasts, another in Thrace. This Apollonia is in Creet. Apolloniats into the City, as Friends in time of Peace, they seiz'd upon the Place, and put all the Men to the Sword, and divided their Wives and Children among themselves, and took possession of the whole Territory.
53. King Antiochus, when he had routed the Aegyptians, and might have cut them off every Man, rid about and call'd out to his Men to forbear killing them, but rather to take them Prisoners; from which Councel he reap'd considerable Advantage in a short time; Ush An 418. Before Ch. 169. for upon the account of this Humanity, he presently gain'd Pelusium, and not long after all Aegypt. 54. But we cannot (observing the method we have propos'd to our selves) pass by the Cowardice of Ptolemy, for who can but judge him of a most effeminate Spirit, that would without a stroke struck, give up so great and rich a Kingdom, when there was Ptolemy Pho∣lometor. Ush. An. 420. Before Ch. 169. not the least danger at hand, and the Enemy at so great a distance from him. Which Effeminateness if it had been Natural, would perhaps have been more excusable: But being it was apparent from the things he afterwards did, that he was a Prince inferior to none for Industry and Resolution, this Sloath must needs be imputed to his Education under the Eulaius. Euuuch, who breeding him up from his Childhood in Pleasures, and Woman∣ish Recreations, Emasculated the vigour of his Spirit. 55. King Antiochus seem'd to all to be a prudent and active Prince, and worthy of the Kindom in every respect, excepting that one miscarriage at Pelusium. 56. When Perseus understood that a choice Body of Gauls had pass'd the River Ister, Perseus his Covetousness. in order to assist him, he greatly rejoyc'd, and sent Messengers into A Province of Thrace near Macedo; i 1. Maedica to hasten their March with all speed. But the General of the Galls demanded present Pay, ac∣cording to the Agreement, to the value of about 500 Talents, which Perseus through his natural Covetousness, refusing to pay, tho' he had before promis'd it, the Gauls return'd back into their own Country. 57. Paulus Aemilius, as soon as he had receiv'd the Legions, call'd them together, and put Life and Spirit into the Hearts of his Soldiers; for he was now above 60 Years of Paulus Aemi∣lius. Age, and a Man of great Repute and Authority among the Romans, for his noble Ser∣vices to the State: And he had invented many new and subtil Stratagems in that War, and by his Valour and Policy, had overcome the Macedonians. 58. Perseus desirous to have many to go along with him, when he fled by Sea, brought out to them Money and rich Furniture, to the value of 60 Talents, to take and carry away with them. Afterwards when he arriv'd at Galepsus, he told his Companions that some of those things that he had suffer'd them to carry away, were formerly the Goods of The Great. Alexander, and desir'd they would forthwith restore them to them, and he would repay them to the value in Money: To which all readily consented, and he receiv'd e∣very thing back again, but never made good his promise. 59. Alexander was of a far different temper from Perseus, for the former was of a brave and noble Spirit, and gain'd an Empire like to the greatness of his Mind. On the Alexander. contrary, the other through his sordid Covetousness, lost the Assistance of the Galls, and by such like gross miscarriages, utterly ruin'd an Ancient flourishing Kingdom. 60. After the flight of Perseus, Lucius Aemilius began to seek for his younger Son Publius Scipio. Africanas, who was the natural Son of Aemilius, but the adopted Son of Scipio, who Publius A∣fricanus. overcame Hannibal. At that time he was a youth about Seventeen years of Age, and under the Care and Tutorage of his Father, in that great and perilous War, so that af∣terwards he became as famous a General as his Father. Being at length found out, and brought safe into the Camp, the Consul was at rest, and freed from that anxiety of Mind he labour'd under; for he lov'd him with a more than a Paternal Affection. 61. Aemilius by his Civil and Courteous usage of Perseus, entertaining him at his Ta∣ble, Aemilius. and receiving him into all publick Councils, gave evident Demonstrations, that as he was a terrour to his Enemies in the open Field, so he was Mild and Merciful to them that were Subdu'd: Which course being follow'd by others, Rome became Mistress of the World, without Envy, and so continu'd as long as it made use of such noble Ge∣nerals. 62. For in former times when the Romans had overcome those two potent Kings Antio∣chus The Generosity of the Ro∣mans. and Philip, they not only forbore inflicting punishment, but restor'd them to their Kingdoms, and took them into the number of their Allies. And in these later times, after many Battles sought with Perseus, and overcoming many great hazards and diffi∣culties, and after they had possess'd themselves of all Macedonia, beyond all Mens hopes and expectations, they proclaim'd liberty to all the Cities; which favour neither the Macedonians nor any Body else could ever expect should have been granted by the Ro∣mans, because they were very Conscious to themselves how much they had injur'd the Roman State. For they judg'd (and that most justly) that there was no room left for mercy, being that they had before been pardon'd former Wrongs and Injuries.
But the Senate forgot all that was past, and carry'd themselves towards them with great Clemency and Generosity. For they suffer'd Perseus to go at large, only with a keeper; a punishment less than his demerit, who against the Faith of his League, and the Obli∣gation of his Kindred and Alliance to the Romans, had most unjustly made War upon them; and they set Free all the People of Macedonia, (whom by the Law of Arms they might have made perpetual Slaves,) and with that readiness and nobleness of Mind, be∣yond all that the Conquer'd themselves could have desir'd. The Illyrians likewise whom they had Subdu'd, they suffer'd to use their own Laws; for they made it more their con∣cern to do what became the Majesty and Grandeur of the Romans, in carrying it Nobly towards others, without Pride and Insolency in Prosperity, than that they look'd upon the Barbarians any way worthy of such Favour. 63. The Senate decreed the Macedonians and Illyrians to be free, and that they should pay but half of that Tribute to Romans, which they paid to their own Kings. 64. Perseus thus thrown into the Goal, miserably ended his days in such sad and un∣comfortable Circumstances. The rest is to be found in the Fragments, Book 31. in Photius his Bibliotheca, at the end of Diodorus Siculus. Fragm. 2. 65. The General of the Gauls being return'd from the pursuit of the Enemy, gather'd the Captives together, and committed a most horrid piece of Wickedness; for he pickt out the Choicest and Strongest young Men amongst them, and Sacrific'd them to the Gods, as if the Immortal Dieties are pleas'd with such Sacrifices. The rest he shot to death with Darts, (most of whom of Ancient acquaintance) he well knew; however former Friendship was no Argument to spare a Man of them. Thus are Barbarians puft up with prosperous Successes. 66. Eumenes far different from Perseus, not only paid his Soldiers what was their due Pay, but bestow'd on them several Gifts besides, with promises of more afterwards, whereby he gain'd all their Hearts, and held them fast to his Interest. But Perseus when 20000 Galls were near at hand ready to assist him, through his niggardliness refus'd their aid and assistance; but Aeumenes, tho' he was nothing near so rich as the other, oblig'd his Mercenaries and all others that might be helpful to him by his Bounty and Liberality And therefore Perseus sinking below the Generosity of a King, and enslaving himself to a covetous and sordid Parsimony, liv'd to see all the Wealth he had heap'd up together, with his whole Kingdom fall into the hands of the Conqueror. But the other, preferring Vi∣ctory before any thing else, not only freed his own Kingdom from the imminent dan∣gers it labour'd under, but brought the whole Nation of the Gauls into subjection. 67. Some of the Councils and Acts of Antiochus were both Princely, and admirable, others Antiochus Epiphanes. so poor and mean, that they were justly despis'd and ridicul'd. For when he celebrated publick Games, he first acted contrary to the manner and practice of all other Kings: for they when they were strengthening themselves all they could with Men and Money, it was their greatest care to keep all private and secret, out of fear of the Roman Greatness: But he on the contrary invited to his Sports the most eminent Persons from all parts of the World, and most Magnificently Adorn'd every part of his Palace; and thus bring∣ing together all the Riches of his Kingdom into one place to be expos'd, as it wereupon a Stage, to the view of all, he occasion'd every thing he did to be known and blaz'd a∣broad. 68. And in the State, Grandeur, and variety of those famous Games, Antiochus far excell'd Antiochus Epiphanes Ant. Ch. 173. about the time of Judas Mac∣chabaeus. Ush. An. 438. Before Ch. 164. all the Princes that ever were before him: But that part which he himself acted in those Maygames, was very despicable and contemptible. For he would ride up and down a∣mong all that Solemn Assembly upon a little Nag, meanly accoutred, bidding some go on, others to stop, and Commanding this and that, as best pleas'd his own fancy; so that if his Diadem had been off, none would have believ'd him to have been a King, who scarce represented the Garb and Meen of a common A Lictor. Officer. All the time of the publick Entertainment he stood at the Door, and introduc'd some, and order'd others to sit down, and Usher'd in the Servants that brought in the Dishes. Some times also he would go to some one of the Guests, and sit down by him, and at other∣times lay himself along on the floor; and then would start up on a sudden and hop up and down, sometimes placing dishes of Meat upon the Table, and other times washing the drinking Cups, and diligently observing every thing round the Room, would pledge those that drank to him standing, sporting and jesting with those that were merrily dis∣pos'd. When it drew towards Evening, and most were gone, he was wrapt up in Li∣nen and brought in by the Anticks and laid upon the ground; and presently after (as if he were call'd) he started up on a sudden naked, and in a jocund Humour, danced
in most ridiculous Gestures with the Mimicks and Stage-Players; insomuch as all being dasht out of countenance through shame withdrew and left the place. Every one indeed that came to the Solemnity, as often as they cast their Eyes upon the sumptuous Furniture, and the Stately and Magnificent Order and Disposal of the whole, in the Celebration of the Sports and Games, admir'd both the King and the Riches of his Kingdom; but when they lookt upon the King himself, and his Irregular Actions, they scarce believ'd it was possible there could so many Vices and Virtues be found to Concenter in one and the same Person. 69. When the Solemnity was ended Tiberius Gracchus arriv'd as an Ambassador sent to inspect into the Affairs of Syria, whom the King receiv'd and entertain'd with so much Ush. An. 438. Before Ch. 164. Kindness and Civility, that Gracchus did not in the least suspect any ill Designs in the King, nor discern'd that he took any thing amiss in relation to what was done in Aegypt. But Antiochus in truth was far from such a Temper, but was altogether a Mortal Enemy to the Romans. 70 Ptolemy being driven out of his Kingdom, and on his Journey to Rome by land, it was made known to Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, who surpriz'd with his misfortune, gave Ptolemy Philometor. an instance of his Royal and Generous disposition. For forthwith, attended with his Ser∣vants, and taking with him a Royal Robe, a Diadem, and a Horse Adorn'd with Trap∣pings of Gold, he went to meet Ptolemy, and came up to him at the * 26th. Stone di∣stant from the City, whom (after he had courteously embrac'd him) he advis'd to put Every Stone was a Mile; Two hundred Furlongs. on the Royal Robes, and to make use of the other Ensigns of Royalty, and so enter in∣to the City as became the Dignity of his Person, left he should be despis'd: Ptolemy was much taken with him for his extraordinary Kindness; but was so far from accepting what was offer'd, that he intreated Demetrius he might rather stop, and take up his Lodgings at some small Village in the way. 71. Antipater having breathed out his last in the midst of these Torments, they bring Antipater. Asclepiades Governor of the City, crying out that Timotheus was the Contriver of the whole Scene of this mischief, and that it was through his persuasions that the young Man so impiously and unjustly put his Brother to death. Hereupon when all the Great Men and Commanders began to smell out the whole Design and Contrivance, and to com∣miserate the sad condition of those that suffered such cruel Torments; Timotheus was in a great fright, and loos'd the rest that were condemn'd from their Torments, and af∣terwards put them privately to death. 72. Philopater sirnam'd Ariarathes being now come to the Crown after the death of Ariarathes King of Thrace his Father, the first thing he did was the Celebrating his Father's Funeral in great Pomp and State; afterwards caressing his Friends, Great Officers and Commanders, and the rest of his Subjects, he gain'd the good Will of all sorts. 73. When A Country in Asia bordering upon the Great∣er Armenia. Ush. An. 458. Before Ch. 161. The death of Paulus Aemi∣lius. Ariarathes had restor'd Mithrobuzanes to his Father's Kingdom, Artaxias Ariarathes Mithrobu∣zanes one of the Sons of Za∣driades King of the lesser Armenia. King of Armenia still infected with his old vice of Covetousness, sent an Ambassador to Ariarathes to sollicit him to join with him and kill one of the Brothers that were then in his hands, and divide Iberia. Sophene between them. But Ariarathes greatly abhorr'd such a piece of Cruelty and Treachery, and smartly rebuk'd the Ambassadors, and writ a Let∣ter to Artaxias, wherein he advis'd him to forbear such wicked practices; which Carri∣age of Ariarathes much advanc'd his Fame and Reputation; and Mithrobuzanes through the faithfulness and integrity of him to whom he fled for shelter, regain'd his Father's Kingdom. 74. Lucius Aemilius who conquer'd Perseus, and was a Consul and Censor, and the bra∣vest Man of his Age of all the Romans, dy'd about this time; whose death when it was ge∣nerally known, especially at the time of his Funeral, caus'd such a general Sorrow and Lamentation, that not only Artificers and other sorts of common People flock'd toge∣ther, but the Senate and all the Magistrates of the City prepar'd every thing that was necessary for the Gracing of his Funeral. And all Persons of the Free Towns and Cities bordering upon Rome, that could posibly attend at the day, came in flocking together, both to see and honour the Solemnity. 75. Such as Aemilius was reported for his Wealth while he liv'd, such he appear'd to be when he was dead. For tho' he was the only Person in his time that enricht the Treasury at Rome with plenty of Gold, brought with him out of Portions. Spain, and had the Command of all the Riches of Macedonia, and was cloath'd with absolute Authority in all those places; yet he was so far from converting any thing to his private use, that when his two adopted Sons, after his death, possess'd themselves of his Estate; out of all his Goods they were not able to raise so much as would be sufficient to satisfie his Wife her just Dowry, without selling some of his Land,; and therefore some have preferr'd him for his Abstemiousness
and freedom from Covetousness before Aristides and Epaminondas that were so famous and eminent among the Grecians upon that account. For they only refus'd Money that was offer'd them by such as thereby design'd and aim'd at their own advantage; but this Man medled not with any thing where he had possession of all, and might have taken to his use as much as he pleas'd. And if any look upon this as a thing incredible, let such consider that they must not judge of the Sobriety and Moderation of the Ancient Romans, by the griping Covetous∣ness of those at this day. For in truth in this our Age the Romans exceed all other Nati∣ons in their Insatiableness after Riches. But since we now revive the memory of so excel∣lent a Person, we shall briefly say something of Scipio his Son, he that afterwards raz'd Numantia, lest ignorance of his Care and Diligence in the Study of the most excellent, and commendable Arts and Sciences, should occasion Incredulity, that he should attain to such an Eminency in all virtuous Qualifications. Publius Scipio therefore was the natural Son of Lucius Aemilius who conquer'd Perseus, as we have before declar'd; but was the Adopted Son of Scipio that conquer'd Hannibal, and the Carthaginians, and so by Adop∣tion Scipio Africanus the most Eminent of all the Romans that ever were before him, was his Grandfather. Scipio thus Nobly descended and taken into so famous a Family, approv'd himself not the least unworthy the Glory and Renown of his Ancestors. For he was brought up and instructed from his Childhood in the Learning of the Greeks; and when he was 18 years of age, apply'd himself to the study of Philosophy under the Inspection of Polybius of Me∣galopolis the Historian his Tutor, with whom he continu'd a considerable time; and in∣creasing in all manner of Virtue, he not only excell'd his equals in years, but those far elder than himself, in Sobriety, Affableness, Generosity, and all other virtnous qualificati∣ons. But before he fell to the study of Philosophy, it was every bodies Opinion that he was but dull and blockish, very unworthy to be Heir to so great a Family. In the first place he made it his chief Care and Business to be Sober, as conducing much to the com∣mendation of his youthful age, which was then at his years a very difficult Task. For the Youth at that time were hurried away by filthy Lusts, and an Excess of intemperance, with an impetuous Current, some to Sodomy, others to Whores, Gluttony, Drunken∣ness, Revellings, and such like Luxurious and Voluptuous Courses: For the Romans pre∣sently learnt the Effeminate Manners of the Greeks in this kind, through the long conti∣nuance of the Persian War; and besides, having gain'd abundance of Wealth, they were plentifully supply'd with Fuel to seed their Luxury. 76. But Scipio following another course of Life, and combating with all his natural cor∣rupt Lusts, as with so many wild Beasts, within the space of Five years attain'd to a fix'd and habitual state of Sobriety and Temperance. To which all giving their Testimony, and generally crying him up upon that account, he then put forth himself in acts of Boun∣ty, Generosity, and Liberality in distributing his Money for the good of others: For which sort of Virtue he had an Example in his Father Aemilius, under whose instruction he was long bred up, and now exhibited, as it were, a perfect Copy of his Vir∣tue: But Fortune likewise presented him an Eminent occasion of expressing his Liberality. For when Aemilia the Wife of Great Scipio, the Sister of Aemilius who conquer'd Perseus, dy'd, and left a great Estate behind her, of which Scipio was Heir; he first gave an in∣stance of his generous disposition upon this occasion. For his Mother Papiria being cast off long before the death of his Father, had liv'd a considerable time separate from her Husband, in a far meaner condition than became one of her Noble Birth: But Aemilia the Mother of his adopted Father leaving behind her a great Inheritance, besides other Riches, had a rich Robe and Womans Gown, together with a splendid Retinue of Houshold-Servants, as being the Wife of the Great Scipio, and so Sharer with him in his Estate and Fortune: All these Scipio Nobly bestow'd upon his Mother; in which stately Habit, when she appear'd in publick amongst the Ladies of Quality, the Bounty and Ge∣nerosity of the young Man, and his Piety towards his Mother was highly applauded, First among the Women, and then among all Companies and Societies of Men, through∣out the whole City. This piece of Liberality was lookt upon by the whole City, not on∣ly as a thing commendable, but even wonderful, especially at Rome, in which City none easily parts with any thing they have to another. After this, there being a great sum of Money owing to the Daughters of the Great Scipio, as their Portions. Dowries; and where∣as by the Roman Laws the Party that was to pay such Portions, had liberty to pay them in Three years time, by a certain proportion every year, he paid the whole down at once. Afterwards when his natural Father Aemilius was dead, and he and his Brother Fabius were constituted joint Heirs of his Estate, Scipio did another Honourable Act, well
worthy to be remembred. For when he knew that his Brother had far less than himself, he freely bestow'd upon him his own share of the Inheritance, amounting to above Sixty Ta∣lents, and so made his Brother as rich as himself; which Act being generally cry'd up, he did that which was further remarkable: For when Fabius was resolv'd to exhibit sin∣gle Combats by Gladiators at the Funeral of his Father, yet was not well able to bear the great Charge it would require, Scipio bore half of the Cost and Expence out of his own Purse. A little time after, when his Mother died, he was so far from taking again what he had before bestow'd on her, that he gave not only them, but all the rest of his Mo∣ther's Inheritance to his Sisters, altho' no part of her Estate by the Laws, belong'd to them. Thus Scipio being cry'd up by the unanimous Consent of all Persons, for his ge∣nerosity, he grew every day more and more famous and renown'd, which he attain'd unto, not so much by greatness of Expence, as by choice of fit opportunities to express his Kindnesses, and an Art in Conferring of his Gifts and Benefits, upon proper Ob∣jects. He gain'd likewise a just Reputation for his Chastity without any Cost or Charge, but only by his Moderation and Sobriety, from whence likewise he reapt the great Be∣nefit of Health and Strength of Body, and following this Course all his life long, he injoy'd a Reward of his Temperance with great pleasure and delight. And as for all the parts of Valour, which is a Virtue absolutely necessary every where, especially a∣mong the Romans, he was not in the least wanting or negligent, in that respect Fortune affording him a special opportunity to approve himself; for the Macedonian Kings being much given to Hunting, Scipio by far surpass'd them all. 77. After that the Romans had Conquer'd Ptolemy Philometer. Perseus, they put some of them to death Charopus. who had sided with the Macedonians, and others they sent to Rome. But Charopus being cloth'd with an absolute Power and Authority in Epirus, because he seem'd to be a great favourer of the Romans, at first dealt with the Epirots something gently and mildly, but afterwards growing every day more proud and insolent, he turn'd every thing in Epirus upside down. For by false Accusations against the richest Men he banish'd some, put others to death and Confiscated their Goods: And he not only squeez'd Money from Men, but from Women, by the help of his Mother Philota; who was more than a Wo∣man in Cruelty and Wickedness. Many likewise who were accus'd to be plotting a∣gainst the Romans, he gave up into the Hands of the People, who were all Condemn'd to die. 78. Orofernes having depos'd his Brother Ariarathes, when he ought to have manag'd Orofernes, King of Capa∣docia. Ush. An. 460. Before Ch. 160. his Affairs with the greatest prudence imaginable, and ingratiated himself into the Hearts of his People by Kindness and Acts of Grace and Favour, intended no such Matter: But being wholly intent on scraping up Money together, he wickedly put many to death; he gave to Timotheus Fifty, and King Demetrius Seventy Talents, and promis'd in a short time to pay other 400 Talents, and besides to add to them 600 more: At which, di∣scerning that the Cappadocians were greatly incens'd, he began to Rob and Spoil every Body, and Confiscate the Goods of the Nobility; and having Treasur'd up a vast Sum of Money, he intrusted 400 Talents with the Pirenians, to serve him at a Turn, and Change of Fortune, which were afterwards faithfully repaid him. 79. Ptolemy the Elder, having presently by the multitude of his Forces penn'd up his Euergetes. Brother, by a In the City Ladithus. Ush. An. 465. Before Ch. 159. close Siege, and reduc'd them to the utmost Extremity, yet pardon'd him; induc'd thereunto, both by his natural Clemency, and the nearness of Relation, and his awe and fear of the Romans: And he did not only pardon him, but entred into a League with him, according to which, he was to be content as the younger Brother with Cyrene, and with a certain proportion of Wheat every Year. And thus a War be∣tween Brothers, which had wholly alienated their Affections one from another, and was continu'd to the utmost hazard of them both, was on a sudden ended upon moderate Terms and Conditions. 80. When Orofernes discern'd that his Affairs declin'd much to the worse, he resolv'd to Orofernes. Ush. An. ib. Before Ch. 159. satisfie his Mercenary Soldiers as soon as he could, lest they should Mutiny, for want of their Pay: But being at present straitn'd through scarcity of Money, he was necessitated to rifle Jupiter's Temple, scituated at the Foot of Mount Ariadne, which before had been ever preserv'd Sacred and Inviolable, and by this means he paid his Soldiers all their Arrears. 81. Prusias King of Bithynia, being altogether disappointed in his Design of taking Attalus, destroy'd and laid waste the Sacred Grove call'd Nicheporius, which lay under Prusias. the Walls of the Pergamus. City, and rifled the Temple it self, and took away the Statues, and the Images of the Gods, and among the rest, the famous Statue of Aesculapius, said to
be one of the curious Pieces of Phipomachus, and robb'd the Place of all its sacred and consecrated Goods and Treasure. For which sacrilege, the Gods in a short time after, inflicted upon him deserv'd punishment: For most of his Land Army perish'd by the Bloody Flux; and the like Calamity hapned to his Naval Forces, for by a sudden Storm in the Propontis, most of his Ships with their Soldiers and Rowers together were Sunk; and some few were cast upon the Land, and Shipwrackt. And these were the first punish∣ments inflicted upon Prusias for his Impiety. 82. The Cretians arriving at Siphnus, besieg'd the City, and the Inhabitants partly A City in one of the Cyclides, call'd Syphus. now hear Crete. through fear, and partly through feign'd and and deceitful promises admitted them into the City; the Cretians first promising that none of the Inhabitants should receive the least prejudice; but when they were enter'd, according to the usual Treachery and Perfidious∣ness of the Cretians, they both carri'd them all away Captives, and rifled and robb'd all the Temples of the Gods, and so loaded with spoil hois'd up Sail, and made back for Crete. But in a short time after, they paid Dear for this Treachery, the Gods pre∣sently executing Vengeance upon them for their Impiety; for out of fear of some Ene∣mies that overpowr'd them in Shipping, they were forc'd to loose out of Harbour in the Night, and most of their Ships by a sudden Storm were sunk at Sea, and others were cast upon Land, and dasht in pieces upon the Rocks, where all in them miserably perish∣ed; some few that consented not to this perfidious dealing escap'd. 83. Philip the Son of Amyntas, coming to a Kingdom then Subject and Tributary to the Illyrians by his Arms and skill in Martial Affairs, restor'd it to its former Liberty, Philip. and by his mild and gentle Usage of those he subdu'd, he enlarg'd his Kingdom above any that was in Europe. For having beaten the Athenians in a great Battle (who con∣tended with him for the Principality of Greece,) he buried all their dead that fell in the Fight, whom they had left in the open Field, and sent back above 2000 Prisoners to their own Country, without any Redemption: So that they who before had contended with him, hearing of his generous Usage of their fellow Citizens, voluntarily yielded up to him the Sovereignty of Greece, and so what he could not accomplish by so many Battles and Hazards, meerly by his Mildness and Humanity he obtain'd with the free and una∣nimous Consent of his Enemies. But what he had got, he afterwards maintain'd, by striking a Fear and Terrour into the Hearts of his Enemies, for he raz'd the Populous City of Olynthus to the Ground. In the same manner his Son Alexander, by the Ruine of Thebes, deterr'd the Lacedemonians and Athenians (who were plotting against him) from their design'd Revolt. And his Civil and generous Usage of the Prisoners in the Persian War, was such, that he gain'd the Hearts of the Asiaticks, not so much by his Va∣lour, as his Mildness and Humanity. But in later times, the Romans thirsting after a U∣niversal Monarchy, in a great measure obtain'd their ends, by the force of their Arms, but their Clemency towards such as they had Conquer'd, added much to the increase and inlargement of their Conquests. For they were so far from Cruelty, or being Ri∣gorous in executing punishment upon those they had Subdu'd, that they seem'd to carry it towards them rather as Friends, than as Enemies. For when the Conquer'd expect∣ed the utmost severity of Revenge from the Conquerors, they left no room for any others to exceed them in Humanity, and Clemency: For some they made Free of the City, with others they join'd in Affinity by Marriages, others they set Free to Govern ac∣cording to their own Laws; and to sum up all, none underwent any severity by being Conquer'd, farther than what was fit. And therefore upon the account of this extraor∣dinary Clemency, Kings, Cities and Countreys, generally sheltred themselves under the Protection of the Romans. But when they were Lords almost of the whole World. then they strengthen'd and confirm'd themselves in their Dominions, by severity, and razing of Towns and Cities, to strike a Terrour into their Enemies. For they utterly destroy'd Corinth in Achaiah, Carthage in Africa, Numantia in Spain, and rooted up the Kingdom of Macedonia, in the Ruine of Perseus, and became a Terror to many. 84. The Romans make it their great Care, that the Wars they begin, be upon just grounds, and therefore never resolve upon any thing rashly, or inconsiderately. 85. Publius Scipio (who was afterwards sirnamed Africanus, and was then a Colonel. . Tribune, when almost all the rest of the Romans made light of their Terms and Articles made with Scipio. their Enemies, tho' confirm'd by solemn Oaths;) most Religiously observ'd and kept his promises with the Besieg'd, and us'd them with all Humanity and Clemency when they fell into his hands. His Faith and Integrity therefore being nois'd abroad all over Africa, none surrendred up themselves into the hands of the Romans, unless Scipio, join'd in signing of the Articles.
86. When there were only three Romans kill'd in the Skirmish, and were left lying up∣on the Ground unbury'd, all were very much troubled and concerned at it. But Scipio with the Consent of the Consul writ a Letter to Hasdrubal, to desire him to bury those Romans; who presently order'd the thing to be done, and when all was perform'd sent their Ashes to the Consul, which added much to the Honour of Scipio, as one whose Au∣thority was prevalent even with the Enemies themselves. 87. The Counterfeit Philip, having beaten the Romans in a great Battle, became Proud, Cruel and Tyrannical; there was not a Wealthy Person which he put not Pseudophilip∣pus, call'd An∣driscus. Liv. Book 50. Flor. Hist. lib. 2. c. 14. Orosius lib. 4. c. 22. Ush. An. 469. Before Ch. 149. P. Scipio. most wickedly to death, upon false Accusations: He spar'd not his own intimate Friends, but dispatch'd many of them out of the Way; for he was naturally Fierce and Cruel, Proud and Haughty in all his Familiar intercourses, and at last deeply in∣gag'd in Covetousness, and all manner of Vice. 88. The Romans had such a kindness for Publius Scipio, that tho' neither his Age nor the Laws did qualifie him, yet they endeavour'd with all their might to Elect him Consul. 89. Calpurnius the Consul, after he had some Towns deliver'd up to him upon Articles, contrary to the Terms agreed upon, and against his Faith and Ingagements, raz'd them * Lucius Cal∣purnius, Piso. to the ground, and therefore in all his Designs and Contrivances afterwards, he was dis∣appointed as a Faithless and Treacherous Person, as if some Deity set himself against him; for he attempted many things, but was never able to effect any thing, 90. King Prusias being both of an ugly Visage, and a mean and effeminate Pre∣sence, was mortally hated by the Bythinians. 91. After the taking of Carthage, Scipio gave Liberty to the Sicilian Ambassadors to search among the Spoils, and order'd every one to carry back into their several Cities Scipio. such things as had formerly been taken away from them by the Carthaginians: Upon which were found many Statues and Pictures of famous Men, of exquisite Workman∣ship, besides many things Devoted and Consecrated to the Gods, some of Silver and o∣thers of Gold; among which, was the famous Phalarian Bull of Agrigentum, made by Perilaus, for the Tyrant Phalaris, who caus'd the Artificer himself to make the first ex∣periment of his own Art, by executing that sort of punishment upon him, which he had invented for the Torturing of others. 92. In our time Caius Julius Cesar, sirnamed for the greatness of his Actions Divine. Julius Cesar, rebuilt Co∣rinth. Divus, when almost a hundred Years after he saw the Ruins and Rubbish of Corinth, was so compassionately Affected, and withal desirous to make himself glorious, that he put forth himself to the utmost to rebuild the City. And therefore it is but just that the Humanity and Clemency that was eminently in this Man, should be allow'd its just and due praises, and that his Virtues should be Recorded in History, for an everlasting remembrance to his eternal Praise and Honour. For when his Ancestors were Extreme in their severity a∣gainst this City, he rectified their Excesses by his own Lenity and Moderation, preferring Mercy before Cruelty. Besides, he far excell'd all that were ever before him in the Great∣ness of his Actions, and upon the account of his Virtuous Qualifications, was sirnamed Di∣vus. To conclude, this Man was the most Famous and Renown'd for Eminency of Birth, Fluency of Tongue, the Art of War, and Contempt of Riches, of any whatso∣ever that was in his Age. 93. Viriathus of Lusitania, the Captain of the Robbers, was just and exact in distri∣buting the Spoil, and those who had valiantly behaved themselves in Battle, he would A part of Spain now Portugal. liberally reward according to their several Merits, and he never converted any of the publick Moneys to his own private use, and therefore the Lusitanians never shrunk or drew back from any hazardous undertaking, when he Commanded them, and was their Leader, honouring him as the Common Benefactor and Saviour of their Country. 94. Plautius the Roman Praetor greatly misgovern'd his Province, being therefore Con∣demn'd by the People, because he had dishonour'd his Government, he fled from Rome. C. Plautius. 95. In Syria, King Alexander, being far unfit for so high a Station, by reason of his Sloath and Meanness of Spirit, gave up the Government of Antioch to Hierax and Diodo∣tus. Vid. Liv lib. 40. Alexander of Syria, call'd Alexander Belas a Counterfeit Son of Antiochus Epiphanes. See Joseph. lib. 13. c. 8. Ush. An. 470. Before Ch. 140.
96. The Kingdom of In the Greek it is Aegypt, but mistaken I conceive. Demetrius Nicanor, Son of Demetrius Soter. Josephus ib. 1 Mac. 11. Olymp. 158. An. 1. Syria, being now brought low, and Demetrius being only the surviving Branch of the Royal Stock, believing himself to be out of all Danger, disre∣garded the Deportment of the former Kings, who studied to ingratiate themselves into the good Opinion of their People, by their affable and courteous Behaviour: But he growing every day more and more unsufferable, fell at length to downright Cruelty, and all sorts of hainous Enormities. The cause of all which is not only to be attributed to his own corrupt Disposition, but to one of his Friends, who had the Management of all the Affairs of the Kingdom: For being a Wicked and Rash Fellow, he incited by his Flattery, the young Man to all manner of Wickedness. At first therefore, he put to death all that had sided against him in the War, with unusual sorts of Punishments. Afterwards, when the Antiochians Taunted and Jear'd at him, as they were wont to do, * One Lastlie∣nes. he got together a Company of Mercenary Soldiers against them, and commanded that they should be disarm'd, but the Antiochians refusing to deliver them; some he kill'd as they fell into his hands, others he Murdered in their own Houses, together with their Wives and Children; upon which a great Uproar being rais'd in the City, he burnt down most of the Town to the Ground, and many that were accus'd to be Heads of this Commoti∣on, were put to death, and their Estates Confiscated, and brought into the Kings Exchequer: And therefore many of the Citizens, both out of Fear and Hatred of Demetrius, Fled Ush. An. 475. Before Ch. 145. out of the City, and wander'd up and down all Syria, watching for a fit time and op∣portunity to be reveng'd. In the mean time, Demetrius hated of every Body, rag'd notwithstanding in Slaughters, Banishments, and Confiscations, far exceeding his Father in Cruelty: For he was far from Royal Clemency and Kindness, but exercising a Ty∣rannical and Arbitrary Power, oppress'd his Subjects with most grievous and unsufferable Calamities, in somuch as the Kings of this Family, for their oppressions, were hated by all, and those of the Of Alexander Balas, who pre∣tended to be the Son of Antio∣chus Epipha∣nes. Josephus lib. 13. c. 3. 1 Mac. 101. Ush. An. 465. other, as much belov'd for their Moderation and Clemency; so that thro' the mutual Plots and circumventing Contrivances of the Heads of both these Families, one against another, Syria was continually full of Stirs and Commotions: and the com∣mon People themselves, through the Flattery and fair Promises of those Kings that sought to succeed the other, were so led aside, as that they still delighted in Change. 97. The Of Aradus Island. Aradians growing high Crested and Insolent, abus'd the Of Mara∣thum in Phae∣nicia. Ush. An. 471. Before Ch. 140. Diodor. Sicul. Legat. 29. Strabo lib. 16. P. 753. Marathenian Ambassadors, who crying out against their Impiety, challeng'd the Sacred regard that ought to be had to Suppliants, and the Security and Protection due to Ambassadors, upon which, some of the audacious young Fellows, presently knockt them on the Head. Then these Murderers and their Co-partners got together in a general Assembly, and adding one piece of Wickedness to another, contriv'd an Impious and Vile design against the Marathenians; for taking the Rings off the Fingers of them that were Murder'd, they writ Letters to the Marathenians, as from the Ambassadors, by which they inform'd them, that the Aradians would within a short time send them Aid, to the end that the Mara∣thenians might receive the Aradian Soldiers into their City, and so be Surpriz'd, thinking they were really, and without Fraud, sent to them as Auxiliaries. But the Aradians fail'd in their wicked Design, for when they had laid an Embargo upon all the Ships, that none might discover their Treachery to the Marathenians, a certain Seamen, a Neigbour to the Marathenians commiserating their Condition, and being acustom'd to Sail in the Neigh∣bouring Sea, took a Ship, and in the Night pass'd over that narrow Cut, about Eight Furlongs in Breadth, and discover'd the Fraud of the Aradians, to the Marathenians; the Aradians therefore, when they understood their Plot was discover'd, forbore sending the Letters. 98. Ptolemy Physcon, the Brother of Philometer, began his Reign most wickedly; for Ptolemy Physco. Valesius Fragm. cited by Ush. An. 493. c. 475. His Mercenaries set his Palace on Fire. Justin Lib. 38. Oro∣sius lib. 5. c. 10. charging many with Plots against his Life, he put them all to death, with most cruel Torments, others for pretended Crimes invented by himself, he Banish'd and Confiscated their Estates: by which cruelties, in a short time, his Subjects were so inrag'd, that they all hated him Mortally; however he Reign'd Fifteen Years. 99. Viriathus, when at his Marriage many Gold and Silver Cups, and all sorts of rich Carpets of exquisite Workmanship, were set forth to grace the Solemnity, he held them all upon the point of a Lance, not with admiration of such rich and splendid Furniture, but rather in scorn and contempt. After, when he had upon this occasion spoken ma∣ny things, with much Wisdom and Prudence, he concluded with many Emphatical ex∣pressions, and with this one, very remarkable Here's some∣thing wanting. for by this saying, he signifi'd, that it was the greatest Imprudence imaginable, to trust in Goods of Fortune, which are so uncertain; especially, since it was then apparent, that all those highly esteem'd riches of his Father in Law, were liable to be a prey to him, that might carry them away upon his Spears point; further he added, that his Father in Law ought rather to thank him,
for that nothing of his own was given by his Father in Law, to him who was Lord and owner of all. Virathus therefore at that time, neither washt nor sat down, altho' he was earnestly intreated so to do. And whereas the Table was plentifully furnish'd with rich Dishes of Meat, he only distributed some Bread and Flesh amongst them that came along with him. After he had a little more than tasted the Meat himself, he order'd his Bride to be brought to him, and having Sacrific'd after the manner of the Spaniards, he mounted her on Horseback, and forthwith carry'd her away to his Appartments in the Mountains: For he accounted Sobriety and Temperance the greatest Riches, and the Liberty of his Country gain'd by Valour, the surest Possession. In his Leagues and Treaties he was very careful and exactly faithful to his Word, and spoke plainly and sin∣cerely what he intended, instructed therein (without any other Arts) by his own na∣tural Principles of honesty and fair dealing. 100. Demetrius, while he staid at Laodicea, spent his time in Banquetting, and such Demetrius Nicator. Ush. An. 476. Before Ch. 144. like Luxury; and yet exercis'd his Tyranny upon many in the mean time, not at all bet∣ter'd by his Afflictions. 101. The Cnotians contended for the Sovereignty of the Island, which they alledg'd, belong'd to them, both upon the account of the Ancient Dignity of the City, and the Glory and Renown of their Ancestors in the Heroick times. For some say that Jupiter was brought up amongst them, and that Minos, who had the Dominion of the Seas, was bred up by Jupiter, at Cnossius, and excell'd all other Men in Virtuous Accomplish∣ments. 102. But in Egypt, King Ptolemy for his Cruelty, was hated of all his Subjects: For his Manners were not to be compar'd with his Brother Philometer's; for he was of a mild Ptolemy Physco. and gentle Nature, but the other fierce and cruel; and therefore the People long'd for a Change, and earnestly waited for a fit opportunity to Revolt. 103. At the time when Ptolemy (after the Solemn manner of the Aegyptians) was In∣thron'd at Memphis, his Queen Cleopatra was deliver'd of a Son, at which he exceedingly Ptolemy. rejoic'd, and call'd him Memphites, because he was Born in the City Memphis, at the time of his Solemn Inauguration. But while he was Celebrating his Son's Birth day, he forgot not his usual Cruelty, for he order'd some of Cyrene (who had brought him into Aegypt) to be put to death, because they rebuk'd him something too freely, upon the ac∣count of the Strumpet Irene. 104. After Diegylis King of Thrace, came to the Throne, he was so puft up with his prosperity, that he began to Rule over his People not as his Subjects and Friends, but to Diegylis his Cruelty. Domineer over them, as so many Slaves and Bondmen: For he put many good and ho∣nest Thracians by Tortures to death, and abus'd with the highest marks of disgracemany others: For he spar'd neither Woman nor Boy that were handsom and beautiful, and stuck not at stripping Men out of all they had, by force and and strong hand, but fill'd all his Dominions with Rapine and Violence. He plunder'd and spoil'd likewise the Cities of Greece that border'd upon him, and abus'd some of the Captives, and put others to death with exquisite Torments. After he had taken the City Lysimachia (which belong∣ed to Attalus) he burnt it down to the Ground, and pickt out the greatest Persons of Quality from amongst the Captives, and put them to death with strange and unheard of Tortures: For he cut off the Heads, Hands, and Feet of their Children, and hung them about their Parents Necks, and exchang'd the Members of Men and Women one from a∣nother. Of some he cut off their Hands, and clove them down the small of the Back, and sometimes would cause the Members to be carry'd about upon the top of their Spears, so that he far exceeded Phalaris himself, and Apollodorus the Tyrant of the Cassandrians. His Barbarity is more evident in this one Instance following. When he was celebrating his Nuptials, after the Ancient manner of the Thracians, he catcht up Two young Men of Greece that were Travelling, who were Subjects to Attalus, and were Brothers, both very beautiful. The one was fully attain'd to Mans Estate, and the other was near bordering upon it; Diegylis caus'd them both to be introduc'd Crown'd with Garlands, after the manner of the Victims: The younger being laid along and extended at length by the Officer, as one ready to cut him off at the Middle, the Tyrant cry'd out, that Kings and private Men, were not to offer the like Sacrifices; hereupon the Elder making great lamentation, out of endear'd Love to his Brother, interpos'd himself between him and the Sword, upon which Diegylis commanded he should be likewise laid along, and then doubling his Cruelty, at one stroak dispatch'd them both, the Spectators all applauding so noble a piece of Dexterity. Many such like wicked acts were committed by him. 105. When Attalus understood that Diegylis was hated by all his Subjects for his Cru∣elty and Covetousness, he took a quite contrary Course: And therefore when he had
taken many Thracian Prisoners Captive, and freely Releas'd them all, there were many that spread abroad his Fame for his Generosity and Clemency: And when many of the Thracian Nobility out of hatred to Diegulis, fled to him, and were kindly receiv'd, and the thing came to be known, Diegulis tortur'd the Hostages of them that were fled with most Diegulis ki Cruelty. grievous Torments. Many of whom that were very Young, and of tender Age, he pull'd in pieces, Limb from Limb, and of others he cut of their Hands, Feet and Heads; some he crucified and others he hung upon Trees, many Women likewise who were Persons of Quality) he stigmatiz'd before they were put to death, and prostituted them to the Lust of every vile Fellow, in a most Barbarous manner giving up himself to all manner of Filthiness. Which as it clearly evidenc'd his unparall'ld Cruelty, so it mov'd many of the Spectators, who had but the least sense of Humanity, with pity and com∣miseration. 106. When Pompey was preparing to Besiege the City Lagnus, the Numantines willing Quintus Pompey. to assist their Countrymen, sent to them in the Night 400 Soldiers; whom the Lagneti∣ans at first readily receiv'd, and bountifully rewarded as their Saviours. But in a few * Lagnetum in Africa. days after, dreading a Siege, they Treated with Pompey, to deliver up the Town upon Terms, insisting only upon sparing their Lives. But when Pompey would admit of no Conditions, unless the Numantians were deliver'd up to him, the Lagnetians at first shrunk at the thoughts of such a wicked Act against their Benefactors, and therefore resolv'd to stand it out to the utmost: But being afterwards reduc'd to the utmost extremity, they sent to Pompey to acquaint him they were ready to Redeem their own Lives by the De∣struction of their Confederates; which the Numantians coming to understand, they set upon the Citizens unexpectedly in the Night, and made a grievous Slaughter amongst 'em. Pompey having Intelligence of this Tumult and Bustle in the Town, forthwith set scaling Ladders to the Walls, and took the City, and put all the Lagnetians to the Sword, but generously discharg'd all the Numantian Auxiliaries, to the Number of 100; both pitying the Men that were so unworthily brought into such extremity and distress, as likewise hereby designing to to gain the Goodwill and opinion of the Numantians towards the Romans. Afterwards he Raz'd the City to the Ground. 107. Arsases King of the Parthians being a Mild and Gracious Prince, was exceeding Arsases. prosperous and successful, and greatly enlarg'd the bounds of his Empire; for he Con∣quer'd all before him, as far as to India (where Porus Reign'd formerly) with a great deal Ush. An. 480. before Ch. 142. of ease: And tho' he was advanc'd to that degree of Power and Authority, yet he in∣clin'd not in the least to Pride and Luxury, as is common with Princes in such cases, but was Kind to his Subjects, and Valiant in the Field against his Enemies: and having subdu'd several Nations, gathered together a System out of the best of their Laws, and Ush. An. 481. imparted them to his Parthians. 108. Viriathus was Bury'd by the Lusitanians with great Pomp and State; for Two hun∣dred Gladiators were matcht singly with as many more, and sought Duels at his Sepulchre, in honour of the remarkable Valour of this Man. For he was (as is agreed by all) Va∣liant in Dangers, Prudent and Careful in providing whatever was necessary, and that which was most of all considerable was, that whilst he Commanded he was more belov'd than ever any was before him: For in dividing the spoil he never serv'd himself with any thing above any of the rest; and of those things which fell to his share, he often reward∣ed them that had behav'd themselves valiantly, and reliev'd those Soldiers that were most in want. He was likewise of incredible Sobriety and Vigilancy, not sparing any Labour, or drawing back from any hazard, not to be overcome in the least by Ease or Pleasures. The Arguments of his virtuous Qualifications are evident and demonstrable: For being General of the Lusitanians for the space of Eleven years, during all that time his Soldiers were not only peaceable without any Mutinies, but remain'd unconquerable: But after his death the Forces of the Lusitanians in a short time after were broken and dispers'd, being depriv'd of such a General. 109. Ptolemy for his Cruelty, Murthers, filthy Lusts, and deform'd Body (whence he was Ptolemy. call'd Physco) was hated by all. But Hierax his General being an expert Soldier, and Popular in all General Assemblies, and a Man of a great Spirit, took upon him the Government: For when Ptolemy wanted Money, and the Soldiers for want of Pay were ready to Revolt to Galaestes, he put a stop to their Mutiny by paying off their Arrears out of his own Purse. 110. The Aegyptians altogether contemn'd Ptolemy when they saw him so childish in his Speeches, drown'd in filthy Lusts, and his Body Emasculated by his Intempe∣rance. 111. Physco, Nastiness. Ush. An. 483. Aemilius the Consul being of an heavy and unweildy Body, by reason of his bulk, Mareus Aeml∣lius. and too much pampering of himself, was very unfit for Martial Affairs.
Out of the 34th BOOK. 1. ABout this time there arose so great a Mutiny and Sedition of the Slaves in Sicily, Olymp. 161. Ant. Ch. 133. The servile War by Eunus. vid Frag. Di∣odor. in Pho∣tius lib. 34. in my Trans∣lation. f. 57. Orosius. Lib. 5. c. 9. as no Age before could ever parallel, in which many Cities suffer'd, were mi∣serably ransackt, and innumerable multitudes both of Men, Women and Children fell in∣to most grievous Calamities; and the whole Island was now upon the point of falling into the hands of the Slaves, who design'd no other bounds should be put to their exorbitant Power, than the absolute Destruction of their Masters. And these things fell out when none in the least suspected them; but those who were accustomed to pierce deep into the Grounds and Causes of all Events, concluded that this was not a thing that happen'd meerly by chance. For the Inhabitants of this rich Island growing wanton with too much plenty, fell into Luxury and Voluptuousness, and then into Pride and Insolence. For those reasons the Cruelty of the Masters towards their Servants, and the Hatred of the Servants to their Masters raging and increasing more and more every day, at length (a fit opportunity offering it self) their Hatred broke forth, and many Thousand Slaves on a suddain (without any sign or appearance of any such thing before) got in a Body together to cut the Throats of their Masters. And the same thing happen'd in Asia, almost about the same time. For when Base Brother to Attalus King of Perga∣mus. Velleius Paterc. Lib. 2. c. 4. Luc. Fl. Lib. 2. c. ult. vid. Ush An 489. Wanting. Ari∣stonicus, without any colour of Right, sought to gain the Kingdom of Asia, all the Slaves, by reason of the Cruelty of their Masters, join'd with him, and fill'd many Towns and Cities with Blood and Slaughter. 2. In like manner those that had large Possessions in Sicily bought up whole Goals to till their Lands—Some they shackled, others they overcharg'd with hard Labour, and branded and stigmatiz'd every one of them: So that such a multitude of Slaves, even like a Deluge, overflow'd all Sicily, that the excessive number may seem incredible to all that hear of it; for all the rich Men of Sicily vied with the Italians for Pride, Covetousness, and vicious Practices; For many of the Italians who had great numbers of Servants, ac∣custom'd their Shepherds to that degree of Rapine and Licentiousness, as that they suf∣fered them to Rob and Steal for want of necessary subsistence from them themselves. Which Liberty being once Granted to those Men who had strength of Body, sufficient to enable 'em readily to execute any Villany, together with Time and Leisure, and through want of Subsistence were reduc'd to the utmost Extremity of attempting any thing for their Supply; these unruly Fellows in a short time were ripe and compleat in wickedness. At first they us'd to Murder Travellers upon the High-way, when only One or Two were together: Afterwards they would in Bodies enter into little Villages, in the Night, and pillage poor Mens Houses, and forcibly carry away whatever they found, and kill all that oppos'd them. At length growing every day more and more Audaci∣ous, there was neither Security in the Roads in Sicily for Travellers in the Night, nor Safety in their Houses for them that dwelt in the Country, but all places were full of Rapine, Robberies and Murthers. And because the Shepherds and Herdsmen were fur∣nish'd with Arms, and inur'd to lie Night and Day in the open Fields, they every Day grew bold and daring: For carrying Clubs and Lances and long Staves, and cover'd with the Skins of Wolves and Wild Boars, they lookt with a most dreadful and terrible As∣pect as the Children of Mars. Besides, every one had a Guard of great Mastiff Dogs to attend them, and guzling down Milk, and glutting themselves with Flesh, and all sorts of other Food and Provision, they resembled Beasts both in Souls and Bodies. So that the whole Island seem'd as if it had been full of Soldiers roving up and down in every place, or as if all the daring Slaves were let loose by their Masters to act the parts of ra∣ging Mad men. It's true indeed that the Roman Praetors and Governors did what they could to suppress this Insolency of the Slaves; but because they durst not punish them, by reason of the Potency of their Masters, they were forc'd to suffer the Country to be in∣fested with Robberies; for whereas most of their Masters were Roman Knights, who had Judicial Authority at Rome, and were us'd to chuse Judges out of the Aequestrian Order in the Causes of the Praetors and the Proconsuls, who were summon'd to appear before them after their Provincial Authority was determin'd, the Magistrates were upon good grounds afraid of them. 3. The Italians, who had large Possessions in Sicily, and therefore bought many Slaves, Damopilus his Luxury and Cruelty to his Servants. every one of whom they stigmatiz'd with marks on their Cheeks, and opprest them with hard Labour, and yet defrauded them of their Wages and Subsistence. 4. There was one Damophilus of Aenna a wealthy Man, but very proud and arrogant;
this Man Till'd a large compass of Land, and had a vast Stock of Cattle, initiated the Luxury and Cruelty of the Italians towards their Slaves. For being carry'd in a Coach drawn with stately Horses, he travers'd the Country up and down, guarded with a company of Arm'd Slaves; he carry'd likewise about with him continually many beauti∣ful Boys, Flatterers and Parasites; and in the City and Villages had his Silver Vessels cu∣riously wrought, and all sorts of Purple Carpets of very great value; and made Magni∣ficent Feasts and Entertainments, after the State and Grandeur of a King, in Pomp and Expence far surpassing the Persian Luxury, and as much as all other Men in Pride and Arrogancy. For being rude, and never bred up with Learning, or any liberal Education, and having heap'd up a great deal of Wealth, and himself left to a licentious Liberty, with∣out controul; he first from fulness and plenty became insolent, and at last was a plague to himself, and occasion of bringing many Miseries and Calamities upon the Country. For having bought many Slaves, he abus'd them in the highest degree; And those that were Free born in their own Country, and taken Captives in War, he stigmatiz'd in their Cheeks with the sharp points of Iron Pins, some of which he sent bound in Fetters to the Goals, and to others that were order'd to look after the Cattle in the Fields, he nei∣ther allow'd Cloaths, nor Food sufficient to satisfie Nature. 5. The Barbarity and Cruelty of this Damophilus was such, that never a day pass'd Damophilus. wherein he scourg'd not his Slaves, without the least cause or occasion. And his Wife Megallis was as cruel as himself, towards the Maid-Servants, and other Slaves that fell in∣to her Hands. The Slaves therefore being thus provok'd by the cruelty of their Master and Mistriss, concluding they could not be brought into a worse condition than they then were, rose up all on a sudden. 6. In Sicily Demophilus had a young Daughter of a very gentle and courteous Disposi∣tion, Demophilus who made it her business to relieve and heal those Slaves that had been abus'd and scourg'd by her Parents, and to bring Meat to them that were in prison; so that she was wonderfully belov'd by all the Servants, insomuch, as in remembrance of her former Kindness, all had compassion of her, and were so far from offering any violence or in∣jury to the young Maid, that every one of them made it their business to preserve her Chastity unviolated; and chose some out of their own company, the most expeditious amongst them to conduct her to Catana to some of her Friends. 7. After Eunus was declar'd King, he put many to death, and spar'd only those that Eunus. for the sake of his Prophecies commended him at their Feasts, to which his Master An∣tigenes us'd to bring him to make sport; those likewise that were so kind as in a jest to give him part of the Dainties with them, he preserv'd; so that the strange turn of For∣tune was to be admir'd, and that Kindness shew'd to such mean and inconsiderable Per∣sons should occasion so great Favour and Respect, at a time when it was so welcome and seasonable. 8. About the same time broke out another Rebellion of the Slaves; one Cleon a Sici∣lian Cleon a Slave raises a com∣motion in Si∣cily. near Mount Taurus inur'd to Robberies from a Boy, being appointed to look to the Horses in their Pastures in Sicily, beset the High Ways, and committed hainous Mur∣ders up and down the Country. This Fellow hearing of the good Fortune of Eunus and his Followers, having persuaded some of the neighbouring Slaves to join with him, on a sudden Revolted, Wasted and Spoil'd the City Agrigentum, and all the neighbouring Country round about. 9. In Asia, Attalus being newly come to the Crown, began to manage Affairs in a way Attalus ki Cruelty. far different from all the former Kings; for they by their Clemency and Kindness to their Subjects, Reign'd prosperously and Happily themselves, and were a Blessing to the Kingdom; but this Prince being of a Cruel and Bloody Disposition, oppress'd his Subjects with many Slaughters, and grievous Calamities: Suspecting that some of his own Relations that were Potent, and Men of Interest, were Plotting against him, he re∣solv'd to rid himself of them; to that end he pickt out some of the most Covetous and Bloody Fellows from among his Barbarian Mercenary Soldiers, and hid them in cer∣tain Vaults in the Palace; and then sending for such of his Friends and Kindred as he was most jealous of, when he had them there, he cut all their Throats by those bloody Exe∣cutioners of his Cruelty, and forthwith ordered their Wives and Children to be put to death after the same manner. The rest of his Father's Friends that either had Command in the Army, or were Go∣vernors of Cities, he either caus'd to be treacherously Assassinated, or seizing them, Mur∣ther'd them and their Families together. Being therefore hated not only by his Sub∣jects, but by all the neighbouring Nations, all within his Dominions, endeavour'd as much as they could to bring about a Revolution and Change of Government.
10. Tiberius Gracchus was the Son of Tiberius who had been twice Consul, and a Man Tiberius Gracchus. very famous, both as to the Sword and Gown. He was likewise the Grandchild of Pub∣lius Scipio by his Daughter, that Scipio who conquer'd Hannibal and the Carthaginians. Be∣ing Nobly Born on both sides, he excell'd all his equals in Age, in sound Judgment and Elocution, and indeed in all manner of Learning, so that he was not afraid to enter the Lists with any that dar'd to oppose him. 11. The Syrian Slaves cut off the Hands of those they took prisoners, not at the Syrian Slaves. Wrists, but Hands and Arms together. 12. The Senate dreading the Anger of the Gods, consulted the Sibyl's Books, and The Senate of Rome send Ambassadors to Sicily. sent Ambassadors into Sicily, who passed through the whole Island, erected Altars to Ju∣piter Aetneus, and offered solemn Sacrifices to him, inclosing the Altars round with Stone Walls to exclude all but those of the several Cities, who, after the Customs of their own Country, were us'd to offer Sacrifices to him. 13. Gorgus was of * Morgantium sirnamed Cambalus, a Principal Man for Wealth and Now Georgeto in the Kingdom of Naples. Authority in the City. Going abroad to Hunt, and falling in amongst a company of Robbers, he took to his Heels to get into the Town, who being by chance met by Gor∣gus his Father on Horseback, the Father forthwith leapt off his Horse, and desir'd his The Love of a Father and a Son. Son to Mount, and make away with all speed into the City; but as the Son was not willing to prefer his own preservation before that of his Father's, so the Father could not bear the death of his Son by avoiding the Danger himself. And thus while they were with Tears intreating one another, and striving to exceed each other in endearing natural Affections, the Love of the Father in contest with the Love of the Son, they were overtaken by the Thieves, and both kill'd upon the place. 14. Zibelmius the Son of Diegylis following his Father's steps in Cruelty, enrag'd at Zibelmius his Cruelty. what the Thracians had done, proceeded to that degree of implacable Severity, and height of Wickedness, that he put to death all that had displeased him, with their whole Families, and upon most slight and frivolous occasions cut some in pieces Limb from Limb, Crucify'd others, and Saw'd several asunder. He kill'd likewise little Children before their Parents Faces, and Infants at their Mothers Breasts, and having cut them in pieces, disht up their Members as Curiosities for their Kindred to Feast upon, reviving as it were those Antient Repasts and Entertainments of Tereus a King of Thrace. See the Story of Tereus Progne and Philomela, Ovid, Met. Lib. 6. His punishment by his own Subjects. Tereus and Thyestes Feasted by his Brother Atreus King of Mycena, with his own Sons begotten upon Atreus his Wife. Ovid. Met. Thyestes. At length the Thracians seiz'd upon his Person; but it was scarce possible to punish him ac∣cording to his Deserts. For how could one body suffer the punishment justly due for the Cruelties and Injuries committed against a whole Nation? However to the utmost of their Power they repaid him with all the Scorn and Contempt, and extremity of Torture upon his Body, they could invent. 15. Ptolemy Physcon when he saw his Sister Cleopatra was so great an Enemy to him, and Ptolemy Physco his barbarous Cru∣elty. Justin. c. 8. 39. Livy. Olymp. 162. 4. Ant. Ch. 130. Val. Max. lib. 9. c. 2. This of Vales. Prag. cited by Ush. An. 494. Atheneus ci∣ted by Ush. Ant. Ch. 128. Hegelocus Marsyas. See Ush. An. 495. Valesius his Fragments ci∣ted Ant. Ch. 139. could not revenge himself otherwise upon her, contriv'd a most notorious piece of Villa∣ny for that purpose. For he imitated the Cruelty of Medea, Murdering her Son Mem∣phites, Begotten by himself, who was then in Cyprus, and a very young Boy: And not content with this, he committed a far more wicked Act: For cutting off the Child's Limbs, he put them in a Chest, and deliver'd them to one of his Guard to be convey'd to Alexandria; and whereas Cleopatra's Birth-day was then near at hand, he commanded that in the Night next before that day, he should set down the Chest at the Palace Gates; which being accordingly executed, Cleopatra made great lamentation, and all the Peo∣ple were in a great Rage against Ptolemy. 16. Atheneus Antiochus his General in a short time met with a just and due Reward for his Insolencies and Abuses in all places wherever he Quarter'd in his March: For be∣ing the first that fled, and forsook Antiochus in the heat of the Fight, coming to some of the Towns where he had abus'd his Quarters, all shut their Doors upon him, and eve∣ry one refus'd to help him, either with Meat or Drink, so that he wander'd up and down the Country, till at length he was famish'd to death. 17. Hegelochus General of Ptolemy Physco sent against Marsyas the Alexandrian General, took him prisoner, and cut off all his Army. When Marsyas was brought before the King, and all concluded that he would forthwith put him to some cruel death, Ptolemy pardon'd him beyond all Mens expectation: For now he began to repent of his former Cruelties, and endeavour'd to regain the Peoples Love and Favour by acts of Clemency.
18. Euemerus King of Parthia Born in Hyrcania, exceeding all other Princes in Cruelty, Euemerus. omitted no sorts of Torments he could invent. For many of the Babylonians, upon slight grounds, with their whole Families, he made Slaves and sent them into Media to be Sold. He burnt likewise to the ground the Market-place, and some of the Temples in Babylon, and raz'd the fairest and most beautiful parts of the City. 19. Alexander sirnam'd Zabinas, when those Renown'd Captains Antipater, Ponius, and Alexander Zabinas cited Ush. An. 498. Ant. Ch. 124. Aeropus Revolted from him to Seleucus De∣metrius, Son of Nicanor. Caius Sextius. Revolted from him, and seiz'd upon Laodicea; he at length took the City: However, he Generously spar'd them all. For he was of a mild and gentle Disposition, and pleasing Temper, and of a wonderful Affability in his Converse or Discourse, and was therefore greatly Belov'd of every Body. 20. When Caius Sextius had Taken the City of the Gauls, and Sold the Inhabitants for Slaves, One Crato who was led in Chains with the rest, came up to the Consul, as he sate upon the Tribunal, and told him, He had ever been a Friend to the Romans, and for that rea∣son had suffer'd many Injuries, and had undergone many Stripes and Scourgings from his fellow Citizens: Upon which, Sextius forthwith, with all the demonstration of Kindness, as of a Kinsman, Released him from his Bonds, and Restor'd him his Goods; And for his Good Will to the Romans, gave him Power to set free 900 of the Citizens, such as he himself thought fit. For the Consul was more Generous and Bountiful to Crato than he ex∣pected, to the end the Gauls might see how exactly Just the Romans were, both in their Punishments and Rewards. 21. Alexander not being very confident of the multitude, both in regard of their Raw∣ness Alexander Ush. An. 498. this cited. in Martial Affairs, and their natural Inconstancy, and hankring after Innovations would not adventure upon a pitcht Field; but having got together as much Money as he could, out of the Publick Treasuries, and pillag'd the Temples, resolv'd by Night to steal away into Greece. But whilst he attempted, by the help of some of his Barbarians, to plunder Jupiter's Temple, he was seiz'd upon, and himself and whole Army had like to have been cut off: but he soon escap'd out of their hands and made towards Seleucia: But the Seleucians having heard before-hand, the Brute of his Sacriledge shut their Gates against him; Failing there of his purpose he went to Pisidium, and never after departed from the Sea-Coast. 22. After Caius Gracchus was kill'd by the hands of his own Servant, Lucius Lucius Vitel∣lius his Trea∣chery to his Friend. C. Gracchus. Vitellius who had been one of his particular Friends, was the first that got his Bo∣dy; and was so far from being troubl'd at his death, that he cut off his Head, and car∣ry'd it to his own House, thereby giving a remarkable Instance of his Cruelty and Co∣vetousness. For when Lucius Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 33. c. 3. Opinius the Consul by Proclamation promis'd to Reward him that should bring to him Gracchus his Head, with the weight of it in Gold, Vitellius bor'd a hole in the Neck, and drawing out the Brains, poured in melted Lead in the room. Then he brought the Head to Opinius, and return'd with the promis'd Reward, but was afterwards hated by all to the day of his death, as a Betrayer of his Friend. The Flacci were also all put to death. 23. In Lybia the two Kings drew up their Armies one against another, and Jugurtha Jugurtha and Adherbal Two Brothers Kings at War. routed the Numidians in a great Battle, slaying many of them; whereupon Adherbal his Brother fled to Cirta, where being straitly Besieg'd he sent Ambassadors to Rome to in∣treat them not to suffer a King that was their Friend and Ally to be utterly ruin'd: Whereupon the Senate forthwith sent Messengers into Numidia with Orders to Jugurtha to raise his Siege: which he disregarding, they sent another Embassy vested with Power and Authority; but that was as fruitless as the other; and at length Jugurtha straitly block∣ing up the City round, through extremity of Famine forc'd it to a Surrender, and most unnaturally slew his Brother as he was going out of the City with his Children, and lea∣ving the Kingdom, beseeching him only to spare his Life, neither regarding the Laws of Nature and Consanguinity, nor of Arms, in sparing those that beg for Quarter: He like∣wise scourg'd all the Italians to death that sided with his Brother. 24. Publius Scipio Nasica the Consul, was a Man renown'd both for his Virtue and No∣bleness Scipio Nasci∣ca his Commen∣dation. of Birth; for he was of the same Family with Africanus, and Hispanicus; of whom the first Conquer'd Africa, the other Asia, and the third Spain; and from thence gain'd the several Sirnames before mention'd: And besides the Eminency of his Birth, his Father and Grandfather were the most Eminent Men of the City; for both of them were Chairmen or Speakers. Presidents of the Senate; and the first that gave their Votes, and delivered their Opinions in all publick Matters, to the time of their Deaths. His Grandfather upon an Occasion was judg'd by the Senate the Best Man of all the Roman Citizens. For it be∣ing found written in the Sibyls Books, That the Romans should build a Temple in honour of the great Mother of the Gods, and should bring her Image from Pessinunt in Asia, and
meet it out of the City with all the Orders and Degrees of the Citizens in solemn Pomp and State, and that the Best Man should lead the Men, and the Best Woman be at the head of the Women, when they receiv'd the Image of the Goddess: The Senate per∣forming all that was prescrib'd by the Sibyls writings, judg'd Publius Nasica to be the Best Man, and Valeria the Best Woman. For he was not only eminent for his Piety towards the Gods, but of singular Prudence in governing and ordering matters of State, and of a piercing Judgment. For when Marcus Cato who was Sirnam'd Demosthenes, in delivering his Opinion in the Senate, was ever and anon affirming, That Carthage must be raz'd, though nothing was in debate concerning it, but the Senate was consulting of other Mat∣ters; Publius Nasica was ever of a contrary Opinion, that Carthage was to be preserv'd; In which difference of Opinions it seem'd a matter of great Difficulty to the Senate which of the Two was most adviseable; but those that were accounted the best Statesmen a∣mongst them, preferr'd the Opinion of Nasica. For they conceiv'd, that the Power and Grandeur of the Romans was not to be judg'd of by the Ruine and Destruction of other Cities, but rather by its Sovereign Power and Authority over such as are accounted the most Potent. Besides, if Carthage stood, out of fear of that City the Romans would be kept within the bounds of their Duty, and in Peace and Concord among themselves, and the Common-wealth would be forced to carry it towards their Subjects with more Mode∣ration and Clemency; which things usually strengthen and enlarge all sorts of Govern∣ments: But if Carthage the Rival City be once destroy'd, what can be expected but Ci∣vil Wars among the Romans themselves, and the hatred likewise of all their Allies for the Pride and Covetousness of the Roman Magistrates; all which accordingly happen'd to the Romans after the Destruction of Carthage. For turbulent Factions, Agrarian Laws, grie∣vous Revolts of Confederates, continual and destructive Civil Wars, and all the other Mis∣chiefs which Publius Scipio foretold, came to pass: His Son Nasica afterwards, when he was well in years, ordering the Senate to follow him, kill'd Tiberius Gracchus with his own hands, when he was contriving to set up himself and take upon him the Government. At the Commission of which Fact, the Commons being in an Uproar and Exasperated against the Authors of the Murder, and the Tribunes of the People asking every one of the Senators Man by Man, being brought before them, Who it was that kill'd Gracchus? Every one out of fear of the Rage of the People, deny'd the Fact, and made use of shift∣ing and impertinent Answers: But when it came to Nasica, he own'd, that he kill'd him with his own Hand; and further declar'd, That the designs of Gracchus in aspiring to be absolute Monarch, was a Secret to all other Persons, but very well known to him and the Senate. Whereupon the People, though they were much troubled at the Fact, yet being mov'd by the Boldness and Authority of the Man, from thenceforth rested quiet and said no more: This Scipio Nasica likewise, (Son of the former Nasica) who dy'd Consul this Year, was of an unspotted Conversation all his Days, never tainted or corrupted with Bribes: And being endow'd with Philosophical Principles, he was not only a Philosopher in Words, but in Truth; so that he inherited both the Glory and Virtues of his Ancestors. 25. Antiochus Cyzicenus as soon as he got into Possession of the Kingdom, applied him∣self Antiochus Cyzicenus, cited by Ush. An. 500. to Revellings and Luxury, and Courses altogether unbeseeming Kings. For being extremely Addicted to Anticks, Stage-players, and all sorts of Juglers, he learn'd their Arts with a great deal of Vehemency; He apply'd himself also to Puppit-playing, and plac'd his chiefest Delight in making the Images of living Creatures in bulk Five Cubits, (cover'd over with Gold and Silver,) to move of themselves, and other Engines of that Nature. But as for Warlike Engines and Testudoes, call'd Helepoles, whose Preparations and Magni∣ficence belong'd to Princes, and were commonly of great use, he was altogether want∣ing in them. Moreover, he was much addicted to unseasonable Huntings, and oftentimes would steal out privately by Night, with a Servant or two, to hunt Boars, Lions and Leo∣pards; so that many times he was in danger of his Life by his rash encountring of these wild Beasts. 26. Mecipsa, Son of Massinissa King of Numidia, had many Children; but above them all he lov'd Adherball his Eldest, and Hiempsales and Micipsa; the last of which was the Mecipsa, a King of Nu∣midia; a mild and learned Prince. mildest Prince of all the Kings of Numidia, and sent for the Learnedst Men out of Greece he could hear of, and spending his time with them in improving himself in all sorts of Liberal Sciences, and especially in Philosophy, he enjoy'd his Kingdom, together with his Study of Philosophy to his Old Age. 27. Contoniatus, the Petit Prince of Jentora in Gaul, was eminent for his Prudence and Contoniatus. Skil in Martial Affairs: He was a Friend and an Ally of the Romans, being formerly brought up in Rome, and so season'd with Virtue and Civility; by the help of the Romans he gain'd that Principality in Gaul.
28. Caius Marius, one of the Ambassadors, was slighted by the Proconsul, as one of the Caius Marius. Meanest of them. The rest who were of eminent Birth, and in high Place, were Ho∣nour'd and Respected by the Proconsul. But as for the other who was said to have been but a Publican, and had much ado to get into the lowest Form amongst the The Proconsul. Magistrates, Metellus made no account of him: Though in truth, all the rest lov'd their Ease and a∣voided the Camp, but Marius having been often employ'd in the Wars in desperate Ad∣ventures, seem'd highly to resent the Injury and Affront. But addicting himself with great application of Mind to Martial Affairs, he became a most expert Soldier; and be∣ing naturally of a warlike Spirit, in a short time he grew very Famous; and for his Ge∣nerosity and courteous Deportment, and his affable Carriage in all Meetings towards all that were under his Command, he gain'd the Hearts of all the Soldiers, who studying to make grateful returns for his Kindness, fought the more Chearfully and Courageously, to the end they might advance the Honour and Reputation of their General: And if any other at any time happen'd to be sent to command them, the Soldiers on purpose in the very height of the Battel would fight more carelesly; so that most commonly things mis∣carry'd and came to nought when any other commanded the Army; but when Marius was General the Romans were ever Conquerors. Out of the 36th BOOK. 1. THE Rebellious Slaves did not only waste and destroy Sioily, but those that were The Slaves in Scicily and o∣thers, their Cruelties. free, who had neither Lands nor Goods) betook themselves to Rapine and Rob∣beries, and ravag'd up and down in the Country in Flocks and Droves; they drave away whole Herds of Cattel; Robb'd the Barns in the Towns and Villages, and carried away the Corn and other Fruits of the Earth, and kill'd every one they met, without distinction of either Bond or Free, that none might be left to tell tales of their Murthers and Cruel∣ties. For being there was at this time an Anarchy in Sicily, having no Roman Praetor that exercis'd any Jurisdiction, all ran headlong and committed many and great Enormities with impunity; so that all Places were full of Rapines and Robberies, and the Goods of the Rich made a Prey to Force and Violence: and they who a little before were Noted and Eminent amongst their fellow Citizens for their Wealth, by a sudden change of For∣tune, were not only with the greatest Contempt and Scorn imaginable, Robb'd of all they had by their Slaves, but were forc'd to bear unsufferable Abuses from them that were Freemen of the same Country. And therefore none could scarcely call any thing his own within the City Gates; but what was without, they lookt upon as quite lost, and to be an irrecoverable Prey to the Robbers. To conclude, Confusion and utter Subversion of Law and Justice, rag'd throughout all the Cities and Towns in the Country. For the Rebels after they had wasted the Country, out of Hatred to their Masters, and insatia∣ble Covetousness, beset the High Ways and made them impassable. And those Slaves that were yet within the Cities Sick, but in their Hearts longing for an opportunity to Rebel, were a dread and terror to their Masters. 2. Saturninus the Tribune being a Man of a profuse Life, and Quaestor in the Province of Ostia, ordering all the Corn to be carry'd away to Rome, for his Male Administration Saturninus. of the Government was Rebuk'd by the Senate, and divested of his Authority, and the Province committed to the Care of another. But afterwards leaving off his former Lux∣urious course of Life, and growing Sober in his Conversation, he was chosen Tribune of the People. 3. Whereas for Two years together in every Publick Assembly Q Metellus his restoring from Banishment was taken into Debate—His Son traversing the Market-place with his Beard and Hair overgrown, and in a nasty Garment, with Tears in his Eyes, pro∣strated himself at the Feet of every Citizen, intreating them to recall his Father. But the People, though they were very backward to make a President for Exiles for the time to come to hope for Return against the Laws; yet in Compassion to the Young Man, and being moved with importunity of his Intreaty, they recall'd Metellus from Banish∣ment, and sirnam'd the Son Pius for his singular Affection and Care he had of his Fa∣ther. 4. The Romans formerly being govern'd by good and wholesom Laws and Constituti∣ons, by degrees grew to that height of Power, that at length they gain'd the greatest The Roman Manners dege∣nerated. Empire of any that ever any History makes mention of. But of later times, after they
had conquer'd many Nations, and had so long nuzzl'd themselves in the Enjoyment of an unterrupted Peace, they declin'd from their Ancient manners, to wicked and destructive Courses. For the young Men, enjoying Rest and Ease from War, with Plenty of all things to be Fuel to their Lusts, gave themselves up to Luxury and Intemperance; for in the City, Prodigality was preferr'd before Frugality, and living at Ease, before the Ser∣vice of the Camp: And he that Wasted all his time in Voluptuousness, and not he that was of a virtuous and sober conversation, was accounted by all to be the only happy Man. And therefore sumptuous Feasts, most fragrant Oyntments, flowr'd and embroi∣der'd Carpets, rich and stately Furniture, for their Banqueting Rooms, curiously wrought with Gold, Silver, Ivory, and such like Materials were then cry'd up every where. Wine that was but of an ordinary Gusto, would not be toucht, but only Of Faleri∣nus in Cam∣pania, in the Kingdom of Naples, now call'd Terra di Lavaro. Falernian and Chian, and such like pleasant Wines: the choicest Fish likewise, and every thing of the best sort, was provided to gratifie their shameless Luxury. The young Gallants likewise, wore Garments of the finest and softest Wooll, Woven so fine, as that they were even transparent, and for their slender Webb, altogether like unto Womens Gowns. All these things serving to nourish Luxury, and Voluptuousness (to their Ruin and destruction) being generally coveted by all, in a short time grew to excessive Rates; for a Hogs∣head of Falernian Wine was sold for a 100 Every Drach∣ma Seven pence half-peny, so 100 Drachmas is 3l. 2s. 6d. Drachmas, and a Hogshead of Salted Fish from the Pontick Sea, for 400. Skilful Cooks were sold for Four Talents a-piece, and delicate and beautiful Boys, for many Talents. And whereas all with full swing gave up themselves to this luxurious course of Life, some of the Governors in the Provinces, us'd their utmost endeavour to reform these Enormities, and to that end, being in high Places, and so most observable, by reason of the Eminency of their Stations, they fram'd their own Lives so, as to be Examples of Virtue, and liberal Education to others. 5. Quintus Mucius Scoevola, us'd his utmost endeavour to reform other Mens corrupt Mucius Scae∣vola, his Vir∣tues. Ush. An. 509. Cited. Manners, by his own Virtuous Example. For when he was sent Proconsul into Asia, he made choice of Quintus Rutilius his most intimat Friend for his Legate, and ever took his Advice in the management of his Government, and making of Laws: All the Costs and expences both of himself and his Retinue, he order'd to be defray'd out of his own Publius Ru∣tilius Rufus. Purse; and by his moderation and frugality, together with his just and upright dealing, he freed the Province from its former Miseries and Oppressions. For the Proconsuls of Asia that were before him, confederated with the Publicans (in whose hands at that time, was the administration of Justice at Rome) and fill'd the whole Province with the Pressures of their illegal Exactions. 6. Mucius Scoevola managing his Government with all possible Diligence and Integri∣ty, did not only suppress all false Accusations, but restrain'd the Injuries and Oppressi∣ons Mucius Scae∣vola. Ush. An. cited 509. committed by the Publicans. For as often as any who had been pinch'd by those Toll-gatherers made their address to him, he Commissionated upright Judges, by whom he Condemn'd them wheresoever he came, and forc'd them to pay the Mulct impos'd upon them to the Persons they had injur'd, but for Offences that deserv'd death, he gave sentence of death. One of the chief of these Publicans that had contracted with his Master for his Freedom, for a great Sum of Money, before he was manumitted, he condemn'd to die and crucify'd him. 7. Those that were condemn'd by the Judges, he deliver'd over to the Persons injur'd, to be by them carry'd away to Prison, so that they who before through their insolency Mucius Scae∣vola. Ush. An. ibid. and covetousness committed all manner of Injustice, were unexpectedly hurried away to the Goal by them that they had injur'd. Moreover by discharging his own Ex∣pences and the Expences of his Retinue out of his own private Purse, he soon inclin'd the Hearts of all the Province towards the People of Rome. 8. Lucius Asellius (whose Father was a Quaestor) being sent Praetor into Sicily, finding Lucius Asel∣lius. a prudent Governor of Sicily. in the Province great Havock and Devastation, by his prudent management of things in a short time restor'd it to its former state and condition. For after the Example of Scoe∣vola, he made choice of his intimate Friend Caius Sempronius Longus for his Legate, and join'd with him Publius, the famous Roman Knight for his Counsellor, who then resided at Syracuse, and besides the goods of Fortune, was eminent for the Virtues of his Mind; his Piety towards the Gods is sufficiently testify'd by his Sacrifices, Gifts, and Adorning of the Temples. And the quick and lively use of all his Senses to the last moment of his Life was an evident Argument of his Sobriety and Temperance: And his Learning, & courteous Disposition are apparent from the great Value and Esteem he ever had of learned Men, and his Bounty and Liberality out of his own Purse towards them that appli'd themselves to the study of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. Assellius assisted with the advice of those two Men, who continu'd with him under the same Roof, and sate with him in Judg∣ment
upon the Bench, made it his daily care to reform and set all things right again in the Province. 9. In the Courts of Justice, he aim'd at the Publick Good, and clear'd the Court of all Asilius. Sycophants, and false Accusers; and it was his chief care to relieve the poorest Man, and those that were less able to help themselves; for whereas the other Praetors committed the care of Orphans and Widows, that were destitute of Friends, to Tutors and Guardi∣ans that were Strangers, he lookt after them himself, and decided their Causes with all the care and diligence imaginable, and was a great Relief to the Oppressed. And as long as he was Governor of Sicily, continually using his utmost endeavour to Suppress both private and publick Injuries, he at length settled the Province in its former State of happiness and prosperity. 10. Marcus Livius Drusus, tho' he was very young, yet was adorn'd with whatever M. Livius Drusus. was commendable either in reference to his Body or Mind: For he was the Son of a renown'd Father, who was singularly belov'd of the People of Rome, both upon the ac∣count of his noble Birth, and virtuous Qualifications. And he himself for Eloquence excell'd all his equals in Age, and all his fellow Citizens in Wealth and Riches: And up∣on the account of his Faithfulness to his Word, he gain'd a very great Interest and Au∣thority among the Citizens, and being likewise of a great Spirit, seem'd to be the only Patron of the Senate. Out of the 37th BOOK. 1. POmpoedius General of the Marsians, attempted indeed a Great, but a most Rash and inconsiderate Act; for he pickt out 10000 Soldiers from amongst them, that Pompaedius, General of the Martians, his atempt upon Rome. were afraid of suffering due punishment for their Offences, and commanding them to hide their Swords under their Coats, Marcht with them towards Rome, with a design to beset the Senate round with this Rabble, and to demand the Freedom of the City, and if he could not prevail, to lay the City Wast with Fire and Sword. Being by chance met * A People in Italy. upon the Road by Caius Domitius, he askt him, whither goest thou Pompedius with so great a Company? Who answer'd, to Rome, for that he was sent for by the Tribunes of the People, to be receiv'd into the Freedom of the City. But Domitius reply'd, saying, Thou mayest obtain what thou seek'st for, with far more ease and much more honesty, if thou didst not make up to the Senate in a Hostile manner; for the Senate will not be compel∣led, but intreated and petitioned to bestow that Grace and Favour upon the Latines, that are their Allies and Confederates. The Man being taken with this, as with a Divine Admonition from Heaven, and over-perswaded with what Domitius had said, forthwith return'd home. And thus Domitius by his seasonable and prudent advice, deliver'd his Country from dreadful Mischiefs that threatned it, addressing himself to Pompaedius, much better than Servilius the Proconsul did to the Picentians. For he spoke not to them as to Freemen and Allyes, but as to Slaves, and insulted over them with the greatest scorn and contempt imaginable, and threatn'd and terrifi'd them to that Degree, that he stirr'd up the Confederates, to the Ruin and Destruction both of himself and others. But Domitius on the contrary, by his Mild and calm Discourse, allay'd the Fury and Violence of the Inrag'd Multitude. 2. There was one Agamemnon a Cilician, for his many wicked pranks and slaughters of the Confederates, was committed to Prison in A City in A pulia, in Italy. Asculum by the Romans. This Man being Releas'd by the Picentians, in gratitude for the kindness shew'd him, Fought resolutely on their side: And being enur'd to Robberies from a Boy, joyning with others of the like Gang, he Wasted and Spoil'd the Enemies Country. 3. The Inhabitants of the City In Italy Pinna, for their constant Fidelity to the Romans, fell into most dreadful calamities, for being obstinately resolv'd not to desert the Romans (without any touch or Sense of Natural affection) were forc'd to see their Children knockt on the Head before their Eyes. 4. Lucius Suila bravely and gallantly perform'd most noble Actions, and his Fame and Renown was Blazon'd all over the City: And the People of Rome judg'd him worthy of Lucius Suila. the Consulship, looking upon him as a Man Eminent, both for Valour and Conduct in Martial affairs: To conclude, it was apparent, he was likely to arrive at the highest pitch of Glory. 5. Mithridates having conquer'd the Roman Generals in Asia, and taken many Prisoners, Mithridates, citd by Ush An 515. sent them all home Cloth'd, and with provision in their Snapsacks. This mild Passage
was cry'd up every where, that all the Cities generally came flocking in to him; inso∣much that Ambassadors came to him from all Cities, inviting him by their publick De∣crees to come in to them, calling him their God, and Deliverer. And upon notice of the Kings approach, the People came hudling out of the several Cities in white Garments, to to Salute him, and receiv'd him with great joy and acclamation. 6. Mithridates his Party sweeping all before them in Asia, as they went without Con∣troul, all the Cities strangely Revolted from the Romans: And as for the Lesbians, they resolv'd not only to yield up themselves to the King, but to deliver up Aquilius also, Mithridates; cited by Ush. An. ibidem. who flew away to Mitilene, and lay there to be Cur'd of a Disease. Whereupon they sent to his Lodgings a Company of choice Youths, Stout and Resolute, who came rush∣ing into the Room where Aquilius was, and took him and bound him, supposing he would be a most rare Present, and very acceptable to Mithridates: But Aquilius tho' he was but as yet a Youth, perform'd a most Noble and Heroick Act; for preferring Death before Disgrace, and the punishments of a Slave, he prevented them that were ready to hurry him away, and kill'd himself. With which desperate Act, those that came to take him along with them, were so Terrifi'd, that they durst not approach him. But Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 33 c. 3. says Mithridates, pour'd melted Gold down his Throat, for his Covetousness. Ush. An. 518. Ant. Ch. 88. This was in the War between Mithridates and tue Ro∣mans. His Valour and Resolution therefore was cry'd up every where, who by the putting an end to his own Life, had rescu'd himself with an undaunted Courage from the Torments design'd to be Executed upon him. 7. In order to a Sea Fight, the Rhodians were overmatcht in nothing, but in the num∣ber of Ships, and in all other respects they were far Superiour, as being the better Pilots, knew better how to order their Ships, ply the Oars, had the more sprightly Soldiers, and the more expert Commanders; whereas on the contrary, the Cappadocians were but Fresh water Soldiers, seldom exercis'd at Sea Fights, and, which commonly proves the Bane of all, did all Tumultuously and without any Order. It's true indeed, they were as cheerful and ready to Ingage as the Rhodians, because they were to Fight just under the King's Eye, and therefore desir'd to approve their Loyalty and Affection to him; and in regard they only overpowr'd their Enemies in number of Ships, they us'd all the Arts and Contrivances they could devise, to Surround and Hem them in. 8. Caius Marius was the most renown'd Person of any of his time, when he was young; he was ambitious of Honour and Glory, free from Covetousness, and perform'd many Caius Marius, occasion'd great troubles in Rome. noble Acts, both in Europe and Africa, so that his Name was famous, and cry'd up in all Places. But when he grew old, and coveted the Riches of King Mithridates, and the Wealth of the Cities of Asia, and sought against the Laws to have the Province which was allotted to Cornelius Sulla, to be transferr'd to him, he fell justly into many Calamities; for he not only miss'd those Riches which he Coveted, but lost all that were his own; the Quaestors by reason of his extraordinary Covetousness being sent, to seize upon all his Goods for the publick Use. He was moreover by the Judgment of the People con∣demn'd to die, but escap'd that punishment by flight, and wander'd Solitarily and alone, up and down Italy, and at length got into Numidia, poor and destitute of all things Afterwards when the Civil Wars broke out in Rome, he join'd with those that were judg'd Enemies to the Romans, and being Victorious, he was not contented with his Return into his own Country, but rais'd great Commotions in the Commonwealth; But at length having gain'd the Seventh Consulship, and by his own Misfortunes, learn'd the incon∣stancy of Fortune, he was unwilling to put things to a hazard any more: And therefore foreseeing the dreadful War Sylla was bringing upon his Country, he Murder'd himself; but leaving behind him the Seeds of a most grievous War, he involv'd his Son and Coun∣try in most dreadful Calamities: For his Son being forc'd to contest with an Enemy more Potent than himself, he most miserably perisht (upon taking of the City) in a Vault, whither he fled to hide himself. And the People of Rome, and Cities of Italy, having been now long ingag'd in a cruel War, fell under most dreadful Calamities. For two principal Men of the City, Scaevola and Crassus, without any Course of Legal proceed∣ings, were Murder'd in the Senate; whose cruel Murder plainly evidenc'd the greatness of those Miseries that then threatned both the City and all Italy. For the greatest part of the Senate, and the most eminent Men of the City were slaughter'd by Sylla, and no less than 100000 Soldiers were slain, either in Mutinies or Battles; and all these Miseries were at first occasion'd by the Covetousness only of Marius. 9. Lucius Cornelius Merula, who was chosen Consul in the room of Cinna; when Cin∣na agreed to Peace, upon Condition he might be restored to the Consulship, approv'd himself a good Citizen, and evidenc'd his extraordinary love to his Country. For ad∣dressing himself to the Senate and People, and Discoursing concerning what might most tend to the publick good, he promis'd he would be the Procurer of Peace; and whereas
he was chosen Consul much against his Will, he declar'd he would now freely of his own accord give up his Authority into the hands to Cinna; upon which he forthwith surren∣dred his Consulship, and became a private Man. The Senate hereupon sent Ambassa∣dors to Cinna, and having agreed with him upon the Terms of Peace, introduc'd him in∣to the City. 10. Lucius Sylla being greatly straiten'd for want of Money, rifled Three Temples Lucius Sylla. that were full of devoted Gold and Silver, that is the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, and the famous Temple of Jupiter at Olympus, out of which last, he carry'd away a vast Treasure; for that it had never been before violated. But as to the Temple at Delphos, the Phocians in the time of the sacred War, had drain'd it of its Wealth. When Sylla therefore had thus heap'd up a mighty mass of Gold and Silver, and other Treasure, he was sufficiently furnish'd with Money to carry on the War in Italy. But having without all Fear or Sense of Religion, thus robb'd the Temples, he conse∣crated a piece of Land to the Gods, for the maintaining of yearly Sacrifices, in lieu of the Money: And would often in a Joke and Jest say, That he was sure to be Victorious in all Encounters, who had the Gods for his Assistants, and for that end, had help'd him with Money. 11. Fimbria having out-ran Flaccus, and gotten a long way before him in his March, Fimbria his Soldiers spoil the Country by License Cited, Ush. An. 522, 523. thought he had now gain'd a most convenient opportunity for some Commotion or o∣ther; and therefore that he might indear the Soldiery to him, he permitted them to make incursions into the Countreys of their Allies, and make what havock they pleas'd therein, and to take Captive every one they met withal. The Soldiers very readily embrac'd the License, so that within few days, they had scrambl'd together abundance of Wealth by their plundering. But those that had been spoil'd of their Goods, went to meet the Con∣sul, and made bitter complaints to him of the Injuries they had receiv'd, who being much troubl'd at the business, commanded them to follow him, and he himself would see re∣stitution made to every one that had suffer'd; and accordingly with Threats he command∣ed Fimbria to return forthwith to the Owners, whatsoever had been taken away from them. But Fimbria laid all the blame upon the Soldiers, who did this without any Com∣mission from him; but covertly he advis'd them, not to regard the Consul's Command, nor suffer that to be taken from them which they had got by the Law of Arms: Upon this, when Flaccus commanded restitution to be made of their Rapine, adding threatning to his commands, the Soldiers refus'd to Obey, so that there follow'd a great Mutiny in the Camp. 12. Fimbria having again cross'd the Hellespont, animated his Soldiers to Rapines and Fimbri. Ush. An. 524. all kind of Villanies, exacted Moneys from the Cities, and divided it amongst the Sol∣diers, who having obtain'd an uncontroul'd License, did what they listed, and allur'd moreover with the hopes of a large Income, lov'd Fimbria as one who had deserv'd ex∣treamly well of the whole Army. Moreover those Cities that had stood out against him, when he had taken 'em, he gave them to the plunder of his Soldiers, and so he dealt Ush. An. ibi. with * Nicomedia. 13. The same Fimbria being admitted into Cizicum, professing himself a Friend to the Fimbria. Ush. An. 523. Ant. Ch. 85. Place, as soon as he was got in, began to Impeach all the wealthiest of them, and charge them with some Crime or other: Two of these, the principal Men of the City, after he had pass'd Sentence on them, he caus'd to be whipt with Rods, to terrifie the rest, and afterwards struck off their Heads, and set their Goods to Sale, and forc'd others out of Fear, to give him all they had, as a Ransom for their Lives. 14. Cn. Pompeius addicted himself to Martial Affairs, and inur'd himself to the hard∣ships and Fatigues of War, so that in a short time he became very expert in Military Matters: For casting off all Sloth and Effeminateness, he was always Night and Day doing something or other that was useful and advantagious for matters relating to War: For he was very sparing in his Diet, eat his Meat sitting, and altogether forbore Baths, and such like delights. He allotted but a few Hours of the Night for Sleep, and spent the rest in the Cares of a General, relating to what he was to put in Execution the next Day; so that by his constant forethoughts of the uncertain Events of War, he became a most expert Commander. And therefore, whereas another could scarce in the same time sit himself to take upon him the Charge of an Army already rais'd, in that time, and much less he Rais'd them, Train'd, and Disciplin'd them. And when the News of his famous Exploits was brought to Rome, every Body at first reflecting upon his youth, more than thinking upon his Valour, slighted him, supposing the Messengers stretcht in their Relations, and made things look bigger, than in truth they were. But when the certain Event confirm'd the former Report, the Senate sent out Junius Bru∣tus. Junius against him, whom he routed and put to Flight.
15. Lucius Scipio's Army being corrupted, Revolted, and went over to Sylla; Scipio Lucius Scipio. now looking upon himself as a lost Man, Sylla sent to him a Party of Horse to con∣duct him whithersoever he pleas'd. Being therefore forc'd in a Moment to lay aside the Ensigns of his Authority, he was forthwith by the courtesie of Sylla, brought in a pri∣vate Habit to the Place he desir'd. But presently after he resum'd the Ensigns of his Authority, and again Marcht forth with a considerable Army. 16. In the mean time the Persons of the greatest Quality at Rome, by false accusations, were put to death, amongst whom Quintus Mucius Scaevola, the chief Priest, a most ho∣nourable and virtuous Person, came to an unworthy End, only the Romans were fortu∣nate in this, that the High Priest dy'd not in the most Sacred Place: For the cruelty of the Murderers was such, that they laid him upon the very Of Vesta. Altar, and there cut his Throat, so that by his own Blood, he extinguish'd that Fire that out of a Religious De∣votion, from Ancient times was ever kept Burning. 17. The Names of those that were proscrib'd, being fixt up in the Market-place, on Proscriptions, Liv. Epitom. lib. 89. A remarkable Instance of one proscrib'd, who glory'd over others. a sudden a Multitude of People came flocking in to read it, of whom very many pity'd those that were thus Condemn'd to die. But one amongst the rest a most malicious and insolent Fellow, glory'd over the miserable Condition of the afflicted, and bawl'd out most spiteful words against them, whom some incens'd Deity forthwith repaid with a just Revenge. For by chance reading his own Name, as one proscrib'd at the bottom of the Roll, he presently threw his Gown over his Head, and began to fly through the thickest of the People, but being known to one that stood next to him, who discover'd him to be one condemn'd, he was instantly surrounded and seiz'd, and then put to death to the great joy of all that heard of it. 18. Cneius Pompeius being a long time Praetor in Sicily, appli'd himself to the business Cn. Pompeius of the Courts of Justice, and deciding both publick and private Controversies, discharg'd his Office with so much diligence and integrity, that none ever merited more Com∣mendation. For tho' he was but Two and twenty years of Age, a time which might have drawn him off by foolish youthful Lusts, yet he carri'd himself with so much gra∣vity and sobriety all the while he was in Sicily, that the Virtue of the young Man was much admir'd by all the Sicilians.
FRAGMENTS OUT OF The Lost Histories OF Diodorus Siculus, CONCERNING EMBASSIES. Published by Fulvius Ursinus. LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in Pater-Noster-Row: 1699.
To the READER. THese few Fragments, together with those of Polybius, Dionysius Halicarnas∣sus, Dion Casseus, and Appian were Publish'd in the Year of Our Lord 1581. By Fulvius Ursinus a Roman Born, and Eminently Learn'd; But for a further and more particular Account of 'em, I refer the Reader to the Epistle to the Fragments of Valerius plac'd next before these. And therefore have now no further to add, but an acknowledgment of Thanks due to a Learned Person in Oxford, through whose Can∣dor the Book out of which the Translation of these Fragments was made, was brought to hand for perusal. I. IN the Reign of Tullus Hostilius King of the Romans, the Albans, jealous of the Olymp. 27. Ant. Ch. 669. About the 31 of Manasses. King of Judah. growth of the Roman Power, pretended that the Romans committed Thefts and Robberies in their Country, and therefore sent Ambassadors to Rome to demand Justice, with Instructions, that if they did not hearken to them, to denounce War against 'em; Hostilius the King of Rome understanding that they sought occasion to pick a Quarrel, and begin a War, Commanded his Friends and Officers to Entertain the Ambassadors courteously, and persuade them to Peace and Amity. But the King not willing hastily to give 'em Audience, sent some in the mean time to the Albans with Orders and In∣structions like to those of the Albans to him; ordering this, as prompted thereunto by Livy lib. 1. Dionys. lib. 3. that Antient Custom, according to which the Old Romans studied nothing more than that their Wars should be Just and Warrantable: For he was very cautious lest not be∣ing able to find out the First Authors of the Depredations, or such as were to be deli∣ver'd up to the Demands of Justice, he should be thought to be the first Fomenter of an unjust War. But it falling out that the Ambassadors that were sent to Alba were first denied Justice; upon the 30th. day they denounc'd War against the Albans.  The Al∣bane Ambassadors, according to their desires receiv'd Answer, That they being the first that deny'd doing Justice, the Romans were they that now denounc'd War against them. And these were the Reasons that the People, who were before Ally'd by Marriages, and at mu∣tual Here seems something to be defective, to be supply'd by Livy, lib. 1. Amity one with another, now became Enemies, and Alienated one from another. II. When Cambyses King of Persia was Lord of all Aegypt, the Lybians and Cyrenians confederating with the Aegyptians, sent Presents, and promised entire Obedience and Subjection to their Commands. III. The Ambassadors that were sent from Nabis and Titus Quin∣tus Flamini∣nus, not Fla∣minius as Plu∣tarch says; for Flamininus was of the Pa∣trician, but Flaminius of the Plebeian. See Livy. lib. 32. Ant. Ch. 189. Flamininus to Rome concern∣ing the terms of Peace, after they had open'd to the Senate the Matters given them in Charge; the Senate decreed the Articles to be confirm'd, and that all their Garisons should be remov'd, and their Forces drawn out of all parts of Greece. When Flamininus heard of the Senate's Decree, he Summon'd all the Nobility of Greece from all parts, to meet in a General Council, where he rehears'd to 'em the great Kindnesses and Good will of the Romans towards the Grecians, and Apologiz'd for the matter relating to Nabis, because they did in that Affair, as far as they were able. He told them likewise, that ac∣cording to their Desire all the Inhabitants of Greece should be free and eas'd of all their Garisons, and above all, be Govern'd by their own Laws. But he begg'd the Greeks would so far Gratifie him, as to enquire what Italian Servants were among 'em, and to discharge them within Thirty Days; which was done accordingly. IV. The Senate again gave Audience to the Grecian Ambassadors, and Caress'd 'em with very fair words, desirous to have them earnest and forward in the prosecution of the War against The Great. Antiochus, which they suddenly expected. They gave Answer likewise to the Ambassadors of King of Ma∣cedon. Philip, that because he maintain'd his Fidelity they would free him from Tribute, and discharge his Son Who was a Hostage. Liv. lib. 34. See Livy De∣cad. 4. lib. 4. Demetrius. And to those that came from Antiochus they appointed Ten of the Senate to hear what they said they had in charge from the King. When the Commissioners sate, one of the Ambassadors nam'd Menip∣pus, President of the Embassie, Declar'd, that they came to make up a League of Friend∣ship and Confederacy between the Romans and Antiochus. But he said that the King greatly wondred for what manner of reason the Romans should lay their Commands
upon him, what parts of Europe he should make his Concern; What Cities he should not meddle with, nor collect the Tributes of some that were in Arrear; that it was not usual for those that are making a Treaty upon equal Terms, but for the Conquerors, to Impose in such a manner; And that their Ambassadors that were sent to him to Lysi∣machia, imperiously charg'd him with these things: That Antiochus had no War with the Romans, and if they have a mind to enter into an Alliance and League with him, he was ready. Flamininus Answer'd, there were two things propounded by the Senate, let him chuse which of them he wou'd; and that is, If he would relinquish all his Pretences in Europe, the Romans would not meddle with his Concerns in Asia: And if this did not please him, then they were to let the King know that the Romans would assist their Friends and Allies when opprest. The Ambassadors reply'd, They could not agree to any thing that might impair the King's Sovereignty. The next day the Senate told the Grecians, That if Antiochus did busy himself, and intermeddle with any thing in Europe, the Romans wou'd with all their Care and Diligence imaginable set free all the Greeks that were in Asia. The Grecian Ambassadors hereupon approved of all by an Applause, but the King's Ambassadors intreated the Senate that they would consider into what Dan∣gers and Miseries both Parties would be brought, and not to be rash in their Resolves, but that they wou'd give the King time to consult, and themselves to be better advis'd about these things. V. As to the Aetolian Ambassadors that sought for Peace, the Senate decreed, that they should either give up all their Country to the Romans, or forthwith pay to them a Liv. lib. 37. Thousand Talents of Silver, upon this severe Answer (never suspecting any such thing would have been enjoyn'd) they were seized with great Fear, and being that they had adher'd to the Philip of Macedon. King they fell into inextricable streights and perplexities, not having any means left, or way open to escape utter Ruin. VI. Antiochus hearing that the Romans had pass'd over into Asia, sent Heraclides of Byzan∣tium to Treat with the Consul about a Peace, with offers to bear half of the Charges Antiochus the Great. Ant. Ch. 187. Livy. lib. 37. Polyb. Leg. 23. of the War; to give up Lampsacus, Smyrna, and Alexandria, upon the account of which Cities he conceiv'd the War broke forth: For those were the first of all the Greek Cities of Asia that by their Ambassadors to the Senate, pray'd the Assistance of the Romans for the regaining of their Liberty. VII. Antiochus promis'd Publius Scipio the President of the Council to release his Son Ant. Ch. 189. Justin. lib. 34. c. 7. Polyp. Leg. 23. without Ransom, whom he had taken prisoner when he lay about the Island Eubaea: and besides this, that he would give him a great Sum of Money upon the obtaining of a Peace. Scipio answer'd that he would return the King Thanks for the Release of his Son, but that he did not want those Sums; and in requital of so remarkable a Kindness, he advis'd him as a Friend not to withstand the Pomans, of whose Valour he had had Ex∣perience. But Antiochus judging those terms to be harder than were fit to be comply'd with, rejected his Advice. VIII. In Rome before the overthrow of Antiochus, the Ambassadors from the Aetolians being brought into the Senate, and not in the least excusing the Faults, but setting forth the great Services the Aetolians had perform'd to the Roman State; one of the Senate rose up and ask'd the Ambassadors whether the Aetolians had given up themselves to the Protection of the Romans? The Ambassadors being hereupon silent and dumb, the Se∣nate suspecting that the Aetolians fixt their hopes in Antiochus, sent them back into Greece with a fruitless Embassy. IX. Antiochus laying aside all thoughts of War, sent Ambassadors to the Consul to ask Ant. Ch. 187. Pardon for his Miscarriages, and to procure a Peace upon any terms that possibly might be had. The Consul keeping close to the Moderation and Clemency of his Country, and advis'd likewise by his Brother P. Scipio. Vid. Liv. lib. 38. Polyb. Leg. 35. Liv. lib. 37. Just. lib. 31. c. 8. Publius, agreed to a Peace upon these Conditions; That the King should leave all Europe to the Romans, and part likewise with all the Coun∣tries and Cities lying on this side the Taurus; That he should give up all his Elephants and long Ships, and pay all the Charges and Expences occasion'd by the War, which were computed to Fifteen thousand Eubaean Talents. That he should deliver up into their Hands Hannibal the Carthaginian, and Thoas the Aetolian, and some others, and give Twenty Hostages, such as the Romans should nominate. Antiochus out of a long∣ing desire of Peace having accepted these Conditions was freed from the War. X. After the overthrow of Antiochus there came Ambassadors from all the Cities and Liv. lib. 37. 38. Polyb. Leg. 25. 36. States of Asia, some concerning the Freedom of their Cities, others relating to Congra∣tulations for the good Services they had done for Rome, in joining in the War against Antiochus. To all which the Senate gave great Encouragement, and said they would send Ten Commissioners into Asia, who with the Praetors. Generals should bring all Orders
with them. When the Ambassadors were return'd into their own Countries, the Ten Commissioners with Scipio and Aemilius met in Council together, and decreed that the Regions on this side Tus should be given to Eumenes, and the Elephants. But Caria and Lycia they assign'd to the Rhodians. They order'd likewise that such Cities as paid Tribute to Eumenes should be subject to him; but that such as were Tributary to Antiochus should be freed from all Tribute whatsoever. XI. When the Gallogreeks. Galatian Ambassadors came to Cncius Manlius the Proconsul to Treat for Peace, he answer'd he wou'd come to terms of Peace with them when their Kings came to him. XII. The same coming into Lycaonia brought Wheat. Corn that was due from Antiochus, and the yearly Tribute of a Thousand Talents according to the Articles of Peace. XIII. The General Assembly of the Achaians coming together in Peloponnesus, the Ro∣man Commissioners met them, and Declar'd that the Senate was much displeas'd at the Ant. Ch. 186. demolishing of the Walls of Lacedemon, which was done by the States of Achaia when they were Lords of Sparta, and had brought the Lacedemonians as Members into the same Common-wealth. To this Assembly came the Ambassadors of Eumenes, and brought along with them a Polyb. Leg. 41. 120. Ta∣lents. Present of Twenty Talents; out of which the King intended the Charge of such as were Members of the Achaian Senate should be defraid. But the Achaians disliking the disposal of the Money refus'd the Gift. Thither likewise came Ambassadors from Seleucus, to renew the League formerly made between the Achaians and Antiochus, which League they renew'd and accepted the Present sent from him. XIV. Ambassadors coming to Rome from the Kings and Princes of Asia, those Prin∣ces with Attalus had a Noble Reception, for they were met with great State. and Pomp, and Presented with Rich Gifts, and other extraordinary marks of Respect and Favour; for for these Princes were fast Friends to the Romans, and observant in every thing to the Senate; and besides, having courteously Entertain'd above all others those Romans that came to visit the Stratonice upon the news of Eumenes her Husband being dead. See Liv. lib. 42. Queen, they were judg'd worthy of the most Honourable Recption. For these Reasons the Senate having heard all the Ambassadors, and especially desirous to gratifie the Princes that belong'd to Eumenes, return'd them a Gracious Answer; For they signified that they would send Delegates from the Senate to put a full end to the War with Pharnaces. XV. The defrauding of Creditors in Thessaly, setting all in a Flame among the Aeto∣lians, and every City being fill'd with Seditions, and Tumults; the Senate suspected that all this Confusion was caus'd by King of Ma∣cedon. Vid. Liv. lib. 42. Perseus, and Declar'd to his Ambassadors that they wou'd acquit him of other Crimes whereof he was accus'd: But as to his ejecting of Ab∣rupolis King of Thrace out of his Kingdom; they commanded Perseus, to To'mend his manners. rectifie what he had done. XVI. When Arpalus Perseus's Ambassador was silent, the Senate so far Honour'd Eu∣menes as to present him with an Ivory Chair of State. Chariot, and conferr'd upon him other Ho∣nours, and with special Favour and Respect sent him away into Asia. XVII. The same day the Senate decreed the War against Perseus, and declar'd it to the Ambassadors, but return'd no Answer; and Commanded the Consuls expresly to re∣ject Perseus's Ambassadors. them in the Assemblies, and order'd that the Ambassadors and all the Macedonians should that very day depart out of Rome, and within Thirty Days out of Italy. XVIII. Ptolemy Philometor. Ptolemy King of Egypt knowing that his Ancestors had been formerly Lords of Caelo Syria made great preparations to gain that justly, even by the Law of Nations that was before lost by an unjust War. Antiochus Epiphanes. Ant. Ch. 166. Antiochus having intelligence of these preparations, sent Ambassadours to Rome, Commanding them to acquaint the Senate, that Ptolemy had begun an unjust War against him; But he before nam'd, sent Ambassadors to make his Defence, and to inform the Senate how Antiochus against all Right and Justice Lorded it over Caelo Syria, being Ptolemy's own Inheritance, descended to him from his Ance∣stors. But he order'd them to renew Friendship with the Romans, and to endeavour to Polyb. Leg. 72. put an end to the War against Perseus, XIX. Ambassadors came to Rome from Rhodes to clear themselves of those Crimes that were charg'd against 'em; For in the War against Perseus they seem'd in their Hearts to lean to the King, and to be loose in their Friendship towards the Romans;) But per∣ceiving the aversion and displeasure of the Senate against 'em, they were greatly deject∣ed; Ant. Ch. 193. and when one of the Marcus Ju∣vhntiu. Thalna. Liv. lib. 45. Praetors (who had call'd together an Assembly) stirr'd up the People to a War against the Rhodians, they were exceedingly afraid upon the Ac∣count of their Country, and fell into that Consternation, that they put on Mourning Ha∣bits, not any longer making their Demands, or Solliciting after the usual freedom of Friends, but Deprecating with Tears, that nothing that was Remediless might be decreed
against 'em. But one of the Marcus An∣tonius, Liv. lib. 45. Tribunes introducing them into the Senate, and vio∣lently plucking down the Praetor from the Desks, who was stirring them up to the War, he caus'd them to speak, who saying many things in a way of humble Supplication, re∣ceiv'd such an Answer as altogether freed them from their excessive Fears; But for some of their Crimes they were sharply rebuk'd. XX. About this time came Ambassadors to Rome from all parts to Congratnlate their Victories; the Senate courteously receiv'd them all, and returning them Gracious An∣swers, presently sent them back into their own Country. XXI. About this time there being many Ambassadors arriv'd, the Senate first dispatch'd those that came along with Attalus. For the Romans were jealous of Eumenes, by reason of some Letters that were intercepted, by which it appear'd that he had confederated with Perseus against the Romans, being likewise accus'd by many Ambassadors that came out of Asia, and especially by those that were sent from King King of By∣thynia. Prusias, and the Gallo-Greeks; those with Attalus readily answer'd to every Article of the Charge, and not only clear'd themselves of all the Crimes, but return'd home with much Honour and Reputation. However, the Senate did not altogether lay aside the Suspicion of Eumenes: but pitching upon Caius, sent him away strictly to observe his Affairs and Motions. XXII. Prusias became unworthy of the Royal Dignity, spent his days basely and sor∣didly in flattering his Superiours; and when the Roman Ambassadors came to him, he threw aside the Ensigns of Royalty the Diadem and the Purple, and imitating exactly the Garb of the Roman Libertines, met the Ambassadors with his Head shaven, and wearing a White Cap, and having on the Gown and * Shooes of a Manumitted Slave, so Saluted the Ambassadors, Declaring himself to be a A Manumit∣ted Slave. Libertine of the Romans, then The Purple Robe. which it's no easie matter to find a more dishonourable Title; and many other such mean things he had done before. And when he came to the Portico of the Senate-House, stand∣ing at the Door straight over against the Senators, he fell down prostrate upon both Polyb. Leg. 7. Hands, kissing the Threshold, and cry'd out with a loud voice to them as they sate, All Health! Ye Gods! The Saviours! not sparing any high-soaring Compliments of unmanly Flattery and Effeminacy. And moreover, making a Speech in the Senate agreeable to his sordid Deportment, he proceeded so far as is a shame for me to write. But the Se∣nate being offended at many things he said, return'd him Answer suitable to his Flatte∣ries. For the Romans are eager chiefly to conquer a Stout and Couragious Enemy. XXIII. Ambassadors came to Rome both from the younger and the elder Ptolemy. An Account of Affairs being given to those in the Assembly, the Senate upon hearing of Polyb. Leg. 117. part decreed, that the Ambassadors from the Ptolemy Philometor. elder Ptolemy should depart out of Italy within Five Days at most, and the Confederacy be broken off. But that Ambassadors should be sent to the Ptolemy Euergetes. younger Ptolemy to Declare to him the Good Will of the Senate, and those things that had been signify'd to his Brother. XXIV. About the 155 Olympiad, Ambassadors came from Ariarathes King of Capa∣docca. Ant. Ch. 158. Polyb. Leg. 119. 121. See Just. lib. 35. c. 1. Ariarathes bringing a Crown of the value of 10000 pieces of Gold, signifying the Good Will the King bore to the Romans, and that upon their account he had prohibited Marriage and Amity with De∣metrius; which was attested and confirm'd by the Ambassadors from Greece. The Senate commended Ariarathes and accepted the Crown, and sent back to him such A Staff and an Ivory Cha∣riot, or Chair of State. Polyb. Leg. 121. Presents as were of greatest Esteem among the Romans. XXV. At the same time Ambassadors came from Demetrius bringing likewise a Crown of the value of 10000 pieces of Gold, and those prisoners that were guilty of the Mur∣ther of Octavus: But the Senate had a long Debate what was best and most advisable to do in these Concerns; at last they accepted the Crown, but wou'd not receive Isocrates the Gramarian. defended it. Polyb. Leg. 122. 114. Isocrates and Leptinus stabbed Cneius Octavius the Roman Legat at Laodicea. Leptinas that were offer'd to be deliver'd up to them. XXVI. The Celtiberians Spaniards. Celtiberians after the Victory, wisely foreseeing what wou'd follow, sent Ambassadors to the Consul to Treat of Peace, but he looking upon it necessary to keep up the Grandeur and Magnanimity of his Country, made Answer, That they must either give up all to the Romans, or else be Victors in the War. XXVII. When the Romans were at War with the Carthaginians, the Carthaginians hearing that they were sailing to Lilybaeum, and not in the least making a Descent up∣on them, sent Ambassadors to Rome, and by them deliver'd up both themselves, and all the Concerns of their Country to the Romans. The Senate accepting the Surrender of their Country, gave this Answer; Since the Carthaginians are so well advis'd, the Se∣nate returns them their Country, their Laws, their Temples, their Sepulchres, their Li∣berties and their Estates; (not at all mentioning their City Carthage, for that was con∣ceal'd under these kind Concessions) if they wou'd give Three hundred Sons of the Senators Hostages, and obey the Consuls Commands. They thinking hereby to be
free from the War To. Lilybae∣um. sent the Hostages not without great Lamentation. Afterwards Consuls came to Utica. See Eutrop. lib. 4.  lor. lib 2. c. 15. Livy. Epitom. lib. 49. they came to Utica; and the Carthaginians again sent Ambassadors to ask what further com∣mands the Romans would lay upon 'em; when the Consuls told them they must deliver up their Arms and Engines without fraud, they at first (because of the War against Asdrubal, their General. Asdrubal) took it heavily, however they brought in 200000 Arms of all sorts, and 2000 Engines. Afterwards the Romans sent again to the Carthaginians Commands, to send some Persons of their Senate to whom they would declare their further Commands, and ac∣cordingly they sent Thirty of the Noblest. Manilius the Senior Consul told 'em that it was the Senates Pleasure they should leave the City they Inhabited, and build another Engines to shoot Stones or Arrows. Eighty Furlongs distant from the Sea: But the Ambassadors crying out for Mercy & Com∣passion, all of them cast themselves to the Ground, uttering many lamentable Complaints with Tears, upon which great confusion was rais'd in the Assembly: And when the Car∣thaginians were a little recover'd out of their Consternation, one only, Named Blannus * About Ten Miles. delivering himself in the natural Language of the Auditory, Debated the matter with great Heat and Earnestness, attended with an undaunted Presence of Mind, which mov'd the Auditors to Pity and Commiseration. 28. The Romans being unmovable in their Decrees, as to the Razing of Carthage, the Senate commanded them forthwith to depart to Carthage, and to declare to the Ant. Ch. 14 Citizens what things were Decreed; but some of the Ambassadors refusing to return to their Country, fled each of them where ever they could; the rest chusing rather to re∣turn, went home, having thus finish'd a doleful Embassy. When the People came thronging together to meet 'em, they gave 'em never a Word, but beating their heads, and stretching out their hands, and invocating their Gods, they went on to the Court, and inform'd the Senate what things were commanded. 29. The Arradians supposing they had got an opportunity to destroy those of Mara∣thum, sent privately to Ammonius Of Syria, un∣der Alexander Bala. Olymp, 157. Viceroy of the Kingdom, and with a Bribe of 300 Talents, prevail'd with him to deliver up A City of Phaenicia. Ant. Ch. 150. Marathum, whereupon Ammonius sent Isadore to the Marathonians, who by his speech was to pretend some other matters, but in truth went to seize upon the City, and to deliver it up to the Arradians. The Marathonians being ignorant that they were design'd for Destruction, yet observing how that the Arradians were higher in the Kings Favour than themselves, refus'd the Kings Soldiers Entrance into their City, and resolved to make their Addresses as Supplicants to the Arra∣dians. They forthwith therefore sent Ten of the most Eminent of their eldest Citizens, as Ambassadors to Arradus, who brought with them a humble Address and Supplication, * An Island o∣ver against Phaenicia. and the oldest Images of their Gods, which they had in their City, hoping that upon the account of their kindred, and mov'd with Reverence to their Gods, the Arradians would be appeas'd, and their anger diverted. As soon as they landed according to the See Vales. Fram. of Dio¦dorus Siculus, 349, 3. Commands given, they addressed themselves as Supplicants to the People: But the Arra∣dians Blood being up, they slighted the usual and common Laws of Supplicants, and cast off all Reverence of their kindreds Images, and their Gods, and therefore broke the Ima∣ges, and trampled them most shamefully under their Feet, and attempted to Stone the Ambassadors; but some of the Senators interposing themselves between 'em and the rage of the People (scarce restrain'd from stoning them, notwithstanding the Reverence they ow'd the Senators) commanded 'em to be convey'd to Prison.— The Numantia i Spain. Numantines and Germissum in Spain. See Patetcul. lib. 2. c. 4. Ant. Ch. 130. See Eutropius. lib. 4. Termisians sent Ambassadors to the Romans, to treat of a Peace, which was granted to them upon these Conditions, that they should deliver up each their Cities to the Romans, 300 Hostages, 900 Soldiers Coates, 300 Hides, 800 War-Horses, and all their Armes, and they should be Friends and Allies to the Romans. There being a day appointed for the performance of these Conditions by the Cities, all was done accor∣ding to the Articles, but when at last it came to the delivering up of their Arms, there a rose a certain Generous Regret and Lamentation, and a couragious Resolution in the Po∣pulacy to regain their Liberties. Therefore they were angry one at another they should ever consent, that they should like Women strip themselves of their Arms. Wherefore repenting of those things that were decreed, the Fathers accus'd their Sons, Children their Parents, and Women their Husbands, and so coming to themselves again, resolving not to deliver up their Arms, they renew'd the War against the Romans. 31. Call'd Dio∣dotus, one of Alexander Bala's Com∣manders King of Syria. 1 Mac. 11. 39 c. 13. v 31, 32. Liv. l 2. 5. Tryphon, of a private Man being made King, hasted all he could to establish the Government in himself, by a decree of the Senate: Wherefore preparing a golden Me∣dal of Victory weighing 10000 Crowns, he sent Ambassadors to Rome, to present it to the People, not doubting but that he should obtain from them the Compellation of King, considering the Present which he sent was not only very rich in it self, but such whose Name carried along with it the happy Prognostication of Victory. But he found the Se∣nate
far more Subtile than himself, whose Prudence prompt'd them to a Dislike of those that Ant. Ch. 183. deceitfully circumvent others: For they receiv'd the Present, and the good Omen, together with the profit, but instead of Grifon's Name, the Senate Decreed that the Title of the King that was treacherously Murder'd, should be Engraven upon it; and thus doing they approv'd themselves haters of his wickedness in Murdering of the Child, and such as would not accept of the presents of wicked Men. 32. There came with Scipio Africanus other Ambassadors to Alexandria, to view the whole Kingdom. Antiochus Theos, Alex∣ander Bala's Son, whose Guardian Tryphon was. See Justin, lib. 36. c. 1. Ptolemy met them in Pomp and State, with a great Retinue, and Feasted them Sumptuously, and going about with them, shew'd them his Palace and Trea∣sury. But Ptolemy Eu∣ergeres, the se∣cond sirnamed Physeon. they being Persons Eminent in Virtue, contented themselves with a spare Diet, and such as was wholesome, scorning that rich Provision, as prejudicial both to Mind and Body. As for those things which the King esteem'd as Rarities and Admirable, they only Glanc'd their Eyes upon 'em, and look'd on 'em as things of no Value: But what was really worth their Eying, those things they view'd most exactly; as the Scituati∣on of the City and its Capacity, and particularly the P. Scipio Africanus. Spurius Mum∣mius. L. Me∣tellus, See Ci∣cero in Som∣nio Scip. Pharos, and what belong'd thereun∣to: Thence likewise they Sail'd to Memphis, and took notice of the goodness of the Coun∣try, the conveniencies of the River Nile, the number of the Cities, the infinite Thousands of Inhabitants, the The Pharos at Alexandria, that gave light to Seamen in the Night. Fortification of Egypt, and the excellency of the Country, how well it was provided, both as to the Security, and Extent of an Empire: And having admir'd both the Populousness of Egypt, and the Conveniency of the Places therein, they were of opinion that the Kingdom of Egypt would easily swell into a vast Empire, if it once had Masters answerable. After the Ambassadors had well view'd Egypt, they went to Cyprus, and from thence into Syria. In short, they past through most parts of the World: And carrying themselves Soberly, to Admiration in all Places wherever they came, they gain'd exceeding Honour and Reputation; and Travelling through most parts of the World, with the general Applause of all, they return'd home. For those that were at difference, they reconcil'd one to another; others they perswaded to do Right and Justice, to those that complain'd against them; those that were impudently Obstinate, they were Ant Ch 128. necessitated to Curb and Restrain by Force; such Causes as were Difficult to be Determi∣ned, they transmitted to the Senate. Conferring both with Kings and their People, and renewing all former Leagues, they increas'd the love of all sorts to the Roman Government, and so all applying themselves in their several Countrys to chuse fit Persons, they sent Ambassadors to Rome, and highly applauded the Delegates with Scipio, and the Senate for imploying of such Men. 33. Bocchus, King of Lybia, having sharply rebuk'd those that would have perswaded him to make War upon the Romans, sent Commissioners to Marius, craving pardon for for his Crimes, and desiring to enter into a League, made many promises to be serviceable to the Romans for the time to come. But Marius ordering him to send Ambassadors to the Ant. Ch. 108. Senate, to Treat of these matters, the King observ'd his directions, and sent accordingly. Upon which the Senate answer'd, that Bocchus should in every respect be receiv'd into Grace and Favour, if he could prevail with Marius. Marius desirous to have Natural For∣tification. See Livy. Epit lib. 59. Jugurtha, the King his Prisoner, Bocchus willing to serve him, sends for King of Nu∣midia, Father in Law of Bocchus. See Liv. Epit. lib. 62, 64, 65. 66. Flor. lib. 3. c. 1. Jugurtha, as if he would discourse with him about Business of concern to them both, and by this means seizes him, and delivers him Bound to Lucius Sylla the Quaestor, who was sent out for that purpose; and so by the misfortune of this Prince, he bought his own Safety, and escap't Punishment from the Romans. 34. Ambassadors came from King Mithridates to Rome, with a great sum of Money, with hopes by that to corrupt the Senate. L. Apuleus Saturninus, a Tribune of the People, hated the Senate upon former grudges. See Flor. lib. 3. c. 16. Livy E∣pitom. lib. 69. Ant. Ch. 99. Saturnius thinking now he had an advantage against the Senate, reproach'd and bespatter'd the Embassy at a great rate; the Senators instigated the Ambassadors, and promis'd to assist them, who thereupon call'd Saturnius in question for this abuse. There being then rais'd a mighty popular Tumult by reason of the violation of the Ambassadors, and of that constant Abhorrence the Romans have of such notorious Affronts, Saturnius (who was now condemn'd to die, by the Senate his proper Judges in such Cases) fell into most racking Fears and Perplexities; and because of the great Stirs and Tumults that were rais'd, in a Consternation he betook himself for Shelter to the Pity those commonly find that are Unfortunate. cast out of all; throwing therefore off his rich Apparel, and putting on a mean and sordid Habit; suffering his Beard to grow, he ran up and down to the Tumultuous throngs of People throughout the City, fal∣ling. down upon his Knees to some, catching others fast by the Hands, begging with Tears that they would assist him in his present Calamities, declaring he was Factiously opprest by the Senate against all Right and Justice, and suffer'd all this for his Good-will he bore to the People; that the Senators were his Enemies, Accusers and Judges. The
Mobb hereupon being all in an uproar, (affected by his Prayers and Intreaties) many Thou∣sands of 'em run to the Tribunal, and unexpectedly for that time rescu'd him, and with the assistance of the People, he was again declar'd Tribune. 35. Mark Anthony made a Peace with the Cretians, which they kept for some time; but afterwards calling together a General Council to consider what was most advisable for them to do in order to their advantage; the more Ancient and Prudent amongst them Councell'd to send Ambassadors to Rome, to make Defence against those The Father of Mark Antho∣ny, who Mar∣ried Cleopatra See Liv. Epit. lib. 97. was routed at Sea by the Cretians Accusations that were brought against them, and by fair Words and Intreaties, to work upon the Se∣nate to a Reconciliation. To this end they dispatch'd away Thirty chosen out of the most Eminent Men, for Ambassadors, who privately Visiting the Senators at their se∣veral Houses, and courting them with fine Words, secur'd those that made up the Assem∣bly: and being Introduc'd into the Senate, they made their Defence against the matters objected against them with great Prudence, exactly setting forth their good Services, and their Associations with the Senate, desiring that they might be Restor'd to their former Amity, and Confederacy: The Senate pleas'd with what they said, gave forth a Decree, * The Senate had decreed Was against 'em because they assisted Mithridates by their Piraces Appian leg. 30 Dio. leg. 37. by which they not only acquitted the Cretians, of the Crimes laid to their charge, but declar'd them Confederates and Friends to the State. But Lentulus sirnam'd Spinther, got the Decree revers'd, however the Cretians were dismissed. But the Senate had often Debates concerning the Cretians, alledging, and at length concluding that they join'd with the Pirates, and were Sharers in the Robberies; and therefore they decreed the Cretians should send in all their Ships to Rome, even to a Skiff of Four Oars, and resign the 300 Those they had of the Romans See Dion. leg. 37. famous Hostages, and send away Lasthenes had fought with Antonius. Lasthenes and Paneres, and amongst them pay 4000 Talents of Silver. The Cretians hearing what was Decreed, went into a Con∣sult about these Commands impos'd upon them, the more Prudent amongst 'em, advis'd to be observant in all things to what was enjoyn'd them: But those that were of Last the∣nes's party, and guilty of the same Crimes, and fearing lest being sent for to Rome, they should be there punish'd for their Offences, stirred up the People to a Sedition, advising them to maintain those liberties that they had ever, time out of Mind enjoy'd.
THE SUPPLEMENT Referred unto in the XVIIth. BOOK of DIODORUS, (Pag. 557.) 1. How Alexander marching through a dry Country, for want of Water lost many of his Soldiers. Curtius, lib. VII. c. 5. ALexander himself, with a Band of Light-arm'd Men, marching all the Night, entred the Deserts of Mistaken by Curtius for the Deserts of Sog∣diana. Susitana. The total want of Water, with the Thoughts of their desperate Condition (as is before declared) enflam'd their Thirst be∣fore they had a reald esire to drink; for, sor the space of About 50 Miles. 400 Furlongs, not the least Lake, or any thing that was moist, appear'd. The scorching Sun fired the Sands, which when inflam'd, burnt up all round about like a raging Fire; hence, through the excessive Heat of the Earth, arose a Mist which obscur'd the Light, and all the Champaigne seem'd no other than if it had been the vast Ocean. Their March in the Night was tolerable, because their Bodies were refresh'd by the Dew and Coldness of the Air, before the rising of the Sun; but when Light appear'd, the Heat began, and Drought dried up all their natural Moisture, and both their Mouths and their very Intrails were altogether parch'd up with scorching Heat; and therefore first their Spirits and then their Bodies began to faint. It was grievous to 'em both to stand still and go forward: Some few of 'em, by the help of them that knew the Country, had got Water, which quench'd their Thirst for a little while; but the Heat encreasing, their desire of Drink was again the more enflam'd; and therefore whoever had any Wine or Oil, it was presently guzzl'd down, and the present Pleasure of Drinking was so great, that it banish'd all fear of Thirst for the future. Those that had thus swell'd themselves with immoderate Drinking, cou'd neither carry their Arms, nor march for∣ward; and those seem'd to be in a far better condition that wanted Water, than they who by pouring it down to excess, were forc'd to vomit it up again. Those that were about the King seeing him griev'd and much perplex'd with these Misfortunes, entreated him to mind and take care of himself; for his Courage was the only Life and Relief of his drooping Army. While they were thus advising him, two of those that were sent before to mark out a convenient Place where to encamp, came with Water in their Vessels for the use of their Children who were in the Army, and whom they knew were not able to hold out without Drink: These meeting the King, one of 'em opened his Vessel, and fill'd a Cup which he had with him, and offer'd it to the King, who receiv'd it; but ask'd him for whom the Water was brought, who answer'd, That it was for his Children. Upon which. returning the Cup full as it was, I cannot find in my Heart (says he) to drink it alone; and 'tis to be divided amongst them all; away therefore with all speed, and give it your Children, for whom it was brought. At length he came to the River Oxus about evening, but a great part of the Army were left behind: He commanded there∣fore Fires to be kindled upon a high Mountain, that those that followed slowly after might know they were not far from the Camp. He commanded likewise those that were in the Van (having sufficiently refresh'd themselves both with Meat and Drink) to fill
all sorts of Vessels wherein Water might be carried, and help their Companions that were behind. But those that drank immoderately, quench'd their natural Heat by Sur∣feit, and died presently, by which means he lost far more Men than he had done before in any Battel. 2. How Alexander destroy'd all the Branchidans (as Traitors to the Grecians) whom anciently the Persians forc'd to remove from their own Habitations to the furthest Part of the Kingdom. Curtius, lib. VII. c. 6. HE came to a little Town where the Branchidans inhabited, who heretofore remov'd from Miletus, by the Command of Xerxes when he return'd out of Greece, and settled themselves in this place: They were they that Gave Xerxes the Riches that were in it, Stra∣bo, lib. 14. violated the Temple call'd Dideus, to ingratiate themselves with Xerxes. The Customs and Manners of their Country were not as yet wholly laid aside, but they spoke a kind of broken Language, neither perfect Greek nor Barbarian. They receiv'd therefore the King very joyfully, and gave up themselves and their City into his hands. He thereupon call'd together the Milesians that were in his Army, who bore an old Grudge and inveterate Hatred against the Branchidans, he left it therefore to these Milesians, whose Ancestors had been betray'd by 'em, to do with them what they thought fit either to remember the Injury, and so revenge themselves, or the Original of the Branchidans, who were so their Country-men, and upon that ac∣count to spare them. When they cou'd not agree amongst themselves what to resolve upon, the King told 'em he himself wou'd take time to consider what was fittest to be done. The next day the Branchidans meeting him, he order'd 'em to go along with him; and when he came to the City, he enter'd the Gate with a select Detachment, ha∣ving in the mean time order'd the Phalanx to surround the Walls, and upon a Sign given to raze the City to the Ground, that had been a Nest for the Traitors, and to put them all to the Sword, Man, Woman, and Child. Hereupon being all disarm'd, they were knock'd on the head in every place up and down, and no stop cou'd be put to their Cruelty by nearness of Language, or the Prayers and Tears of the poor and miserable People. At length they raz'd the Walls to the very bottom of the Foundation, that there might not remain so much as the least sign where it had once stood. Neither stopt they here, for they not only cut down, but rooted up the Sacred Groves, that they might leave all a vast and solitary Desert, barren, without so much as a Root in the Ground; which Executions, had they been inflicted upon the first Actors of the Treason, might have been judg'd a just Revenge, and not the Effects of Cruelty, as they seem'd to be; sor now the Posterity, who never so much as ever saw Miletus (and therefore cou'd not betray it to Xerxes) suffered for the Faults of their Ancestors.—. 3. How the King led his Army against the Sogdians and Scythians. Arrianus, lib. 4. IN the mean time the Barbarians that border'd next to the River, surpriz'd the Mace∣donians that were plac'd in Garisons in Scythia, and put them all to the Sword, and fortified the Cities for their greater Security. Many of the Sogdians join'd with him in the Defection, being sollicited thereunto by them that had seiz'd upon Bessus, who like∣wise drew away after them some of the Bactrians, either because they were afraid of Ale∣xander, or for that (as they gave the reason for their Rebellion) Alexander had summon'd a Senate of the Governours of the Province to meet at Zariaspa, the greatest City there, from which Convention they saw no ground to hope for any good to themselves. When Intelligence was brought to Alexander of these things, he forthwith commanded his Foot in every Regiment to prepare Scaling Ladders; and he himself march'd away with his Army to a City call'd Gaza, which was next to the Camp, and lay first in his way; for it was said the Barbarians had fled into seven Towns of that Country. Craterus he sent to Cyropolis, the greatest of all the Cities, and in which a very great number of the Barbarians had shelter'd themselves. The King commanded him to encamp near the City, and to fortifie his Camp with a Trench and Wall drawn round, and place such Engines upon
his Bulwarks as he saw occasion to use, that the Townsmen being busie in assaulting, Craterus might have no leisure to come in to the assistance of other Cities. The King himself, as soon as he came to Gaza, forthwith at the first approach commanded his Men to set Scaling-Ladders round the Walls, which were but of Earth, and not very high. Upon which, the Slingers, Darters, and Archers, together with the Foot, made an As∣sault, ply'd and gall'd them that defended the Walls with their Darts, and shot out of the Engines, so that by Showres of Darts and Arrows the Wall was presently clear'd of its Defendants, and the Scaling-Ladders in a trice were set to the Walls, and the Mace∣donians enter'd, and put all the Men to the Sword (for so Alexander had commanded) but the Women and Children, with the rest of the Prey, they carry'd away. Thence the King forthwith march'd to another City (fortified much like unto Gaza) which he took much after the same manner the very same day, and dealt with the Prisoners after the same manner as with them at Gaza. After this, he made to a third City, which he took the next day upon the first Assualt. In the mean time, while he was reducing these Cities with his Foot, he sent away his Horse to two other neighbouring Cities, with Orders to watch 'em, lest the Inhabitants hearing of the taking of the Cities bordering upon 'em, and o the King's near approach, should fly and leave the Cities, so as he should not be able to pursue with any hopes to overtake 'em. And indeed it fell out as he thought, which evidenc'd the sending forth of the Horse to be necessary: For the Barbarians, who still were possess'd of two other Cities, seeing the Smoak of the City which was burnt, and was over-against 'em (besides some who escap'd out of the Overthrow, brought them news of the City being taken) with all speed in whole droves fled out of the Cities, and fell in among the Horse that were sent forth, and multitudes of 'em were knock'd on the Head. The King having taken and raz'd these five Towns in the space of two days, march'd away to Cyropolis, the greatest of their Cities: The Walls of this City were higher than any of the rest, the Town being built by Cyrus. And forasmuch as there were many stout Men and good Soldiers, the Inhabitants of the Country were got together into this place; the Macedonians could not easily (like to the other places) take it at the first Assault, and therefore Alexander order'd, that with the Battering-Rams and other En∣gines they shou'd batter the Walls, and where-ever any Breach was made, there forth∣with to make an Assault. But the King observing the Channel of the River (which ran through the City like a little Brook) to be then dry, and not contiguous or near the Walls, but affording a direct Passage for his Soldiers into the City, he took with him his Guard Targateers, Archers, and the Agrians (the Barbarians then busie in observing the Engines and those that manag'd 'em) and secretly with few at first enter'd through the Channel into the City, and broke down the Gates that were in that part, and readily let in the rest of the Soldiers: Upon which, the Barbarians perceiving the City to be en∣ter'd, however set upon Alexander's Soldiers, and fought and resolutely, in which Conflict Alexander receiv'd a Blow on his Head and Neck with a Stone. Craterus and many others were wounded with Darts and Arrows; but at length the Barbarians were driven out of the Market-place. In the mean time, those that assaulted the Walls enter'd, all being clear of those that should have defended them. In the first Conflict at the en∣tring of the City, there were slain of the Enemy about eight thousand, the rest (for they were eighteen thousand that had there put in themselves) fled into the Castle, who after one day's siege for want of Water surrender'd themselves. The seventh City the King took at the first Assault: Ptolemy indeed says that it was surrender'd; but Aristo∣bulus relates that it was taken by storm, and that all in it were put to the Sword. Ptolemy writes, that all the Prisoners were distributed in the Army, and order'd to be kept bound till the King left the Country, lest any one of 'em that revolted should be left be∣hind. While these things were on foot, the Army of the Asian Scythians came to the Banks of the River Not Genais, near the Lake Meotis, but a∣nother call'd Iaxartes. See Pl. N. Hist. l. 6. c. 16. Ganais, because they heard that some of the Barbarians inhabiting beyond the River had revolted from Alexander; and their aim therefore was, that if there were any considerable Defection, they likewise might act their part in falling upon the Mace∣donians. At the same time Intelligence was brought, that Spitamenes had besieg'd those that were left in Garison in the Castle of Patachades. Alexander therefore sent Androma∣chus, Medemenus, and Caranus against Spitamenes, with sixty Horse of the Social Band, and eight hundred of the Mercenaries, who were under the Command of Caranus: But of Foot there were Fifteen hundred Mercenaries; with them the King join'd in Commis∣sion one Pharnuches for an Interpreter, a Lycian by Nation, who was well skill'd in the
Language of the Barbarians, and therefore was judged a fit Person to transact matters with them. The King having in the space of 20 days Wall'd the Call'd Alex∣andria, upon the Banks of Iaxartes call'd Tanais. City he had before design'd to build, gave it the Greek Mercenaries to be Inhabited by them, and to such neighbouring Barbarians as had a mind to remove their Habitations and dwell there, and to some of the Macedonians that were Disabled, and unfit to bear Arms. Afterwards having Sacrificed to the Gods after the manner of his Country, and exhi∣bited the Gymnick Sports, and Horse-Courses, finding that the Scythians did not March back and leave the River, but threw their Darts over, (for it was there very narrow) and after their Barbarous manner, gave out most opprobious and railing Language against Alexander, as that he durst not fight with the Scythians, and if he did, he should find by experience, how great a difference there was between the Scythians and the Barbarous Asiaticks: The King being provok'd with these things, resolv'd to pass the River and fall upon 'em, and commanded Leather Boats to be made ready for that purpose. Ha∣ving therefore Sacrific'd for his good Success, the Intrails of the Beasts promised nothing that was Prosperous, which made him very uneasie, but he bore it very patiently, and staid there. The Scythians still continuing their slight and contemptuous Language, he again Sacrificed, and when Aristander the Soothsayer declar'd that danger was portend∣ed, Alexander answer'd, it was better to undergo the extreamest hazard, than for him who had Conquered all Asia to be a Scorn, a Mockig-Stock to the Scythians, as Da∣rius the Father of Xerxes was heretofore. Aristander, on the other side repli'd, that he wou'd not declare any thing to the King, but what was portended by the Gods, tho' Alexander had rather hear other things. However Alexander's Boats being now ready, and his Army standing all in Arms at the Rivers Brink, he order'd that upon a Sign gi∣ven, they should Discharge the Engines against the Scythians that Rid over against them, on the other side; which done, some of them were wounded with the Darts, and one of them especially was pierc'd with a Dart througli his Buckler and Breast-plate, and fell down dead from his Horse. But the Barbarians being terrified with Darts that wounded them at so great a distance, and with the fall of that Valiant Man, by degrees drew off further from the Bank of the River. Alexander discerning 'em to be in disorder by the stroaks of the Darts, with sound of Trumpet passed over the River at the head of his Army; and the Archers and Slingers being first sent over, he Commanded them to ply the Scythians with their Slings and Arrows least they should fall in upon the Phalanx as they were passing over, before all his Body of Horse had recover'd the other-side. When all had now gain'd the further Bank of the River, he first fell upon the Scythians with one of the Squadrons of the Social Regiment, and Four Regiments of those that were arm'd with Saralles, whose Shock the Scythians bravely bore up against, and surrounded 'em with their Horse, so that many overpowring them, that were but few, they easily kept them∣selves whole and entire. Alexander thereupon mixing his Archers and Agrians, and o∣ther select Troops (over whom Balacrus had the Command) fell in upon the Scythians, and being now on both sides mixt together, the King order'd three Squadrons of Horse of the Social Band, and all his Horse that were Darters, to Charge in upon the Scythians; and he himself at the Head of the rest of the Horse made straight upon 'em, so that now they were not able any longer to keep their Horse in a Ring as before; for the Horse prest sore upon 'em, at the same time, and the light armed Men being mixt with the Horse, they suffer'd not the Enemy with any safety to Wheel about with their Horse to surround 'em. Upon which the Scythians were put to a Total Flight, and about a Thou∣sand kill'd, and an Hundred and fifty taken Prisoners, amongst whom was Satrices one of their two Generals. 4. How the Sogdian Noblemen being led forth to be put to Death, were unexpect∣edly preserv'd. Curtius lib. VII. c. 10. SOme of the Prisoners of the Sogdians of Noble Birth, and Proper Handsome Men were brought before the King; who as soon as they understood by an Interpreter that they were to die, they began to Sing, Skip and Dance as Men transported with joy, using many Lascivious gestures of their Bodies. The King admining the greatness of their Courage, at the approach of Death, commanded them to be brought to him, and ast them why they were so Excessively my, when Death was even before their Eyes? who
answer'd, that if they had been put to death by any others Command, they should have, been as Sad at the apprehension of death as other Men; but since they were sent out of the World by so great a King as was Conqueror of the World, they Celebrated their hono∣rable death (which all valiant Men wish for) with Songs of Mirth and Jollity, after the Custom and Manner of their Country: The King wondring at their Courage askt them, whether they would not be his Enemies, if he was so kind and generous as to suffer them to live. They answered, they never were his Enemies, but as Invaded, Oppos'd him to de∣fend themselves, and if any made trial of 'em by fair means, and not by Force and Injury, they would lay out themselves to the utmost, that none should exceed 'em in grateful Of∣fices of respect. Then he askt 'em what pledges they would give of Loyalty. They repli'd, their lives which they had receiv'd from him, and which they wou'd give him up again upon his demand. Nor did they sail him by Breach of promise: For they that re∣turn'd into their own Counrey, kept their Countrymen in due Obedience, Four of them which he kept for Squires of his Body, prov'd as true and faithful to the King, as any of the Macedonians. 5. How Alexander punish'd the Bactrians, and subdued the Sogdians a Second time, and built Cities in convenient Places to punish the Revolters. Arrianus lib. IV. ALexander himself Marcht again to the River Oxus; for he resolv'd to make against the Sogdians, for he heard that many of them put themselves into Forts and Ca∣stles, and refus'd to obey the Provincial Governors the King had placed over them. At the time he was encampt near the River Oxus, two Springs rose out of the Earth near to Alexander's Pavilion, the one of Water, and the other of Oyl: Of which pro∣digy  Curt lib. 7. Ptlemy Lagus forthwith inform'd the King as soon as he heard of it, whereupon Alexander without delay, at the command of the Priest, Sacrific'd; Aristander the Priest told the King that the Fountain of Oyl portended Labour, but Victory at last, the fruit of Toil and Pain: Marching therefore away with part of his Army against the Sogdians, he left in Bactria, Polyspercon, Attalus, Gorgias, and Meleager to be a Guard in that Coun∣try, both to keep them in Obedience that were Reduc'd, and to Subdue the others that had fallen off from their Allegiance; having divided his Army into Five parts, he gave the Command of Three of them to Hephestion; a Fourth part to Caenus and Artabazus: He himself with the Fifth entr'd the Country leading towards Maracanda. The rest en∣ter'd wherever each of them cou'd, and stormed the Forts of them that had possessed themselves of them, and others they took in upon Surrender. After all, the Forces (hav∣ing first ran over the greatest part of the Country) join'd together at Maracanda, he sent forth Hephestion to bring in Colonies into the Cities of the Sogdians: Coenus and Arta∣bazus he order'd against the Scythians, because he heard Spitamenes was fled to 'em. He himself with the rest of the Army entring into Sogdiana, easily reduc'd the rest of the Towns that had revolted. 6. How the Sogdians revolted the Third time, and how they were taken that betook themselves to the top of the Rock. Arrianus lib. IV. AFterwards at the beginning of the Spring, he Marcht to a Rock to which he heard many of the Sogdians fled; and here it was said that the Wife and Daughters of Curtius calls him Arimares lib. 7. c. 11. or by Strabo, Oxyartes had plac'd his  in Smithres Rich in Bactria where Alex∣ander Married xana, one of  Strabo  11 517. Oxyartes had sheltred themselves. For Oxyartes plac'd them here as in a Hold that was Inexpugnable, he himself being one that had revolted from Alexander. And the King was the more earnest for that this Rock being taken, there appeared no Fort left in Sogdia that cou'd incourage them to a Defection. When he came to the Rock, he found it steep and inaccessable on every side, and that the Barbarians had brought in Provision for a long Siege, and that the depth of the Snow, as it made the Approach of the Ma∣cemians more difficult, so it furnisht the Barbarians with plenty of Water. However Alexander resolv'd to assault the Rock. The Proud and Contemptuous answer likewise of the Barbarians stirr'd up Rage and Ambition in Alexander at one and the same time. For whereas at a Parly with them, he promis'd them that if they would Surrender, they should all have liberty to return safely home; they barbarously scoffed at him, and bid him seek some Soldiers that had Wings, who might so take the Rock, for they feared
no other Mortals. Upon which Alexander commanded Proclamation to be made by an Herald, that he would bestow 12 Talents as a reward upon him that should first mount the Rock, and so the second and the third, in their due order should every one receive a reward till it came to the last that ascended the Rock, who should receive 300 Daricks; the hopes of which reward stirr'd up the Macedonians, who were eager before to fall up∣on them of their own accord. Three hundred therefore of those that were accustom'd to climb Rocks, being drawn out, they furnish'd themselves with Cramp-Irons (where∣with they fastned their Tents) that they might fix them in the Snow where it was hard Frozen, and in other parts of the Rock where there was no Snow, and to them they tied strong Cords, and in the Night made to that part of the Rock that was steepest and highest, and therefore (as they conceiv'd) least guarded; and with the Cramps, some fastned in the Rock, and others in the Snow that was frozen, they scrambled up from place to place 'till they gain'd the Top: But of these, 30 perish'd in endeavouring to get up, so that their Bodies could not be found to be buried, being lost in the depth of the Snow; the rest about break of day recovered the top, and by shaking of the Lin∣nen Cloaths gave notice to the Army that they had gain'd the place, for that sign Alex∣ander had commanded them: Upon which a Trumpeter was forthwith sent out with command to the Barbarians that they should without any further delay surrender them∣selves, for that he had now found Soldiers that had Wings, who had possessed themselves of the top of the Rock; and at the same time the Soldiers that had gain'd the Rock, pre∣sented themselves in view to the Barbarians, who being amaz'd at such an unexpected sight, supposing them to be more, and better arm'd than indeed they were, gave up themselves; the sight of a few Macedonians was so terrible to 'em. There were there taken Prisoners many of the Wives and Children of the Barbarians, and amongst them the Wife and Daughters of Oxyartes. Oxyartes's Son likewise was about the Age of Nine Years. 7. Of the Hunting in Basistis, and the multitude of Wild Beasts there. Curtius, lib. VII. c. 1. HAving given a gracious Audience to the Ambassadors, he there stayed waiting for Hephestion and Artabazus, who being afterwards join'd him, he came into the Coun∣try call'd Bazaria. Of the riches of the Barbarians in those Places, there can be no greater argument, than the multitude of stately wild Beasts that range in large Woods and For∣rests in that Country. They frequent spacious Woods pleasantly water'd with many refreshing springs. They are Wall'd round, in which are built Towers for Stands to view the hunting of the Beasts. One of these Chases had remain'd free and untouch'd for the space of Four generations, which Alexander entring with his Army, he com∣manded the Game in all parts as he came to be rouz'd; amongst which when a Lyon of a vast Bigness met and set upon the King, Lsimachus (who afterwards was o Thra King) happening to be next to Alexander offered to make at the Beast with his hunting Spear, the King put him by, and bid him be gone adding that the Lyon might be kill'd by him∣self as well as by Lysimachus. This Lysimachus had before in a hunting in Syria kill'd an exceeding great Lyon with his own hand, but he had been even at the point of Death, his lest shoulder having been (in that Encounter) rent and torn even to the very Bone. The King twitting him with this, shew'd more of Valour afterwards in action than he did before in this expression; for he not only stood the Beast, but kill'd him at one blow. The story that was foolishly spread abroad that the King gave up Lysimachus to be de∣voured by a Lyon, rose (I believe) from this accident before related. But the Macedo∣nians (though the King was thus happily delivered) yet according to the Custom of their Country, establish'd a Decree that he should not hunt on Foot without a Guard of his Captains and Friends. The King having kill'd Four thousand brave wild Beasts, feasted with his whole Army in the Forrest. 1. Of his Offence against Bacchus, and the Murder of Clitus in his Cups. Arrianus, lib. IV. TO declare in this place the death of Clitus, and the foul act of Alexander in that matter (though it happned some little time after) yet I judge it not altogether out of course. The Macedonians (its said) have a certain day sacred to Bacchus, and Alex∣ander
was accustomed to sacrifice to Bacchus every year upon that day; but at that time he neglected Bacchus, and sacrific'd to Custor and Pollux; and from that time he appointed Sacrifice to them, with Feasting always at that day. And whereas now the Company had been a considerable time quaffing and carouzing (for Alexander had now learn'd to imitate the Barbarians in his Cups) and all were heated with Wine, a discourse hap∣pned concerning the Castor and Pollux. Discorides how to derive their Original from Jupiter, and set aside that of Tyndarus; some who were present to flatter the King (which sort of Crea∣tures are ever Pernicious both to the Persons and Concerns of Kings, and are ever at hand) deliver'd their Judgment that Castor and Pollux were not in the least respect to be compar'd to Alexander, and his brave and noble Actions: Others in their Cups did not spare Hercules himself; but said that Envy was the cause that debarr'd Mortals from these Honours that were due to them from those among whom they convers'd. But Clitus who ever heretofore hated Alexander's imitation of the Manners of the Barbarians, and the discourses of his Flatterers, having now his Spirits something rais'd with Wine, was not able to bear those Contempts cast upon the Gods, nor that by undervaluing those Acts of the antient Heroes, so thankless a piece of service should be paid to the King. And declar'd that Alexander had neither done such wonderful things as they cri'd him up for, neither did he do any of them himself alone, but the Praise of a great part of 'em was due to the Valour of the Macedonians. But Alexander was much inrag'd at these words of Clitus; neither indeed, can I commend him in what he said, for I am of opinion it had been much more prudent for him in this time of carouzing to have held his peace, as well as to forbear joining with others in this sordid Vice of Flattery: And whereas some call'd to mind the Acts of Philip, and did all they could most unjustly to bear down and make slight of all he did as nothing at all memorable (in the mean time caressing and extolling of Alexander) Clitus now not himself, began to advance the the actions of Philip, and vilifie Alexander and his Atchievments: And cast it in the King's Teeth (now raging like a Madman) amongst other things, how he had at the River Granicus in the Charge, in the Horse Engagement preserv'd him, and impudently stretch∣ing out his right Hand, cried out, This Hand O Alexander, preserv'd thy Life in that Battel: Alexander not being able longer to endure the unbridled Passion of Clitus, or his base language, nor his reproaches cast upon him, in a rage leapt out towards him, but was held back by them that were round about him; on the other hand Clitus let fly all the reproachful words he cou'd devise, surpassing all bounds. The King with a loud voice call'd out for Argyraspides, and no Man regarding him, he cried out again that he was now in the same Condition Darius was in, when he was seiz'd and led away by Ressus and his Accomplices, and that there was nothing left him but the Name of a King. His Friends then could not hold him any longer, but springing from them, some say he snatcht a Launce out of the hands of one of his Guards, and with that run Clitus through, and kill'd him; others report it was with a Macedonian Launce. Sarissa deliver'd to him by one of the Guard; Aristobulus gives no account whence this mad Fit of Alexander's arose; but says all the fault was wholly in Clitus; for that when Alexander in a rage rush't up and made at him to kill him, he at a back Door shifted out of the way, and got quite out of the Trenches into the Fort to Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, a Squire of the Body, yet could not contain himself but must needs come back again; and lighting upon Alexander when he was calling out for Clitus, Here's Clitus, Alexander, said he, upon which the King ran him through with a Sarissa: As I cannot but greatly blame Clitus for his Insolency to the King, so I am troubled for Alexander on the other side, because at that time he expos'd himself as guilty of Two Vices together, Anger and Drunkenness; to be overtaken with either of which, did not in the least become a sober Man. But yet again I must praise Alexander upon another account, that presently he repented of the soul Fact he had committed. For some who write of the Affairs of Alexander, say, that he set the end of the Spear against the Wall, and attempted to run himself upon the point, because his Life seem'd hateful to him, having through his Drunkenness destroy'd his Friend. But many Writers do not mention this. But when he was upon his Bed he lay lamenting, calling and repeating still the name of Clitus. Lanices the Daughter of Dropidus, who had brought up Alexander, received from him now he was a Man a large reward for his Education: she had lost Two Sons in the War, fighting for the King, and had her Brother now kill'd by his own Hand: He cry'd out he was the Mur∣derer of his Friends, and wou'd neither eat nor drink for Three days space, nor take any care of himself what became of him. Some of Bacchus's Priests told him that these Mis∣fortunes befell him because he had neglected to Sacrifice to Bacchus. His Friends had much ado to perswade him to eat or drink any thing to refresh him. But at last
he sacrific'd to Bacchus; since it was not displeasing to him that that misfortune should be imputed rather to the Anger of the God, than to his own wickedness. 9. Of the Death of Calisthenes. Arrianus, lib. IV. AS to the Adoration of Alexander, how Calisthenes oppos'd him, and what relates to it, 'tis reported, That it was agreed between Alexander and the Sophisters, and some of the Nobility of the Medes and Persians that attended upon him, that in the time of their Feasting a Discourse should be started concerning this matter. Anaxarchus was the Person that began, and declar'd, That Alexander had more right to be accounted a God than either Bacchus or Hercules, not only for the greatness of his Noble Actions, but be∣cause Bacchus was a Theban, a meer Stranger, having no Communication with the Mace∣donians; and Hercules was of Argos, as much a Stranger as the other, save that Alexander was of the same Stock, for he was from the Heraclides; and 'tis far more just and equal for the Macedonians to adore their own King with Divine Honours than any other. And no doubt (he said) was to be made but they wou'd pay to him Divine Honours when he was dead; therefore 'tis much better to adore him as a God while he was alive, than when he was dead, when their Divine Worship of him would be of no advantage to him. When these and other things to the same purpose were said by Anaxarchus, those who were of the same Pack praised all that was spoken, and declar'd they would forth∣with This Adorti∣on was by Pro; stration. Adore him: But many of the Macedonians, who condemn'd Anaxarchus's Speech, held their peace. But Calisthenes in the midst of the Silence spoke thus: Indeed, Anaxarchus, I count not Alexander unworthy of any Honour (how great soever it be) that is fit to be ascrib'd to Men; but there are prescrib'd Differences amongst Men between Divine and Human Honours, amongst many others in the Building of Temples and Erecting of Statues; for to the Gods we consecrate Oratories, offer Sacrifices and drink Offerings: To the Gods are sung Hymns; Men are prais'd, but not ador'd: Kisses in Salutations are given to Men, but the Gods are plac'd on high, and 'tis not lawful to touch 'em; and therefore they are worshipp'd with Adoration. Solemn Times of Dancings are perform'd to the Gods, and Paeans sung to them. Neither is it to be wonder'd at, inasmuch as the Honours given to the Gods are various; some sort of Honours given to one, and others to another (especially those Honours of later time.) Nay; those Honours given to some of the Hero's differ from Divine Honours. 'Tis not therefore fit to confound these things, nor to advance Men above themselves and all Mankind besides, and to de∣grade the Gods, by Worshipping them with the same Worship wherewith we adore Men. Alexan∣der himself would not suffer any private Man to usurp the Regal Dignity and Honours due to him∣self, though he gain'd 'em by the unjust Suffrages of the People; much more justly therefore may the Gods be angry if any mortal Man assume to himself Divine Honours, or accept of them from others. However, let Alexander be esteem'd (as in truth he is) by many degrees the most Va∣liant of them that are Valiant, the greatest King amongst all other Kings, and amongst Generals the most Worthy to Command. But as for thee, Anaxarchus, 'tis thy Duty above any other to instruct Alexander in these things that have been spoken, and to dter him from the contrary; for thy Conversation he daily makes use of, in order to improve in Wisdom and Learning. Nei∣ther does it become thee to be the beginner of this Discourse, but rather to remember that thou art not advising Cambyses or Xerxes, but the Son of Philip, descended from Hercules and Achilles, whose Ancestors came out of Argos into Macedonia, and maintain'd their Empire not by Arbi∣trary Power, but by Ruling according to the Laws and Customs of the Macedonians. But Di∣vine Houours were not confevr'd upon Hercules himself by the Grecians while he was living, nay nor when he was dead, before the Oracle at Delphos commanded that he should be worshipp'd as a God. But if there be but few that are in the Country of the Barbarians, we ought to entertain the same Sentiments with them. And I earnestly entreat thee, Alexander, to remember Greece, for whose sake this Expedition was undertaken by thee, in order to add Asia to Greece: And now consider whether when you return thither, you can be able to compel the free People of Greece to adore you as a God, or (excepting them of Greece) you can impose this Dishonour and Slavery upon the Macedonians only, or whether it be fit that quite different Honours be there allow'd you; being the Grecians confer only those that are Human, according to the Custom and Manner of the Greeks, when at the same time only the Barbarians worship you as a God after the manner of Barbarians. But if it be objected, That Cyrus Son of Cambyses was the first of all mortal Men that was ador'd by Men as a God, ana that since that time this Adoration has continued amongst the Medes and Persians; yet you are to consider how his Pride was curb'd by the Scy∣thians,
a poor and indigent People. And how other Scythians again reduc'd Darius to more sober Thoughts of himself, and the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, Xerxes and Clearchus, and Xenophon, Artaxerxes, only with Ten thousand Men; and Darius now overcome by Ale∣xander, when at that time no Divine Honours were decreed to him. When Calisthenes had spoken these and other things to the same purpose, Alexander took it very heinously; but what he said was very grateful and acceptable to the Macedo∣nians; which being known, Alexander sent some to urge the Macedonians to remember the Adoration of the King; upon which there being a great silence, those among the Persians that were most Eminent for Birth and Honourable for Age, all rose up together, and Prostrated themselves. ador'd him. But Leonatus, one of Alexander's Friends, when he saw one of the Perfians sordidly prostrating himself, he fell a laughing at the poor and mean Gesture of the Persian; at which Alexander was at the first very angry, but was afterwards pacifi'd. Some write, that the King drank in a golden Bowl to them with whom he had made the Compact to adore him in a Ring as they sat, and that the first that pledg'd him, pre∣sently arose and By Pystra∣t. ador'd him, and then kiss'd him, and so in order the rest did the same, one after another. But when it came to Calisthenes's turn, he rose up, and drank off the Bowl, and when he had done (without adoring him) drew near to the King to kiss him. Alexander was then accidentally discoursing with Hephestion, and therefore did not mind whether he omitted the Adoration or not. But Demetrius the Son of Pythonax, one of Alexander's Friends, observing when Calisthenes approach'd to kiss Alexander, inform'd him that Calisthenes had not ador'd him, upon which the King turn'd away from him; and thereupon Calisthenes said, he must now be discarded with the Loss of a Kiss. I cannot indeed praise either any of these things that tended to Alexander's Dishonour, or the Moroseness of Calisthenes; for I conceive it had been enough for him modestly to have carry'd himself, and for him who would serve the King, to promote his Affairs to the best advantage, as far as ever he was able: And therefore I am of Opinion, that Calisthenes was not without just cause hated by Alexander, by reason of the unseasonable liberty of his Speech and foolish Malepertness. For which reason (I believe) Credit was more easily given afterwards to his Accusers, by whom he was charg'd to be in the Con∣spiracy with the Pages against the King's Life, and to others who affirm'd that they were put on to it by him. The Conspiracy was thus: There was an Order formerly made by Philip, that from among the Sons of the Macedonian Nobility, when they grew up to Men's estate, choice should be made of some from time to time to attend upon the King, both to be Squires of his Body, and Gentlemen of his Bedchamber: These Youths, when the King was about to ride, receiv'd the Horses from the Querries, and led them to the King, and after the Persian manner help'd him to mount, and waited upon him whenever he went forth a Hunting: Among these, there was one Hermolaus, the Son of Sopolides, who studied Philosophy, and was Scholar to Calisthenes: The Report is, That a wild Boar in the course of Hunting meeting Alexander, this Hermolaus prevented the King (who was aiming at him) and kill'd the Boar. The King hereupon being in a rage to have the Opportunity of killing the Boar snatch'd out of his hand, commanded that the Youth should be whipt in the presence of all the other Pages, and have his Horse taken from him: Which Disgrace he not being able to bear, open'd his Mind to Sostrates, the Son of Amyn∣tas, one of his Companions, of the same Quality, and his Bosom Friend, and declar'd to him that his Life wou'd be but a Burden to him, unless he could revenge the Injury done him upon Alexander; and it was no difficult matter to persuade Sostrates (being his spe∣cial Friend) to join with him in this Traiterous Conspiracy. Antipater likewise, the Son of Asclepodorus (Lord Lieutenant of Syria) Epimenes the Son of Arseus, and Anticles the Son of Theocritus, together with Philotas the Son of Carsides the Thracian, were all brought in by him to join in the same Treason. The Night that it came to Antipater's turn to wait in the Bedchamber, was the time pitch'd upon to kill Alexander when he was asleep. But it hapned (as some write) that Alexander that very Night sate up Drinking till Morning. But Aristobulus says, That a certain Woman of Syria pretending to be divinely inspir'd, still follow'd Alexander from place to place, whom Alexander and his Courtiers at first ri∣dicul'd; but when what she had foretold was still verify'd by the Event, she was no longer despis'd by Alexander, but was freely admitted to the King both by night and by day, and often was in his Bed-chamber when he was asleep. 'Tis said at that time this Pro∣phetess by chance met the King as he came from his Cups, and entreated him to return to his Companions, and spend the whole Night in Drinking. Alexander judging it might be a Divine Warning, return'd, and by that means disappointed the Traiterous Designs of the Pages.
The next day, Epimenes the Son of Arseus, one of the Conspirators, discover'd the whole matter to his Friend Caricles the Son of Menander, Caricles to Eurylochus the Bro∣ther of Epimeues; Eurylochus going into Alexander's Tent; reveal'd all to Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, the Esquire of the King's Body, and he to Alexander, who forthwith order'd all that Eurylochus had nam'd to be seiz'd; who being apprehended, upon their Exami∣nation confess'd their Treason, and discover'd some others. Aristobulus indeed says, that they declar'd Calisthenes stirr'd 'em up to undertake this piece of Villany, which Ptolemy likewise confirms: But there are some others that give another account of this matter, viz. That Alexander perfectly hated Calisthenes, and be∣cause there was a great Intimacy between him and Hermolaus, he was easily wrought up on by the Informers to suspect Calisthenes. Some likewise say, That Hermolaus being brought beforethe Macedonians, confess'd that he himself plotted the Treason, and that it was not in the Power of any free-born Man to endure the Disgrace and Dishonour Alexander had brought upon him; and then reckon'd up all that Alexander in that kind had done; to wit, the unjust Death of Philotas, and with far more Injustice his putting to death Parmenio, Philotas's Father, and the rest that were then kill'd; the Murder of Clitus through his Drunkenness, his assuming the Habit of the Medes, the Edict for his Adoration, not yet recall'd, his carousing and drun∣ken Dozing; which vile Courses he not able further to endure, he was earnest to regain Liberty both to himself and the rest of the Macedonians. Hereupon Hermolaus and the rest that were seiz'd were ston'd to death by the Standers-by. But Aristobulus says, That Calisthenes was carry'd about with the Army in Chains, and died. Ptolemy says he was first rack'd, and afterwards hang'd. So that these Authors, though of great Credit and Repute, and who were themselves present in the Army, and attending upon Alexander at the very time when these things were acted, yet cannot agree about a matter, whereof there cou'd be no doubt at all at the time when it was done. 10. The King's Expedition against those call'd Nauticans, or Naurans; and the De∣struction of many of his Army by a great Snow. Curtius, lib. VIII. c. 4. THese things being thus set in order, the third Month he march'd From Naura, or Nautica. out of his Win∣ter-Quarters towards a Country call'd In Sogdiana Gabaza. The first day he had an easie March; the next day was not as yet stormy or gloomy, but something darker than the day before, not without some threatning of a Storm at hand. The third day the whole heaven flash'd with Lightning, sometimes light, then presently dark, which not only amaz'd the Eyes, but terrify'd the Hearts of the distracted Army. The Air resounded with continual Thunder, and Thunder-bolts up and down seem'd to be shot from the Clouds; the Army, even struck deaf with the Thunder, as Men astonish'd, durst neither march nor stand still. Then on a sudden fell down a Storm of Hail like a violent Tor∣rent. At first they cover'd themselves with their Shields, but presently their henumb'd and frozen Hands let fall their Arms, neither did they know towards what Place or Country to move themselves, the Violence of the Storm being greater than could possibly be avoided, turn themselves, which way soever they would. Their Ranks and Order therefore being broke, they wander'd through the Or Forest. Wood in Parties as they could; and many fainting rather with Fear than through Weariness, fell down upon the Ground, although the Fierceness of the Cold had frozen the Hail; others lean'd themselves to the Bodies of Trees, which was to many both a Support and Defence. Neither were they deceiv'd in chusing out a place to die in, when their natural Heat, overcome by the Cold, left them immovable. But it was a grateful Sloth to them that were tir'd out, neither did they count it ik∣some to find Rest by Death; for the Cold was not only vehement, but also not likely to abate, and the dark Shades of the Wood, besides the Storm (which was as the Night) supprest and kept out the Light, that common Comfort and Refreshment. The King only was patient under this sad Misforttune, and walk'd round his Camp, and brought together the dispers'd, and lifted up them that were down, shewing them the Smoak that came from Chimneys afar off, advising every one to take the highest Refuge. Neither did any thing conduce more to their Safety, than to see the King, who had taken more Pains than they, yet most unwearied of any, and therefore were asham'd to leave him. But Necessity, more forcible than Reason in their Distresses, found out a Remedy for
the Cold: For hewing down the Trees with their Axes, they set the Heaps of Wood up and down on fire, so that you would have thought all the Wood had been on a lame, and scarce any place left for the Army to lodge. This Heat presently enliven'd their be∣numb'd Limbs, and by degrees their Spirits, which the Cold had even clos'd up, began freely to pass Some were entertain'd in the Houses of the Barbarians which hid from them in the late Wood; but now their Necessity had discover'd others lodg'd in their Tents, which though wet, yet were more tolerable, the Fury of the Storm being some∣thing abated. This unhappy Accident swept away a thousand Soldiers and other mean Scullions, Horse-boys, &c. Attendants upon the Camp. 'Tis reported, that some were found standing at the side of the Trees, and seem'd not only as if they had been alive, but as if they had been discoursing one with another in the same posture as they were in when they died. 11. How Alexander falling in Love with Roxana, marry'd her, and induc'd many of his Friends to marry the Daughters of the Chief Men among the Barba∣rians. Arrianus, lib. IV. Roxana, the Daughter of Oxyartes, was there likewise, a Virgin ripe for Marriage, * In the Rock before mention∣ed Sogdiana; but Strabo says it was at the Rick in Ba∣ctria. See be∣fore. whom Alexander's Fellow-Soldiers judg'd to be the most Beautiful Lady of all Asia next to the Wife of Darius; upon sight of her, Alexander fell deeply in Love, yet would not by any means use her dishonourably as a Captive; neither did he disdain to take her for his Wife. Which Act of Alexander (I conceive) was more worthy of Praise than Reprehension. And for Darius's Wife (who was esteem'd the most Beautiful Lady of all Asia) he neither was tainted so much as with an unlawful Desire towards her, or as a domineering Lord commanded her to his Bed, though he was then in the Heat of his Youth, and the highest pitch of Worldly Prosperity; which two Conditions are apt greatly to provoke Men to be very injurious to others: But he, out of a Reverence to her Person, spar'd her; herein evidencing his great Continency, and prompted likewise thereunto by a desire of his own Honour and Reputation. 12. His breaking into India, and his putting all to the Sword in the first Country he enter'd, to be a Terrour to the rest. Arrianus, lib. IV. IN the middle of the Spring, Alexander remov'd with his Army out of Bactria towards India, and left Amyntas there with three thousand five hundred Horse, and ten thou∣sand Foot. Having pass'd the Caucasus, in ten days he came to Alexandria, which he had built in Paropanisus at his first Expedition into Bactria, and put out the Governour here for his ill Behaviour in the Place, and then Peopled the City with more Inhabitants out of the Neighbouring Countries, and such of his Macedonians as were grown unser ceable for the War, and made Nicanor, one of his Associates, Governour of the City;-but appointed Tyriaspes Commander of the whole Region of Paropanisus, and of all that Territory or Province as far as the River Cophene. Thence he went to the City of Nicea, and there offer'd Sacrifice to Minerva, and then march'd to the River Cophene, and sen∣ding an Herauld, commanded Taxiles and the rest of the Governours of the Countries lying beyond the River to come to him. Taxiles and other petty Princes came first and met him, bringing him large Presents, such as were most esteem'd in India, promising likewise to send him five and twenty Elephants. He there divided his Army, and sent Hephestion and Perdiccas into the Country call'd Peucelaotis towards the River Indus, toge∣ther with the Troops of Georgias, Clitus, and Meleager, and half the Horse of the Social Band, and all the Mercenary Horse, commanding them to take in by fair means or foul all the Towns which lay in their way, and that when they came to the Bank of the River Indus, they should prepare all things that were necessary to pass over. And with them was sent Taxiles and other Commanders of those Parts, to put in execution, when they came to the River Indus, what Alexander had commanded. Astes, the Governour of the Country of Peucelaotis, offering to revolt, lost both him∣self and the City which he put himself into; for Hephestion came and besieg'd it, and after thirty days time took it, and killing Astes, made one Sangaeus Governour of it, who a
little before forsaking Astes, had fled over to Taxiles, which made Alexander the more con∣fide in him ever after. Alexander with his Band of Silver Targeteers, and the Horse of his Fellow Cavallers that went not with Hephestion, and the Troop of Horse call'd Asseteri, together with his Archers, Agrians, and Horse-Lancers, march'd into the Country of the Aspians and Phy∣raeans, and Arosacans; and going on his way to the River Choes (which was for the most part mountainous and rocky) and having at last past that River, he commanded Crate∣rus to come after him fair and softly with the Foot; and himself taking with him the whole Body of his Horse, and eight hundred Macedonian Foot-Targeteers on Horseback, he march'd away at a great rate, because he heard that the People of the Country were fled, some to the Mountains, others to fenced Cities, and all to make head against him. Having set upon the first of these Cities that lay in his way, those which came forth to oppose him, he routed at the first Charge, and drave them back into the Town, but was himself wounded with a Dart in the Shoulder, which pierc'd thro' his Breast-plate; but the Wound was but slight, the Breast-plate repelling the force of the Dart. Ptolemy, Lagus, and Leonatus were likewise wounded. Then Alexander observing what part of the Wall was fittest to pitch upon for an Assault, encamp'd close to the City, just against that part. The next day early in the morning the Macedonians took the outward Wall with little ado, for the City was doubly wall'd. At the inner Wall the Inhabitants made some resistance; but when the Macedonians had once scal'd the Walls, and the Towns∣men felt the Arrows showing down about their ears, not being able longer to endure, the Soldiers within brake out of the Gates, and ran every Man his way to the Mountains, many of whom the Macedonians kill'd in the pursuit; and all the Prisoners (being in a rage because the King was wounded) they put to the Sword. Many escap'd to the Mountains, which were not far off from the City. Having laid the City level with the Ground, he march'd away with his Army to Andaca another City. 13. Of his Kindness to the City Nysa, upon the account of his Descent from Bac∣chus. Arrianus, lib. IV. IN this Region, into which Alexander entred, lying between the Rivers Cophone and In∣dus, is situated Nysa, a City built (as is reported) by Bacchus. Dionysius, at that time when he Commanded in India; who this Dionysius was, and when, or from whence he brought in his Armies against the Indians, I cannot conjecture: Whether it was the Teban from Thebes, or he from Tmolus in Lydia, that led an Army from thence against the Indians. But though he pass'd into so many Warlike Nations, at that time altogether unknown to the Greeks, yet he subdu'd none of them but the Indians. This only I am satisfied in, That those Fables that the Ancients have writ concerning the Gods, are not too curiously to be pry'd into; for such Writings as do not otherwise deserve much Credit, yet when they happen to speak of the Gods, they seem not to be altogether incredible. As soon as Alexander came with his Army to Nysa, they sent Acuphis, the Chief Man of the City to him, with thirty others of the Leading Men of the Place, intreating him to leave the City free to the God Bacchus. When the Ambassadors were introduc'd into the King's Pavilion, and saw him as yet dusty with his March, clad with all his Armour, and his Helmet upon his Head, and his Lance in his Hand; amaz'd at the sight of him, they fell flat upon the Ground, and were silent a long time together: But after that Ale∣xander had commanded them to rise, and cheer up, Acuphis thus began:—The Ny∣saeans intreat, O King, That in reverence to Bacchus you would leave the City free, and the In∣habitants to Govern by their own Laws: For Dionysius, after he had conquer'd the Indians, and was about to return to the Grecian Sea, built this City for those Soldiers who were unser∣viceable for War (being of Bacchus's Family) as a perpetual Monument to Posterity of his Expe∣dition and Victory; as your Majesty has built Alexandria at Mount Caucasus, and another in Egypt, and many others, some finish'd, and others now in building, having now perform'd much more than our Dionysius did: And he call'd the City Nysa, from his Nurse so nam'd, and the Country Nysaea; and the Mountain which hangs over the City, he was pleas'd to call Meros (which is a Thigh) because according to the Fables he was cherish'd in Jupiter's Thigh. Since that time we have dwelt in Nysa as a free City, and have liv'd at ease under the Use of our own Laws. And that this Place was built by Bacchus, this one thing may be a Demonstration, That Ivy grows no where in India but in this City. This Speech of Acuphis was very pleasing to Alexander; for he had a great desire those things should be believ'd that were related
concerning Bacchus's Peregrination, and wou'd have none to doubt but that Nysa was built by Bacchus, because that he himself was now come as far as Bacchus ever came, and was still desirous to go further than he ever did. And he was of Opinion, that the Mace∣donians, out of Emulation to the Acts of Bacchus, wou'd willingly with himself undergo further Toils and Labours. He granted therefore Liberty to the Nysaeans, and that they should Govern according to their own Laws And when he understood what their Laws were, and how they were under the Government of an Aristocracy, he commended their Constitution, and commanded 'em to furnish him with three hundred Horsemen, and send him a hundred of them that were of the Aristocracy (who were three hundred in all) such as he would chuse. Acuphis was one of the Number of them that were pick'd out, whom the King had made Governour of the whole Province of Nysaea. 'Tis reported, that Acuphis smil'd at these Demands, and that Alexander asking him why he laugh'd, Acuphis answer'd, How is it possible, O King, for the City to be well Govern'd, when 'tis stript of an hun∣dred good Men all at once! But if your Majesty have a Kindness for the City, be pleas'd to accept of three hundred Horsemen (and more if you think fit;) but as for an hundred of the best Men of the City which you desire, be pleas'd to be content with two hundred of the worst, that whensoever you return hither again, you may find that the City has maintain'd and kept up her ancient State and Grandeur. With these Words, because he judg'd them prudently spoken) Alexander was persuaded, and commanded only the three hundred Horsemen to be sent him; and for the three hundred of the Chief of the City, he neither desir'd them, nor any others in their stead. But Acuphis his Son, and his Nephew by his Sister, were sent to Alexander. Afterwards Alexander had a longing desire to see that City, in which the Nysaeans boast there are some Monuments of Dionysius; and to go likewise, accompanied with some Horse of his Friends, and a Regiment of Foot, to the Mountain Meros, that he might see the Hill grown over with Ivy and Laurel, and the shady Groves, that aboun∣ded with all sorts of wild Beasts. The Ivy was a very pleasant Sight to the Macedonians, having not seen any of a long time; for India bears no Ivy, neither those Places where Vines grow. Of the Ivy they wore Garlands on their Heads, singing Praise to Bacchus, with all his Titles and Appellations. Alexander there sacrific'd to Bacchus, and feasted with his Friends. 14. How having taken a strong City call'd Massaga, he put to the Sword all the Mer∣cenary Soldiers that had fought Valiantly. Arrianus, lib. IV. WHen the Barbarians heard of Alexander's coming, they durst not abide him in a Body, but brake up their Army, and dispers'd themselves every one as they could into several Cities, purposing there to stand upon their Guard. Alexander march'd first with his Army to Mazaga. Massaga, the greatest City of that The Country of the Assace∣nians. Country; approaching therefore with his Army close to the City; the Barbarians having got into the Town for their assistance seven thousand Mercenary Indians from the inner parts of India made a fierce Sally upon the Macedonians as they lay Encampt. Alexander per∣ceiving that the Fight was likely to be under the City Walls, design'd to draw off the Enemy at a further distance, lest when they fled (which he clearly foresaw they would) they might with ease (being so very near) get into the Town and so escape, perceiving therefore the Barbarians pouring out upon them, he forthwith commanded his Macedo∣nians to wheel about and make to a Hill about seven furlongs distant from the River Guraeus, where he had purpos'd to Encamp. The Enemy hereupon emboldned (the Ma∣cedonians seeming to give back) in great confusion and disorder hotly pursu'd them, But when they were got within the cast of a dart, upon a sign given by Alexander, the Pha∣lanx furiously turned upon 'em. But first indeed the Horse that were darters, the Agri∣ans and Archers made an excursion, and ingag'd with the Barbarians, But Alexander led the Phalanx (in Battalia) himself. The Indians amaz'd at the sudden and unexpected turn, when it came to the Swords point fled back into the City. Two hundred of 'em were kill'd in the pursuit, but the rest got within the Walls. Alexander presently drew up his main Battel of Macedons before the Walls, and from thence was slightly wounded by an Arrow struck into his Heel. The next day the En∣gines . Curtius, l. 8. c. 10. says the Calf of the Leg. being brought up to the Walls, part of 'em were easily batterr'd down, upon which (the Macedonians endeavouring to force their way through the Ruins) the Indians stoutly
withstood them, so far as that Alexander for that day sounded a retreat, and call'd off his Men. But the next day the Macedonians renew'd the Assault with greater vigour, bringing up a wooden Tower to the Walls, out of which the Archers powring showers of Darts and Arrows grievously gall'd the Indians. But yet with all these devices they were not able to enter. The Third day the main Body of the Macedonians being again led up to the Walls, a Bridge was cast out of the Wooden Tower over that part of the Wall that was broken down, upon which Bridge the King order'd the Agyraspides who had before taken Tyre after the same manner; but when with great Courage and Re∣solution they had got upon it with too much Weight, it yielded and broke, and it and the Macedonians tumbled down together. The Barbarians rejoycing at the Accident, set up a great shout, and ply'd the Macedonians with Stones, and all sorts of Darts and Ar∣rows, or whatever was at hand, or they could come at; and others issuing out through narrow Sally-ports that were placed between the Turrets, knock'd them in that Disorder and Confusion on the head. Alexander sent Alcetas with a Party to take care of the woun∣ded Men, and to call the Besiegers off into the Camp. The 4th day he cast another Bridge with other Devices upon the Walls; but the Indians (as long as the Governor of the place was alive) valiantly repuls'd the Macedonians: But when he was kill'd by a Dart from the Engines, and many of their Men lost by continual Assaults, and others wounded and become thereby unserviceable, they sent to Alexander, who was very ready and willing to spare such stout and valiant Men. He agreed therefore with the mercenary Indians, that they should take up Arms with him, and join themselves to his Army. Hereupon they march'd out of the City by themselves, and encamp'd upon an Hill opposite to the Macedonians, with a design to fly away in the night to their own Country, because they wou'd not fight against the other Indians. When Alexander was inform'd hereof, the same night he surrounded the Hill with his Forces, and put 'em every one to the Sword, and took the City (now without these that should defend it) by storm, and in it the Mother and Daugh∣ter of Assacenus. On Alexander's side there were only five and twenty kill'd during the whole Siege. FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Principal Matters In the First Five BOOKS of Diodorus the Sicilian: Containing his MYTHOLOGIES. Note: The First Figures of this Table refer to the Pages of this Book; and the Last Figures with r. before them, refer to the Pages of Rhodomannus's Edition plac'd in the Margin of this Book. A. ACteon; Torn in pieces by Dogs, and Occasion, Page 171 r. 195 Adoption; the Rites of it among the Barbarians, 147 r. 170 Adulteresses; an innumerable Company burnt in Egypt, 31 r. 30 Aeacus; His Genealogy, 166 r. 183 Aegestines; Their War with the Selinun∣tines, 297 r. 103 Aegypt; Its Shape, Greatness, &c. 14 r. 19 —All living Creatures first there, 3 r. 3 —One Sea, 86 r. 101 —Other Matters of Aegypt, 12, 13, 22, 36, 40, 41, &c. r. 17, 42, 43, 51, 61 —Divided into three Parts; for the Priests, Kings, and Soldiers, 38 r. 46 —Three other Classes, 39 r. 47 —Their Gods most ancient, 3 r. 7 —Many Colonies from hence; as Babylo∣nians, Argives, Colchians, Jews, and Athenians, 13 r. 17 —The Number of their Judges and Sala∣ries, 39 r. 48 —Their Kings, &c. p. 36 r. 43, 45, 46. —Their Burials, 38 r. 57, 58 Aeolus, 164 r. 188 —The Entertainer of Ulysses, 179 r. 202 Aequinoctial; Under the Aequinox, the most temperate Air, and the State of the Days and Shadows, 82 r. 97 Air; Airy Bodies seen in some Parts of Afri∣ca, 109 r. 128 Aesculapius; His Original, 166 r. 189 —Accus'd by Pluto, ibid. r. ibid. Age; An Age accounted 30 Years with the Grecians, 81 r. 96 Aethiopians; Boast they were the first Men; p. 85 r. 100 —Religious, 86 r. ibid Aetna; Vomits Fire, 138. r. 159 Africa; Where Till'd, and where Desert, p. 108 r. 138 —Freed from wild Beasts by Hercules, p. 136 r. 157 —The nature of the Fruits of the African Palm-Tree, 81 r. 95 Alexandria; Built by Alexander the Great; p. 26 r. 32, 33
Amalthea; Amalthea's Horn in Africa, p. 145 r. 141 —In Aetolia, what? 120 r. 168 Amazons of Africa, 110 r. 129 —Their Seats, Arms, &c. 111, 112 r. 130 The Scythian Amazons, 76 r. 90 —Their Wars with Hercules, p. 77, 135 r. 91, 156 —Their Irruption into Attica, and Overthrow by Theseus, 141 r. 163 Ammon King of Lybia, the Husband of Rhea, 120 r. 141 —Overcome by Saturn, 122 r. 142 Amphiraus, General of the Argives at Thebes; a Conjurer Betray'd by his Wife, and Re∣veng'd by his Son, 163 r. 186, 188 Apis Consecrated to Osiris, 9 r. 13 —Its Worship, 44, 45 r. 54, 55 Apollo; the Son of Jupiter, r. 9 —Found out the Laurel, 7 r. 10 —His several Names, 211 r. 237 —His good Acts, 209 r. 255 —His Contest with Marsyas, and his Cruel∣ty towards him, 114, 115 r. 134 Apries; King of Aegypt, 35 r. 42 —Strangl'd, ibid. Aquaduct; a Stately Aquaduct made by Se∣miramis at Ecbatana, 58 32 Arabia; its Description, Situation, People, &c. p. 78 r. 29, 92 —The Happy; its Fruitfulness, Spices, &c. p. 79 r. 93 —The Tree as Cedar, Juniper, &c. ibid. —Gold pure, Cattle, Wild Beasts, Precious Stones, 80 r. 94 —A description of both Shoars in the Red-Sea, 102, &c. r. 120, 122, 124 Arbaces the Mede, his Conspiracy against Sardanapalus, 66, 67 r. 78, 80 Argives; their War with the Thebans, 163 r. 186 —The Destruction of the Seven Captains at Thebes, ibid. Argonauts; the Expedition of the Argonauts, 148, &c. r. 178, 181, 160 —Explanation of the Fable, 151 r. 174 Ariadna; Ariadna's Crown in the Heavens, 160 r. 184 Arts; one Man using several Trades not al∣low'd in Aegypt, 39 r. 46 Asphaltes; the Lake Asphaltes, and its Brim∣stone or Pitch, 78 r. 92 Assyrians; their Kings do not suffer Themselves to be openly seen, 64 r. 76 —They sent Aid to the Trojans under Memnon, 65 r. 77 Astrology; the Aegyptians excellent Astro∣logers, 26, 36 r. 32, 44 —So the Caldeans, 70 r. 83 —Atlas, Hercules, 141 r. 163 —Hyperion, 141 r. 131 —The Heliadae in Rhodes, 200 r. 227 Astyages; the last King of the Medes; over∣come by Cyrus, 72 r. 85 Atalanta; Belov'd by Meleager, Intrapt by the Thestiadae, 145 r. 167 Athens; how their Common-wealth was di∣vided, 13 r. 17 Atlantides; their Country in Affrica, 115 r. 137 —The Names of the Atlantides and their Offspring, ibid. Atlas; his Kingdom, and chief Study, 115 r. 125 —Why he's said to Carry the Heavens upon his Shoulders, ibid. Avernus; a Description of the Lake Avernus, 138 r. 159 Amber; where it is produc'd, 185, 186 r. 209 B. Babylon; built by Semiramis, 57 r. 80 —Its Walls, Towers, Lake, Passage under Water, Hanging Gardens, 57 r. 69 Bacchus; how many there were, 116 to 119 r. 137, 148 —His Acts, 120 to 122 r. ibid. 141, &c. —The Indian Bacchus the most Ancient, 126, 127 r. 147 —Why he was of a double Shape, 129 r. 149 —The natural meaning of Bacchus, 117 r. 147 Bactra; 55, 56 r. 66 —Besieg'd by Ninus, 57 r. 67 Baleares; a Description of the Baliary Islands, 183 r. 206 Balm; the Place and Usefulness, 79 r. 93 Bards; Ancient Poets among the Gauls, 189 r. 213 Belus; his Temple, 58 r. 69 —His Statue, ibid. r. 70 Beasts; Worshipp'd in Aegypt, 43, 44 r. 52, 54 Brimstone; how it Rises up in the Lake As∣phaltes, 79 r. 93 —The Plenty of it about Babylon, 59 r. 73 Britain; The Discription of the Island, 185 r. 203 —Their Laws, Manners, &c 185 r. 209 —Their Traffick with Tin there, r. ibid. —The Island Discover'd by Julius Caesar, ibid. r. 120 Busiris; the Ground of the Story of his killing all Passengers that landed in Egypt. 46 r. 55 Burials; the manner of Embalming in Egypt 47 r. 57 Bull; a dreadfull wild Bull, 100 r. 117 —The Marathonian Bull, 159 r. 182 C. Cadmus; Built Thebes, his Wife, Children, &c. 127, 197 r. 147, 223 —Was the First that taught the Greeks
Letters, and brought them into Greece, 201, 120 r. 140, 227 Cadusians; their perpetual War with the Medes, 71 r. 84 Caesar; Julius Caesar first Discover'd the Nor∣then Parts to the Romans, 185 r. 120 —Conquer'd Britain, ibid. Calydonia; the Calydonian Boar, the Hunt∣ing of him, 145 r. 167 Camels; Wild Camels, 105 r. 123 Camels; Leopards of Arabia, their Shape, 80 r. 94 Campes; the Great Monster, kill'd by Bac∣chus, 122 r. 143 Carbuncles; where they are Found, 111 r. 120 Cat; Worship'd in Egypt, 47 r. 53 Chastity; a Trial of Conjugal Chastity, 31 r. 38 Celtiberians; their Description, Customs, &c. 190 r. 214 Centaurs; their Original, 165 r. 189 —Their Conflict with Hercules, 133 r. 153 —And War with the Lapithae, 165 r. 189 —Eurytion the Centaur kill'd by Hercu∣les, 144 r. 166 Cerberus; Drawn out of Hell by Hercules, 139, 140 c. 161 Ceres; is the Earth, 5, 117 r. 8, 137 —The same with Isis, as the Egyptians say, 206 r. 230 —Her Acts, 177 r. 200 —Obscene Speech in her Feasts, ibid. r. 101 Chaldeans; their Astrology, Augurs, 69, 70 r. 51, 82, 83 —Their Priests, 66 r. 78 Chemmis King of Egypt, his Pyramid, 32 r. 39 Chius; the Ancient Inhabitants of Chius, r. 238, 239 Circes; her History, 150 r. 173 Circumcision; the Troglodites Cicumcis'd, 98 r. 115 Caelus King of the Atlantides, his Sons, 113, 115 r. 133, 135 Corsica; its Situation, Cities, ancient Inhabi∣tants, &c. 181 r. 205 —Bitter Honey, 182 r. ibid. Corybantes; the Sons of the Mother of the Gods, 170 r. 194 —Their Sacreds, 198 r. 223 Crete; the Antiquities, 116, 122, 135, 204, 211 r. 136, 142, 230, 157, 238 —Its Name, whence, 122, r. 142 Crocodile; its Description, 16 r. 24 —The Hunting of it, 16, 17 r. 23 Crueltty of Hecates, 151, 152 r. 173, 151 Cyaxares; the first Monarch of the Medes, 71 r. 84 Cybele; her Name, whence, 114 r. 134 —The several Stories of the Atlantides and Phrygians concerning her, 114, 115 r. 133, 134 Cyrus transferr'd the Empire from the Medes, to the Persians, 72 r. 85 —Crucified by the Scythian Queen, 76 r. 90 D. Dactyli Judaei, 204 r. 230 Daedalus; his Monument in Egypt, 170 r. 61 —His Statues, 168 r. 192 —His Works in Crete, 159 r. 183 —In Sicily, r. ibid. —His Wings, r. ibid. 182 —In Sardinia, 170 r. 194 Daphne the Daughter of Tiresias, her Oracles, 164 r. 187 —Her History, 173 r. 179 Delphos; the Temple Rifl'd by the Gauls, 189 r. 214 Derceto; the Syrian Goddess, the Mother of Semiramis, 55 r. 95 Description of pleasant Places, 121, 173, 176, 194, 195 r. 141, 197, 199, 220 Diana; why the Nurse of Children, 208 r. 234, 235 —What Places Dedicated to Her in Sicily, 117 r. 200 Deluge; by the Eruption of the Pontick Sea, 197 r. 223 —In Boetia, 136 r. 158 —Rhodes, 200 r. 220 —In Samo-Thracia, 197 r. 223 —Deucalion, 3 r. 7 Diomedon; his Mares devour Men, 135 r. 155 Dogs; Men with Dogs Heads, 100 r. 117 —Why Worshipp'd in Egypt, 7 r. 11 Doreans; their War with the Lapithae, 146 r. 169 —Expuls'd by the Theban Exiles, 164 r. 187 Dragon at Cholchos, what, r. 162 Druids; Poets of the Gauls, Philosophers, and Divines, 189 r. 213 Dromenaries, 106 r. 125 E. Ecbatana; a Famous Aquaduct there, and the City Beautified by Semiramis, 60 r. 72 —The Palace of Arbaces, 68 r. 81 Effeminacy; a Remarkable Example of Effe∣minacy in Sardanapalus, 65 r. 78 Elephants; the manner of Hunting them by the Ethiopians, 96 r. 112 —How they are destroy'd by Serpents, 89 r. 104 —Their Fight with the Rhinoceros, 99 r. 117 —Their manner of Generation, bringing forth their Young, &c. 75 r. 89 Epitaphs of Isis, r. 16 —Of Osiris of Osimanduas, 12 r. 31
Ergamenes; King of Ethiopia, abolish'd the cruel Custom of forcing the Kings to kill Themselves, 87 r. 102 Erycina; the Temple of Venus Erycina, 172 r. 196 Eteocles; his cruel War with his Brother a∣bout the Kingdom of Thebes, 162 r. 186 Euphrates; a Famous River, 67 r. 70 Eurydices; the Wife of Orpheus, brought back out of Hell by Orpheus, 140 r. 162 Eurystheus; imposes Labours upon Hercules, 132 r. 153 —His Death, 158 r. 181 Expiation; the strange manner of Expiation among the Ethiopians, 81 r. 96 F. Famine all the World over, but in Egypt, 13 r. 17 Fire; its Irruption, 138, 179 r. 159, 202 Fortunate Islands of Arabia, 108 r. 127 —In the Atlantick Ocean, 183 r. 207 Fruits; Two Harvests in the Year in India, 72 r. 85 —The Fruitfulness of Taprobane. Corn first found out by Ceres in Sicily, 176, 177, 206 r. 199, 200, 232 Funerals; the Funeral Rites among the Egy∣ptians, 38 r. 57 —The Pompous Burials of their Kings, 30 r. 46 G. Ganges, a famous River, 73 Gades or Cadiz, by whom built, 184 r. 208 Gauls; 186 r. 210 —The Extream Cold, their Rivers, &c. ibid. r. 214 —The Description, 187, 188, 189 r. 211 to 214 Geometry; first found out in Egypt, 36 r. 44 —The Usefulness of it, 42 r. 51 Giants; Egyptian Giants, 10, 11 r. 16 —Their Triple War with Jupiter, 207 r. 234 —Overcome by the Gods, 121 r. 142 Giants of Phlegraea, overcome by Hercules, 138 r. 159 —Why said to be Born of the Earth, r. ibid. Gods; the History of the Gods of Egypt, 23, 50 r. 61 —Their Worship by the Cretians, Ethiopians, 210, 86 100, 237 —The God Jao of the Hebrews, 49 r. 59 Gold; the Laborious way of making of Gold, in the Confines of Egypt, 89, 90 r. 105, 106 —The Gold Mines in Ethiopia, ibid. —Gold chang'd for Brass or Iron, 106 r. 125 —The History of the Golden Fleece, 157 r. 174 —A River that flows down Gold, r. H. Hecates; her History, 151 r. 173 Helen; carry'd away by Theseus, 162 r. 185 Heliopolis; by whom built, 50 r. 29 Helius; the Son of Hypericon and Bazilia, metamorphos'd into the Sun, 113, 114 r. 133 Hellespont; whence the Name deriv'd, 151 r. 174 Heraclidae; Banish'd out of all Greece, 158 r. 181 —Depart out of Peloponnesus for 50 Years, by Agreement, 158 r. 182 Hercules; there were three, 124 r. 145 —The Egyptian, Gelai, and him of Alc∣mena, ibid. —The Acts of Hercules the Cretan, 210 r. 236 —The Genealogy of the last, his Acts, 131 r. 152 —His Sickness and Madness, 156 r. 154 —His further Acts, r. 156, 163 —His Labours, 132, &c. r. 153 —His Expedition into Spain, 153 r. 156 —The Institutor of the Olympick Games, 134 r. 155 —Is worship'd by the Agyrineans, 139 —Overcomes the Trojans, 152 r. 176 —His Sickness, r. 169 —He burns himself, 147 r. 176 Hermophrodites; their prodigious Originals, 129 r. 150 Hermes; the Egyptian Hermes, 6 r. 10 —His Inventions, ibid. —First finder out of Arts, 23 r. 28 Herodotus; the time he Flourish'd, 71 r. 83 Hesion; expos'd to be devour'd by a Whale, 149 r. 171 —Deliver'd by Hercules, ibid. Hesperides; divers Opinions of the Hesperian Apples, 141 r. 162 Hippolytus; his Stepmother falls in love with him, 161 r. 184 —Is falsly Accus'd; Kill'd by his Chariot, ibid. Homer; the most ancient of the Poets, 86 r. 100 —His Works, 152, 164 r. 8, 176, 187 —Imitates Orpheus, 50 r. 61 —The Place of his Birth, ibid. Honey; bitter Honey, 182 r. 205 I. Jambulus; his strange Voyage and Travels, 81, 84 r. 96, 99 Jason; Captain of the Argonauts, his Acts, 148, 149 r. 170, 171 —Goes to Corinth, cast of Medea, and marries Glauces, 145, 146 r. 179 —His Death, ibid. Iberians; their Gold Mines, 191 r. 162 Ibis; the Usefulness of this Bird, 45 r. 55
Ichneumenon; the Enemy of the Crocodile, 17 r. 22, 55 Ichthyophagi; not affected with any thing, 91 r. 108 —The manner of their Burials, 93 r. 109 Jehovah call'd Jao, 49 r. 59 Indians; their Seven Tribes, 74, 75 r. 88, 89 —Their War with Semiramis, 62, 63 r. 47 India; the Description, 72, 73 r. 85, 87 Indus River, 73 Jocasta; the Acts of Jocasta, r. 202 —The Mother of Oedipus, 162 r. 185 Iolaus; one of the Thespidae brings a Colony into Sardinia, 142 r. 163, 164 Iris or Ireland, an Island of Britain, a fierce People, 189 r. 213 Isis; the same with Ceres, 6 r. 9 Jews; a Colony of Egypt, 10 r. 17 —Why they are Circumcis'd, 28 r. 35 Judges; the Proceedings in Judicature in Egypt, 39, 40 r. 48 Jupiter; the Ancient Jupiter, was the Brother of Coelus, and King of Crete, whose Daugh∣ters were the Curetes: the other was Lord of the World, the Son of Saturn, 116 r. 16, 136 —The Kingdom of the Cretan Jupiter after Ammon and Bacchus, 123 r. 145 —More, 204 r. 231, 233 Ixion attempts to Ravish Juno, is tormented upon a Wheel, 165 r. 189 K. Kings; draw a Chariot r. 57 —The strange way of living of the Kings of Egypt, 36 r. 44 —Death to the Sabaean Kings to stir abroad, 107 r. 126 Kingdoms; formerly bestow'd upon such as had done good Publick Service, 23 r. 28 L. Lakes; a wonderful Lake in Ethiopia, 60 r. 72 —A Description of the Lake of Myris, 26, 27 33, 34 —In Sicily, 139 161 Lapithae; their War with the Centaurs, 165 r. 189 —With the Doreans and Hercules, 146 r. 169 Laws; Of the Egyptians, r. 48 —Of the Ethiopians, 87 r. 102 Liparae Islands; their fruitfullness, &c. 180 r. 203 Letters; Two Sorts in Egypt, 86 r. 101 —Hieroglyphicks of Egypt and Ethio∣pia, what, ibid. —Greek Letters, why call'd Pelasgian, and Phaenician, 120 r. 140 Letters in Tabrobanana, vii Figures, 83 r. 48 Locusts; Eaten, and liv'd upon by the Ethio∣pians, 97 r. 114 Lotus; of Egypt, what, r. 21 —Tall Trees of Lotus, 105 r. 123 M. Macarian Islands; why so call'd, 213 r. 239 Megabarean Ethiopians; their manner of Burial, 98 r. 115 —Their voluntary Deaths, 99 r. 116 Marathon; the Marathonian Bull, 159 r. 182 Maraneans of Arabia; how destroy'd, and rooted out by the Garyndaneans, 105 r. 123 Marsyas: His Contest with Apollo in Musick; his Death, 114, 115 r. 134 Mars; his Inventions and Acts, 209 r. 235 Medea; assists the Argonauts with her Ad∣vice, and makes an Agreement with Jason, 151, 152 r. 173, 174 —Her wonderful Witcheraft in the Palace of Pelias, 153, 154 r. 176, 177 —Forsaken by Jason, and cruel Revenge up∣on her own Children, 156 r. 179 Media; a Catalogue of the Kings, 71 r. 84 Meleager; his sad Destiny, 145 r. 167 Malta Island; its Description, 181 r. 204 Menas; the first King of Egypt, how pre∣serv'd by a Crocodile, 46 r. 56 Mercury; the Egyptian Mercury, his Inven∣tion of Arts, Eloquence, Musick, &c. 6, 23 r. 10, 28 —Conductor of Souls, 50 r. 60 Meroes; Islands in Nile, their Description, r. 19, 20 Minerva; the Place of her Birth, 208 r. 214 —Her Inventions, 209 r. 235 Minos the first, Son of Jupiter, 160 r. 183 —The second, of Lycasta, ibid. —His Cities, Laws, &c. 211 r. 237 —His Death in Sicily, 170 r. 194 Minotaur; Kill'd by Theseus, 160 r. 183 —How born, 169 r. 193 Money; the Punishment of those that counter∣feited Money in Egypt, 41 r. 50 Moses; the first that put Laws in writing, 49 r. 59 —His Praise, ibid. Mice; Bred in Egypt out of the Mud or Slime, 2 r. 1 Muses; Accompany Bacchus, 127, 128 r. 148 —And Osiris, 8 r. 10 —Why, Virgins, 130 r. 150 —Their Names, ibid. r. 235 Miris, King of Egypt; his Lake, 26, 27 r. 33, 34 —His Pyramid and Sepulchre in the Lake, 27 r. 33 Myrrhe; A Description of Myrrhe, 194 r. 220
N. Nabathean Arabians, 78, 105 r. 92, 130 —Thieves, never Conquer'd, ibid. Naxus; the History of Naxus, 198, 199 r. 184, 224, 225 Nemean; a Description of the Nemean Lion, his Place, Death, &c. 132 r. 153 Neptune; his Inventions, good Deeds, why accounted God of the Sea, 207 r. 233 Nile; the Islands in it, 15 r. 19, 20 —The Cattracts, Mouths, ibid. —Beasts, Fishes, &c. 16, 17 r. 20, 21 —Flow its Decrease is observ'd, and the dif∣ferent Opinions of the Inundations of Nile, 18, &c. r. 23, &c. Ninus, King of Assyria; his Acts, 54, 55, 56 r. 64, 65, 66 —His Death and Sepulchre, 57 r. 67 Nineveh; Built, 55, r. 65 —Its Shape, Compass, &c. ibid. —Its Siege, and taking by Arbaces, 66, 67, 68 r. 80 Ninyas; the Son of Ninus, 64 r. 67 Niobe; her Pride and Punishment, 167 r. 167 Nysa; the pleasant Situation of the City the Birth-place of Bacchus, 120, 121 r. 141 —The Cave of Nysa, a most pleasant Place, 127 r. 147 O. Obscenity; Obscene Speech us'd in the Feasts of Ceres, 177 201 Obelisks; the Obelisks of Semiramis, one of the seven Wonders of the World, 59 r. 71 Oedipus; his Birth, Casting forth, his Acts, Marriage, &c. 162 r. 180, 185 Olympicks; the Years: The Olympicks were distant one from another, r. 44 —Invented by Hercules Dactylus, 204 r. 230 —Instituted by Hercules, 134, 155 r. 155, 178 Orion; the Story of Orion, 173 r. 197 Osymanduas; King of Egypt, 24 r. 30 —His stately Pyramid, ibid. —His Epitaph, 25 r. 31 Orpheus; why said to draw Beasts after him, 139, 140 r. 162 —His History, 140 r. ibid. —His Verses, 45 r. 28 —Rites of Bacchus brought into Greece by him, 50 r. 60 Osiris; his Expedition throughout the whole World, and Acts, 5, 6, 7, 8 r. 9, 10 —Deify'd; Death, Burial, and Epitaph, 9, 12 r. 9, 12 P. Palestina, 104, 105 r. 123 Palm-Trees; a full Description of the Palm-Trees in Arabia, and the Province of Baby∣lon, 81 r. 95 Palmetum; a pleasant Place of Palms, and o∣ther Delights in Arabia, 104, 105 r. 123 Panchaian Islands; their Descriptian, 195 r. 220, 221 —Genius and Customs of the Inhabitants, 196 Paradise; the Earthly Paradise in India, 121 r. 141 Parents; the Honour given to dead Parents in Egypt, 48 r. 58 Pasiphae; the Wife of Minos, 160 —Her Carnal knowledge of a Bull, 169 r. 183, 193 Patricides, 162 r. 628, 185 —How Patricides are punish'd, 40 r. 49 Pelias; King of Colchos; his strange Death by his own Daughters, through the Witch∣crafts of Medea, 154, 155 r. 177, 178 Penthesilea; the Amazon Queen, assists the Trojans, 77 r. 91 Perjury; the punishment of Perjury, 40 r. 49 Persians; the Persians record their Anti∣quities in Rolls of Parchment, or Skins, 71 r. 83 Plague; a great Plague in Rhodes, and the Cause, 213 r. 239 Phaeton; the Story of Phaeton, 186 r. 210 Phineus; a Prince in Thrace: his Cruelty towards his two Sons, 149 r. 170 Phaenicians brought Letters into Greece, 209 r. 235 —Eminent for getting of Wealth, 191 r. 211 —Their Colonies, 184 r. 208 Perithous; the History of Perithous, the Rape of Helen, 161, 162 r. 184, 185 Pillars; Hercules Pillars, 135, 136 r. 157 Pityusa; Islands Describ'd, r. 106 Pleiades; their Names, 115 r. 135 Pluto; his Genealogy, Invention, 211 r. 237, —Why call'd the God of the Dead, 207 r. 233 Punishment of various Crimes in Egypt, 40 r. 49 Polynices; his War with his Brother, 163 r. 186 Pontus, or the Pontick Sea; once but a Lake, 197 r. 213 —Of its Breach, 148 r. 170 Priamus; King of Troy, 168 r. 192 —Plac'd in the Kingdom by Hercules, 152 r. 175 Priapus; what, 129 r. 149 Promotheus; the Explication of the Fable, of his stealing of Fire, 205 r. 231 —His Eagle, what, r. 11 —Loos'd from his Chains by Hercules, 135 r. 155 Proserpina; her Rape, 176, 177 r. 199 —Places in Sicily dedicated to her, 177 r. 290
Proteus; King of Egypt, 32 r. 39 —Why he was said to have several Shapes, ibid. Pyramids; the Pyramid of Chemmis, one of the seven Wonders of the World, 32 r. 39 —Mountains like Pyramids, 106 Pythagoras; What be learnt from Egypt, 51 r. 62 —His Opinion of the Metempsychosis among the Gauls, 187, 188 r. 212 R. Religion: The Neglect of Religion punish'd; the Calydonian Boar, 145 r. 167 Remphis; the Egyptian King, exceeding Co∣vetous, 32 r. 39 Rhadamanthus; his Justice, Acts, Sons, 211 r. 228 —His Parents, 211 r. 237 —The Lawmaker in Crete, 160 r. 183 Rhinoceros, 99 r. 117 —His Fight with an Elephant, ibid. Rhodes; divided into three Parts, 158 r. 182 —The great Deluge there, 200 r. 226 —Why so call'd, ibid. Rome; taken by the Gauls, 189 r. 214 —Built by Romulus, 137 r. 159 S. Sabaean Arabians, 107 r. 125 —The Kings, Riches, &c. 107, 108 r. 126 Samothracia; The Name, Inhabitants, Deluge, Mysteries, Temple, &c. 197, 198 r. 200, 223 Sands; Mountains of Sand, 106 r. 124 —The sandy Deserts of Arabia, 81 r. 96 Sardanapalus; his Effeminacy, Luxury, De∣position, Death, 65, &c. r. 78, 79, 81 Saturn, King of Egypt, 5 r. 9 —Saturn one of the Titans, 204, 205 r. 231 —Kill'd his Children, 207 r. 233 —Overcome by Bacchus, 122, r. 143 —Saturn the Brother of Atlas, 116 r. 136 —His Impiety, &c. ibid. —The Golden Age of Saturn, r. 23 Satyrs; the Companions of Bacchus, 129 r. 149 —Of Osyris, r. 11 —Why they are worshipp'd, 45 r. 55 Scorpions; where they abound, 97, 91 r. 114 Semele; her Adultery with Jupiter, and how she was consum'd, 117, 118 r. 137, 138 Semiramis; her History, 55, 56 r. 65, 66 —Her Journey into Bactria, r. 67 —Builds Babylon, 57 r. 68 —Her Expedition into India, and other Actions, 60, &c. r. 73, &c. Serbon; The Lake of Serbon very dangerous, 14 r. 18 Serpents; vast Serpents in Ethiopia, 100, 101 r. 118 —Destroy Elephants, 89, 102 r. 104 —The great Serpent taken, and brought to Alexandria, 101 r. 119 —How taken, fed and made tame, ibid. —Serpents infest Khodes, 201 r. 227 Sesostris; King of Egypt, 27, 28 r. 30, 31 —Travels through the World, his famous Acts, 29, 30 r. 34, 35, &c. —Sesostris the Second, how cur'd of his Blind∣ness, 31 r. 38 Sicily; its ancient Names, 176 r. 199 —Its Circuit, Princes, &c. 178, 179 r. 202 —Once a Peninsula, 173 r. 197 Silla, a wonderful River, 73 Silenus; the first King of Nysa, 122 r. 143 —Tutor of Bacchus, 128 r. 148 Sun; in what Shape it rises among the Ara∣bians, 108 r. 127 —Its Circuit and Course, 51 r. 62 —India directly subject to the Tropick of Ca∣pricorn, 72 r. 85 Spectra's; in the Air among the Lybians, 109 r. 128 —The natural Reason of them, 110 r. 129 Sphinx, 162 Spouses; in the Baliaries prostituted at the Nuptial Feasts to all the Guests, 183 r. 207 Suatues, 168 r. 192 —As if they were living Men, ibid. Stratagems; Mock-Elephants made by Semira∣mis, 62 r. 73 Stymphalia; the devouring Birds of Stym∣phalick Lake destroy'd by Herculess 133 r. 154 T. Tantalus; his History in short, 167 r. 191 Taprobana; a Description of the Island, and of the Inhabitants and their Manners, 90, 97, 98, 99 r. 81, 82, &c. Thebes; in Egypt built by Osiris, 6 r. 9 Thebans in Greece; their War with the Ar∣gives, 162, &c. r. 186, 187. Theseus; his Original, Acts, Wives, &c. 159, &c. r. 182, 183 Thespiadae; their Original, 142 r. 163 —Driven out of Sardinia, settle about Cu∣ma, 182 r. 206 Titans; in Africa, 113 r. 133 —Assist Saturn, 116 r. 136 —Are rooted out by Bacchus, 123 r. 144 —The Titans in Crete, their Parents, Si∣sters, &c. 204, 205 r. 231 Troglodites; their Manners, 18, 98, 99, 100 r. 115, 117, 120 Troy; taken by Hercules, 143, 144 r. 165, 166, 175 —The Pedigree of the Kings, 167, 168 r. 191 Typhon; the Giant in Phrygia, 127, r. 234 Trees; how Sinnis destroy'd Men by binding Trees together, r. 182 —Them that sleep in Trees, 159 r. 183
V. Uchoreus; King of Egypt, built Memphis, 26 r. 32, 33 Venus; the Daughter of Saturn, 5 r. 9 —Her Office, 208 r. 234 —Her several Names, 211 r. 237 —Her magnificent Temple in Sicily, 172 r. 196 Vesuvius; Mount Vesuvius in Campania vo∣mits Fire, 138 r. 159 Virgin; a monstrous Virgin in Scythia, 76 r. 89 Vulcan; the Inventer of Fire, 5 r. 8 —Where he is worshipp'd, 209 r. 235 W. Writing; from the top of the Leaf downward, in Tapribana, 83 r. 98 Wine; made of Barley, found out by Osiris, 8 r. 10 X. Xerxes; his innumerable Army, 56 r. 66 Y. Years; an Account of the Egyptian Year, 26 r. 32 —The Greeks Great Year, 78 r. 92 —The Lunar Year of 30 Days, 12 r. 15 —The Year of 4 Months, ibid. Z. Zythus; a Drink of Barley, 127 r. 147
A TABLE OF The Principal Matters In the Last Ten BOOKS of Diodorus the Sicilian: Containing his MYTHOLOGIES. Note: The First Figures of this Table refer to the Pages of this Book; and the Last Figures with r. before them, refer to the Pages of Rhodomannus's Edition plac'd in the Margin of this Book. A. A Gathocles his Butcheries in Sicily, 687 r. 770 Abderites; almost all cut off by the Treballians, 423 r. 476 —Deliver'd by Chabrias, ibid. Acarnanians; their War with the Ambroci∣ats, 287 r. 317 Achaians; assist Phayllus, 494 r. 529 —Demetrius restores Liberty to their Cities, 494 r. 786 Acimnestus; his unfortunate aspiring to the Government at Enna, 364 r. 402 Agrigentines; their War with the Syracusians, and their Rout, 243 r. 269 Ada; Princess of Caria Restor'd by Alexander the Great, 531 r. 574 Adranum; in Sicily built, 375 r. 416 Aeacides; King of Epirus endeavours to restore his Sister Olympias to the Kingdom of Ma∣cedon, 612 r. 676 —But in Vain, 624 r. 690 —Is expell'd his Kingdom, ibid. —Restor'd, and afterwards kill'd in a Bat∣tel, 642 r. 712 Aegestines; their War with the Lilybaeans, 259 r. 286 —With the Selinuntians, 297 r. 328 —Burn the Tents of Dionysius, 382 r. 425 —The Cruelties Executed upon them by Aga∣thocles, 686 r. 769 Aegesta; wholly Destroy'd and Raz'd, 687 r. 770 Aegineans; are Subdu'd by the Athenians, 256 r. 283 —Expell'd by the Athenians, 281 r. 309 Aegium; taken and raz'd by Aristodemus, 637 r. 707 Aegppt; their Defection from the Persians, 252 r. 279 —The two Persian Expeditions against them, 254, 255 r. 280, 281, 282 —They assist Evagoras against Artaxerxes Mnemon, 410 r. 460 —King Acovis leagues with Gaius against the Perseans, 413 462 —King Tachus his War with Artaxerxes, 473 r. 504
—They revolt from Tachus, and Tachus restor'd by Agesilaus, 474 r. 506 —Revolt from Artaxerxes Ocus, 496 r. 531 —Gain'd by Alexander M. 542 r. 588 —Ptolemys Province, 591 r. 628, 648 Aequi Conquer'd by the Romans, 289 r. 319, 786 Aetna; the City Aetna first call'd Eunesia, 254 r. 281 Aetolians; overcome the Athenians, and Be∣sieg'd Naupactus in vain, 287 r. 317 —Rebell against Alexander the Great, 522 r. 563 —Oppose Alexander's Edict, 577 r. 632 —Their War with Antipater, 584 r. 641 —Their Treachery against the Agrineans, 638 r. 708 Africa; dry and full of Serpents, 674 r. 754 —The Africans rebell against the Cartha∣ginians, 391 r. 437 —Divided into four Sorts, 681 r. 762 Agathocles; his Original, Increase, and Cru∣elty, 607 r. 670 —Becomes King, 610 r. 673 —His Cruelty at Gela, 655 r. 739 —His Fight with the Carthaginians at Ec∣nomus unsuccessfull, 655 r. 729 —His Preparations for an Expedition into Africa, 658 r. 734 —Burns his Ships in Africa, Beats the Afri∣cans, 660, &c. r. 738, 739, 740 —His further Acts there, 670 r. 749, r. 750, 752 —His treachery against Ophellas, 673 &c. r. 753, 754 —Takes Utica, 680 r. 761 —Flies back into Sicily, 681 r. 762 —His Acts there, 682, 683, &c. r. 764, r. 765, 766 —Returns into Africa and is worsted by the Africans, 685 r. 767 —A mutiny in his Camp, ibid. —Flies out of Africa, his Sons murder'd, and his Army dispers'd, and all made Slaves, 686, 687 r. 769 —His Cruelty upon the Aegestines, 687 r. 769 —And the Syracusians, idid. —His Sacrilege and Death, 699 r. 785 Agesilaus; General against the Persians, 392 r. 438 —His Praise, 421 r. 473 —His Acts in Egyyt, 474, 475 r. 505, 506 —His Death, 475 r. 506 Agis; King of Lacedemon, 277 r. 306 —Accus'd for making Peace wiuh the Ar∣gives, 295 r. 326 —His Valour at the Battel of Mantinea, 295 r. 326 —General against Antipater, 547 r. 595 —His Heroical Death, ibid. Agrigentines; overcome by the Syracusians, 243 r. 269 —A famous Pond there, and other Works, 228 r. 256 —Their ancient Grandeur, 340 r. 374 —Besieg'd, 341 r. 377 —The Miserable destruction of the City, 343 r. 379 —They afterwards seek to free all the Cities of Sicily, 670, 681 r. 748, 762 Agrinium; a City of Acarnania, the Cities put to the Sword by the Aetolians against terms agreed, 638 r. 708 Alcetas; Brother of Perdiccas overcome by An∣tigonus, 593 r. 651 —Betray'd by the Pisidians; kills himself, 594 r. 652 Alcibiades sent by the Athenians to Argos, against the Lacedemonians, 296 r. 327 —His Praise, 297 r. 329 —Accus'd to be the thor cutting off the Nead of Mercury's Statues, 301 r. 332 —Is Condemn'd in his absence, 301 r. 333 —Flies to Sparta, ibid. —Restor'd to favour of the People, 333 r. 367, 368 —Banishes himself, 336 r. 370 —Treacherously murder'd by Pharnabazus, 362 r. 400 Alesa; built by Archonides in Sicily, 364 r. 403 Alexander the Son of Amyntas King of Ma∣cedon, 433 r. 488 —His Acts against Alexander Phereus, 434 r. 489 —Kill'd by Ptolemy Alorites, 478 r. 510 Alexander M. a short History of him, 521 r. 562 —The Fight at Chaeronea, 516 r. 555 —His besieging and razing of Thebes, 524 527 r. 568 —His design against Persia, his Passage in∣to Asia, and mustering of his Army, 528 r. 570 —The Battel at Granicum, 529 r. 571, r. 572, 573 —His Acts in the lesser Asia, 529, 530 r. 574, 576 —His desperate Sickness, 534 r. 578 —The Battel at Issus, 535 r. 579 —Besieges Tyre, 538 r. 583 —Takes Gaza, 541 r. 588 —Gains Egypt, ibid. —Goes to Jupiter Hammon's Temple, 542 r. 589 —The Battel at Arbela, 546 r. 591 —Enters Susa, 551 r. 598 —His kindness to the Greeks maim'd by the Persians, 550 r. 597 Persepolis burnt by him, 552 r. 599 Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons, 554 r. 603
—His other Acts in Persia, 555, 556, &c, r. 604, 605, 606 —His Expedition into India, 558 r. 608 —His Acts there, 560, &c. r. 610, 612, 613 —His War with the Oxydracans, 563 r. 613 —His desperate Case and Hazard there, ibid. —Marries Statira, 567 r. 619 —Enters into Babylon, 570 r. 622 —Prodigies before his Death, 572 r. 624 —His Intemperance, Sickness, and Death, ibid. —The Division of his Conquests among his Captains, 574, 591 r. 628, 648 —A Description of his Funeral Charriot, 586 r. 642 —The Captains join with Eumenes, and presently fall from him, 617 r. 682 —The magnificent Feast of the Captains and Great Commanders in Persia, 617 r. 682 —The third division of the Provinces, 628 r. 696 —All the Captains join against Antigonus, 633 r. 701 —Great Captains take upon them the Stile of Kings, 654, 680 r. 728, 761 Alexander King of Epirus, 510 r. 548 Alexander Son of Alexander the Great, to∣gether with his Mother murder'd by Cassan∣der, 654 r. 728 —The Family of Alexander the Great Ex∣tinct, 672 r. 752 Alexandria; in Egypt, built by Alexander the Great, 543 r. 589 —Another beyond Caucasus, 568 r. 606 —Another in India, 556 r. 617 Alexander Pheraeus; his War with the Thes∣salians and Macedonians, 434, 438 r. 489, 494 —His Cruelty, 440 a. 466 —His other Acts, 442, 475 r. 499, 507 —Is murder'd by his Wife, 483 r. 517 Alexander Polysperchon; his Acts, 602, 623, 632, 636, &c. r. 662, 689, 700, 706 &c. Amazons; the Queen lies with Alexander the Great, r. 663 Amilcar; the Carthaginian General besieges Himera, 226 r. 253 —His Death, 227 r. 254 Amilcar; the Carthaginian General against Agathocles 654 r. 728 —Is taken attempting to surprize Syracuse in the night, and his Punishment, 669 r. 747, 748 Amhictyons; their decrees against the Spar∣tans, 491 r. 525 —Against the Phocians, 505 r. 542 Amphipolis; an Athenian Colony, their Slaugh∣ters, 252, 276, r. 278, 304, 279 —Their various Changes, 290 r. 321 Amyntas; King of Macedon, 283 r. 312 —Driven out of his Kingdom, 397 r. 444 —His War with the Olynthians, 416 r. 467 —His Death, 433 r. 488 Andromachus; the builder of Tauromenium in Sicily, 480 r. 513 Antigenes; Colonel of the Argyraspides, 601 r. 661 —Burnt alive by Antigonus, 626 r. 694 Antigonus; his share in the Provinces, 574 r. 628 —Most Active of all Alexanders Captains, 584 r. 640 —Joins with others against Perdiccas, ibid. —His first Expedition against Eumenes, 591 r. 649 —His other Acts, 592, 593, &c. r. 650 r. 651, 654, 655, 656, 661, 666 —His second Expedition against Eumenes, 605, 614, 615 r, 666, 679, 680 —His other Expedition against Eumenes, 618 r. 683 —A Battel between him and Eumenes, 620 r. 686 —His last Battel with Eumenes, and his Victory, 626 r. 693 —He robs the Treasuries at Susa, 629 r. 697 —His Quarrel with Seleucus, 633 r. 701 —Besieges Tyre, and takes it, 635 r. 704 —His other Acts, 639, 641, 643, 648 r. 709, 712, 714, 720 —His Expedition against the Nabathaeans, 649 r. 722 —Builds Antigonia, 677 r. 758 —His Expedition into Egypt, unsuccessfull, 688 r. 770 —His War with the Rhodians, 690 r. 774 Antipater; Macedonia alotted to him, 574 r. 628 —The Lamian War with the Athenians, 578 r. 633 —Conquers the Athenians, and changes their Government, 581 r. 637 Aorni; the Rocks of Aornus described, 558 r. 607 Apes; the Indian Apes, 610 r. 562 —Worship'd in Africa, 635 r. 704 Apollonides forc'd to abdicate the Government of Agrigentum by Timoleon, 514 r. 553 Apollo; the besieged Tyrians bind Apollo in Golden Chains, 541 r. 587 —Alexander M. releases him, ibid. Apology; Eumenes his story or parable of the Lyon wooing a Virgin, 618 r. 684 Apothegms; of Agesilaus, 448 r. 506 —Of Alcibiades, 277, 544 r. 306, 591 —Of Antipater, 612 r. 676 —Of the Athenians to Mardonius, 230 r. 257 —To them that fled from the Battel at Syra∣cuse, 307 r. 339 —Of the Mother of Brasidias, 293 r. 324 —Of Callicratides, 348 r. 384 —Of Charonidas, 270 r. 299 Of Demades, 516 r. 555
—Of Demaratus, 218 r. 245 —Of Diomedon, 360 r, 386 —Of Dionysius, 479 r. 512 —His Apothegmatick Letter to the sacrile∣gious Athenians, 504 r. 541 —Of Dionysius his Friends, in perswading him not to leave the Government, 689 r. 773 —Of Epaminondas, 430, 445, 618 r. 485, 503, 684 —Of Gellias, 340 r. 375 —Of the Greeks, 216 r. 243 —Of Heloris, 360 r. 399 —Of Hephestion, 571 r. 623 —Of Hermocrates, 519 r. 559 —Of the Lacedemonian Ambassadors, 288 r. 318 —Of Leonidas, 217 r. 244, 245 —Of Megaclis, 689 r. 773 —Of Myronidas, 257 r. 284 —Of Pharnabazus, 425 r. 478 —Of Philoxenus, of Dionysius his Verses, 411 r. 461 —Of Proxenus, 369 r. 409 —Of Ptolemy, 647 r. 718 —Of Socrates, the General of Cyrus, 369 r. 410 —Of Sophilus, 368 r. 409 —Of Thessalion, 497 r. 533 —Of Thrasibulus to the 30 Tyrants, 373 r. 414 Appius Claudius, his Works, 672 r 571 Arbela; the Battel at Arbela, by Alexander with Darius, 545, 548 r. 592, 596 Arcadians their Sedition, and War with the Exiles and Lacedemonians, r. 488 —Their other Acts, 434, 436, 443, 524 r. 489, 492, 500, 563 —Their other War with the Lacedemonians, and Rout, 410 r. 459 —Their War with the Eleans, 440 r. 497 Archenactidae; Kings of the Cimmerian Bosphorus, 275 r. 303 Archagathus; Son of Agathocles kills Lycis∣cus in Africa, 670 r. 749 —The Mutiny that arose thereupon, ibid. —Against Agathocles, 684 r. 768 —Archagathus kill'd by the Souldiers with his Brother, 686 r. 769 Archelaus; King of Macedon, 323 r. 356 —His Death, 374 r. 416 Archidamus King; of his Prudence in the Earthquake, and the War, 248 r. 274 —His Acts, 280, 282, 284 r. 308, 311, 313 Archidamus Son of Agesilaus his Acts, 488, 508 r. 523, 545 Archeus King of Macedonia, 397, 474 r. 444, 550 Arginusae, 348 r. 384 —The Sea-Fight at the Islands of Arginu∣sae, between the Athenians and the Spar∣tans, ibid. Argivi; their War with the Mycenians, 249 r. 275 —With the Lacedemonians, 319 r. 352 —The lamentable Sedition at Argos, 296 r. 327 —Another dreadful Sedition at Argos, call'd the Scytalisme, 432 r. 487 —Another War with the Lacedemonians, 493 r. 528 —Another Sedition. 635 r. 705 Argyraspides; their age, and Valour, 625, 626 r. 693, 694 —Their treachery towards Eumenes, and their just Punishment, 628, 629 r. 696, 697 Aristides; the Athenian General at Platea, a∣gainst Mardonius, 231 r. 258 —His eminent Justice, 239 r 266 Aristophanes; his Verses of Pericles, 274 r. 307 Aristotiles; the Philosopher, one of the Lear∣nedst Grecians, 263 r. 291 Armenia; r. 330 —The Snowy Mountains, the danger of the Grecians there, 370 r. 411 Arridaeus; made King in the room of Alexan∣der M. is murder'd by Olympias, 612 r. 676 —His royal Burial, 630 r. 699 Arses King of Persia murder'd by Bagoas, to∣gether with his Children, 603 r. 564 Artabanus murders Xerxes, 251 r. 278 —Is kill'd, upon his Attempt to murder Artax∣erxes, ibid. Artabazus; the Persian General against Da∣tames, 447 r. 505 —Rebels against the Persian King, 462 r. 527 —Is restor'd to the Kings favour by Mentor, 502 r. 538 Artaxerxes succeeds Xerxes, 251 r. 278 —His War with the Egyptians, 253, &c. r. 280, 281, 282 —With the Athenians at Cyprus, 265 r. 292 —His other Acts, 266 r. 293 —His Peace with the Lacedemonians, 273 r. 301 —His Death, 289 r. 319 Artaxerxes II. Mnemon, succeeded Darius the second, 353 r. 389 —His War with the King of Egypt, and the Grecians, 446 r. 504 —War with his Brother Cyrus, 365, 367 368 r. 405, 407, 408 —His War with Evagoras, 399, 410 r. 447, 459 —His Death, 482 r. 506 Asia; the Description, 575 r. 629 Astrology; Meton's Circle of 19 years, call'd Enneadeceterides, 277 r. 305 Asphaltes; the Lake Asphaltes, 651 r. 724 —The Description of Pitch, and how it's ga∣ther'd, 652 r. 725
Atalanta; Vid. Island. Athenians; their City burnt by Xerxes, 223 r. 250 —Their Walls rebuilt by the Policy of The∣mistocles, 236 r. 263 —Gain the Dominion of the Sea, 239 r. 266 —Aid the Rebels in Egypt, and overcome the Persians, 252, 253 r. 279, 280 —Their War with the Corinthians and E∣geans, 253, 255 r. 282, 283 —Their remarkable Victory at Tanagra, over the Thebans, 257 r. 284 —Their flourishing Condition after the War with Xerxes, 263, 264 r. 291, 292 —The Peloponnesian War, 277 r. 305, &c. —Their Expedition into Sicily, 284, 285 r. 313, 314 —Their Fight and Rout in the Battel with the Beotians, 290 r. 321 —Their Expedition into Thrace, against Bra∣sidias, 292 r. 323 Their Cruelty with the Scyonians, ibid. —Their second Expedition into Sicily, 300 227 r. 328, 332 —They besiege Syracuse, 302 r. 334 —Their Victory at Sea, 303 r. 335 —Beaten at Sea, 307 r. 339 —Their Ruin in Sicily, 307 r. 340 —And their misery there, 314 r. 347 The Government of 400 in Athens, 315 r. 348 —Are overcome by the Lacedemonians, ibid. —Their Victory against Callicratides, 349 r. 385 —Their unjust Judgment against their Cap∣tains, 350 r. 386 —Their Ruin at Egos Potamos, 352 r. 388 —The taking of their City by Lysander, 353 r. 389 —The Thirty Tyrants of Athens, 357 r. 396 r. 397 —The War with the Tyrants, 373 r. 414 —Their Ejection, ibid —Ten others set up in their room prove as as bad as they, 374 r. 415 —Athens wall'd again, 393 r. 442 —They stir up the Cities against Sparta, 419 r. 471, 471 —The Beotian War, and their Expedition into Beotia, 420 r. 472 —How the league with Sparta is broken af∣ter the Peace of Antilcida, ibid. —A new War with Sparta. The first Victo∣ry (after their loss at Egos-Potamos) a∣gainst the Spartans at Naxos in a Sea-fight, 422 r. 475 —Their Expedition into Corcyra, and Vi∣ctory over the Spartans, —They assist the Spartans, their implacable Enemies, against the Thebans by Iphicrates, 435, 437 r. 490, 493 —Are routed by Philip, 478 r. 511 —Their Acts in the Social War, 485 r. 521 —Their War with Philip, 503 r. 539 —The Battel at Chaeronea, where they are overcome by Philip, 516 r. 555 —Their War with Antipater, 578 r. 633, &c. —Their City given up to Antipater, and ga∣rison'd by him, 581 r. 637 —Their Democracy restor'd, 602 r. 662 —Antigonus and Demetrius honour'd by them, 677 r. 757 Athenae; a University for the Liberal Arts and Sciences, 311 r. 344 Attica; wasted by Xerxes, 223 r. 250 —By Mardonius, 230 r. 257 —By the Spartans, 280, 284 r. 308, 309, r. 313, 314 Atho; Mount Atho digg'd thro' by Xerxes's Army, 310 r. 343 Augurs; a superstitious Observation of Au∣gurs, the occasion of the Ruin of the Athe∣nians in Sicily, 305 r. 337 —Shew'd to Philomelus, 489 r. 524 —Portending the death of Alexander M. 571 r. 623 Axiotheca; the Wife of Nicocles murders her self and her whole Family, 665 r. 743 B. Babylon; Alexander M. his first Entry into Babylon, 548 r. 596 —His second and last, where he died, 570 r. 622 Babylonia; the Province of Arcon, 574 r. 628 —Its Scituation, 576 r. 630 —Antipater allotted it to Seleucus, 590 r. 648 Bactria; Conquer'd by Alexander M. The Province of Philip, 574 r. 628 —The Scituation, 576 r. 630 Bagistama; a fruitful Country, r. 621 Bagoas the Eunuch, colleague with Mentor in Egypt, 499, 500 r. 535, 536 —Destroys Ochus and all his Family, 501 r. 537 —How he was punished, 502 r. 564 Belus; his Sepulchre, repair'd by Alexander M. 570 r. 622 Bessus; treacherously murders Darius, and stirs up the Bactrians against Alexander M. 552 r. 601 —Punished by Alexander M. 556 r. 606 Beotians; whence so call'd, r. 696 —Their War with the Plateans, 280 r. 308 —With the Athenians, 290 321 —With the Phoceans, and Lacedemonians, 393, 394, 395 r. 439, 441, 442 —The Beotian War against the Lacedemo∣nians to the end, 414 r. 465, 466 —Overcome by Philomelus, 491 r. 526 —By Onomarchus, 493 r. 528 —They overcome Phayllus at Orchomenus, Cephissus, and Chaeronea, 504 r. 541 —Overcome by Leosthenes, 578 r. 633
—Join with Antigonus, 642 r. 713 Boeotarchs, 431 r. 485 Bomilcar; his Ambition, 661 r. 737 —Invades the Soveraignty over the Cartha∣ginians, 674 r. 754 —His Conflict with the Citizens, 675 r. 755 —His punishment, 676 . 756 Bucephalus; Alexander M. his Horse, his properties, 554 r. 603 —Is taken, ibid. —Built a City in India call'd Bucephala, in memory of his Horse, 564 r. 612 Bura and Helice drown'd, two Cities in Greece, 428 r. 481 Buildings; Stately Buildings in Sicily, 514 r. 553 Burial; the remarkable love of a Wife to her Husband at his Funeral, 622 r. 689 Bees make their Honey Combs in the Hipps of Agathocles his Statue, 607 r. 671 Byzantians, their Expedition into Bithynia, and Cruelty, 297 r. 328 —The City taken by the Athenians by Trea∣chery, but not without Blows, 331 r. 366 C. Cadmus; the first King of Thebes, 271 r. 300 Cadmea; the Cittadel of Thebes taken by the Spartans, 416 r. 467 —Recover'd, 418 r. 470 Callantineans; their War with Lysimachus, 640 r. 711 Callicrates; his Sea-Fight with the Athenians, 305, 349 r. 373, 385 Camillus; overcomes the Volsci, Equi, and the Gauls, 406 r. 456 Campanians; assist Dionysius in Sicily, 330 r. 364 —Are Rooted out of Sicily by Timoleon, 514 r. 553 Cappadocia; the Province of Eumenes, 574 r. 628 —Its Situation, 576 r. 630 Carducians; the hardships of the Grecians through their Countrey, 370 r. 411 —The Mountains there, ibid. Caria; its Situation, 576 r. 630 —The Province of Cassander, 574 r. 628 Carmania; the Province of Tlepolimus, 574 r. 628 —Its Situation, 576 r. 630 Carrhae; Villages in Mesopotamia, 569 r. 621 Carthaginians; their numerous Forces brought into Sicily as Confederats with Xerxes, 225 r. 252 —Their miserable slaughter at Himera, by Gelo, 227 r. 254 —Their Cruelty and Impiety in the Sacking of Selinunt, 327 r. 361 —And after, of Himera, 330 r. 364 —Their War with Dionysius, 376 r. 418 —Are overcome by the Syracusians, 385 r. 430 —Their Navy damag'd by Dionysius, 391 r. 434 —A grievous Plague amongst them, ibid. —The burning of their Fleet, 390 r. 435 —Another Expedition into Sicily, against Di∣onysius, 398 r. 445 —Another War with him, 414 r. 465 —Plague and Pannick fears, 418 r. 469 —The last War with Dionysius, 439 r. 495 —Another Expedition against Timoleon, 508, 512 r. 545, 550 —Overcome by Timoleon, 513 r. 551 —Their Expedition against Agathocles, and their Shipwrack, 654 r. 728 —The manner of the publick Mourning, ibid. —Their Victory at Ecnomon, 656 r. 730 —The Terror amongst the Carthaginians, up∣on the landing of Agathocles in Africa, 660 r. 737 —Human sacrifices in Africa, 662 r. 739 —Towns taken by Agathocles in Africa, 664 r. 741 —Their miserable Slaughter in Assaulting Sy∣racuse, 668 r. 747 —They overcome Agathocles in Africa, 684 r. 767 —The Tents of the Carthaginians burnt by chance, cause a great terror, ibid. Cassander; his War with Olympias, 622 r. 689 —He builds Cassandra, and repairs Thebes, 630 r. 699 —Uses Rhoxana and her Son very ill, ibid. —His Expedition into Peloponnesus, 630 r. 699 —Confederates against Antigonus, 632 r. 701 —Another Expedition into Peloponnesus, 635 r. 705 —Into Illyrium, and his happy success there, ibid. —Into Cario against Antigonus, and his good success there, 641 r. 712 —His War with the Apolloniats, 648 r. 719 —Wickedly murders the Son of Alexander and his Mother, 654 r. 728 —Assumes the Kingdom, 680 r. 761 —His Expedition against Antigonus, 702 r. 788 Caulonia Besieg'd and raz'd, 401, 403 r. 449, 451 Cerberus; how he was pull'd out of Hell by Hercules, 372 r. 413 Chabrias; the Athenian General defends Co∣rinth against the Thebans, 437 r. 493 —Their General in Sicily, 285 r. 314 —His Victory at Sea over Pollides the Spar∣tan 422 r. 475 —His Death, 423 r. 476 Charonaea; Philip gains a great Victory over the Athenians at Charonaea, 516 555
Chaldaeans; their Opinion of the Prodigies in the Heavens, 429 r. 483 —The Nature of their Divinations, 570 r. 622 Chares; the Athenian General overcomes the Argives, 440 r. 496 —His Acts in the Social War, 480, 486 r. 514, 521 Charonidas; His Laws, 267 r. 295 Cilicia; The Province of Philotas, its Situa∣tion, 578 r. 630 Cimon; His Acts in Thrace, Asia, and Vi∣ctories both by Sea and Land, 246, 247, 248, 264 r. 272, 273, 274, 292 —His Death, 265 r. 293 Clearchus, the Peloponnesian General; his Acts, 324, 362, 366, 368, 369 r. 357, 401, 406, 408, 409 Cleombrotus, King of Sparta, 430 r. 484 —His Acts and Death at the Battel of Leu∣ctra, 432 r. 486 Cleomenes, King of Sparta, reign'd 60 years 10 months, 668 r. 747 Cleon; his Cruelty, 285 r. 314 —His Death, 292 r. 323 Cleopatra, the Sister of Alexander M. mar∣ry'd to Alexander, King of Epirus, 517 r. 557 —Murder'd by Cassander, 673 r. 753 Concubines; how they were us'd to be con∣vey'd to the Persian Kings, 247 r. 271 Conon; the Athenian General in Corcyra, 323 r. 356 —His Sea-Fight with the Spartans, 337, 375, 392, 394 r. 372, 417, 438, 441 —He builds the Walls of Athens, and is cast into Prison, 395 r. 442 Corcyrians; their War with the Corinthians, and Victory, 275 r. 303 —A dreadful Sedition amongst them, 322 r. 355 —Their other Acts, 643, 701 r. 714, 787 Corinthians; their unhappy War with the Me gareans, 256 r. 283 —With the Corcyreans, 275 r. 303 —Their Sedition, 395 r. 442 —Another Sedition, ibid. —Another Sedition, 424 r. 477 —They help Dion the Syracusian, 513 r. 480 —The Assembly of the Greeks at Corinth about the Persian War, ibid. Cheronea; A great Battel there between the Athenians and the Thebans, 265 r. 293 Craterus, Alexander M. his special Friend, 570 r. 622 —Assists Antipater at Lamia, 581 r. 636 —Against the Etolians, 585 r. 641 —His Expedition against Eumenes, 578 r. 633 —His Death, 587 r. 644 —His Burial, 634 r. 703 Crotoniats; they destroy the Sybarites, 266 r. 294 —Their War against Dionysius, 397 r. 444 Crucifixion; Daimenes crucifi'd by Diony∣sius, 382 r. 425 Cruelty; prevented by a prudent Speech, 286 r. 315 —Of the Spartans upon the Plataeans, ibid. —Of the Carthaginians in the Sacking of Selinunt, 327 r. 361 —Of the Persians towards the Grecians, 550 r. 599 —Of Antigonus upon the dead Body of Al∣cetas, —Of Olympias upon Arrhidaeus and Eu∣rydices, 612 r. 676 Ctesias the Historian; Where he ends his Hi∣story, 379 r. 421 Cyprus; the War with Evagoras by the Per∣sians, 399 r. 447 —The War between Demetrius and Ptole∣my for this Island, 675 r. 757 —Recover'd by Demetrius, 680 r. 761 Cyreneans; a lamentable Sedition at Cy∣rene, 374 r. 415 —Their War with Thimbro, 582 r. 638 —Are reduc'd by Ptolemy's General, 644 r. 715 —March to assist Agathocles, 673 r. 753 Cyrus the Elder; his courteous Behaviour, 308 r. 341 Cyrus the Younger; his War against his Brother Artaxerxes, 362, 365, 366, r. 401, 405, 406 —His Battel with the Persians, and Death, 368 r. 408 —The Valour of his Captains after his Death, 361 r. 400 D. Darius; his Warlike Preparations against the Grecians, 215 r. 242 Darius, the Son of Xerxes, murder'd by his Brother, 251 r. 278 Darius, King of Persia, 291 r. 322 Darius; the last made King by Bagoas, 522 r 564, 565 —His Preparations against Alexander M. ibid. —The Battel at Granicum, 530 r. 573 —His first Expedition against Alexander M. 534 r. 578 —His second Expedition, 544 r. 590 —The Fight at Arbela, 545 r. 592 —Kill'd by Bissus, 552 r. 601 —Alexander M. marries his Daughter, 568 r. 618 Decalia; The Decalian War, 303 r. 335 Delphos; How the Oracle was first discover'd, 488 r. 523 —Why an old Woman was Priestess, ibid.
—The vast Sum robb'd out of the Temple, 402 r. 450 —The Robbers punish'd by the Gods, 505 r. 542 Demetrius, Governor of Syria, by his Father Antigonus, 636 r. 709 —His Expedition against Ptolemy, 644 r. 715 —His War with Ptolemy and Seleucus; Fight, and Flight, 646 r. 717 —His Beauty, 644 r. 715 —His Expedition against the Nabathaeans, 652 r. 725 —Into Babylonia, 644 r. 715 —Honour'd at Athens, 646 r. 757 —His Expedition against Cyprus. 677 r. 757 —His great Engines in Cyprus, 677 r. 758 —His Preparations to fight Ptolemy, 678 r. 759 —His Victory, 679 r. 760 —The great Damage of his Fleet at Gaza, 640 r. 711 —His War with the Rhodians, 690, 691 r. 774, 775 —A Description of his Engine Helepolis, 694 r. 779 —His War with Cassander, 699 r. 785 —His Acts in Asia, 704 r. 791 Demosthenes, the Athenian General; his Acts, 287, 290, 291 r. 317, 321, 322 —General in Sicily, 304 r. 336 —Is taken, 308 r. 341 —Put to Death, 314 r. 347 Demosthenes, the Orator, 503, 515. r. 539, 554 —Stirs up the Athenians against Philip, ibid. —His Banishment, 579 r. 634 Deucetius; the Sicilian General, 254 r. 281 —Builds Menaeus. —His War with the Agragentines and Sy∣racusians, 353 r. 389 —Builds Callatina, 274 r. 302 Dimnus; a Plotter to kill Alexander M. Kill'd by the King's own hand, 554 r. 604 Diocles. Vid. Laws. Diodorus the Sicilian; his History: How ma∣ny it comprehended from the Ruine of Troy to Agathocles, 607 r. 670 —And to the Death of Antigonus, 657 r. 733 Diomedon, the Athenian General; his Speech when he was most unjustly led to Execution, 305 r. 386 Dion; his Preparations for War with Diony∣sius, 479, 480, 481 r. 512, 513, 515 —His Fight with Dionysius, 482 r. 516 —His Honours at Syracuse, 485 r. 520, 521 Dionysius, the Tyrant of Sicily; his Rise, 344, 345, 346 r. 380, 381, 382 —Declares himself Monarch, 347 r. 383 —His Horsemen rebel, spoil the Palace, and abuse his Wife, 355 r. 392 —Oppos'd by the Syracusians, 359 r. 398 —Disswaded from Abdicating the Govern∣ment, 360 r. 399 —Restor'd to his Government in Syracuse, 361, r. 400 —Walls Epipole with wonderful Dispatch, 365, 366 r. 404, 405 —His Prepartions for the War against the Carthaginians, 376, 378 r. 418, 420 —Theodorus his Speech against Dionysi∣us, in his presence before the Syracusian As∣sembly, 386 r. 431 —His attempt upon Rhegium, 397, 400 r. 444, 448 —A new War with the Carthaginians, 399 r. 446 —His Poems exploded at the Olympick Games, 404 r. 452 —His Cruelty to the Rhegians, 405 r. 453 —He sells Plato, 411 r. 461 —His other Acts, 413, 414, 415, 437 r. 464, 465, 466, 493 —Dies of a Surfeit, 439, 440 r. 495, 496 —His Letter to the sacrilegious Athenians, 504 r. 541 Dionysius; the younger his War with Dion, 481, 532 r. 515, 576 —Is Conquer'd, ibid. —Reigns again in Syracuse, 509 r. 546 —Abdicates the Government, and lives a pri∣vate life, ibid. Dioxippus the Athenian; his famous Victory in a Duel, over Charogus the Macedonian, his sad Misfortune and miserable Death, 566 r. 615 Drangina; Conquer'd by Alexander M. 554 r. 704 —The Province of Stasanor, 574 r. 628 Duel; between Coragus the Macedonian, and Dioxippus the Athenian, 566, 568 r. 615, 618 —Of Darius with Cadusius, E. Erygius's Combat with Sartibarzenes, 556 r. 606 —Eumenes with Neoptolemus, 587 r. 644 Earthquakes at Sparta, 244 r. 270 —At Rhages, 627 r. 695 —God the Cause of Earthquakes, 418 r. 48 Eleans; their Commigration, 243 r. 269 —Their War with the Lacedemonians, 365 r. 404 —With the Arcadians, and Pisatae, 440 r. 497 —Join with the Athenians in the Lamian War, 578 r. 633
—Elis Conquer'd by Telephorus, 648 r. 719 Epaminondas; his Praise, 424 r. 477 —The Theban General, 430 r. 484 —His Valour in the Battel at Leuctra, 435 r. 490 —Rebuilds Messina, 435 r. 491 —Besieges Corinth, 436 r. 493 —Preserves the Army, 437 r. 494 —His Acts in Peloponnesus, —His other Acts, 441, 443, 362 r. 498, 500, 401 —His Valour at Mantinea, and Deaths wound, 445 r. 503 —Was a Pythagorean, and Fellow-Schollar with Philip King of Macedon, 477 r. 510 —Regardless of Auguries, 430 r. 484, 485 —His Sayings at the time he lay a dying, 445 r. 503 Ephori; the Great Court at Sparta that over∣ruled the Kings, 639 r. 709 Epidamnus; The sedition there, 275 r. 303 Evagoras endeavors to recover all Cyprus, 399 r. 447 —His War with Artaxerxes, 411 r. 460 —Kill'd by Nieucoles, 428 r. 482 Euboea; Subdu'd by Xerxes, 222 r. 249 —The intestine War, 480 r. 513 Eumelus; King of Bosphoros, his War with his Brother for the Kingdom, 665 r. 743 —Overcomes his Brother Prytanis, 667 r. 744 —Kill'd by his Horses running away with his Chariot, 667 r. 745 Eumenes; Governor of Cappadocia, 581 r. 635 —His Expedition against Antipater, 587 r. 643 —His Battel with Craterus and Neoptole∣mus, and Victory, 587 r. 644 —Is overcome by Antigonus, and besieg'd, 591 r. 649 —His Exercise of his Horses in the Siege, 589 r. 649 —His various Fortunes, 596 r. 655 —His other Acts, 598, &c. r. 653, 659 —His danger at Euphrates, 604 r. 667 —His Expedition against Seleucus, 612 r. 677 —His danger at Tigris, ibid. —His other Acts, 613, 614, 616, 617, &c. r. 678, 680, 682, 683, &c. —His last Battel with Antigonus, 625 r. 693 —Deliver'd up to Antigonus and put so death 626 r. 694 Euripides; His death, 351 r. 387 Eurydice; The Wife of Archidaeus, 590 r. 648 —Hangs herself, 612 r. 676 Eloquence. See Gorgias. F. Fabii; Three Hundred of the Family kill'd together in one Battel 243 r. 269 Famine; At Athens in a Siege, 353 r. 389 —At Rhegium, 320 r. 353 —At Pydna, where Olympias was besieg'd 629 r. 697 Feast; By Alexander M. before his Persian Expedition, 527 r. 570 Fountain; at the Temple of Jupiter Hammon of a Wonderful Nature, 543 r. 589 Fortune; hates the Proud and Cruel, 308 r. 341 —The wonderful Turns in Eumenes, 56 r. 655 —In Agathocles, 662, 670, 678 r. 739, 749, 759 —In the Carthaginians, 662, 668 r. 739, 746 —Of a Gardner makes a King, 541 r. 587 Funeral; the sumptuous Funeral of Hephe∣stion 571 r. 623 —Far more pompous of Alexander M. 586 r. 642 —Burnt with their dead Husbands in India, 562 r. 610 —A Contest between two Wives which should be burnt with the dead Husband, 622 r. 689 G. Gauls; Take Rome, 406 r. 455 —Are almost all cut of by Camillus, 407 r. 456 Geloans; they leave the City Gela and go to Syracuse, 264 r. 292 —Then to the Leontines, 358 r. 397 Gela besieg'd by the Syracusians, 609 r. 672 —The Cruelty of Agathocles at Gela, 655 r. 729 Gellias the Agragentine; his Wealth, Hospita∣lity, Beauty, &c. 340 r. 375 —His Wine-Cellar, 341 r. 376 —His Death, 343 r. 379 Gelo; overcomes the Carthaginians at Hi∣mera, 227 r. 253 —His Praise, ibid. —His Victory, and the Death of Leonidas, fall out both on the same day 227 r. 255 —Inriches Sicily with the Spoils of his Ene∣mies, ibid. —His Death, Burial, &c. 235, 249 r. 262, 276 God; God defends the Greeks against Xerxes, 222 r. 249 —His Anger the Cause of all publick Cala∣mities, as Earthquakes, &c. 428 r. 482 —His Revenge of Sacrilege, 505, 506, 508 r. 542, 543, 545 —Remarks of Divine Providence, 508, 514, r. 545, 553, 769
Gorgias; the Leontine his Eloquence and in∣vented Rhetorick, 284 r. 313 Grecians; their Assembly and Decree at the Isthmus against the Persians, 216 r. 243 —Their Valour at Thermopyle, 219 r. 246 —The Sea-Fight and Victory at Artemesia over the Persians, 222 r. 249 —At Salamis; 223 r. 250 —Their Expedition against Mardonis and their Fight with him 231 r. 258 —The Grecian Auxiliaries against Arta∣xerxes for Cyrus his Brother are Victors, 368 r. 408 —The Grecian Captains that were prisoners all put to Death, 369 r. 410 —Their troublesome passage out of Persia back into their own Country, 370, 371, 471 r. 411, 412, 413 —The Grecian Cities confederate against the Lacedemonians in the Theban War, 419 r. 471 —The Grecians advis'd to Peace amongst themselves by Artaxerxes, 438 r. 494 —Peace after the Battel at Mantinea, 446 r. 504 —Their War at Lamia with Antipater, 496 r. 631 Gylippus; his severe Speech against the Athe∣nian Prisoners in Sicily. See Speech. Gold; the Sacred Hunger of Gold, 492 r. 527 —Rich Mines at Philippi, 480 r. 514 Gulf; a deep Gulf cover'd with Sand in Egypt, 498 r. 534 H. Halicarnassus; Taken by Alexander M. 531, 532 r. 574, 576 Hammon; the Temple of Hammon, 542, 543 r. 588, 589 Hannibal; the Carthaginian General against the Syracusians, 319 r. 352 —Razes Selinunt, 327 r. 361 —Dies of the Plague, 341 r. 377 Harpalas; his Luxury and Rapes, 569 r. 619 Helepolis; an Engine of Battery us'd by De∣metrius describ'd, 677, 694 r. 758, 779 Helice and Bura; two Cities drown'd, 428 r. 482 Hephestion dies at Ecbatana: His Funeral, 623 r. 571 Hercules; the ancient Hercules: His Acts, 557, 564 r. 607, 613 Hermocrates; his Acts in Sicily, 330 r. 364 —Is slain, ibid. Hicetas, Prince of Syracuse, ejected by Diony∣sius Junior, 508 r. 545 —Overcomes Dionysius, is routed by Timo∣leon, 509, 511 r. 546, 548 Hiero, King of Syracuse, 235 r. 262 —His Acts, 240, 241, 243 r. 267, 268, 269 —Builds Catana, 240 r. 267 Hilotes; their War with Sparta, 248, 290 r. 274, 320 Himera; raz'd to the Ground by Hannibal, 328 r. 362 Historians; who are to be Blam'd, and who Excusable, 244 r. 380 —Who end with the Battel at Mantinea, 446 r. 504 —Unpleasant, when broken off with many Speeches, 657 r. 733 —The Profit of History, 583 r. 639 Honey in Colchis; makes Men mad, 371 r. 412 Horses; how exercis'd by Eumenes when he be∣sieg'd in a strait Place. See Exercise. I. Japygians; Overcome the Tarentines, 241 r. 268 Jason, the Pherean; his Acts, 420, 432, 433 r. 472, 487, 488 Ida; the Mountain Ida describ'd, 524 r. 565 —The Wonders there, ibid. Illyrians; Overcome the Macedonians, 478 r. 510 —Conquer'd by Philip, 479, 486 r. 512, 522 Imilco; the Carthaginian General in Sicily: his Acts, 380, 382, 383 r. 423, 426, 427 —His Sacrileges, 385 r. 430 —Looses his Fleet, Army, &c. 391 r. 436 —His extream Misery in his own Country, ibid. —Dies for want, ibid. Isaurians; burn themselves in Pisidia, 584. 640 India; the Description, 576 r. 630 —By a Law among the Indians, the Wives burn themselves with their dead Husbands, 622 r. 688 Inundations; fearful Inundations in Pelopon∣nesus, 428 r. 482 —And in other Parts of Greece, 286 r. 316 —At Rhodes, 627 r. 695 Iphicrates; the Athenian General in Egypt, 425 r. 478 —His Acts in Egypt, 426 r. 479 —His other Acts, 397, 435, 486 r. 444, 490, 521 —His Praise, 516 r. 555 Issus; the Battel at Issus by Alexander M. with the Persians, 535 r. 579 Judges in Persia are flea'd alive, 411, 412 r. 462, 463 L. Lacedemon; the Earthquakes at Sparta, 244 r. 270 —Take Athens, 353 r. 389 —Their Quarrels with the Eleans, 365 r. 404
—Assist Cyrus against his Brother, ib. 367 r. 405, 407 —Lose their Dominion at Sea, 394, r. 441 —Overcome by the Athenians in a Sea-fight at Naxus, 422 r. 475 —Their War with the Argives, 493 r. 528 Lamia; the Story of Lamia, 674 r. 754 Lamia; the Beginning and Cause of the La∣mian War, 490, 576 r. 525, 631 Laws; Laws of Charondas 267 r. 295 —Of Zeleucus, 269 r. 298 —Of Diocles the Syracusian, and his Tra∣gical End, 314 r. 347 —Of the Twelve Tables of Rome, 271, 272 r. 300, 301 —Confirm'd by the Death of the Legisla∣tor, 270, 314 r. 290, 347 Leonides; the Spartan General at Thermo∣pyle, 217 r. 244 —His Heroick Death there, 220 r. 247 Leosthines; the Athenian General in the La∣mian War, 569 r. 621 —Overcomes Antipater, 579 r. 634 —His Death, and Praise, ibid. Lesbians; subdu'd by the Athenians, 286 r. 315 Libanus; a Description of Mount Libanus, 367 r. 407 Long Life of Democritus, 362 r. 401 Lucanians; their War with the Thurians, and remarkable Victory, 400 r. 448 —With Dionysius the younger, 479 r. 512 —With the Tarentines, 701 r. 787 Lycaonia; the Situation, 576 r. 630 Lydia; the Province of Meleager, 574 r. 628 —The Situation, 576 r. 630 Lysander; the Spartan General against the Athenians, 333 r. 368 —His Victory over the Athenians at Aegos Potamos, 352 r. 388 —His Death, 393 r. 439 Lysimachus; one of Alexander M. his Com∣manders. —Thrace his Province, 574 r. 628 —Relieves the Rhodians with Provision, r. 782 —Assists Cassander, 702 r. 788 —Stoops to Antigonus, ibid. Lysimachia built, 667 r. 746 M. Macedonians; the Parricides amongst the Macedonian Kings, 477 r. 510 —Rout the Greeks at Charonea, 516 r. 555 Mago, the Carthaginian General, fights with Dionysius, and is kill'd, 414 r. 465 Mantineans; overcome by the Lacedemo∣nians, 295 r. 326 —The City Mantinea besieg'd, and taken by the Spartans, 411, 413 r. 460, 464 —The Battel with the Tageans describ'd, 445 r. 502, 503 —Their War with the Megalopolites, 449 r. 507 Marathon; the Slaughter of the Persians there, r. 242 Marmarensians; being besieg'd, burn their Houses, Parents, and Friends, 532 r. 576 Megalopolis built, 439 r. 495 —Their War with the Mantineans, 449 r. 507 —With the Spartans, 495 r. 530 Megara; the Acts of the Megareans, 231, 256, 265 r. 258, 283, 293 —Their Sedition, r. 478 Mentor, the Rhodian, betrays the Sidonians, 496 r. 532 —His other Acts, 500, &c. r. 536, &c. Mesopotamia; the Province of Arcesilas, 574 r. 628 —The Situation, 576 r. 630 Messenians; their War with the Spartans, 248 r. 274 —Are routed out of Greece by the Spartans, 374 r. 415 —Their Increase in Sicily, 392 r. 438 —The City Messina in Sicily sack'd by the Carthaginians, 382, 383, r. 426, 427 —Repair'd by Dionysius, 392 r. 437 —They assist Dion, 481 r. 515 —The City gain'd by Agathocles, 652 r. 726 —Messina in Peloponnesus rebuilt by Epa∣minondas, 435 r. 491 Meteors; an Astrological account of them, 429 r. 483 Methon; a City in Thrace Sack'd by Philip, 493 r. 528 Meton; the Circle of 19 years call'd Ennea∣deceterides, 227 r. 305 Miletum; their War with the Samians, 273 r. 301 —Their bloody Sedition, 352 r. 388 Mitylene; taken by the Athenians, 285, 286 r. 314, 315 —Their Goods sold, ibid. —The Port, 340 r. 375 Motya; a City of Sicily, r. 359 —Taken by Dionysius, 373, 379 r. 414, 422 —Recover'd by the Carthaginians, 382 r. 426 Munychia; Raz'd by Demetrius, 676 r. 756 Muses; the Games of the Muses in Macedo∣nia, 527 r. 570 Mycale; a Description of the battel at Mycale, 234 r. 261 Mycenas Raz'd to the ground by the Argives, 249 r. 276
N. Nabathaeans; Arabians, their Laws and Manners, 650 r. 722 —Their War with Demetrius, 651 r. 724 Naxus; Raz'd by Dionysius, 480 r. 513 Nectanabus; King of Egypt, his War with Artaxerxes, 425 r. 478 Nectanabus; revolts from his Father Tachos King of Egypt, and is overcome by Agesila∣us, 448 r. 506 —Rebells against Ochus, 496 r. 531 Neptune; the Causer of all Earthquakes and Innundations, 429 r. 483 —Priests drown'd in the Sea offer'd to him, 305 r. 377 Niceas; the Athenian General his Acts, 485 r. 519 —His Expedition into Peloponnesus, 290 r. 320 —His great misfortunes and lamentable Con∣dition in Sicily 307, 308, 311, 312 r. 340, 341, 344, 345 —Is put to death, 314 r. 347 Nicocles; the Cyprian, the Tragical end of him and his whole Family, 665 r. 743 Nicolaus the Syracusian; his brave Speech for the saving the Athenian Captives from be∣ing put to death, 200 r. 241 O. Ocean; the Wonders found in it, 568, 569 r. 618, 619 Ochus; King of Persia succceeds Artaxerxes, 448 r. 506 —His Expedition against Egypt, 491 r. 531 —His Acts, 498 534 —Is destroyed with his whole Family, 413 r. 564 Olympias; the Mother of Alexander M. 598 r. 658 —Her Return out of Epirus into Macedonia, and Cruelty towards Archidoeus and Eury∣dice and others, 612 r. 676 —The terrible Famine in the Siege of Pydna, 621 r. 697 —Her Accusation and Death, 629, 630 r. 698, 699 Olympus; the Temple of Jupiter Olympus, at Agrigentum, 340 r. 375 —Another at Syracuse 301, 514 r. 333, 553 Olynthians; their War with Amyntas King of Macedon, 416 r. 467 —Demand their Land again, 397. r. 444 —War with the Lacedemonians, 417 r. 468 Ophellas; Subdues the Cyrenians, 583 r. 639 —Joins with Agathocles in Africa, 673 r. 753 —He with his Auxiliaries perfidiously slain by Agathocles, 674 r. 754 —His Cruelty, ibid. Oracle of Dodona, 439 r. 495 —Of Hammon, 543 r. 589 Oracles deliver'd to Alexander M. at Ham∣mon, ibid. —To the Clazomeans and Cumeans, con∣cerning Leuca, —To Dionysius of his death, 440 r. 496 —To Eumelus King of Bosphoros of his death, 667 r. 745 —To the Helicenses, 428 r. 482 —To the Ionians, ibid. —To the Lacedemonians of expiating the murder of Pausanias, 239 r. 266 —To the Messinians in Sicily, 399 r. 447 —To Philip before his death, 517 r. 557 —To Philomelus, 489 r. 524 —To Satyrus King of Bosphorus, of the manner of his death, 667 r. 745 —To Seleucus by the Caldeans, 632, 649 r. 701, 720 —To the Spartans of the Victory of the The∣bans, 241, 430 r. 268, 485 —To the Thebans of the Victory at Leu∣ctra, —Of their ruin, 524 r. 566 —To Timoleon of his success in Sicily from Ceres, 508 r. 545 Orchomenos; Raz'd by the Thebans, 441 r. 498 —The Thebans their old Enemies, ibid. Ostracism; the Law and manner of it at Athens, 244 r. 270 P. Pallica; a City in Sicily; built by Ducetius, 261 r. 288 —Its Growth and Destruction, ibid —The strange boiling Pots call'd Craters in the Earth there, ibid. Pamphilia; the Province of Antigonus, 574 r. 628 —The Situation, 576 r. 630 Paphlagonia with Cappadocia, 574 628 —The Provinces of Eumenes, 581 r. 636 Parmenio; his Acts in Phrygia, 540 r. 586 —Suspected of Treason, and put to death, 554 r. 604 Pausanias; the Lacedemonian General at Platea against Mardonius 231 r. 258 —His Treason against his Countrey, 237238 r. 264, 265 —Discover'd how, and punished, ibid. Passes difficult Passes in Thermopyle, 219 r. 246 —In Uxiana 549 r. 597 —In the Rock Aornus, 557 r. 667 Peace; Peace all over the World, 273 r. 301 Pelopidas; the Theban General, 434 r. 489 —Taken by Alexander Prince of Pherea, 438 r. 494
—Deliver'd, 440 r. 496 —His Acts and Death, and Praise, 442 r. 499 Peloponnesus; Peloponnesus liable to Earth∣quakes, 429 r. 483 —The Peloponnesian War, the Causes, Re∣nual &c. 271, 280, 303 r. 300, 308, 325 Perdiccas; One of Alexander M. Comman∣ders 547 r. 592 —At Arbela, ibid. —Divides the Conquer'd Provinces, 574 r. 628 —His other Acts, 575, 576, 581, 583 r. 629, 631, 636, 639 —The Captains conspire against him, 585 r. 641 —His Expedition into Egypt, 588 r. 645 Pericles; His Acts in Peloponnesus, 259, 260 r. 286, 287 —His other Acts, 273, 274 r. 301, 302 —His Arrears the publick Cause of the Peloponesian War, 277 r. 306 —His hot Speech, 273 r. 301 —His second Expedition into Peloponnesus, 281 r. 310 —His Death, ibid. Persepolis; Taken and burnt (by the instigation of a Strumpet,) by Alexander M, 550 r. 599 Persia; The Province of Peucestas, 574 r. 628 —The description of a pleasant Tract there, 616 r. 682 Petalisme, 259 r. 286 Phalaecus; The General of the Phoceans, 495 r. 530 —His Sacrilegious Covetousness, 503 r. 540 —Punish'd by the Gods, 505 r. 542 Pharnabasus; The Persian General, 316 r. 349 —Helps sometimes the Athenians and some∣times the Lacedemonions, 321, 324, 375 r. 354, 357, 416 —General of the War against the Aegyptians, 446 r. 504 Phialensians; Their seditian, 424 r. 477 Philip, King of Macedon; The Epitome of his History, 477 r. 510 —His Acts and Wars, 477 to 516 r. 510 to 556 —His Feast and stately Games; and ominous Verses, 518 r. 558 —The Plot against his life, and the Cause ibid. —His Murder. &c, 519 r. 559 Philocles; The Athenian General at Aegos-Potamos, 352 r. 388 —Is put to Death ibid. Philomelus; stirs up the Phoceans, 486 r. 522 —Robs the Temple at Delphos, 491 r. 526 —Casts himself down from the top of a Rock, ibid Phoceans; Their War with the Doreans and Spartans, 256 r. 283 —With the Boetians, 393 r. 439 —With the Thebans, 432 r. 487 —They spoil the Temple at Delphos, 488, 491 r. 523, 526 —Their Fight with the Thebans, 503 r. 539 —Are burnt in the Temple, 504 r. 541 Phocio; the Athenian General, 496 r. 532 —The sentence upon him and his punishment, 602 r. 663 Phoenicia; the Situation, 576 r. 630 Phrygia the Less, the Situation, ibid. —The Greater, ibid. Pindar; When he flourish'd, 200 r. 226 Pisidia; The scituation, 576 r. 630 Plague; Grievous amongst the Carthaginians, 418 r. 469 —The first Plague at Athens, 281 r. 310 —The second, 286 r. 316 —And the Causes, ibid —In the Camp of Hanniball in Sicily, for his Impiety, 341 r. 377 —In the Camp of Imilco, and the Cause, 389 r. 434 —In Africa, 358 r. 397 Plateans; the Battel at Platea with the Per∣sians, 231 r. 258 —Are besieg'd by the Spartans, all put to Death and the City raz'd, 282, 286 r. 311, 315 —Their other misfortunes, 427 r. 481 Plato; Sold by Dionysius, 411 r. 461 —The most learn'd of the Greeks, 263 r. 291 Porus; His War with Alexander M. 561 r. 608 —His Valour and Stature, 562 r. 609 Princes strengthen themselves more with Gen∣tleness than Arms, 309 r. 342 —Their Vices most notorious, 57 r. 395 Prodigies; to Alexander M. before his Death, 572 r. 624 —To the Athenians before irreparable slaugh∣ter in Sicily, 305 r. 337 —To Epaminondas before his Victory at Leuctra, 428, 430, r. 482, 484 —To Hannibal after the violation of the Se∣pulchres in Sicily, 341 r, 377 —To Pelopidas before his Death, 442 r. 499 —To the Spartans before their slaughter at Leuctra, 428, 430 r. 482, 484 —To the Thebans before the Sacking of their City, 604 r. 566 —To Timoleon before his Expedition into Sicily, 508 r. 545 —Before his Fight with the Carthaginians, 513 r. 551 Ptolemy Alorites, King of Macedonia, kills his Brother, and was kill'd by his Brother, 440, 477 r, 497, 550 Ptolomaeus Lagus was cur'd by a divine Pow∣er, 567 r. 617 —Governour of Egypt, 574 r. 628
—His stately preparations for the buying of Alexander M. 587 r. 643 —Confirm'd in the Government of Egypt, 590 r. 648 —Subdues Phoenicia, 592 r. 650 —Opposes Antigonus in divers places, —His Expedition into Cyprus, Silicia, and Syria, and his Successes, 98 r. 115 —His Battel and Victory, 646, 647 r. 717, 718 —His War with Antigonus, 664 r. 742 —His Sea. Fight with Demetrius at Cyprus, 678 r. 759 —Is worsted, and returns into Egypt, 680 r. 761 —Recovers Coelo-Syria, 704 r. 791 Pylae; the Gates or Entry into Cilicia, 366 r. 406 Pyrrhus; the famous Enemy to the Romans, 623 r. 690 Pythagorean Philosopher; the Master to Epa∣minondas, and Philip King of Macedon, 478 510 —The last of his Sect, when they liv'd, 440 r. 497 Pythia; why the Priestesses were no longer Vir∣gins, 489 r. 524 Q. Quinda; a strong Castle where Alexander M. Treasures were laid up, and carried away by Antigonus, 633 r. 702 Quinquiremes; or five Oars on a Bank, when first us'd, 376, 377 r. 418, 419 R. Race; a Horse over-run by a Man, 362 r. 401 Rhegion; a pleasant and fruitful Country in Africa, 659 r. 736 Religion; Zeleucus his Law concerning it, 270 r. 299 —The Violation of Religion punish'd by pub∣lick Calamities, 286, 391, 392, 428 r. 316, 436, 437, 482 Rhodes; the miserable Inundation at Rhodes, 627 r. 695 —Their War with Demetrius, 691 r. 775 —Staightly Besieg'd, 692 r. 776 —Their Fight with Demetrius and Victory, 693 r. 777, 778 —The repairing of the City, 699 r. 785 Rhoxana, Wife of Alexander M. murder'd with her son, by Cassander, 654 r. 728 Romans; the first time they paid Wages to their Soldiers, 364 r. 403 —The first time the People disobey'd the Se∣nate, 404 r. 452 —Their sad Overthrow by the Gauls at Allia, 406 r. 454 —Defend the Capital, 406, 407 r. 455 456 —Their Wars with the Samnites, 611, 640, 641, 642, 652, 675, 710, 711, 713, 726 —With the Marsians and Hetrurians, 676 r. 756 S. Sacrifice; a Butcherly Sacrifice of Captives, pu∣nished by God, 684 r. 767 Sacrilege; in divers manners punished by the Gods, 504, 505, 506, 490, 494, 698 r. 541, 542, 543, 526, 529, 784 —Causes a War, 443 r. 500 —Check'd by an Earthquake, 503 r. 540 —Cast in the Teeth of the Athenians by a Tyrant, ibid. Salamis; the Sea-Fight at Salamis between the Grecians and Persians, and the remarkable Victory of the Greeks, 224, 225 r. 251, 252 Saturn; a Boy offer'd up to him: The Idol at Carthage, 341, 663 r. 377, 740 Sciones; besieg'd and taken by Storm, and most cruelly dealt with by the Athenians, 291, 292, 294 r. 322, 323, 325 Stytalisme; amongst the Argives what it is, 432 r. 487 Sedition: Of the Arcadians, 433 r. 488 —Of the Argives, ibid. —Of Alexander M. his Soldiers, 568 r. 620 —The most bloody Sedition of the Corcy∣rians, 322 r. 355 —Of the Corinthians, 424 r. 477 —Of Dionysius his Horsemen, 355 r. 392 —Of Megareans, 425 r. 478 —Phialeans, 424 r. 477 —Of the Phliasians, 425 r. 478 —Against Timoleon, 513, 514 r. 551, 553 —Of the Syracusians, 253 r. 280 —Of the Zacynthians, 426 r. 480 Seleucus, Governour of the Province of Baby∣lon, so made by Antipater, 590 r. 648 —His Acts, 613, 632, 634, 635, 646 r. 677, 701, 703, 705, 717 —Recovers Babylon, 649 r. 720 —Wears a Diadem, 680 r. 761 Serpents; the Serpents of India, the Greatest and the most Venomeus, 562 r. 610 —Of Africa, 674 r. 754 Sicilians; their War with Hannibal, 339 r. 374 —With Imilcar, 341 r. 377 —With Imilco, 380 r. 423 —With Hanno, 312 r. 545 —With Amilcar, 654 r. 728 —Assists Dion, 481 r. 515 —Recover their Liberty by the help of Ti∣moleon, 511 r. 548 Sidonians; their Revolt from Ochus, King of Persia, 496 531 —Are betray'd by Mentor the Rhodian, 497, &c. r. 532, &c.
—Their miserable Destruction, 498 r. 533 Socrates; His Condemnation, 374 r. 416 Sogdiana; Its Scituation, 576 r. 630 Sophocles; the Athenian General in Sicily, 285 r. 314 —The wonderfull Death of the Poet, 351 r. 387 —His Son likewise a Tragick Poet, 382 r. 425 Soul; the Immortality, 574 r. 627 —The Cure of the Soul more excellent than the body, 268 r. 296 Spartans; the praise of them that were kill'd at Thermopyle, 0 r. 247 —Sparta first bsieg'd by the Thebans, 435 r. 490 Speech; Gyiipus the Lacedemonian his severe Speech against the Athenian Captives in Si∣cily, 312 r. 345 —Nicolaus his brave Speech to save their lives, 308, &c. r. 341, &c. Stratagems; of the Aegestines against the Athenians of Agathocles against the Gelo∣ans, 609, 655 r. 672, 729 —Against the Carthaginians, 656, 659, 660, 661, 664, 671, 683 r. 730, 735, 736, 738, r. 741, 750, 705 —Against Sosistratus, 602 r. 672 —Of Alcibiades in perswading Ducetius to to fortify Sparta, 303 r. 335 —Of Alexander M. in Burning his Fleet, 530 r. 573, &c. Susa deliver'd up to Alexander M. 548 r. 596 —The Situation, 576 r. 630 Sybrarites; Sybaris razed by the Crotoniats, 266 r. 294 —Repair'd, 267 r. 295 —Again erected, 261, 267, 271 r. 288, 295, 300 Syracusians; Besig'd by the Athenians, 302 r. 334 —Overcome the Athenians in several Sea-Fights, 305 r. 337 —Their Cruelty upon the Athenian Captives, 314 r. 347 —Their many Wars with the Carthaginians, 319, 320, 339, 341 r. 352, 353, 374, 377 —With Dionysius 359 r. 398 —They beat Imilco in a Sea-Fight, 385 r. 430 —How they were freed from the Tyranny of the Dionysiates, 481, 510 r. 515, 547 Dion receiv'd, ibid —The City plunder'd by the Dionysians, 485 r. 520 —Deliver'd from slavery by the assistance of the Corinthians under Timoleon, 507, 509, 510 r. 544. 546, 547 —The City sadly plunder'd by the Soldiers of Agathocles, 609 r. 673 —His cruel punishment of the Citizens, 687 r. 770 —And his butchery of the Fugitives, 693 r. 777 Syria, the Province of Laomedon, 574 r. 628 —The Situation, 576 r. 630 —Subdu'd by Ptolemy, 592 r. 650 T. Tarrentines; Their unfortunate War with the Japygians, 241 r. 268 —They help the Sicilians against Agatho∣cles, 640 r. 710 —Antigonus against Eumenes; 620 r. 686 —Their War with the Lucanians, 701 r. 787 Tauromenum; When built, 480 r. 513 Tegeans; Their War with the Mantineans, 477 r. 510 Teribazus, the Persian Governor of Arme∣nia, allows quiet Passage to the Greeks re∣turning out of Persia, 378 r. 411 —Is accus'd by Orontes, and acquitted, 411, 412 r. 462, 463 Thais, the Strumpet, perswades Alexander M. to burn Persepolis, 511 r. 600 Thalestris, the Amazon Queen, comes to A∣lexander M. to have Issue by him, 554 r. 603 Thebans; their War with the Athenians, 257, 280, 286, 300 r. 284, 308, 319, 322 —Their Cittadel Cadmea seiz'd by the Spartans against the League, 417, 421 r. 468, 474 —They refuse to join in the General Peace, 424, 429 r. 477, 483 —Their great War with the Lacedemo∣nians, ibid. —The Prodigies that appear'd before the War, ibid. —Their Victory at Leuctra, 407 r. 456 —Their other Acts, 408, 434, 436 r. 457, 489, 492 —Their Expedition into Peloponnesus, 437 r. 493 —Another Expedition into Peloponnesus, 440 r. 496 —Some Battels with the Lacedemonians, 495 r. 530 —They raze Phocis, 496 r. 531 —Their Fight with the Phoceans, 503 r. 539 Thebes Garrison'd by Philip, and afterwards driven out, 516, 521 r. 556, 563 —Rebell against Alexander M. 524, 525 r. 566, 567 —The miserable destruction of their City and Inhabitants by Alexander M, 526, 527 r. 568, 569 —The City rebuilt by Cassander, 630 r. 699 —Its various Changes, 631 r. 700 Themistocles the Athenian General, 216 r. 243
—His wise Counsels at Artemesium, and at Salamis, 222, 223 r. 249, 250 —His Stratagems, 224, 225 r. 251, 252 —His banishment 243 r. 269 —Flies to Xerxes, 244 r. 270 —His last Stratagem whereby he deceiv'd Xerxes, 245 r. 271 —His Death and praise, 245, 246 r. 271, 272 Theodorus; His brave Speech to the Syracu∣sians to preserve their Liberties, 386 r. 431 Thermopyle; defended bravely by the Greeks against Xerxes, 217, 219 r. 244, 246 Thrace; The Province of Lysimachus, 574 r. 628 —They waste Chersonesus, 375 r. 417 —Treacherous to the Abderites, 423 r. 476 —Their War with Lysimachus, 640 r. 711 Thucydides; where he begins and ends his Hi∣story, 319, 377 r. 306, 352 Tigris; The Course of the River Tigris, 549 r. 597 —Join'd with a Bridge by Antigonus, 614 r. 680 Timoleon; The Corinthian General into Sici∣ly: A short Account of his Acts, 507, &c. 513 r. 544, &c. 551 —Causes Peace and Plenty all over Sicily, 513, 514 r. 552, 553 —His Death, and pompous Funeral at Syra∣cuse, 516 r. 556 Tissaphernes, the Persian General, fights brave∣ly with Cyrus, 368 r. 408 —Treacherously cuts off the Grecian Com∣manders, 369 r. 410 —His War with Agesilaus in the Lesser Asia, 392 r. 438 —Overcome by Agesilaus, 393 r. 439 —And afterwards Beheaded, ibid. Trees; Trees distilling of Honey, 553 r. 602 Tribunes; Military Tribunes, when first Crea∣ted at Rome, 251, 271, 272, 277 r. 278, 300, 301, 306 Tripolis; a City in Phoenicia, 496 r. 531 Tunis; taken by Agathocles, 501 r. 737 Tyrants; the Thirty Tyrants at Athens, 357, 358, &c. r. 395, &c. —Their Cruelties, ibid. 372 r. ibid. 413 —A Tyrant distracts every body, 675 r. 755 —How Tyrants are to be dealt with, 411 r. 461 Tyre; besieg'd by Alexander M. 537, &c. r. 583, &c. —Made a Peninsula, ibid. —Is taken, 431 r. 486 —An ancient City is had been, but then de∣stroy'd, 537 r. 583 —Afterwards rebuilt, 541 r. 587 V. Virginia; kill'd by her own Father at Rome, to prevent her being a Slave to a Villain that had sworn, she was his Slave Servant, 271 r. 300 Virtue; we hate when it's present, but desire it earnestly when it's lost, and taken from us, 221, 566 r. 248, 615 Utica; the memorable Siege and Defence at Utica in Africa by Agathocles, 680 r. 761 —The Captives of Utica hung at the En∣gines alive to be shot at by the Townsmen, ibid. W. Wine-Cellars; the stately Wine-Cellars of Gel∣lias in Agrigentum, 341 r. 376 X. Xenophon the Historian; where he begins and ends his History, 319, 446 r. 352, 504 —Is created General over the Greeks that return'd out of Persia, 374 r. 416 Xerxes; his Expedition, Armies, &c. into Greece, 213, 216, 218 r. 242, 243, 245 —The Sea-Fight at Artemisium, 222 r. 249 —The Fight with Leonidas at Thermo∣pylae, 218, 219 r. 245, 246 —The Sea-Fight at Salamis, 224, 225 r. 251, 252 —His Flight to Ecbatana, 234 r. 261 —Is Assassinated, 258 r. 278 Z. Zacynthus; the Sedition and War at Zacyn∣thus, 416 r. 480 Zaleucus; his Laws at Thurium in Italy, 270 r. 299
A TABLE OF THE Eclogues or Fragments. Note: The Letter b in the Fragments stands for Book, and the Letter e for Eclogue or Excerpt; Likewise the Letter l stands for Lib. and the Letter s for Section. The ECLOGUES or FRAGMENTS out of the First Six Books after the Twentieth of Diodo∣rus the Sicilian. A. ACra Leuca, built in Spain by Amil∣car, Hannibal's Father, Book 25. Eclogue 2. Page 720 Aemilius, the Consul, wast the Country of the Celte Galls, b. 25. e. 3. ibid. Agathocles, King of Syracuse, his Acts and Death, b. 21. e. 2, 3, 4, 8, 11, 12. 709 Alexander, the Son of Cassander, murder'd by Demetrius, b. 21. e. 7. ibid. Amesalus raz'd by Hiero, b. 22. e. 15. 714 Amilcar, his Acts in Sicily against the Ro∣mans, b. 23. e. 9. 716 —His Death, b. 25. e. 2. 719 Antander, the Sicilian Historian, b. 21. e. 12. 710 Antigonus his Death, b. 21. e. 1. 709 Appius Claudius his Acts in Sicily, b. 23. e. 2. 715 Ars; none can please all in any Arts, b. 26. e. 1. 721 Asdrubal unsuccessful in Sicily, b. 25. e. 2. 719 B. Barcas, the Carthaginian General, his Acts in Sicily, b. 24. e. 2. 719 Brennus, the Gall, his Inroad into Macedo∣nia, the Slaughter of his Army, and his Death, b. 22. e. 13. 713 Brutii; they rout Agathocles, b. 21. e. 3. 709 —He wasts their Country, e. 8. ibid. Cadmean Victory, what, b. 22. e. 4. 712 Calatinus routs the Carthaginians at Sea, b. 24. e. 12. 719 Cantharides blinds the Sight, b. 22. e. 2. 712 Carthaginians; their War with Pyrrhus in Sicily, b. 22. e. 11, 14. 712, 713 —With the Romans, b. 23. 715 —Overcome by Appius Claudius, b. 23. e. 4. 715 —Their War with their Confederates, b. 25. e. 1. 719 Carthalo, his Successes in Sicily against the Romans, b. 24. e. 1. 719 Celte, routed in Sicily through their Intempe∣rance, b. 23. e. 12. 717 —Slaughter'd in Spain by Amilcar, b. 25. e. 2. 720 Cios, the General of the Mamertines, routed by Hiero, kills himself, b. 22. e. 15. 715 Covetousness; the Evil of it, b. 21. e. 1. 709 D. Demetrius his Acts, b 21. e 1, 7, 10, 11. 709, 710
Decius, his Cru at Rhegium; his Sight lost by a Physician wilfully, by the use of Can∣tharides, b 22. e 2. 712 E. Enna taken by the Romans, b 23. e 9. 716 Eryx in Sicily taken by Pyrrhus, b 22. e 14. 713 —Raz'd by the Carthaginians, b 22. e 9. 712 F. Fabius, the Roman Consul, slaughters the He∣truscans, Galls, and Samnites, b 21. e 6. 702 G. Gades, b 25. e 2. 719 Galls; their Inroad into Greece, b 22. e 13. 713 —Their miserable Return, ibid. H. Hannibal; his Acts in Sicily, b 22. e 15. 714 Hannibal, Son of Amilcar, chosen General in Spain by the Army, b 25. e 5. 720 —His taking of Sagunthum, b 25. e 5. ibid. Hanno; his Acts in Sicily, b 23. e 2. 715 Hiero; his Acts, b 22. e 15. b 23. e 2, 4, 5, 12. b 24. e 1. b 25. e 4. b 26. e 6. 714, 715, 718, 720, 721 I. Indortes, the General of the Iberians, taken and kill'd by Amilcar, b 25. e 2. 720 Istolatius, General of the Celte, taken by Amil∣car, b 26. e 2. ibid. Julius the Consul is Shipwreck'd, b 24. e 1. 719 L. Leontines receive Pyrrhus, 713 Lilybeurn in Sicily besieg'd by Pyrrhus, b 22. e 14. ibid. —When built, ibid. —Besieg'd by the Romans, b 24. e 1, 3. 718 M. Maenon poisons his Master Agathocles, b 21. e 12. 710 —His other Acts, b 21. e 13. 711 Mamertines, their Cruelty at Messina, b 21. e 12. ibid. Messina besieg'd by Hiero, and the Carthagi∣nians reliev'd by the Romans, b 22. e 15. 714 N. Numidians Rebelling against the Carthagi∣nians, are destroy'd by Asdrubal, b 25. e 2. 720 O. Orissus, King of the Iberians, routed by As∣drubal, 720 P. Phintias, Prince of Agragentum, overcome of Hicetas, b 22. e 2. 712 —His Dream of his End, e 5. ibid. Ptolemeus Ceraunus kill'd of the Galls, e 3. ibid. Pyrrhus his Acts in Sicily, e 10, 11, 14. ibid. R. Regulus the Proconsul, his Successes in Africa, b 23. e 12. 716 Rhodes torn by an Earthquake. Romans, their Slaughters of the Hetruscians, Galls, &c. b 21. e 6. 709 —Their ancient Shields, and new, b 23. e 3. 715 —Their Acts in Sicily, b 23. e 2. ibid. —Their Shipwrecks, b 23. e 12. 719 —Are beaten at Sea by Cathalo, b 24. e 1. 718 S. Sagunthum besieg'd, b 25. e 5. 720 —Their Heroick Acts, ibid. —The Women kill both themselves and their Children, ibid. Sicily the bravest of Islands, b 23. e 1. 715 Stilpo, Agathocles his General, Shipwreck'd, b 21. e 8. 709 T. Thebes taken by Demetrius, and demolish'd, b 21. e 10. 710 X. Xanthippus the Spartan overcomes Regulus, the Roman General, in Africa, b 23. e 12. 716
The FRAGMENTS out of the Lost Books of Diodorus the Sicilian, gather'd by Photius. A. ALexander Epiphanes, King of Syria, murder'd by his Subjects, Book 32. Eclogue 1. Page 724 Antiochis Queen of Cappadocia, cozens her Husband with a supposititious Birth, b 31 e 3. 723 Antiochus Epiphanes prophanes the Temple at Jerusalem, b 34. e 1. 726 Antiochus Eupator, his War with the Jews, b 34. e 1. ibid Ariamnes II. King of Cappadocia his great love to his Son, and his Son to him, b 31. e 3. 723 Ariarathes I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Kings of Cap¦padocia, and the last a favourer of Learn∣ing, b 31. e 3. —And the pedegree of those Kings, ibid. Athenio the Captain of the slaves in Sicily, and that servile War, b 36. e 1. 731 B. Battaces; the Priest of Cybele in Phrygia, comes in a strange Habit to Rome, b 36. e 2. 733 Bocchus, King of Africa overcome by Marius, b 36. e 1. 729 C. Cadmus; b 40. e 1. 736 Caesar; his War with Pompey, b 37. e 2. 735 —His Murder, ibid. Callo, a young Wife, afterwards she became a Man, b 32. e 1. 724 Capadocia; The Genealogy of their Kings, b 31. e 3. 722 Carthage; height of its Walls, b 32. e 2. 725 Cattulus murders himself by the Fumes of Lime, b 38. e 2. 736 D. Demetrius, King of Syria, overcomes Alex∣ander, b 32. e 1. 724 E. Enna taken, and plunder'd by the Slaves, b 34. e 2. 727 Eunus the Juggler, and Captain of the Slaves in Sicily, ibid. H. Heraris. a young Wife, becomes a Man, b 32 e 1. 724 Hermaphrodites; strange Relations of Herma∣phrodites, ibid. I. Jerusalem; the Temple by Antiochus Epi∣phanes taken by Antiochus Eupator, b 34. e 1. 726 Jews, hated of all: An Heathenish Relation of their Coming out of Aegypt, b 34. e 1. b 40. e 1. 726, 736 —Their Laws by Moses, ibid. Jugurtha, King of Numidia, brought Prisoner to Rome, b 36. e 1. 729 M. Marsian War, b 37. e 1. 734 Masinissa, his Srength and Age, b 32. e 3. 325 Megallis, the wife of Demophilus of Enna, thrown down a Rock by the Women Slaves, for her former Cruelty, b 34. e 2. 327 Titus Minutius buys a Slave, he fell in Love with, for a great Sum of Money, and stirs up the Servile War in Italy; at length betray'd by his own men, b 36. e 1. 729 Moses his Acts, b 34. e 1. b 40. e 1. 726, 736 N. Nerva manages the War against the Slaves in Sicily; slothful, b 36. e 1. 730 P. Persius, King of Macedonia, his extream Mi∣sery b 31. e 2. 722 Pompey, his Death, b 37. e 2. 734 Prusias, King of Bithynia, murder'd by his Son, b 32. e 4. 726 R. Romans; their superstition, b 36. e 2 733 —Their Statues of their Ancestors, b 31. e 4. 723 —Their Degeneracy from their former Fruga∣lity, b 37. e 1. 734
S. Salvius a Piper, Captain of the Slaves in Sicily, is made King, and call'd Tripho, b 36. e 1. 731 Sicily; Its lamentable Condition in the time of the servile Wars, b 36. e 1. 729 Sylla; His War with Marius, his remarkable Death, b 37. e 2. 735 T. Titinius betrays the Ss in Sicily, b 36 e 1. 731 V. Varius, Captain of the Slaves in Sicily, b 36. e 1. ibid. Viriathus, General of the Lusitanians, once a Captain of Thieves, his Successes against the Romans, b 32. e 5. 726 W. War; The War of the Slaves among the Ro∣mans, b 34. e 2. 727 —And in Attica, ibid. —At Nucera, Capua, and by Minutius, b 36. e 1. 729 —The Servile Wars in Sicily, under Eunus, Varius, Salvius, and Athenio. b 34. e 2. b 36. e 1. 727, 729 The FRAGMENTS out of the History of Diodorus the Sicilian, Publish'd by H. Valesius. A. ACtaeon pull'd in pieces between those that strove for him. See Archias, Lib. 6. Sect. 15. Page 743 Agathocles; Kill'd with a Thunderbolt, l 6. s 16. ibid. —His Revenge upon his Soldiers that kill'd his Son, l 2. s 2. 748 Archias his vile love to Actaeon a virtuous young Boy, l 6. s 15. 743 Astyages King of the Medes his Cruelty to∣wards his subjects, l 6. s 30. 745 Adrastus by Chance kill'd Atys the Son of Croesus; Kills himself for it, l 6. s 32 ibid. Atys. See Adrastus, ibid. Aeneas his Care of his Father when Troy was taken, l 6. s 8. 742 Aristogon; his praise l 6. s 46. 747 Antigonus; one a private Man Kill'd through his Ambition, l 21. s 1. 748 Apollodorus, King of Cassandria in Mace∣donia, his Cruelty, l 22. s 5. 750 Attilius Regulus, the Roman General, his Mis∣fortunes at Carthage, routed by Xanthippus, l 23. s 1. 751 Antiochus the Great, his Acts, l 26. s 28 to 33. 757 —His strange familiarity with ordinary fellows l 26. s 43. 758 —Epiphanes his foolish and light Carriage at Sports and in Feasts, ibid. s 67, 68, 69. 761 Antiochus Cyzienus addicted to Puppit-Plays &c. hunting wild Beasts in the night, l 34. s 25. 774 Aradians slew the Ambassadors, sent to them from the Marathenians, l 26. s 97. 767 Arsases, King of Parthia, his praise, l 26. s 107. 769 Attalus his cruelty, l 34. s 9. 771 Athenaeus, Antiochus's General, abusive in his Quarters, afterwards was famish'd to Death because none would relieve him by reason of his former abuses, l 34. s 16. 722 Asellus; See Lucius Asellus, 776 B. Bias, one of the Seven Wise Men, His noble Entertainment and Redemption of Captive-Virgins, l 6. s 28. 744 C. Castor and Pollux, l 6. s 1. 741 Chilo, one of the Seven wise Men, l 6. s 26. 744 Cyrus; his Praise, l 6. s 29, 31, 34. 744 Croesus, Cyrus his Kindness to him, l 6. s 33, 34. 745 Cambyses, l 6. s 44. 747 Cimon, his love to his Dead Father, l 6. s 51. —His Praise, 52. 748 Carthaginians; their War with the Mercena∣ries. See War. 752 —Their Cruelty towards the Micatanian Re∣volters, l 26. s 10. 754 Cretians; their Treachery to the Citizens of Siphnus, Corinth; Rebuilt by Julius Caesar, l 26. s 92. 766 Caius Gracchus; his Head sold by his tr∣rous Friend Lucius Metellius for its Weight in Gold, l 34. s 22. 773
—Drew out the Brains, and pour'd in Lead to make it weigh heavier. ibid. Caius Marius, one of the Ambassadors sent to Metellus, despis'd by him, but belov'd by the Soldiers, l 34. s 28. 775 Caius Domitius; See Pompaedius. D. Dromichares King of Thrace, his kind Usage of Lysimachus and his Son when he had them prisoners. Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria his Cruelty l 26. Demetrius Son of Philip King of Macedon murder'd by his Father through the instigation of his Brother Perseus, l 26. s 39. 758 Decius, Treacherously kill'd all the Rheglans, l 22. s 1. 750 —His end, ibid Diegulis King of Thrace his cruelties, l 26. s 104, 105. 769 E. Eleans, Consecrated to Jupiter by the Policy of the Lacedemonians, l 6. s 12. 742 Eucephus, his Treachery concerning Polycha∣res his Cattel, and his Cruelty, l 6. s 14. 742 Eumenes; his Kindness to his Brother Attalus, tho' he had married his Queen in his absence, upon news of his death, l 26. s 44. 759 —His other Acts, s 48. ibid. —His Praise, s. 66. 761 Eumenes King of Parthia his Cruelty, raz'd a great part of Babylon. F. Fimbria; encouraged his Soldiers to plunder, l 37. s 11, 12. —His Cruelties, s 13. 779 G. Gauls; their Cruelty, l 26. s 65. 761 Gorgus Father and Son, their remarkable love one to another. H. Hippomenes, caus'd his own Daughter to be eaten up by a Horse, l 6. s 20. 743 Hamilcar; his cruel usage by the Sons of At∣talus, l 24. s 5. 752 Hannibal, his Acts, l 26. s 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9. 753 —His Praise, s 36. 757 Hieronymus King of Syracuse murder'd by his Subjects, l 26. s 7, 8. 754 Hasdrubal; his Commendation, l 26. s 11. 754 I. Julius Caesar his praise, l 26. s 92. 766 —Rebuilt Corinth, ibid. Jugurtha Besieged his Brother Adherball in Cinna, took the place, and unnaturally slew his Brother, l 34. s 23. 77 L. Lycurgus, l 6. s 11. 742 Lucius Tarquinius King of the Romans his praise, l 6. s 23. 744 Lucretia, her story, l 6. s 48. 747 Lysimachus kindly us'd by the Thracians, when he was prisoner, l 21. s 3, 4. 74 —Sent to Seleucus to have Demetrius kill'd s 10. 749 Lucius Asellius, a prudent Governor of Sicily, his praises, l 36. s 8, 9. 776 M. Mynderidyes the Syberite, his state and grandeur, l 6. s 19. 743 Myso, one of the seven wise Men, l 6. s 25. 744 Messina; the Citizens murder'd by the Ma∣mertines, received as Friends, l 21. s 9. 749 Metellus Quintus; Son of Metellus, his great love to his Father, and care to have him re∣stor'd from banishment, l 36. s 3. 775 Mucius Scaevola, see Scevola, 776 Mithridates; his Clemency towards the Ro∣man Soldiers, and his successes in Asia, l 37. s 5, 6. 777 —His War with the Rhodians, ib. 778 N. Numa Pompilius, l 6. s 17. 743 Nearchus the Tyrant of Elis, how he was us'd by Zeno see Zeno, 747 Nabis King of Lacedemon, his murder of Pe∣lops the Son of Lycurgus, and his other Cruelties, l 26. s 12. 754 P. Paulus Emilius, his praise, l 26. s 42, 57, 61. 758 —His death and praise, l 26. s 61. 760 Pittachus, one of the seven wise Men, l 6. s 27, 28. 744 Pleminius King of Thrace, his beastly Cruel∣ties, l 26. s 14. 754 Polychares; see Eucephnus, 742 Pythagoras, l 6. s 36. 745 —The dness of the Pythagorians one to a∣nother, l 6. s 37.
—Other matters concerning them, l 6. s 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Polycrates King of Samos, his cruelty towards the Lydians that fled to him, l 6. s 54. 747 Pyrrhus plundered Egeas in Macedonia, his Soldiers rifl'd the Sepulchres of the former Kings, l 22. s 6. 750 Proserpina; her Temple robb'd by Pleminius the Roman Governor of Locris, l 26. s 14. 754 —The effect of it, ibid. Philip King of Macedon, his Acts, l 26. s 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 756 Perseus, Son of Philip King of Macedon, pro∣cures his Brother Demetrius to be murder'd by his Father. See Demetrius, 758 —His Cruelty, s 46. 759 —His other Acts, s 56, 58. —His Covetousness, s 59. 760 Ptolemy Philometer driven out of his King∣dom; fled to Rome, l 26. s 70. 762 —Met kindly by Demetrius, ibid. Prusias, King of Bythinnia robb'd the Temple of Pergamus, l 26. s 81. 764 —The punishment of his Army both by Sea and Land, ibid. —Hated by his Subjects, l 26. s 90. 766 Philip Father of Alexander, his Acts, l 26. s 83. 765 Pumpeius Quintus his Acts, at the Siege of Lagnetum, l 26. s 106. 769 Ptolemy Phiscon; his cruelty to his Wife and Sister Cleopatra, in murdering her, and his Son Memphites, l 26. s 103. 768 Pompaedius General of the Martians, his rash design to beset the Senate-house with 10 Thou∣sand Men, l 37. s 1. 734 —Diswaded by Caius Domitius, ibid. Pompeius Cn. the Great, his Commendation, l 37. s 14, 18. 779 Poscriptions in Rome; an Instance of a re∣markable Example in the punishment of one that gloried over others, and at last read his own name in the List, l 37. s 17. 778 R. Romulus Silvius, kill'd by a Thunderbolt, l 6. s 9. 742 Romulus and Remus, l 6. s 13. ibid. Rhegium; the People there all kill'd by Decius, and his Garrison of Campanians, l 22. s 1. 750 Romans; their Clemency towards the Con∣quer'd, l 26. s 62. 760 —The degeneration of their Manners, l 6. s 4. 775 S. Sylla, his Commondation, l 37. s  777 —The murders and slaughters in Rome by Syl∣l, l 37. s 8, 16. 778, 780 —Robb'd the Temples to carry on the War in Italy, s 10. 779 Salmoneus defied Jupiter, l 6. s 4. 741 Syberites; their Luxury, l 6. s 19. 743 Solon, l 6. s 24. 744 Servius Tullius; his Praise reigned 44 years, l 6. s 35. 745 Sicily; P. Clodius his Acts in Sicily, l 24. s 1. 752 —Hieronymus King of Sicily, murder'd by his Subjects, l 26. s 7. 754 —The Servile War, l 34. s 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11. 770 —The Cruelty of the slaves, l 36. s 1. 775 Scipio; his humanity to Syphax King of Nu∣midia his prisoner, and his other Acts, l 26 s 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 755 —His Praise, Scipio the Son of Paulus Aemilius, his Praise and noble Acts, l 26. s 76. 763 Scipio Africanus; his faithfullness in his perfor∣mance of Articles with his Enemies, l 26. s 85. 765 —Takes Carthage, and restor'd the Phaleri∣an Bull, and other things to the Sicilians, l 26. s 91. 766 Scipio Nasica; his Commendation, l 34. s 24. 773 Scaevola his Virtues, l 36. s 5, 6, 7. 676 T. Thessalus abdicated the Government of A∣thens, Tiberius Gracchus; his Praise, l 34. s 10. 772 V. Viriathus General in Spain against the Ro∣mans; his Justice in dividing the Spoil, wheen he was Captain of the Robbers, l 26. s 93. 766 —His Contempt of Wealth, s 99. 767 —His Death and Burial, s 108. 769 W. —War; the Mercenary War with the Car∣thaginians, l 25 s 1, 2, 3, 4. 752 —The Servile War in Sicily. See Sicily, 77 Z. Zno; how he us'd the Tyrant Nearchus, when he was upon the Back, l 6. s 47. 747
The FRAGMENTS out of the Lost Histories of Diodorus the Sicilian, Publish'd by F. Ʋrsinus. A. A Chaians refus'd the Gift of Eumenes, s 13. Page 779 —Accept Seleucus's Present, ibid. Aetolians in great Fear, s 5. 783 —Their fruitless Embassy, s 8. ibid. Albans and Romans became Enemies to one a∣nother, s 1. 783 Ambassadors come from Rome to Rhodes, s 29. 779 Ambassadors come to Rome from all parts, s 20. 780 Antiochus the Great, s 6. 783 —Rejects Scipio's Advice, s 7. ibid. —Freed from War, s 9. ibid, Ariarathes commended by the Senate, s 24. ibid. Arradians, s 29. 773 Asia; Princes of Asia fast Friends to the Ro∣mans, s 14. 782 B. Bocchus King of Lybia, s 33. 782 —Sends Commissioners to Marius to crave Pardon for his Crimes, ibid. —Seizes Jugurtha, and delivers him bound, and by that means bought his safety, ibid C. Caria assigned to the Rhodians, s 10. 779 Carthaginians deliver themselves and Countrey to the Romans, s 27. 780 —They are in great Consternation, ibid. Celtiberians treat for Peace, s 26. ibid. Cretians declared Friends to the Senate, s 35 783 —They are commanded to send in all their Ships, ibid. —Are divided about it, and stir up the Peo∣ple to sedition, ibid. D. Demetrius sends the Senate a Crown of great Value, s 25. 780 E. Egypt an Excellent Countrey. s 32. 782 Eumenes presented with an Ivory Charriot, s 16. 779 F. Flamininus sent to Rome, discharges the Ita∣lian Servants, s 3. 782 —He treats with Antiochus his Ambassador, s 4. ibid. G. Gallatians or Gallogreeks, send Ambassadors to treat for Peace, and are refus'd, s 11. 779 H. Heraclides sent to Treat about a Peace, s 6. 783 I. Jugurtha sent for and seized, s 33. 782 M. Marathum deliver'd up, s 28. 773 Mark Anthony makes Peace with the Creti∣ans, s 35 783 Miidates endeavours to corrupt the Senate, s 34. 782 N. Numantines treat with the Romans for a Peace, s 3. 773 —They renew the War with the Romans, ibid. P. Perseus; War decreed against him by the Senate, s 17. 779 —Commanded to mend his manners, s 15 779 Philip freed from Tribute, and his Son Deme∣trius discharg'd, s 4 783 Prusias; his base and shameful Catriage, s 22. 780 Ptolemy endeavours to gain Caelo-Syria, s 18. ibid. —Ptolemy the Elder; his Ambassadors re∣jected, f 23 780 Ptolemy the younger in favour with the Senate, ibid. Ptolemy Euergetes meets the Ambassadors in Pomp and State, s 32. 782 —Shews them his Palace and Treasure, ibid.
R. Rhodians exceedingly afraid, s 19 779 —Deliver'd from their Fears, 780 Romans jealous of Eumenes, s 21 780 —Roman Ambassadors slight Ptolemy's Ra∣rities and fins Things, s 32. 782 —Admire the Populousness and Situation of his Country, ibid. —Travel through the World, ibid. —Return highly applauded, ibid. S. Saturnius after condemn'd to die, rescued by the People and declared Tribune, s 34. 782 Scipio and his Delegates highly applauded, s 32. 782 T. Termisian Ambassadors, s 30. 773 Tryphon of a private Man made King, s 31. 773 FINIS.
