e2758 8743758 41721
THE Votes and Orders Of the Honorable House of Commons, Passed February 25, & 26. 1662. Ʋpon Reading His Majesties Gracious DECLARATION & SPEECH: Together with their Reasons and Address, Humbly presented to His Majesty (The whole House present) By their Speaker Sir Edward Turner, Knight & Baronet, On Saturday, Feb. 28. in the Banquetting-House at Whitehall. With his Speech at the delivery thereof; And his Report of the Substance of His Majesties gracious Answer thereunto. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiesty, 1662. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
THE Votes & Orders Of the Honourable House of Commons passed Febr. 25. & 26. 1662. upon reading His Majesties Gracious Declaration and Speech, &c. THe honourable House of Commons having appoin∣ted Wednesday the 25. of this Moneth for the reading his Majesties Gracious Declaration of the six and twenti∣eth of December last, and his Speech made at the open∣ing of this Session; and the same being then read and taken into mature debate and consideration; The House proceeded to pass these Votes and Orders following, viz. Mercurii 25. Feb. 15. Car. R. Upon Consideration had by the House, of the Kings Majesties Declaration and Speech, Resolved upon the Question, nemine contradicente, THat the humble thanks of this House be returned to the Kings Maiesty, for his constancy in the Observation of the Act of Indempnity. Resolved, &c. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be re∣turned to the Kings Majesty, for His Professi∣on against Introducing a Government by a Military Power.
Resolved, &c. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be returned to His Majesty for His gracious In∣vitation to this House to prepare some Laws against the growth and progress of Popery. Resolved, &c. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be re∣turned to His Majesty, for His Resolution to maintain the Act of Vniformity. Resolved, &c. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be re∣turned to His Majesty for his Gracious re∣commendations to this House to prepare Laws against Licentiousness and Impiety▪ and also to provide Sumptuary Laws, and Laws for the Advance of Trade, and for His Majesties gracious Expressions to retrench the Charge and Expences in His own Family. Resolved, &c. That it be presented to the Kings Majesty as the Humble Advice of this House, That no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of Vniformity. Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to collect and bring in the Reasons of this House for this Vote upon the present Debate, to be presented to His Majesty; and that the nominating of the Committee be adjourned till to morrow mor∣ning.
Jovis 26. Feb. 15. Car. R. Resolved, &c. That in the close of the Reasons to be presen∣ted to His Majesty for the Vote of Advice; it be also added, That this House will assist His Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, and That the Committee appointed to bring in the Reasons do pen an Address for that purpose to His Majesty. And the Committee appointed to bring in the Rea∣sons and Address before directed, having met, and agreed the same, Sir Heneage Finch, His Majesties Sol∣licitor General, made Report thereof to the House on Fryday the Twenty seventh of this Month, and the same being twice read, and some small Amendments and Additions made thereto, and the Reasons and Ad∣dress so agreed, ordered to be fair written. A Message was sent to His Majesty by Sir William Compton and others of His Majesties Privy Councel, Members of the House, to desire leave of His Majesty, that the House might wait on him at such time and place as His Majesty should appoint. And His Majesty being attended, Sir William Comp∣ton on Saturday made report, That His Majesty did most graciously receive the Message, as He did all things that came from that House, and to testifie he did so, had appointed the shortest time He could to be attended, which was this present Saturday, at Three of the clock in the afternoon, in the Banquetting-house at Whitehall: and the House thereupon adjourning till Two of the Clock in the afternoon, and being then met again, Mr. Speaker with the whole House went from thence to Whitehall to attend His Majesty, and Mr. Speaker de∣livered himself in manner following.
Most Gracious Sovereign, THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, did with great joy receive Your Majesties most Gra∣cious Speech, at the opening this Session of Par∣liament: And being thereby invited to consider of Your Declaration of the Twenty sixth of De∣cember last; they have with all Sobriety, Duty, and Affection, examined the grounds thereof; and do by me present unto Your Majesty, their most hearty Thanks for the same, and humble Ad∣vice thereupon; both which, I do beseech Your Majesty that You will vouchsafe me to deliver in their own words. May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, WE your Majesties most Duti∣ful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, having with all Fidelity and Obedience considered of the several Matters comprised in Your Majesties late Gracious Declaration of the 26th of December last, and Your most Gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session: Do, in the first place for our selves, and in
the names of all the Commons of England, render to Your Sacred Majesty, the Tribute of our most hearty Thanks, for that infinite Grace and Goodness, wherewith Your Ma∣jesty hath been pleased to Publish Your Royal Intentions of adhering to Your Act of Indempnity and Oblivion, by a Constant and Religious Observance of it. And our hearts are further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgivings, when we consider Your Ma∣jesties most Princely and Heroick Professions of relying upon the Affections of Your Peo∣ple, and abhorring all sort of Military and Arbitrary Rule. But above all, We can never enough remember, to the Honour of Your Majesties Piety, and our own unspeak∣able Comfort, those solemn and most endear∣ing Invitations of us Your Majesties Subjects, to prepare Laws to be presented to Your Majesty, against the growth and increase of Popery; and withal, to provide more Laws against Licentiousness and Impiety; at the same time Declaring Your own Resolutions for maintaining the Act of Uniformity. And it becomes us always to acknowledge and ad∣mire Your Majesties Wisdom in this Your Declaration, whereby Your Majesty is pleased to resolve, not only by Sumptuary Laws, but by Your own Royal Example of Frugality, to restrain that excess in mens Ex∣penses,
which is grown so general and so ex∣orbitant; and to direct our Endeavours to find out fit and proper Laws for Advancement of Trade and Commerce. After all this we most humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, That it is with ex∣tream unwillingness and reluctancy of heart, that we are brought to differ from any thing which Your Majesty hath thought fit to pro∣pose; And though we do no way doubt, but that the unreasonable Distempers of mens spi∣rits, and the many Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on, during the late Inter∣vals of Parliament, did reasonably incline Your Majesty to endeavour by Your Decla∣ration to give some allay to those ill hu∣mours, till the Parliament Assembled; and the hopes of Indulgence, if the Parliament should consent to it, especially seeing the pre∣tenders to this Indulgence, did seem to make some titles to it, by vertue of Your Majesties Declaration from Breda. Nevertheless, we Your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Sub∣jects, who are now returned to serve in Parlia∣ment,, from those several parts and places of Your Kingdom, for which we were cho∣sen, Do humbly offer to Your Majesties great Wisdom, That it is in no sort advisable that there be any Indulgence to such persons who presume to dissent from the Act of Uniformi∣ty, and the Religion established,
For these Reasons, WE have considered the nature of Your Majesties Declaration from Breda, and are humbly of opini∣on, That Your Majesty ought not to be pres∣sed with it any further; Because it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of Your Maje∣sties Intentions, to do what in You lay, and what a Parliament should advise Your Maje∣stie to do; and no such Advice was ever gi∣ven, or thought fit to be offered, nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with, but by Act of Parliament. They who do pretend a Right to that sup∣posed Promise, put the Right into the hands of their Representatives, whom they chose to serve for them in this Parliament, who have Passed, and Your Majestie consented to the Act of Uniformity. If any shall presume to say, that a Right to the benefit of this De∣claration doth still remain after this Act Passed. It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Go∣vernment, and to suppose a disability in Your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any part of Your
Majesties Declaration, though both Houses should advise Your Majestie to it. We have also considered the nature of the Indulgence Proposed, with reference to those Consequences, which must necessarily at∣tend it. It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church Precarious, and the Censures of it of no Mo∣ment or Consideration at all. It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the reasons of Uniformity continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the execution of it. It will expose Your Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect or Opinion, and of every single person: also, who shall presume to dissent from the Church of England. It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be difficult for it, to defend it self against them: And, which is yet further considerable, those Numbers, which by being troublesom to the Government, finde they can arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be yet more troublesom, that so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, which
Your Majesty hath declared against; and in time, some prevalent Sect, will at last contend for an establishment; which, for ought can be foreseen, may end in Popery. It is a thing altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of convicting Re∣cusants, and be inconsistent with the method and proceedings of the Laws of England. Lastly, It is humbly conceived, that the In∣dulgence proposed will be so far from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is ra∣ther likely to occasion great disturbance. And on the contrary, That the asserting of the Laws, and the Religion establisht, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable means to produce a setled Peace and Obedi∣ence throughout Your Kingdom: Because the variety of Professions in Religion, when open∣ly indulged, doth directly distinguish men in∣to parties, and withal gives them opportuni∣ty to count their numbers; which, considering the animosities, that out of a Religious Pride will be kept on foot by the several Factions, doth tend directly and inevitably to open di∣sturbance. Nor can Your Majesty have any Security, that the Doctrine or Worship of the several Factions, which are all Governed by a several Rule, shall be consistent with the Peace of Your Kingdom.
And if any persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, We do in all hu∣mility declare, that we will for ever, and in all Occasions, be ready with our utmost en∣deavour and assistance, to adhere to, and serve your Majesty according to our boun∣den Duty and Allegiance. The Speakers Report of the Substance of His Majesties Gracious Answer. THat His Majesty gave them hearty Thanks for their many Thanks; That never any King was so happy in a House of Commons, as He in this; That the Paper and Reasons were long, and therefore He would take time to consider of them, and send them a message; That they could never differ but in Judgment, and that must be, when He did not rightly express Himself; or they did not rightly understand Him; but their Interest was so far linkt together, that they could never dis∣agree. LONDON, Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, 1662.
