G1042 R15654 13593946 100724
Good Deeds ill Requited: OR, AN ANSWER TO INNOCENCE UNVEIL'D. BEING A POEM In Vindication of Dr. Oates and Mr. Bedloe. WIse Solomon has said, 'Tis sometimes fit To answer one, that has nor Sense, nor Wit, Lest the vain Fop grow wise, in's own Conceit. A Poem! Bless us, Muses! railing Rhimes, Where Discord only, and no Musick chimes: Where Malice, and no Wit or Sence is shown, And Puddle-dirt at worthy men is thrown. That mortal man in paltry Rhime should prate, Like a she-Orator of Billingsgate; Who, if she ever did at Crambo play, Might rail in Rhime, and better things would say. Poor quibling Fool did lack some Oaten drink, To help inspire his wooden Wit, I think, Who his fine Poem usher'd (out upon't!) With a most silly Quibble in the Front. Those very Men his Worship termeth Fools Handle edge, better than he rhiming, tools: And tho these men he Saviours calls in scorn, And doth with Coxcombs, Fools, and Knaves, adorn His railing Verse; they shall in Story dwell In Heav'nly Fame, like Angels that ne'er fell, Whilst such as he lie in Oblivions Hell. What Stuff he's made of, all the world may see; But Jesuit's Heart won't with Fool's Brain agree.
We can his Spleen however well detect; Their Evidence he'd make of no effect. At that alone his squinting Verses look, A safer way indeed than Reading took: But 'twill not do; his Rhymes do Reason lack, For all the Law, of which you so much crack; The Foil'd may rise, and lay some on their back. Touch the gall'd back of any furious Beast, He'll bite and kick, or wince and fling at least; And he that meddles, when the Beast does feel, Had need be guarded well, gainst iron heel. I am no Surgeon, and shan't rake in Sore; The World have Eyes, and I shall say no more. If some say Black is White, I am content, Or call a running Sore an Ornament. The Romans did not cackling Geese despise, Who kept their Capitol from a Surprise: But we fling Dirt at men, like unwise Sots, Who have the Nation sav'd from Jesuits Plots. Since Jesuits can't the Nation now trepan, They'll do it all the Mischief that they can, And with foul Mouths, worse Pens, and lying Notes, Rail with full Cry, at Bedloe, and at Oates. Who will hereafter Traytors Plots make known, If no Encouragement to these are shown? When scurrilous Pamphleteers shall dayly try To make their Evidence to seem a Lye; To make them Juglers, wicked, perjur'd Knaves, Inventors of strange Plots, the worst of Slaves; Men who of right by us should honour'd be, Their Names made great to all Posteritie; And for Encouragement, and greater Grace, Their Statues set up in some publick place. Whate'er that scribling Poetaster writes, Those very Commons which his Worship slights, May in good time make Truth and Justice known; And who the Knaves are then, will best be shown. Then Oates and Bedloe's Story will be told, And 'twill appear they have not been too bold, But that both Truth and Justice once was fold. FINIS.
