G572 08963439 42121
Subsidium Peregrinantibus. OR An Assistance to a Traveller in His Convers with 1. Hollanders. 2. Germans. 3. Venetians. 4. Italians. 5. Spaniards. 6. French. Directing him, after the latest Mode, to the greatest Honour, Pleasure, Security, and Advantage in his TRAVELLS. WRITTEN To a Princely Traveller for a VADE MECUM. By Balthazar Gerbier Kt Master of the Ceremonies to King CHARLES the First. OXFORD, Printed for ROBERT GASCOIGNE Anno Dom. 1665.
To the High Puissant and most Noble PRINCE, JAMES Duke of Monmouth, Earle of Doncaster, Baron of Tindall, and Knight of the most Honourable Order of the GARTER. May it Please Your Grace, I Do humbly offer to Your view a little Vade mecum for a Prince∣ly Traveller, by whose ex∣ample other Travellers may conforme themselves in their Journeys, as many endeavour to
imitate Eminent Persons; like men who set their Watches at the grand Sun-Dyall, especial∣ly such who (like Your Grace) possesse Noble Bloud, and He∣roick Cardinall Virtues, for the which Your Grace needs not to Travell, nor to be set but by the Grand Soveraign Sun-Dyall of these three Nations, in which consideration this little Offer may be said to be needles, did not my disinteressed Zeale (Re∣spect and Duty) move me to make use of some thing (though but by heard-say of Your intent so Travell.) May therefore the matter treated of in this Vade me∣cum
prove as an acceptable Posy presented by a poor Gardiner, who presumes not to offer flow∣ers to be compared by the Im∣perialls, the Nonpareilles, and such others, as are most a la Mode, or please the Eye, the searcher of Hearts seeing farther hath taught me to offer for the long and prosperous life, the sincere wishes of Your Graces, Most Humble, Obedient, and most Zealous Servant Balthazar Gerbier K.
To Judicious Courteous READERS. THough a Dedicatory Epistle appropriates a Treaty to a prime Reader; yet it being past the Presse, it cannot escape di∣verse who according to Old custome, look for some addresse to them to be called Judicious, and Courteous, when it happens with Books as with Buildings, scarce seen by any man but dislikt in one thing or other, for that all mens fancies differ, and therefore it was no wonder a very Judicious Noble Person of this Na∣tion
said, he would not for five Hundred pound hove put forth a Book, for that, some are consi∣dered but for their outside, and only the Title lookt on, or some two or three leaves turned, and if but one word therein not suta∣ble to their fancy; it is thrown in a corner, and the Author laught at and censured; but since I let this Vade Mecum go, and Dedicatory Epistles are required, I thought fit to tell you, that my scope is not to say peradventure what might stop some Lazy bones at their Fathers Chimney corner; as those who would not trouble themselves to see things so they had but the list, and then
pretend as a fond Mother at Delfe in Holland, that her Son could speak Italian, because he was once minded to go for Venice. And how many great Orators in their Books presume to speak a high Lan∣guage to Caesars, and even to A∣lexanders, when as admitted to their Presence; either remain Mute or Stutter. In a word, the scope of this Va∣de Mecum in the few particulars held forth, is the Travelers interest; That he may set forth with such an Opinion of those Nations, which he shall do well to visit, and such parts which he may see, as may give him the more desire to enquire in person
after all those things, for the which Travell is to serve better then Rea∣ding, since Objects seen, and mat∣ters experimented, are seldome blotted out of remembrance. This Vade Mecum therefore leaves to those that will not or can∣not Travell, the reading of such co∣pious, compleat and excellent de∣scriptions as are extant in their mo∣ther tongue; and especially penned by men, who did not care to carp as severall men make their profession, both at Religion and State Maxims; or particular passions and inclinati∣ons. Farthermore, the Traveller will find good and bad as well in his own
native Country, as in Forraigne parts, wheresoever he steers, that Sola ratio Hominem à Brutis animalibus saeparat. That with∣out the putting knowledge in pra∣ctise, it will be with him both at home and abroad, according unto the saying Theoria absque praxi, I∣dem est quod pharmacopaeis herbarum scientia absque appli∣cationis cognitione servit; He will find in what condition Time, Malice, or Fate may reduce him, that Scientia est Summum bo∣num, quod nec Naufragiis, nec Latronum spoliis subjectum est. And that there is nothing more cer∣tain then the saying, Scientia ad∣haeret
in extremo vitae suspirio, that Eruditio, & arma, sunt ve rae Nobilitatis gradus, and Ju∣stitia & Pietas, sunt Illustrissi∣ma heroicorum Imperatorum specula; Finally, that sola vir∣tus dulcissimum Animae sola∣men est, may all Travellers and those that stay at home find it to be so.
The Contents of this VADE MECUM. 1. Concerning reverence to Religion. 2. Respect and Constancy due to Christian profession. 3. Of Humility. 4. Of Charity. 5. Of Meeknesse, benignity, and Clemency. 6. Of Justice. 7. Of Prudence. 8. Of Liberality. 9. Of Compassion and griefe. SECT. 2. 1. Of Learned Princes, and those that taught them. 2. List of Heathen false gods wherewith Na∣tions have been abused. 3. The best advice to Princely Travellers. 4. Questions made by French, Germanes, Spanish, Venetians, Genovese, Iians in generall, and Low Dutch, concerning Travellers.
5. The best Circuit for a Princely Traveller in his Journey. 6. The naturall disposition of the Low Country. 7. The two main points stood upon by Ger∣mains, and wherein a Princely Traveller may doe himselfe right to discourse among them. SECT. 3. Concerning Coats of Armes ever before and since Marius. SECT. 4. 1. Concerning the Originall of Warrs, and the right way of Fortification according unto the best principles. 2. Wherein the strength and compleatnesse of all Fortresses doth consist. 3. That there is no Fortresse Impregnable. 4. That it is more honour to defend a place then to sight a Battell. 5. The most Blessed defence. SECT. 5.Concerning all the Orders of Knighthood as have been made from the beginning untill this present time.
1. Of the Gray hound. 2. The Gennet 3. The Starre 4. The Porc-espie 5. The Thistle. 6. The Ermine 7. The Broom flower. 8. The Sea shell 9. Dame Blanche 10 The Lilly 11 The Tesuphers 12 Jesus Christ 13 The Swan 14 The Montese 15 The white Rue 16 The Elephant 17 The Boare. 18 S. Hubert 19 The Fooles 20 S. James 21 The Dove 22 the Christian War 23 The Drake 24 The Tussin 25 Of Hungary. 26 Of Suede. 27 The Sword bearer. 28 Of the halfe Moon 29 The Banda 30 The Sepulchre. 31 Of St Lazarus. 32 Of St John Dacon. 33 Of St Catharina 34 Of Montoy. 35 Of the sword of Livonien. 36 Of Gens d'armes. 37 Of Mary glorious. 38 Of Mont Carmel. 39 Of Alcantara. 40 Of Avesiens. 41 Of St George. 42 S. Stephen Martyr. 43 Of the Holy bloud. 44 S. Mary Redemp. 45 S. John Baptist. 46 The Theutonick. 47 Of Salvator. 48 S. John in Spain. 49 Of Calatrava. 50 Of Scama. 51 Of La Calra. 52 Of S. Andrew. 53 The golden Fleece
54 Of Ciprus. 55 Of S. Michael. 56 Burgundy Crosse. 57 The Holy Ghost. 58 The Round Table. 59 Baronetts. 60 Bannerets. 61 Of the Garter. 62 Of the Bath. SECT. 6. The Germans their love to all Arts and Sciences, the Application and best use thereof. SECT. 7. 1. Concerning the Princely Traveller his course towards France, the desent Coat and Quartering of Armes of the French Kings. 2. The Civillity of the French towards stran∣gers, and esteeme of them. 3. The Civilities by them much stood upon. 4. What there is to be observed among them. 5. The manner of their Visits. 6. The liberty to be used therein. SECT. 8. 1. The best course for a Princely Traveller in his going from France into Italy, by Savoy.
2. The Gentility of the Court of Savoy at Turin in Piemont. 3. The Nature and disposition of all Italians, and the distinction they make between strangers (who are not acquainted with their customes and humours) and their own Countrymen. 4. What discourse will be advantagious to a stranger who is not of the Roman pro∣fession. 5. The reservednesse of an Italian in his dis∣course and speech. 6. The difference between Present and Old Rome. 7. The rarities to be seen in and without Rome. 8. That strangers must not stumble at their Imagery, and number of Pictures, for as it is a Church Policy among those of the Roman profession, so there is as yet, an ab∣solute necessity for the adorning their Chur∣ches with Images and Pictures. 9. Naples a Cavallier like place. 10. The Antiquities to be seen at Puteoli be∣yond Naples. 11. Annotations concerning Loretta, the dif∣ference between it, and the Stable wherein our Saviour Jesus Christ was borne.
SECT. 9. 1. The providence of God manifested in fa∣vour of the French and Spanish Nations by the scituation of those Kingdoms, sepa∣rated by the Pirenean Hills. 2. The Confidence and high Disposition of the Spaniards. 3. The Magnificence, Riches, and Greatness of St. Geromine en el Escurial. 4. Concerning Madrid, the pompe of Churches there; that of Toledo, its Revenue; ra∣rities at el Pardo. 5. The great Attendance to the King of Spains prime Ministers of State, the Au∣diences to Ladies of the Court, and of that the late Duke of Buckingham had from the Countess of Olivares, whereas malicious and ignorant men have vented falshoods. 6. What is to be observed in the Visits made to Spaniards. 7. Concerning their prescribed order for Titles settled by publick Act in King Philip the second, his time. 8. Concerning some Embassadors, their Secre∣taries, and Masters of Ceremonies. 9. The Conclusion of the Vade Mecum on the point, Whether men travel, or stay at home.
A VADE MECUM FOR A Princely Traveller. First, Concerning reverence due to Religion. PApirus, a General of the Romanes, having resolved to Fight their Enemies, Engaged on apparent hope of a notorious ad∣vantagious Victory, yet had omitted the consult∣ing of the Oracle, then being certain Hens, to whom the Hen-Priests were to cast meat, whereupon they kept a great pudder, because the Hens (to whom the meat was
cast) would not take it, which moved Papirus to say, That if they would not eat, they might be thrown into the Sea to drink: whereupon Papirus his best Friends (in the Senat) sent him word, That though a Vi∣ctorious General was commonly honoured with a Triumphant Reception, all they could pro∣cure in his Favour (for his Victory) was to keep his Head where it stood; so great the crime of neglecting the Religion (in esteem with the people) was held, though never so absurd in it self, as that was to consult Hens. Antiochus, King of Syria, a barbarian, who had besieged Giersolima, being sought by the Inhabitants for a Truce of seven dayes, to celebrate the Feast of the Taber∣nacles, did not only grant this Request, but sent them a fat Bull with gilded Horns, and sundry golden Vessels full of Incense. Camilus having taken the City Veienti, and made a vow to offer the tenth part of the spoyls to the Temple of Apollo, seeing that the People and the Nobles were at such a variance, as if Rome were to be turn∣ed up-side down; said, That he did not wonder at it, since vowes to God Apollo had not been performed.
Marcellus being desirons (after the taking of Syracusa, to offer to two Gods, to wit, Honour and Vertue; it was opposed by the general voice, That there ought more respect to be born to the Gods, than to sacrifice to two of them at once, and in one place. Concerning reverence due to the Christian Profession, and to Priests. Constantine the Emperour had the Priests in so great esteem, that being in the Coun∣cil of Calcedonie presented with a bundle of complaints against Church-men, he put them in his bosom, and being with drawn threw them into the fire. Alban Armer, being in the year 1499 taken by the Turks, suffered himself to be sawn through, rather than forsake the Chri∣stian Profession. Marin (who by the Emperour Valeria was honoured by a Military Command) being discovered to be a Christian, and put to the choice of life or Death, having but three hours given him to recant, a naked Sword and a Bible laid before him, he choose the Sword, to stick to the Bible.
Hormisda and Suenes (noble persons in the Court of Ildegerdes a Persian King) made good their constancy to the Christian Profession, notwithstanding the first (though of the Royal blood) was degraded, stript naked, and sent to attend the Mules in the Persian Camp: Suenes was not only de∣prived of all his Means, they were not only given to his Servant (who had betrayed him) but Suenes his Wife was given to that Servant, and Suenes a slave to them both. Concerning Humility. When the People of Jerusalem offered to Crown Godsery de Boullon, he refused both the Title of King and the Crown of Gold, as being unfit a sinner should bear that Name and a Crown of Gold, the King of Kings having had one of Thorns. Tiberius (a Roman Emperour) would never suffer the Attendance of Senators a∣bout his Litter, and being once a foot, met by a Citizen of Rome, who profered to cast himself at his feet, retired himself in such haste, as he fell on the ground. Frederick (Count of Urbin) was so
humble of Heart, and so free to his Sub∣jects, that going by the streets he would ask, to all those of his Acquaintance (and Vassals who he met) How they did? How their Father and Friends did? Whether they did prosper in their Vocation? And to the Young-men, Maidens, and Widows, When they would Marry? And speaking to every man with his Hat in his hand. Those of Nova Hispania affect so much Humility, that whensoever they are to Crown their King, they put two Mantles on his shoulders, the one blew, the other black, this covered with dead bones, to put to his remembrance by the blew the Hea∣vens to be above him; by the black, Mor∣tallity. So likewise when the great Cam of Cattay succeeded to the Empire, his Counsellors put him (with his Chair) on a black Felt, telling him, That he must look on the glorious light of the Sun, and on the obscurity of his Seat, that God is above the Sun, without whose mercy he cannot promise to himself the possessing in this world the worth of that black Felt whereon they have put him.
Of Charity. King Amade of Savoy, being sought by certain Embassadors (who did take great delight in Hunting and Hawking, to see his Kennel of Hounds) conveyed the Embas∣sadors into a Gallery, wherein he shewed them a great number of poor People whom he did daily feed; and told the Em∣bassadors, That he had no other Kennel, but did hope by them to purchase perpetual joyes. Sophia (Wife to the Emperour Justini∣an) caused diligent enquiries to be made after the particular places where the poor people did pawn their Clothes, which she then redeemed, and sent them back to the Proprietors to make use of them. Of Meekness, Benignity, and Clemency. Eustorgus Salmin (King of Cyprus) was of such a meek Disposition, and so good, that Histories mention, he never gave any just cause of offence. The Emperour Charles the Fift, having been advertised, That a desperate man had
resolved an attempt on his person; called the man to him, and without making any shew of being advertised, or telling him any thing, gave him five thousand Ducats for a portion to his Daughter. Quintus Fabricius Maximus, being ad∣vertised that Marso (a man valiant at arms) would betray him; caused him also to be called, and did ask him, How long he would suffer him to be his Debtor? gave him Horses, Arms, and Money. Caius Claudius Caligula (Emperour of Rome) caused all the Accusations made during the Raign of Tiberius to be burnt on the publick Market-place, nor could any man perswade him to take any particular notice of the Contents of them, nor to know any of the Names of the Conjura∣tors. Lewis Duke of Orleance (who succeed∣ed Charles the Eight, and was then called Lewis the Twelfth) being put in remem∣brance of the Injuries Recorded during the time of his being Duke of Orleance, answered, That it would not become a French King to resent them. Henry of Bourbon (a French King) was
so full of Clemency, as among thousands of testimonies which he gave of it, would have saved the Duke de Biron, who had conspired against his Royal person, if Biron would have relyed on his mercy. As for daily marks of his matchless Cle∣mency to wave all Resents against all ill∣disposed persons; he made no other reply to a Libel which had been thrown on his way coming from Amiens to Paris, save The man hath said all, and hath forgotten nothing save his Name. Queen Catharine de Medicis (Mother to Charles the Ninth, the French King) being advertised that a great Libellist was penning a Book against her; sent for him, present∣ed him with a Bag, with one thousand Pi∣stols, and took no notice of the man's ma∣lice against her. Of Justice. Artaserste being by his High Chancellor ingaged in a Promise, but finding the Boon could not be in Justice, he made in lieu of it a Present, to the value of the granted Boon; saying, The Gift could not make him poor, but the Boon would have made him unjust. Ribera (Vice-roy of Naples) having
pardoned a Crime worthy of death, and being petitioned in behalf of the party for another heinous offence, said, the first was the offendors, the second would be his if Justice had not its course. The Vicar of Naples having condemned a man that had wounded another, and being Petitioned in favour of the Offendor, whose Friends would make him pass for a Mad man, answered, That Justice tends not to punish the Wise, but the Mad. Trajan the Emperour (in his glorious departure from Rome) being implored by a woman to do her Justice, stopt, lighted from his Horse, heard her Cause, & did her right. The strict observance of Justice was no∣torious in a Count of Holland, who having constrained a Nobleman to espouse a Lady, who the said Nobleman had ravished, caused him immediately (after the Ladies Honour was repaired) to be beheaded. The Grecian Emperours were the first cause of the saying, Audite, & alteram Partem; being accustomed to stop one of their Eares while they heard the Plaintiff; and its a good saying, That those who are accustomed to buy Justice, are apparently apt to sell it.
Of Prudence. King Alphonze (the wise) said, That a prudent man consults long with wise friends, is vigorous and quick in putting the case (resolved on) in practice; never forgets the absent, nor hold the maintaining the In∣nocent, and the overcoming of Passion, as an indifferent matter. The Emperour Maximilian said, That an Italian thinks long on a business: The French executes his thoughts at the same time as he thinks; but that the Germains do and think on it afterwards; which is no Prudence. Of Liberality. This quality in Emanuel the Great Duke of Savoy, made Marini the Italian (a se∣cond Pettarca) write of that Duke his hands, Mani che si stringano al ferro é si∣aprane perdar Oro: in English, Hands clinging to the Iron, and opening to give Gold. George Villiers, late Duke of Buckingham, having observed, that the French Chevallier
de Jarr (exiled from France in England) was in want, and cold not ask, invited him to play at Tennis; caused two Bags, each of one thousand pounds in Gold, to be laid under the Rope, and to have line marks given to the French Cavallier to lay against the ready Money, because he had invited him to the Tennis Court without any fore∣warning, to disguise the better his design to lose the Money, and to make the French Cavallier play the more freely; the Duke plaid false stroaks, yet so dexteriously dis∣guised, as that the Spectators could not perceive the Duke's intention, nor did the French Cavallier ever know it. Of ancient examples of Liberality (be∣sides that of Alexander the Great) that of Gellia is notorious; for he was so gener∣ously liberal of Heart, as he made his Palace a publick receptacle of all men in want; builded for publick uses; assisted in pri∣vate; gave portions to virtuous Widows and Virgins; kept men at the City Gates to invite strangers at his Table, and gave them Presents.
Of Compassion and Grief. When Alexander the Great did see Dari∣us dead. Julius Caesar, the Head of Pompo, Marc Marcellus Syracuse inflames, and Sci∣pio Numaricia, they could not with hold their Tears, though they were their mor∣tal Enemies. Justinian the Emperor, seeing Glimmer King of the Vandals (after many Victories by him fought) brought before him, Glim∣mer having been so hard put to it by Beli∣sary, as that at last he begged from him but one loaf of bread, a Gitar to play his mis∣fortune, and a Sponge to take of his tears: Justinian cryed out, Vanitas vanitatum, and set Glimmer free, allotting to him a Terri∣tory in France to live on.
Sect. 2. Concerning learned Princes. OCtavian Augustus, notwithstanding his warlike proceedings, let not one day pass without reading and making a speech. The Emperour, Charles the Fourth, did take so great delight in Learning, as being at Prague, invited to hear an Orator, and having been four hours time entertained by the Orator, when his Lords did be∣seech him to think on his dinner, the time being past an hour, he bid them go to their dinner; saying, He had fed himself with Learning. Julius the Second was wont to say, Learning with the common People to be as Silver, Gold with the Nobles, Jewels with Soveraigns. Those Princes who have rendered them∣selves famous for their great Knowledge, were carefully provided with choice of Teachers, Darius had Lucan; Alexander the Great Aristocles; Artaxerces Mindare; Palemon (Captain of the Athenians) Xeno∣crate;
Xeniacque, King of the Corinthians, had for him and his Children, the Philoso∣pher Chilon; Epaminond (Prince of the Thebans) had Marut; Ulisses Catinus; Pyrrhe (King of the Epirotes) had Artemi∣us; King Ptolomy (Philadelpho) was Schol∣lar to the famous Philosopher of Greece; Cyrus King of Persia (who did destroy Ba∣bilon) had the Philosopher Prestic; Trajan the Emperour Plutarque; King Darius Herodet; Augustus Pito; Pompey Plaute; Titus had Plinius; Adrian Seconon; An∣toninus Apollonius; Theodosius Claude, Severnis Fabate: These Philosophers had so much credit with all these Princes, that the Children did call them Fathers, and the Fathers did respect them as Masters. So there came more Travellers to Rome to see Titus Livius, and to speak to him, than to see the Magnificency of that Epi∣tome of the World. Love to Knowledge moved all men to have them in singular great esteem, for they were those who taught Numa Pompilus to honour the Churches; to Marc Marcell to shed tears for the vanquished; to Julius Caesar to forgive his Enemies; to Octavian how to
make himself beloved of the people; to Alexander the Great, to Reward all men: they rouzed up the Spirit of Hector; taught to Hercules of Thebes, the Employ∣ing well his Forces; to Ulisses of Greece, discreetly to Adventure; to Pyrrhe (King of Epirotes) to order and invent warlike Engins; to Cattullus Regulus, patiently to endure Torments; Titus to be a Father of Orphans: to procure more Knowledge to Marc Aurellius than to any other; to Cressus (King of the Lydians) to get the love of wise men, and to all Travellers the true scope of Travel, and to make a true useful distinction between men; when as the Nations were enslaved in the Adorati∣on of divers Gods, the Assyrians in Bel, the Egyptians in Apis, the Chaldeans in Isis, the Babilonians in Dragon, the Pharaons in a golden Statue, the Palestins in Belzebub, the Romans in Jupiter, the Africans in that destroying Monster Mars, the Corinthians Apollo, the Arabians Astaroth, the Aguies the Sun, the Achaians the Moon, the Sido∣nians Belphegor, the Amonites Bahalim, the Indians Bacchus, the Lacedemians Oyges, the Macedonians Mercury, the Ephesians
Diana, the Gretians Juno, the Armenians Liber, the Trojans Veste, the Latins Februa, the Tarentins Ceres, and the Rhodians Janus. The List of all these abominations may justly move all Travellers to thank God, that there is at present no danger to be en∣slaved in the damnable Observation of them, but also to implore of the Almighty, that they may not meet in their travel with such as Bordelots, whose wilfulness moves them to perswade others to entertain no belief at all; such as Bordelot taught (du∣ring his being among the Goths) to utter in publick, That King Charles of blessed me∣mory did deserve to lose his head, because his hand wrote so much of God: whose blessed memory justly moves and obligeth me to mention this, for having been an ear wit∣ness of that most diabolical utterance. The best Advice I zealously offer to my Princely Traveller, is first, to take a delight to charge his Memory with the knowledge of such things as may never be a burden to his Conscience, that may afford him sufficient matter of quietness of Mind, and plausible Discourse among all worthy men, that may
move those who shall see and hear him to be his friend; as certainly no Rational in the universal World, nay no wild Heathens would not be friend Bordelots Scholar. The French are accustomed to ask at the very first sight of a stranger, Whether he be Homè desprit, A man of Wit? The Germans, If he be a Gentleman? The Spaniards, If he be a Cavallero? The Venetians and Genovesi, If he be Rich? The Italians (in general) If he be In∣genious? The Low-Dutch, If he be an Honest Man? Secondly, The best Circuit a Traveller can take, is to go through Holland towards Germany, thereby to satisfie his curiosity by degrees, which will encrase upon him, for Germany will afford more satisfaction than the Low Countries; France more than Germany; Italy more than France; and as for Spain, what it may want of the French Complements, it will make good in matter answerable to the Pirenean Hills; so in the Spanish, their Carriage, their Speech, and their Conceits, like as the words concern∣ing
Cortez, who did Conquer the golden part of the American world. Cortez de à sa Rei muchas Triumphas, Reynos y Pal∣ms, à Dios muchas Almas: in English, Cortz gave to his King many Triumphs, Kingdoms and Palmes, to God many Souls. If my Princely Traveller therefore be∣gins with Holland, he will see a People, who by labour, industry, and indefatigable assi∣duty to attain to a settled being, have come the nearest to the great Maker, by raising something out of an almost nothing; to wit, a little very rich world out of moorish ground, mighty fair, populous, flourishing, well built, and well fortified Cities, and strong Holds; every Inhabitant whereof, tending to a settled point, to wit, Preser∣vation, and Melioration, accustomed to the Maxime, Concordia res parvae crescunt: which hath at last brought them (by the blessing from above, the good and prudent conduct of their States, the valiant carriage of their Commanders in chief, the William Maurice, and Frederic Henry, Princes of Orange, and the assistance of England and France) to such a condition, as that (after a War which lasted 80 years) the King of
Spain hath declared them Free States, on whom he hath no more pretence at all. Their chief publick profession of Reli∣gion is called, The Reformed Protestant; their Church Government depending on their Synods; their Pastors maintained by the respective Magistrates, who do permit Li∣berty of Conscience to all men; their Courts of Judicature do observe the Im∣perial Laws; no Arrests of persons before Judgement, so they be Free Denizons; no man suffers death without the party accus∣ed confesseth the Crime; those of Amster∣dam having lost their priviledge in matter of entertaining a Hangman, who they must (in time of Execution) borrow from the Town of Harlem, because in some time past the Magistrate of Amsterdam (by the mistake of Judges) put a man to death who was innocent of a Murder; for the which they had no other ground but that a bloudy Knife was found in a mans pocket who lay drunk asleep under a sttall, near the place where the man laid murthered. I shall spare the over-burdening of this Vade Mecum with their manner of Govern∣ment, the meeting of their City and Town
Magistrates, their Provincial in the gener∣allity of States; nor with any other Go∣vernments in the several parts whereunto my Princely Traveller may turn himself, since entire volumns are extant the reon, he will manage his time, so passing through those Low Dutch Territories as may satisfie his sight by those Towns of Traffick, and find (observing with what thrift those peo∣ple do go through stitch in their Affairs) that Henry the Fourth (the French King) had reason to say of them, as upon occasi∣on, seeing a fair Palace in the Country, when his Nobles found fault with the small though compact Kitchin, Venue St. gu's c'est la petite Cuisinne qui à fait la grand Mayson: [St. Gray belli, it is the compact kitching which hath made the great house] And as before-said, my Princely Traveller will meet their men, who stand on the per∣forming of their word: So in Germany, a Nation by right called the Honest, whose Gentry do make it their study to excel in the warlike profession, in all Arts and Sci∣ences, and noble Exercises; where every Gentleman hath his Stam-book, and his Study with Manuscripts concerning the a∣foresaid
Military Art, Fortifications, and all warlike Engins; besides very notable Col∣lections of Proverbs, & Properties belong∣ing to all noble Arts, and most noble parts of the Mathematicks and Metaphysicks. And as on the first, they will make known their good Memory, whereby they can relate on what ground Noble persons do quote their Arms, it will not be amiss to endeavour to be before-hand with them on that score. Sect. 3. ANd in the first place, to manifest that my Princely Traveller is of the old Count of Egmonds opinion, That there are no Arms more gaudy and inpertinent than those which many ignoble fantastick Me∣chanicks do hold forth. Secondly, That the true original of Arms was the Heroick Acts of a Nation, and Vi∣ctory fought by them; when (to perpe∣tuate the memory thereof) Trophes and Coats were made, representing the van∣quish'd
party; for if they (in the day of Battel) had covered their Heads with Lyons, Leopards, or Tygers skins, the Conqueror would Coat them as the most notorious marks to have vanquisht that party: What Coat of Arms Antraphel the first King (and Moses the first Duke) had, is not ascertained; some Heralds give to Joshua a Thunder-bolt, Gule; with wings Azur; and for Crest a Dragon Azur; to King David a Sling Azur, Field Argent, for Crest a Lions head, signifying his Vi∣ctory on the Philistins by the Sling; and that against a Lion by the Crest. Joseph's Brothers had no honorable nor civil cause to coat a bloody sprinckled Coat, which they shewed to their good old Father Jacob: Cain had less just honour∣able cause than they to coat Abel's Altar, and pleasing Sacrifice to God. The World, before its eighteen hundred years of age, knew of no pitch'd Battel fought. The Romans (before Marius) did only pitch a bundle of Hay on the top of a Lance, to signifie thereby their Husband-like profession; they put likewise a bundle
of green Leaves (as of a bunch of Turnips) on a like Standard; whereupon they fixt a Banner with the Letters, S. P. E. R. but they soon changed those homely signs into a commanding Hand; then to a Dragon, as a thing that could bite, and called the Standard-bearer Draconarius, which they seconded with inflamed Altars, and then with an Eagle, whereon Marius put a Crown; and doubtless their Rams heads in their Trophes (if they as Cromwel could have spoke) would have askt, and will you not Crown us also? since Leopards as well as Eagles have had that honour. In the Arms of Merove (the first of the three sources of the French Kings) was put a Lion Gule, holding in his paw an Impe∣rial Eagle, signifying that he had ceised on part of the Roman Empire; he Raigned ten years in Germany, and in Gaule, from whence the Romans could not force his re∣treat. The Fluer de Lis in the French King's Arms since Clovis and the Thoads, since Pharamond his predecessor (the first Chri∣stian French King) had their original not from Fabels, who supposed the Fluer de Lis
to be come down from Heaven (with the words, Ex omnibus floribus eligi mihi Lili∣um; presented by an Angel and an Hermite of Jurnal) but from Fields wherein great number of them did grow, and wherein Clovis fought a Victory, in remembrance whereof he did Coat them, as on like oc∣casion Pharamond did coat the Toades. And this may serve for a Princely Tra∣veller to discourse with the German Noble∣men, concerning the first cause of Coating of Arms; And as for the Military profes∣sion, full of craft, old as the Devil, who be∣gan it to the general destruction of Man∣kind: My Princely Traveller cannot do a∣miss to Discourse on the Principles follow∣ing concerning the same. Sect. 4. MArolois, Fritach, Errard, and de Ville, are four Authors, who have treated very pertinently (and Methodical∣ly) on the Military Art, and maintained how Military-men are to be Armed, what
spare Arms are requisite, what Ammuniti∣ons of War, what provisions of Victuals; what care a Governor ought to have, both in regular and irregular places, how faults are to be mended, how to judge, wherein the perfection and imperfection of all For∣tifications consists, to wit, That all the parts of a Forteress must be flanked: that is to say, seen side-wayes, which is mutually to be defended; and that defence is to be made by all such aims as may contribute to a de∣fence at a distance, as by Canon or Musket; whence ariseth the question, Whether that part which is to be defended, ought to be either within Canon or Musket shot of that part which defends it? The most common (and best opinions) are, That it ought to be within Musket reach; which argueth, that all Fortresses must be so constructed, as that all their parts must be defended by or∣dinary Muskets, which do carry one hun∣dred and twenty paces, which is of the meaner sort. Now as the said Defences may be form∣ed several wayes (as by half Bastions and the like) the question may be, Which of all them is the best way of Fortification? which
hath been generally resolved on as follow∣eth, That such Bastions as are composed of Flanks, Gorges, Faces, and Angles, have pro∣ved the best Fortresses, especially such as had a competent space left betwixt each Bastions, termed a Curtin, which is the determina∣tion of all true Mathematicians in their constructions; but they never (as yet) a∣greed how the quantities of the several parts were to be proportioned; and hence the several and various constructions of Fortresses do arise, and are become subject to the humours and conceits of the Artists, who (according to their several sancies) do augment or diminish the several proporti∣ons. But the indisputable perfection of Forti∣sication consists in this, viz. That the place be well flanked by such bodies as are separated from each other, only at a certain distance, so as the remotest part (which is to be desended) be no farther distant from that which is to de∣send it, than one hundred and fourscore paces; and the which must be divided into Courtines, Gorges, Flanks, and Faces, as above said. To hit (as to say) the Bird in the eye, to wit, the attaining to this perfection, the
Artist must make a diligent tryal of the di∣visions which may best answer his purpose; not departing from the unmoveable ground work, That such places are most de∣sencible as are best flanked, and to be flanked; which is the main scope in Fortifying, to wit, to flank and to be flanked. But as those things which have no settled determinati∣on (and on which discourses may be grounded) are very hard to be resolved; suppose therefore what extent you will, ei∣ther a great or a less may be said as good as the other; but a mean extent betwixt both, may prove the best, since a mean ex∣tent squares best with all the parts of a For∣tress, since when one intends to Fortifie the side of the Figure must be taken, for it can∣not be otherwise, that when one is to for∣tifie, he supposeth a subject to be fortified, and that to be a place, which must be sup∣posed, and that place to have some figure, which figure is the thing to be fortified. Now the method which some observe in Fortifying, by taking the distance from one point of the Bastion to the other, is ve∣ry absurd, since thereby the Artist seems to suppose what should have been sought for,
and seeketh what should have been sup∣posed; which contradicts reason it self. As for Example, One desires to fortifie an Exagone; and supposeth a line which is to be the distance from one point of a Bastion to the other; and that one may trace this line of a just and exact length, one must return backwards and have found out the line of defence, or the sides of the figure, which are the only measures requi∣site, and by the which all the others must be traced, so that one must either have shortned or enlarged the said line, being the distance of the Bastions points, until such time as one hath found the line of defence, or the side of the figure, without having all that time had any regard unto the di∣stance of the Musket shot. Or otherwise, One must first have traced either the sides of the figure, or the line of defence, and so from thence have inferred the distance from one Bastion to another, and by this (as is most certain) the con∣struction will be contrary to reason; for that one supposeth that which is sought for, and seeks that which is supposed; which is against all order and reason, serving only
to confound a man's intellect, and to make Idiots the more admire this Science, by gi∣ving credit to these seeming high imagina∣tions, because they understand them not, nor will they take the pains to dive into the Mistery, and search whether the diffi∣culties they meet with, proceed from the obscure Rules by some men set down, or from the thing it self; therefore it may be judiciously said, That all such Constructi∣ons are naught, and like unto so many by∣wayes, leading a man about, when at the very instant he may pitch on the thing it self, Which is to make a place that may be well flanked from all sides, and within Mus∣ket shot, it being the main thing in all For∣tresses. There is likewise another troublesome Construction depending on the Diametor of the Figure, whereon some Artists will give no other reason than that there must be a Line of Defence; Ergo, a Line of De∣fence ought first to have been traced, since all depends of it. Others suppose that the first to be begun is the faces of their Basti∣ons, and to compute the proportions there∣of with the remainder of the Line of De∣fence,
when as this would prove the worst of all, since it would follow that all the rest of the measures in the Fortress must be conformable to the faces of the Bastions, when as the line is the least considerable, and the last in all order of constructions, as being the weakest part, for that it al∣wayes suffers, because its continually flank∣ed, and the face of a Bastion is that which is alwayes attach'd. Thus much I thought fit to note on For∣tisication, as being one of the prime Sub∣jects whereon a Germane Cavallier will discourse: I have not over-pestered the same with its common rudiments, which properly do belong to a large Treaty. I shall only note, That the strongest and most seeming impregnable Fortification cannot resist want of Victuals, or any other thing (as the French say) Qui auroit pence à cela: an Ass loaden with Gold will enter any Fortress; as the Poets fain their Jupiter to have made his way to the strait∣est passage Danae had by a golden shoar; against which, the Dodecagone (with twelve Bastions with Cavalliers (were they as high as the Puenean Hills) must yield,
as the Endecagone with Horn-works, the Decagone, Enneagone, Octogone, Eptagone, Exagone, Pentagone, as the Tetragone: For as Henry the Fourth of France said, C'est le dernier Escu qui gaine la bataille; So Maurice, Prince of Orange, was used to say, C'est le dernier pani qui gaigne la place. The first in English, Its the last Crown that gets the battel: The second, Its the last Bread which gets the place. As for point of Honour, it can be maintained that there is no employment in the Warlike profession, wherein more cre∣dit can be had, than in a besieged place; since in Combats Fortune hath the greatest share; Parties are oft equal; the courses are not regular; as likewise the besieger hath a devided Command; divers on-sets are made by sundry Commanders; as it is presupposed that the besieger comes with Forces sufficient to take the place; and finaly, that all besieged places must be taken; and that he who takes it not, must suffer in his credit; that the one is directly contra∣ry to what was expected, and supposed to be a default.
The other is as a thing which was cer∣tain to be. But he who defends a place, is alone, and all what he doth is attributed directly unto him, be it well or ill done; the de∣fence depends of him and his carriage, and very little of Fortune. If he defends himself so well, as that he constrains an enemy to raise the Siege, is it not a wonder, and against the opinion of all men, even to hold out longer than was imagined he could do? And all this is attributed to the Person that Commanded in the place: Finally, it may wel be thought, that he who causeth a Siege to be raised, gets more honour than he who gains a Battel; for that by his long holding out, he destroyes an Army, saves his Men, the Place, and State. The Marshal Turenne said of the Prince de Conde, to have found him in all the parts of the Army; so may it be said of a place well defended, That the Governour must be met in all nooks, corners, and flanks there∣of. Now (my Princely Traveller) give me leave to note somewhat, which my Age,
my Travels, and the Christian profession more particularly requires: That if the defence of a place needs such great cares, those who may resolve to expose their per∣sons to the wild world, what care will there not be requisite for the defence of that which will as long as it is the commander of a dungeon (or fortin, called the body of man) be assaulted by legions who are never tired, who needs not to borrow nor buy Victuals, nor Ammunltions, who have millions of Petards which they can fix to the Gates of such a Fort, without running any hazard of Mines, nor Casa-mats, but who can also deceive the Sentinels eyes with illusions, who can steer their darts point-blank to the eyes, or the heart of a man? What honour will it not be to a Travel∣ler, to cause such Enemies to raise the siege and to retire, as it was the Prayer of King David, the man according unto the heart of the Lord of Hosts? If now the German Nobleman shall have heard a Princely Traveller speak to the pur∣pose on the Military Art, and be desirous to discourse on the Orders of Chevaldry, since
the beginning of them, he may make use of the following Recital and Annotations of all the most known Orders of Knight-hood which have been from the beginning, and of such as are in esse at this present time. Sect. 5. THe House of Momorancy in France, in∣stituted the Order of the Greyhound, which is still the Crest of their Arms; the collor of the Order are enterlaced Stags∣heads: the said House did likewise instituto the Order of the Cock, as a Simbol of He∣roick disposition. Charles Martell (the valiant) instituted the Order of the Gennet, after the Name of his wife Johanna: but the institution was in remembrance of a defeat which he had given to his Enmies in Spain, in a place where great numbers of Weesels were slain. The third Order was of the Star, or of the blessed Virgin; in remembrance of the Star which did conduct the three wise∣men:
This Order was instituted by John de Valois, a French King, in Anno 1351. the motto, Monstrant Regibus Astra viam. The fourth Order was of the Pork-espi, instituted by the Duke of Orleance; the motto was, Comminus & eminus: But the Duke being deceased, Lewis the twelfth, his Heir, put in stead of those words, Ultus avos Troia; the simbol, that as the Hedge-Hog defends it self against Dogs, so he would against all assaults, misfortunes, and the envy of his Enemies. The Order of the Thistle Flower. Lewis Duke of Bourbon (said the good) after his return from Africa, where he had vanquished the Heathens, did institute the Order of the Thistle-flower of the blessed Virgin, in remembrance of his Victory, and to manifest his powerful assistance to Charles Duke of Orleans, Phillip Earle of Ernux, and John Earle of Angolesme, against the Duke of Bourgondy, who had caused Lewis Duke of Orleans his Nephew to be murder∣ed; the coller of the Order were Lillies with leaves of Thistles, the badg a cross, the
motto Esperance: the symbol his firmnes against all disasters, and his hope of good fortune, the Thistle-flower being a Hiero∣glifick of Affliction, and the Lilly of Hope. The Order of the Ermine. Francis the first of that Name (Duke of Brittain in France) did institute the Order of the Ermine; the Collor was of golden cars of corn, enterlaced, the Badge an Ermin, the motto, A Ma Vie, the simbol of purity; for that this Beast suffers it self rather to be taken, than to re-enter its lodging, if de∣filed. The Order of the green Broom-flower. The Order of the green Broom-flower (symbol of Humility) as growing near the ground, was instituted by King Lewis, in Anno 1234. the motto was Exaltat Humi∣lis, the Badg a golden cros, hung to a collar of enterlaced Lillies and Broom-flowers; the Robes were of white Damask, with Violet Hats: the Solemnity was so great, that the shops of Paris were shut during eight dayes
time, the streets hung with Tapistry, and Tables set before every Inhabitants door, to Feast according unto old custome. The Order of the Ship, or Sea-shell. St Lewis, in his Voyage in Anno 1263, having obtained several victories against the Barbarians in the East, instituted the Order of the Ship, representing his going to Sea at Aiges-mortes. The Order of Dame Blanche. The famous General, John de Bouchi∣cauld, Marshal of France (by reason of the manifold Complaints made to Charles the 6th French King, by a number of Ladies and Gentlewomen who were abused in their honour) instituted the Order of Dame Blanche, it was a green Shield; the Knights of this Order were to defie all those that had done any offence to Ladies. The Order of the Lillie. Don Garcia, sixth King of Navar, insti∣tuted
the Order of the Knights of the Lilly, on the top were of the image of the blessed Virgin; they were to defend the true faith. The Order of the Templars. As the Italians, by subduing the City of Jerusalem, instituted the Order of the Hospitallers, so the French in the year 1118 (after the Conquest of the Holy Land) in∣stituted that of the Templars; they were to defend the Pilgrims (going to the Holy Land) against the Sarazens, to make vow of Chastity, to serve God in purity, and o∣bedience, to possess nothing in property: Baldovius the King suffered them for a time to live in his Palace near the Temple, and therefore were called Templars, who did live on the liberallity of the Patriark, and of that of the King, and others; they were settled by Pope Honorius; their habit was a white Mantle, with a red cross put there∣on by Pope Eugenius the third, with eight corners, as that of St John of Jerusalem, for a sign that they did offer their bloud for the defence of the Holy Land, and other places of Christendom: their Banners were
white and black, was called Bea seant, the white did signify their kindnesse to the Christians, the black, that they were terri∣ble to the unbelievers, they were redeemed by a girdle and a knife, they were intomb∣ed with their leggs crosse, they became as mighty as Kings, Pope Callistus the 2d did free them from their obedience to the Pa∣triarch of Hierusalem, and Alexander the 3d of their Tithes, they were destroyed in Anno 1310. at the intercession of Philip le Bell a French King, and by order of the Pope, being in all parts in one night all put to death, after their Order had continued neare two hundred years. The Order called that of Jesus Christ. Dyonysius King of Portugal did in the yeare 1318 Institute the Order called that of Jesus Christ, they were to fight against the Sarazens, their Coate was black, the Crosse halfe white, and halfe red, King Dio∣nisius did transfer unto them all the Reve∣new of the Templars, the chiefe of the Or∣der is the Abbot of Alcohalien in the Bi∣shop-rick of Lisbon, their duty was to fight
against the Moores: Pope Alexander the 6th suffered them to Marry. The Order of the Swan. Silunis Brabon (from whom the word Brabant is derived) did Institute the Order of the Swan, signifying Love and Concord. The Order of the Montese. James the 2d King of Arragon did Insti∣tute (by Pope John in Anno 1317 his ap∣probation) the Order of the Montese, and gave unto that Order the revenew which the Templars had in the Kingdome of Va∣lentia, it hath been united unto that of Ca∣latrava; they are cloathed in white with a red cross, they were to free the coasts of Valentia against the Mores, their banners did beare green and black crosses, but on their shield and habit red crosses. The Order of the Rue-branch. King Achaius after he had made an Al∣liance with France, instituted the Order of
the Rue-branch, and was in great esteeme in Scotland, the Collar was mixt with Rue branch, and Thistle, the Image of St Andrew fixt thereunto, the motto In defence, for as the Thistle cannot well be handled without it pricks, the Rue expells Venome, he meant thereby, that whosoever intended any mischiefe against his Kingdome, would not doe good to himselfe. The Order of the Elephant. The Father of Cristiernus the 4th King of Dannemare, gave for a Blason, a Collor mixt with Elephants, carrying Castles on their backs, whereunto was fixt the Image of the blessed Virgin, besides a little Medall with three nailes, representing those where∣with our Saviour was nailed to the Crosse, with the Armes of Denmarck sprung with teares of blood, or hearts of men; the Ety∣mology that the Elephant his nature a∣greeth most with that of Man, endued with military strength, and Cardinall Vertues, and hereby, men to be moved to endea∣vour the excelling in Vertues, so much the more, as Man surpasseth Bruits.
The Order of the Boare. The Emperour Ferdinandus the 2d did institute the Order of the Boare in the yeare 1213 in memory of St Ursus of the Legion of the Thebains, who was martyred at Soleur in Switzerland, the Collar was a chaine of Gold, whereunto was fastened a Boare d' ore smaille de sable, this Order did continue among the Switzers untill they freed themselves from the subjection to the House of Austria. The Order of S. Hubert. Jerart Duke of Juliers Burckgrave of Clarensberge did institute the Order of S. Hubert in the yeare 1444. on the day of S. Hubert, in memory of the Victory which he got on that day against Arnolt Duke of Geldre, brother to the Count of Egmond, the Collor of this Order, was made of Hunting hornes, whereunto was fixt the Image of St. Hubert kneeling before the I∣mage of Christ on the Crosse, represented between the two branches of the Staggs head.
The Order of the Society of Fooles. Adolph Duke of Clere did Institute the Order of the Society of Fooles, the Blazon or Symboll, was the figure of a Foole with a Coat and cap eschequeté d' argent & de gul. with bells, or stockings, or shooes sa∣ble, and in his hands a golden bason with fruits. The Knights of this Order did weare it imbrodered on their clothes, as a signe of a harmelesse dove one to another. The Order of S. James in Holland. In the yeare of our Lord 1290. the Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, keeping his Court at the Hague, gave the Order of S. James to twelve principall No∣ble men, the colour of this Order was com∣posed of five shells of gold, with the Image of S. James annexed thereunto. The Order of the Dove. John King of Castill in the yeare 1390. did institute the Order of the Dove, invi∣rond with the Sunne beams, to move his
Nobility to generous and magnanimous actions, he did also institute an Order called Reason: it were well all men were tyed to such an Order. The Order of the Christian Warr. In the yeare 1614. when the Emperour Mathias and Ferdinand King of Bohemia, were at Vienne, the Order of the Christian Warre was instituted, under the protection of the Blessed Virgin, the holy Archangel Michael and S. Francis: their duty was to fight against the Turks and other enemies of Christendome. The Order of the Drake. The Emperour Sigismundus famous for his zeale to the Christian Religion, for ma∣ny glorious victories against the Turks, as for two Councells kept at Constance, and at Bazill, did institute the Knights of the Drake with the head downewards, as a signe that by his means, all Schismes and Heresies were overcome.
The Order of the Tusin and Dicipline. Albrecht King of Hungary and Bohemia' did institute the Order of the Tusin, and as Duke of Austria that of Discipline, which was represented by a white Eagle which is the Blazon of Poland. The Order of Hungary. The Histories of Hungary do mention that a Knight-hood was instituted, where∣of the badge was a greene crosse on a Scar∣let cloake, their duty was to withstand the Turk against the invasion of Hungary. The Order of Sweden. Magnus the Fourth King of Sweden, Fa∣mous for his Warlike actions, did in the yeare 1334 institute the Order of Cheru∣bins and Seraphins, with foure Patriarchall crosses, in memory of the Siege of the Town Upsall the Metropolitan of that Kingdome, to the Collar was fixt the I∣mage of our Saviour Christ.
The Order of the Sword-bearer. There was also in Swede the Order of Sword-bearer, the Collar being composed of Swords, interlaced the points against each other and bloody. The Order of the Halfe Moone. René Duke of Anjou, and King of Sicily, Aragon, and Jerusalem, did iustitute the Order of the Croissant or Halfe Moone, in the Cathedrall Church of St Maurice at Angers, the Motto Los en Croissant, none could be preferred to this Order, but such as had given good testimony of their hone∣sty and Valour; all their exploits were known by certain small sticks, tyed together with a ring, hanging about their necks with a fine Ribbon: their means were com∣mon. The Order de la Banda. King Alphonse son to King Ferdinand did institute a new Order called de la Ban∣da which was a broad red Ribbon over their left shoulder, none could be of this
Order, but those who had served the King ten years against the Moores; they were ob∣liged to speak truth to the King, perform their promise, not to frequent ill bred-men, they were to have their Sword constantly on their side, and a Lance at their Gate, never to flatter nor jear, not to play at Cards nor Dice, never to complain of their Wounds, nor to vaunt of their warlike Deeds, to be decently accontered, on com∣mon dayes in fine cloth, at other times in silk, at Feastival dayes in gold lace; when∣soever they did meet Ladies they were to a-light, and to accompany them, to keep a good Table, to have alwayes company as Knights of the Order, to serve against none save the Turk, to recommend to the King the Son of the Deceased Knight and his Widow, for the providing of a Husband, and Dowry for his Daughter. The Order of the Sepulchre. The Order of the holy Sepulchre was in∣stituted in the time of Constantine the Great, for his Mother St. Helena being gone to Jerusalem to seek the Sepulchre, and ha∣ving
found the same by divine Inspiration, did build a Temple on the place to the re∣membrance of the Resurrection of our Lord; and recommended the keeping of the Sepulchre unto certain Gentlemen of her suit, who were obliged to make war a∣gainst the Infidels, to relieve Prisoners, to attend Divine Service, to read the office of the Cross, and to wear five red crosses in remembrance of the five wounds of our Lord. Cambden mentions in his Britannia, That the City Colchester where this Helena was born and brought up, as being the Daugh∣ter to King Coile to her remembrance, and the said Cross hath for Arms a Cross be∣tween four Crowns. The Order of St Lazarus in St. Maurice. The Knights of the Order of St. Lazarus were instituted by Amadeus Duke of Savoy, who having abandoned the world, accom∣panied by ten Cavaliers of eminent Families retired into a Cloyster at Kipaille to live there as an Hermite, cloathed himself in a Coat of Ash-colour, girded with a girdle
of Gold, wearing over the same a Cloak of the same colour, on the which was a gold imbroydered Cross. They were bound to receive in their Hospital those Christians who did repair to the Wars of the Holy Land; they did at first wear a green Cross, with a whit Bor∣der, and was confirmed by several Popes, and was afterwards united to that of St. Maurice, the Duke of Savoy became the chief thereof. The Order of St. John Daccon, St. Thomas, St. Blaise, St. Marie, and Repentance. The institution of the Order of St. John d'Acon, and of St. Thomas in Palestina, is uncertain; they did wear a red Cross, and held to the Order of St. Augustin. The Order of St. Catharine. The Pilgrims of Jerusalem, going to the Cloyster of St. Catharine on Mount Sinay (where remains the Body of this Virgin) are Knights, as those of the Holy Sepulchre, wear like Cloathes: on the left-side of their
Cloak is (next to the Cross of Jerusalem) the sign of St. Catharine, being a Wheel, with six spikes: they are Knighted by the Guardian of the Fryers of that Cloyster behind the High Altar, on her Sepulchre, when Mass is said, and they have received the Holy Sacrament. The Order of the Montoy in Truxillo. The Order of the Knights of Montoy in Syria, had the Name from a Hill near Jeru∣salem, in the year 1180, they afforded great assistance to the Christians in the con∣quest of the Holy Land; their Cloak is red with a white Star with points, they held the Order from the Augustines; it was Con∣firmed by Pope Alexander the 3d, being driven out of Syria, they came into Europe, and especially into Castile, where they changed their Names into that of Truxillo, according unto the Town where they then settled themselves: King Alphonzo gave them very great Revenues.
The Order of Sword Bearer, or the Sword of Livonien. The Prince of Livonia, did in the yeare 1205 by approbation of Pope Innocentius the 3d, institute the order of Militia or Ensiferorum, in imitation of the Teutonique Order: the Blazon was, two red swords in the forme of a Crosse of S. Andrew, Im∣broydered on their Mantle, their duty was to defend the Christians against the Hea∣thens, to extirpate all Idolatry, and to propagate the true service of God, but this Order is incorporated, or become common with the Teutoniques, it did continue for the space of 357 years. The Order of Gens d'armes. There was also an Order called that of Gens d'Armes confirmed by Pope Innocen∣tius, and founded by S. Dominick, for the extirpation of the Albigeois, and the con∣version of those of Toulose and Lombardy, the Knights were of both married and un∣married persons, and for that reason called Brothers, and their Wives Sisters.
The Order of S. Mary Glorious. The beginning of this Order called St. Marie Glorious, was about the yeare 1233. in the time of Gregory the 9th, and was af∣terwards confirmed by Pope Urbanus the 4th, the Knights of this Order did live ac∣cording unto Orders made by Eminent Persons, they were to procure Peace be∣tween men in discord, to defend Widdows and Orphans, to procure Love and Union among all People, and were by some called Fratres Gaudentes, they did weare a white habit with a gray mantle, whereon a pur∣ple crosse in a silver field, with two starres on the top thereof. The Order of Mont-Carmell. The Order of the Knights of our Lady of Mont-Carmell, is that of St Lazars in France, which was first joyned to that of St John, but afterwards by the earnest so∣licitation of Philip de Niestain, in the year 1607, in the time of King Henry the 4th by Pope Paule the 4th, and accorded to be called in France, the Knights of our Lady
of Montcarmell: the Blazon was a violet cross, with the Image of our Lady, and it was Imbroydered on the Cloak. The Order of Alcantara. Gomesius Ferdinandus, in the time of Ferdinand King of Leon and Galicia about the yeare 1176, did institute the Order of Alcantara, the Knights were to resist the pride of the Moores, Alphouse the 8th, pla∣ced them on the River Tagus, called Alcan∣tara. Pope Benedict gave them liberty to weare a green crosse in the shape of a Lilly. The Order of the Avesiens. Next to the Order of Alcantara, was that of the Avesiens in Portugall, they were at first called of Ebora, by the name of the Towne wherein they did live; they did re∣ceive their Title from their great Master Ferdinando Monteyro, for the extirpation of the Moores; their second great Master was Ferdinando de Yamus, having gained the Castell Avys, where he transplanted them nearer the Enemies.
The Order of St George: Rodolphus of Habsburch the first Empe∣rour of the House of Austria did institute the Order of St George of Carinthia, to re∣sist the invasion of the Turks, and gave them a commodious Towne called Carin∣thia for their habitation, and to their great Master the Title of Prince, their Blazon was the red crosse of S. George, some say that Pope Alexander the 6th, and the Emperour Maximilian did institute the Order, and that their Blazon was a golden crosse, with a Crowne fixt to a golden ring. The Order of the Holy Blood. The Order of the Holy Blood hath been instituted at Mantua by Vincent Gonzago the fourth Duke of Mantua, and the second of Monferat, in Anno 1608, the Order was instituted for the defence of the Christian Faith: and because those of the Cathedrall Church of St Andrew in Mantua doe pre∣tend to have a piece of the sponge; of our Lord three drops of blood, and to have them of St Longin a Centurion and Martyr.
The Collar was of golden Ovals made fast with little golden rings, annext to gold∣smiths crusets set on flames of fire, the words, Domine probasti me. The symbol, that they must stand firme in adversity, Live in Friendship and Unity, under the Badge was represented two An∣gels, with an ovall relique of Christal in the which the three drops of blood are repre∣sented, about it the words, Nihil hoc tristo recepto. The Order was confirmed by Paul the 5th, the Knights twenty in num∣ber. The Order of St Mariae Redemptionis Cap∣tivorum, or the Mercede of S. Mariae de misericordia. The King of Aragon was the institutor of this Order in Anno 1223. it was at Bar∣celona, to resist the Moores, and the Knight to put himselfe as an Hostage, for any Christian that had not means to pay his Ransome, their habit was a white mantell with the Armes of Aragon, and Catalogue, the Order was confirmed by Gregory the Nnth.
The Order of the Lords of S. John Baptist of Jerusalem called Hospitallers, as also Johannists. Of the most eminent of all the Orders of Knighthood, that of S. John of Jerusalem is none of the least, it began Anno 1104, by one Gerardus of the Malphitannick mer∣chants, who for the recovery of Hierusa∣lem, did obtain leave from the King of that Land, to make Hospitalls about the Holy Sepulchre, to receive the Pilgrims, and the Sick; which being granted unto them, did vow their Means and Families to the H. John Baptist; they were bound to receive all those that went to visit the Holy Land, to convay and defend them against those of Arabie, and the unbelievers: their Cloak was black, with a white crosse of eight corners as a signe of their purity, and the eight Godlinesses unto which they aspire, they call their Superiors Magistros Militiae, they are of the Order of S. Augustine, are bound to fight in person against the Infi∣dels, those who through Age are unfit for Warre, are sent to governe their Lands and Families, being called Commanders. They
came into Europe after Palestina was lost took Rhodes by force, and kept it 214 years, thence were placed at Malta, which they since that time have valiantly defended; none can be admitted to this Order, ex∣cept Nobly borne; not of Mahometan, Moores' nor Jewish race, nor Illegitimate, nor under the years of eighteen: except six, which is the prerogative of the Great Ma∣ster. The Teutonike Order, or bearing Cross. As concerniug this Order, the Germans would not be lesse in their Institution, then the Italians, Spanish or French, it was In∣stituted in the year 1191, and was called the Teutonick Knights of the blessed Vir∣gin, porte-Croix, they beare that name from the Church and Hospitall which hath been built in honour of her, they are called Teutonicke, because none but Germans were to be admitted into the same, they weare a Rosarie about their crosse, therefore are called Marianes, or Porte-Croix, their origi∣nall is ascribed to certain Citizens of Breme, and Lubec, in the time of Henry the 5th, in
the yeare 1191, who instituted Hospitals to receive Pilgrims bound for Hierusalem, they were confirmed by Pope Celestin the 3d, who did order them to weare a white Mantell, with a white shield, and black crosse, they professe the Orders of S. Au∣gustine, they were to fight against all unbe∣lievers, they are to read between 24 houres 200 Paternosters, Ave Maria and Creede: they are under the command of a head who they call Magistrum, or Summum Ma∣gistrum, the first was Henricus à Walpot: At their reception the Novices did make this promise, Wir tragen euch wasser und brode zuc, und desz genuch, daer ein ge∣ringe kleydung; euwer leben lang: wirt es besser so habt irs auch, wytter sind wir euch nicht schuldich. Being driven away they retired to Ptolomaida, and being by the Sarazens likewise driven away they came into Germany, and in the year 1227 about the 8th yeare of Frederick the 2d, Pope Gregory the 9th, with consent of the Empe∣rour, they were called in Pruisse by Coen∣rade Duke of Mansovien to attacke it, which they so valorously performed, as that they conquered all Pruissia, and Livonia, and re∣duced
the Inhabitants to the Christian faith, and therefore are called Prussions al∣so; but were assisted by the Militia Christi, or Ensiferorum, to conquest Livonia. The Order of St. Salvator. Alphonzo, King of Spain, being set on the extirpation of the Moors out of Ara∣gon and Saragossa, did (in Anno 1118) institute the Order of St. Salvator in the Town of Mont Real in Aragon, and did so encourage them, as that in Anno 1120, they made the Moores to retire, and quit the Country. The Order of St. James in Spain. Petrus Ferdinandus (in Anno 1170) was the first instituter of the Order of St. James, called also of Compostella, by reason the Chanons of St. Elou, near Compostella, did contribute to the establishment of this Or∣der, for the maintaining of the Christian cause; the badg is a purple Cross in the form of a Hilt, Qnae militaris spathae Capu∣lum exprimit.
The Order of Calatrava: The Order of Calatrava begun in the year 1121, by Alphonse the Saint; the ori∣ginal of the Name of Calatrava proceeds from the Moores, being set before the place in the Region of Toledo, which the Tem∣plars did refuse to defend; which 1000 Monks (of the Order of Cisteaux) under∣took, and made the Moores retire: Their Mantle is white with a red cross, Ex Ordi∣natione Benedicti the 13th who was Pope in Spain, they are confirmed by Pope A∣lexander the 3d. They were permitted to Marry once. The Order of Scama. The Order of Scama in Spain was insti∣tuted by John the 2d King of Castil, but is exstinguished. The Order of la Calra. In immitation of the Knights de la Ban∣da, the Venetians did institute the Order of
the Knights of la Calra; there could be none of this Order but persons of Noble bloud: the collar is of gold, the badg the image of St. Mark; the motto, Pax tibi Marce. The Order of the Anunciate. The Duke of Savoy is the chief of the Order of the Anunciate; they are four∣teen Knights, Armadeus the Fourth, called the Great, was the instituter of the Order; the collar is of gold with scutchions and knots of Love knotted together with the words Amadei magni, the badge the image of the blessed Virgin, being saluted by the Angel. The Order of St. Andrew. King Hnngus of Scotland, having over∣come Atheltan King of England, did in∣stitute the Order of St. Andrew, or the Thistle; the collar was of knots with Thistle-flowers, with the words, Nemo me mpune lacessit: alluding unto the Thistle; the badg, St. Andrew with his Cross, which the King said he saw in the Firmament be∣fore the Battel; and therefore in memory
of that Victory, King Hungus made it an Order. The Order of the Golden Fleece. Philip (Duke of Burgundy) called the good, instituted the Order of the Golden Fleece; his intent being to animate the Nobels to the Warr against the Infidels; the badge did seem to presage that Philippus bo∣nus (his successor) should possess a golden World in America; the number of the Knights was in Charles the 5th his time in∣creased to 52. the collor is of golden Tinder steeles, mixt with cross Laurell branches giving fire; the badge a golden Fleece; the day of Meeting is that of St. Andrew: the Feast lasts three days; the first day they are clothed in scarlet Gowns with Mantles, and wooll Chaprons, in remem∣brance that Salvation came by spilling of bloud; the second black for the deceased Knights of that Order; and the third white, in honour of the blessed Virgin. The Order of Cyprus. The House of Lusignan, which hath gi∣ven
many Kings and Princes unto Christen∣dom, instituted the Order of Cyprus, the blazon was a border or collar of gold, mixt with Letters SS, with a Sword be∣neath, the Blade of silver, and the Hilt of gold, the words, Pour loyaute maintenir; the letter S signified Silence; others say that the letter R was joyned to the S, and the meaning Securitas Regni. The Order of St. Michael. Lewis the 11th French King instituted in Anno 1469. the Order of St. Michael, the collar of golden shells, the motto, Immensi Tremor Oceani; to which is fixed the figure of the Archangel, by the Example of his Father, who had the said figure in his Ban∣ners in remembrance of a vision, when he did see the said Angel on a Bridge at Or∣leans, during the siege of the English. The Order of the Burgundy Cross. The Emperour Charles the 5th did insti∣tute the Order of the Burgundy Cross on the day of St. Magdalene, Anno 1535, in
Tunis, when he made there his victorious entry, and did restore Muleasses on his Throne of Tunis which the Pyrat Barba∣rossa had taken from him. The Knights did wear a Mantle with two knotty staves in Santori, in memory of St. Andrew, patron of that House, where∣unto was joyned a Tinder-steel with this inscription, Barbarici. The Order of the Holy Ghost. Henry the third French King, and of Poland, did institute the Order of the Holy Ghost, in Anno 1579; the Knights of the Order wear a black Velvet Robe with Fleur de Lis, and flames all over, imbroider∣ed with gold and silver, with a collar of gold intermixt with Lillies and flames. The Order of the Round Table. Arthur King of England, did in Anno 516, institute the Order of the Round Table, having driven away the Saxons, and several other Nations; and this in recom∣pence of those that had behaved themselves
manfully; he created 24 Knights called of the Round Table, and to balance his favours by equal ranks, did ordain a Round Table, whereat these Knights did sit on Feast∣dayes, removing thereby all jealousie of precedency, and to keep them together in amity. The Order of the Baronets. King James in the Ninth year of his Raign, did institute the Order of Baronets, when he brought the Kingdom of Ireland wholly under his obedience, and driven the Rebels out of the Province of Ulster; the Order is Hereditary on the Eldest son being 21 years of age: the blazon is the Arms of Ulster, a bloudy Hand in a silver Field. The Order of Bannerets. King Edward the 3d instituted Knight-Bannerets; The Order was Ceremonial as followeth. The Knights of the first Rank were brought before the King between two Knights, bearing his Pennon or Banner, and then the Herauld did (in the presence of all
the Nobles and Officers of the Army) be∣seech the King (considering the Merits, Birth, Vertue, and Means of the Knight) to cause the ends of the Pennon to be cut off, and so to advance the Knight to the dignity of Banneret. The Example of the cutting off the end of the Pennon, and the unfolding of the Banner, is mentioned in Froisart, on the subject of John Chandoys, who by Prince Edward (sirnamed the black prince) in the presence of Don Pedro, King of Castill, before the Battell of Navaret, did receive this honour, whose Banner the Prince did unfold. None under a Knight was admitted to this Order of Banneret; the Dignity did require the means of 25 Gentlemen at the least. The Dignity of Banneret required ac∣cording unto the words, Pour faire un Che∣vallier Banneret, c'est quand il a longuement servy les guerres & qui il à assez de ter∣res & revenus tant qui il peut Servi & Souldoyer cinquante gentils homes pour ac∣compagner la Banniere, lors il peut lici∣tenant lever la dite Banniere & non autre∣ment,
car nul aulne homme ne peut porter Baniere en Bataille s'il n'a 50 homes prests pour Batailler (see Gesta Romanorum) s'il n'a cinquante homes d'armes et les Archers, et les Arbaletiers quy y apartienent. So that these persons considered the old affinity of Bannerets with Barons, the suite of Gentlemen, the supporting of their shields, and to beare it in a square Banner, which may not be carried by any of any dignity, save by such as are related to the Warres and an officer, besides Lord Barons and such as are more then Barons. The Order of the Garter. King Edward the 3d in the yeare 1350. did institute the Order of the Garter, to eternize his Victory of his great Conquest against John King of France, James King of Scotland, whom he had Prisoners both at one time, having also chased Henry King of Castill the Bastard, and restored Don Pe∣dro; others say that King Edward did insti∣tute this Order, to defend the honour of Anna Countess of Salisbury, a very faire Lady which the King did Love, whose
blew Garter, the King had taken up as it was fallen dancing, and was worne by the King on his left leg, whereat the Queene being offended, and as some of the Nobles reported the same to the King, he answe∣red Laughing Hony soit qui maly pense, and that he would make that Garter, an ho∣nour to all those that should weare it, and so not long after, made it an Order, and gave the same to his Nobles. The Garter being imbroydered with Gold, and costly stones, made fast with a loope to be worn at the left leg under the knee, signifying love and unity, the Mantle is Crimson Velvet, and a purple Mantle lined with white, and the red crosse of St George invironed with a Garter in a Scutcheon, black velvet Bon∣nets with white Feathers; about their shoul∣ders a Collar of Gold, being a Garter with white and red Roses betweene, whereunto is the Figure of St George, and the Dragon underneath; the number of the Knights are 26, whereof the King is to be head; their feast is kept yearly on St George's day, they are Installed at Windsor, they are bound to keepe 50 Gentlemen to serve the King up∣on all occasions; they must be in their sute
the day of the Feast, the Order hath its Prelate, Chancellor, Guster, Steward, and Roy d' Armes called Garter. The Order of the Bath. The Knights of the Bath, consists pro∣perly to cover the Kings Table, on the day of Coronation, and to ride before the King, the Blazon of the Order, is three Crownes with these words, Tria in unum: with the Ceremonies of their installment. I shall not trouble my Princely Travel∣ler, who by the digression of these severall Orders, will have sufficient matter to en∣tertaine the German from Adell. And having thus treated of the two maine points, very much stood upon by the High German Nobility, a Princely Traveller ha∣ving discoursed thereon, may (if he please) speake of Arts and sciences, and begin with Geometry, without which, no man can be a good Astronomer, nor understand Per∣spective, Cosmography, Architecture, For∣tifications, and Navigation, as without it Euclides, Archimedes, Apollonius, Pergens, Diophantus, Ptolomeus, and diverse others
cannot be understood, and their knowledge attained unto; as that of distances, course, and strange intricate miraculous motions of the resplendent Heavenly Globes, the Sun, Moon, Planets, and fixed starres, nor can it otherwise be received for a possibility, that Archimedes with a glasse, framed by revolution of a parabolicall section, did fire the Roman Navy in the Sea coming to Syracusa; nor could the fabrick of Noahs Arke be understood, without some mean skill in Geometry. The Sciagraphy of the Temple set out by Ezechiel, nor sundry words both in the New and Old Testa∣ment, whose proper signification is meer∣ly Geometricall, nor made good the saying of Plato, that God doth alwaies work by Geometry, that is (as the Wise man doth interpret it, Sap. Xl. v, 21.) Omnia in men∣surà & numero & pondere, disponere, dispose all things by measure, and number, and weight. By Geometry, a Generall of an Army, can best order a fit stand for the same, conduct Mines under the Earth, dis∣charge Canon, discover by Sea the distance of shipps, the exact dividing of Grounds after Inundations, which take away the
bounds and markes of Lands. It teacheth the Architect, quantities, and proportions of all parcells appertaining to any kind of Buildings, and for the exact measuring of sundry solid, regular, or irregular. In a word, it teacheth to make a scale to the whole world, and all that therein is, of Bo∣dies, Surfaces, Lines, and whatsoever else is to be measured, as Arithmetick (which is the first of the foure parts of Mathema∣ticks) doth teach the proceeding, the pro∣perty, and the practick of numbers, resolves all kind of questions concerning trade, and the most noble parts of the Mathematicks: so Cosmography (wherein the German delights) doth further that of the whole Universe, composed of Heaven and Earth, Celestiall and Elementary regions. Geography (which doth compre∣hend the Chorographie, the Topographie, and the Hydrographie; by the first to com∣prehend parts of the Earth, or Kingdoms; by the second a City, or some other place, with the adjacent Neighbourhood; by the third, the particular description of the water and its part. By Perspective is given true proportion
in distances, and shortning of Objects, and of the shadows, which the Sun (by shining on a body) doth cause on the opposite part, for that the lines and rules of Perspe∣ctive, do proceed from equall distances, and tend to a fixt poynt. The light and shadows which the beams of the Sun, do give to a body, having their infallible measures, because such bodies, on which the Sun beams extend themselves, have a proportion, which doth not change by the beams of the light, neither by the faculties of our sight, so that the light which spreads it selfe on those bodies, gives a form to the shadow, according to the bignesse, the height, and forme thereof: and as to the Art of excellent expressive, drawing all dimensions; it consists not only in forme, but in the representing of quick motions, proceeding from passions, as Anger, Feare, Sorrow and Joy, besides the true colour∣ing, which all Painters did not attaine un∣to, though Leonardo de Vinci, Andrea del Sarto, Perin del Vago, Gracious Farmentio, and even Raphael d' Urbin, were of the first classs, yet did Coregio Titian, Jorgeon, Pour∣denon, Paulo Veronese, and even the rough
Tintoret colour more like flesh and blood, then the above named. Imagerie (called Sculptura) is highly minded by the Ger∣mans, their Albert Durer having made good progresse therein, both in Ivory and hard wood, but he did not observe the custome of the Grecians, who did make choyce of the most compleat parts, and united them into one body. Architecture followeth the Carver, his prime parts are Solidity, Conveniency, and Ornament, for what serves strength if not of use? and how can Solidity and conve∣niency please, without a gracious aspect: of such buildings a Princely Traveller will see in some parts of Germany, France, Italy, and Spaine; in Germany, the admirable structure of the Duke of Bavaria at Mune∣ken; in France (for a Kings pallace) the long begun Louure, with its extent to the Tuilleries; the Pallace of Orleans, its Gar∣den, and Waterworks, with diverse great Pallaces of Cardinalls, and of the Nobility. The French Kings Pallaces at St Germain, and Fountain Bleau; for Waterworks, and rare gardens (of all sorts) at Chaliot, St Clou, Ruel, Liancour, the Seate of the Presi∣dent
Belieure, that of the President Mayson, and Richelieu, in Italy every where, in e∣very Citty and Towne, and every street a∣dorned with extraordinary great Statues; the Country set with Palaces, as if all cast into one mould, like to those of Caprarola, Frescati, and the like: Churches so sump∣tuous, as if all built by Solomons directions, Chappells in the Churches, enriched with precious stones, whereof that at Florence is most notable; and so are the sundry rari∣ties in the Arcenall of that Duke, not infe∣riour to those rich Imperiall Cabinets, in Germany, France, Italy, and Spaine. So of rare Horses, which the Germans ride well, the French teach well, and sets out well the Napolitan Cavallier, who affects to have his great Saddle Horse taught more by gen∣tlenesse then by spurr, or whip. So will a Princely Traveller meet with rare Orators in every Art, Science, and Noble exercise, Men that speake words preserved in salt, and with grace; Men that really can (not in shew as Seneca did) despise the means of For∣tune, which is a true operation of a well placed soule, the greatnesse whereof, raiseth man above all things; Men that teach to
lovers of Knowledge the most precious use of all Arts and Sciences, by Arithmetick to number their dayes, to apply their hearts un∣to wisdome; by Geometry to be just in the reparations of each mans Meum & Tuum: by Cosmography to move the soule of man the more towards the seat of Angels, and not to fix his mind on Imaginary Elysian fields, as those between Naples and Puteoli, where my Princely Traveller shall not be confind by Geography to find the extent of subalterne things, but by the many lines which tend to a point in Perspective, be led to leave all Circumvolutions (& far sought by wayes) to find in the bosome of Abra∣ham a setled repose, so is the best Military Art a leader to the Fortifying of the Mind of Man against all onsetts, and more honour to be had in such a defence then in an at∣tache. If now my Princely Traveller be dispo∣sed to Steer towards France, where the Nation makes a singular esteeme of men of Wit, Men that can discourse on all things, who are taken with those who speak well of their Kings, it will be easy for a reason∣able good memory, to lodge and keep in
readines the observations following, con∣cerning the Lines, Coates, and quartering of Armes of French Kings. SECT. VII. SINCE the time the Empire of the French hath been Establisht, that Crown hath been in three Lines: the First that of the Meroviens, of King Merove, who suc∣ceeded collaterally King Clodion, Son to Pharamond: The second was that of the Charliens, so called from Charles Martell: the Third of Hugh Capet. Chiflesius pretends that both the Houses of France and Spaine, are come from one source, Viz. from Ersewaldus Maire of the Palais, and of King d'Agobert, the first Prince of the said House, that out of those two Houses, are Issued the Counts of Al∣corf, the Capets, and the Counts of Habs∣bourgh, and from this last the Emperours of Austria. Bucelinus 2 volum. As for Pharamond, some pretend him the Author of the Salicke Law, because he de∣ceased
in the yeare 426, which was 350 years before the time that the French did find themselves in possession on the other side of the River Sala, which was in Anno 805; but as there are no proofs against the opinion concerning the names of the Kings since the time of Francion (second Son to Hector) untill Pharamond, it may not be thought unfit to be of the Opinion of the most curious observators of the Royall de∣scents of the French, that since the establish∣ment of that Empire, it hath been in those three Lines as aforesaid; so the Line of Hugh Capet, hath Reigned above six hun∣dred and 20 years. The well affected to the Illustrious descent of the French say, that the Francks having conquered the Gaules, called the Country France, and made a Monarchie of it, though it was sometimes divided among Sons of Kings, the Eldest whereof, was as the Master and Soveraigne to the others: their Armes have been so different as that untill they were quartered with Fleur de Lis, they have been very uncertain. The first of the Francks are said to come from Francion as before said, second Son
to Hector, though the Francks of Greece make no mention of it. The Francks built a Towne called Si∣cambe, the name of an Aunt to Francion. After the destruction of Troy, a fabulous Heroe (followed by a great People) called part thereof France, and the other Sicam∣bre, his Armes were a Lion gul. in a chacie field Or. The Francks having been worsted by the Slytes, retired to the Rhyne, stopping for a while at the mouth of the Danow, where under the Emperour Valentinian (440 years after our Saviour Christ) Marcomir (their King) builded severall Townes; he had a Vision, the shape was the under part of a Man, the upper thereof, that of a Crowned Eagle: the right shoulder an Ea∣gle, the left a Toade, it told him all his fate, and taught him his course, which succee∣ded accordingly, and therefore was moved to Coate his Armes with the apparition. Anseno (son to Marcomir) did Coate the Dragon-Lyon of Troy, and three Crownes in his Banner. Helenus the 4th, did Coat a Pallas Argent, and a Dragon in his Stan∣dard, on his Crest a Serpent with an Issant
gul: this Helenns was son to Diocles. Those who note the Counts of Habsbourg to descend their Armes from the French Coate, to witt, those of Priam a Lyon Or. Field sable. Diocles (Nephew to Priam) Lion argent Field sinoble. Helenus, Lion azur, field or. Clodomir (Nephew to He∣lenus) Lion gul, Field argent. Nicanor (son to Clodomir) Field sinoble, Lion or. Mar∣comir Lion or, Field uncertain. Clodius (kill'd by the Romans) Lion sable, Field or. Clodomir (Nephew to Clodius, son of An∣tenor) Lion sinoble, Field argent. Maro∣dac Lion argent, Field sable. Cassander Lion or, Field gul. Francius the 2d Ne∣phew to Cassander, Lion argent, Field a∣zur. Clodius the 2d Lion argent, Field gul. Richimus Lion argent, Field sinoble. He∣rimerus Lion sinoble, Field or. Marcomir Lion or, Field uncertain. Anthenor the 4th Lion sable, Field argent. Odemar Li∣on azur, Field argent. Of all these Coates, Historians are to seek in their relations, they say that Baranus (the 5th King of the Sicambres, was the first that put three Toads Or in his Armes, and of sable, in a Field argent: he did governe in France 284
years before the birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ; these Toads were attributed to the morish continent wherein the Francks did live, and that Marcomir (King of the Wal∣loons) did Coate them quartered with a Lyon rampant gul, Field Or, the Toads sa∣ble. The 16th King (after the Transmigrati∣on) was Anthiacus, who having protected the Gaules against Julius Caesar, and stood out against him, did Coate a Trophee with this motto, In spite of Caesar, and in his Banner a Croissant Argent Field gul. His successor was Francus the 2d, who (as the Germans say) gave that name of Franc, and for a signe of Liberty, did coate an unbridled Horse argent, Field gul; and in his Banner foure Croissants argent, to sig∣nify the encrease of the Empire of the French. Marcomir the 4th married with Atyldae of Bretaini daughter to Marius. Farabert chased away the Romans from Germany, and did coate a Lyon gul, hol∣ding a black Eagle in his paws, which like∣wise denotes (as beforesaid) the originall of Coats of Armes on the spoyles of the victo∣rious.
Sunno succeeded him whose Victories have been written by the Philosopher Hilde∣gate. Then Hildebert, who lost the conquest of Gaule, and to his successors the Em∣pire. Then Baterius, who did ransack part of Italy, and his Sonne past through Gaule, destroyed Tarascone in Spaine. Clodius was very often defeated by the Romans. Gualterus dyed Anno 305. Dagobert was the last who called himselfe King of the Francks, and since his decease there were but Dukes untill Pharamond, who was one of the Dukes. Clodion (which Reigned so short a time as that he was scarce in the lift of Kings) was slaine by the Romans. Clodomir gave to his brother halfe of the Empire of the Francks, and kept the other; this younger brother of the three was Ge∣nebaldus, who was Duke of Franconie. Dagobert his sonne (who could not suc∣cour his Uncle) defeated by the Romans, to be revenged past the Rhyne, coted a ship which Paris hath yet on its Seale.
Marcomir (said the Great Duke of the Francks) did conquer many Territories in Gaule, did Coate a Lyon gule, holding an Eagle and a Toade in his paws, which de∣notes, that the Toade was the French Armes and not of the Francks. Pharamond (as in the first digression) did Coate the three Toades. Clodian his son, did not Coat them but three Crownes. Merovee seased on the Crowne, made peace with Cetius chiefe of the Romans, defeated Antila King of the Hunns, and called the Neighbourhood of Paris France: which gave the name of all that Empire: and (as in the first digression) his successors took the name of Meroviens, the line where∣of hath continued untill Pepin. Clovis (son to Chilperic) being Christe∣ned, was that Clovis who did Coate the Flower de Lis, which were at first in great number, but were reduced to three, by Charles the 6th, the 54th French King, and so did all the Princes of the Blood: It was by perswasion of his Heraold at Armes, who said, Qui plus a moins porte, and these Armes have been continued by the French
Kings untill this present time in the Line of Boucley. The Kingdome of France, (as the French will have it) falls not to the distaf [Lilia non nent] though Julius Caesar said of them, that though in their first heat, they seem to be more then Men, but afterwards to be lesse then woman. They are the most courteous of all Nations, but more unconstant then any, therefore one to whom a notable person of them was high∣ly extold for setlednesse, being said to have well an Ounce of Lead in his head, reply∣ed, the Man ought to be much valued, for that all France had not one pound. The French do generally love their King: they are accustomed to a liberty, which takes not with all Nations, they are much addicted to change, which seems to be their life and element: but as they are prompt to commit faults, they are as quick to repaire them: they love and esteem strangers, hear their profers with attention; they are libe∣rall in bestowing great charges of trust on them, though different of Religion, for example, the Duke de la Force, Marshall de Chastillon, Torras, Turien, Gassion, Ransoro, Balthazar, and many others I shall not
overburden this with the list of the great and mighty Cities, whereof there are 53 as Metropolitans; their nine Parliament Citties in respective shires; where they are Courts of Justice. Neither shall I spend time with such minutes, as mentioned in o∣ther copious recitalls, to wit, the difference between the proceeding of Spanish and French in their dressing of themselves, which signify nothing to a Traveller, though I shall note for the observation of all Travellers, certain precise Civilities which the well bred French will observe, and doe look for from all Travellers. First they confine salutations to Ladies within the bounds of arrivall and depar∣ture, the Familiarity of Kisses being thought an uncivill boldnesse at any other time, and were become troublesome, especially from snottinose, young striplings who had lear∣ned no other quality. It is not permitted to any Gentleman who visits a Lady, to lay downe Cloake or Hat, except in such pla∣ces that can endure Doublet and Breeches to keep the Cloake and Hat company. A Gentleman who hath the honour to Usher a Princesse, must not yeeld her hand to a∣ny
man, except to a Prince, or a Marshall of France. Never refuse but take as a particular Ho∣nour, the accepting to present to a Prince or Princesse the cup or glasse, which by that Prince or Princesse domestick servant may be brought. Its not the custome when a Prince doth Sneese, to say as to other persons (and the old civility was) Dieu vous ayde, God help you, but only to make a Low reverence. Though a French Prince should to a stander by at his Table, present something which may be eaten, yet must he not tast thereof, except the Prince commands it, and it is the like with any Fruit presented between Meales. If a Gentleman be admitted to a Prince his Table, he is not to drinke before the Prince had his Glasse. No Broth is to be taken out of a Dish, but first laid on the trencher. No yolk of Eggs sipped out of the shell, but taken out with a spoone. Nor any blowing of hot Broth in a spoon, which little nicities, must be observed by any man
that will passe for a Gentleman among the Nobility of France: and are here recited only in reference, and for the observation of those who have the honour to accom∣pany a Prince in his Travell. A Princely Traveller curious to know all the ancient and Moderne affairs of France, will do well to visit the Library of Mons du Puy, who hath a collection of above a hundred Vo∣lumes of Manuscripts; as also visit the Li∣brary of the Count de Brienne, for he hath 120 Volumes of Manuscripts, containing the Treaties and Alliances made with For∣raigne Princes, and all the rare pieces of State since Lewis the XI. and among them to take particular notice of the Memorialls of Mr de Villeroy and President Genin, who were Great men in King Henry the 4th his time. As for publick visits, a Princely Tra∣veller (who knoweth what the publick Ac∣cademies for exercises, and for the know∣ledge of the Mathematicks are) shall not need to spend time with Academies, but call upon Masters of Ceremonies, to accom∣pany him for the first time, and afterwards (untill departure) use the liberty of France in visits, not in Italy, nor Spaine, where the
day and hower for visits must be deman∣ded. Hee shall not use any complement in the retreat from a conversation, for it is the manner to depart without any ceremony; except the company be all gone. As for the visiting of Embassadors, it is most fit to consult their leasure, as well in France as in other parts, for it is with them as it was with him who had written on his dore, Whosoever hath knockt twice and is not opened may be gone, for I am not, cannot, or will not be at home. Embassadors are as publick Sentinells, they have their set time of guard, and no conversation then to be had with them. It is fit for a Princely Traveller to visit them, to entertaine amity with those Sove∣raignes, whom they represent, and to know the continuall case of their affaires and in∣triques: and to that purpose, to visit al∣so those Ladies where the publick Ministers do frequent, where a Traveller will heare (as from Parrets when their cage is in the Sun) all what occurres. France is represented by a Woman all deckt with Eyes and Tongues, and if none
could speake loud enough, she hath a Trumpet. SECT. VIII. NOW for Italy: and if by Savoy, men who affect Relicks, may take notice of a Saints Sudari at Turin. And as for the Prime of men, let them take notice on the successors of the great Emanuel of Savoy, and never be wrought upon, by what the Cardinall d'Ossat in his passion wrote against that Great Duke of Savoy, by Birth King of Cypres, of the old Saxon, Imperiall, Spanish and French Roy∣all blood; most magnanimous in all his proceedings; more rich in Jewells then any other Prince in Europe; attended by a great number of Nobles, and in as much Pompe as any Christian Soveraigne Prince can be, a Nobility extreme Generous and Gentile, the Ladies so Beautifull, as that they are called (all Italy over) the Faire Piedmontese.
The liberty of the Court of Savoy is mo∣derated between France and Italy. The first considerable object a Traveller shall meet with in Savoy, is the fortresse of Mount-Milan, which withstood a yeare and above, all the French Kings Army, when King Lewis the 15th had set upon it all the courage of the Nation, and all what could be attempted by Jupiter-like flames, and Vulcan like forgery, to blow up the For∣tresse, to which, the French King had invi∣ted all the adjacent Nobility to be specta∣tors, but the successe proved a forced re∣treat of the French Army. Chambray (the first Metropolitan of Sa∣voy, seated as a center to the Hills, as if those whereon the Tempter set the King of Kings) may be the first nights lodging to a Traveller, who will see there that most magnificent Stable, built by the late Prince Thomas of Savoy; all of white Marble with∣in; the Post, the Manger, and the Racks of massy Copper, to entertaine one hundred great saddle Horses. Susa is the next great Fortresse. The next place of note is Rivoly (14 Italian miles from Turin.) Rivoly is a place with
variety of rich furniture, the gardins Eden like, as in that at Turin, 85 Brazen metall Vases, 8 foot high, all imbossed by the fa∣mous John de Bologne, cast so as the like of them is not to be seen in Europe, except in a Dorade within the Kingdome of the A∣merican Guiana, where such (and other or∣naments) are of massie Gold. The rare Palaces and Seats without Tu∣rin, are first, that of the Capuchins built by the Duke, as the Rotonde at Rome, all of Marble, and to serve also in time of Warre for a Fortresse of defence. The next is the Palace of the late Cardi∣nall Maurice, Uncle to the present Duke of Savoy. That of Valentin neer the River Po, a mile from Turin, and is as Noble as any can be seen in all Italy. Three mile farther is that called Mile Fiori, (a thousand flow∣ers) and may it raise the Savoyards and Pie∣montesis thoughts to that Bower whereof the Imperialls, and the choice Anemones are Sunne, Moone, and Starres, whereon Con∣stantine made his Victorious conclusion, as is seen neerer to the Equinoctiall then Eng∣land is to the cape of good hope. May none
of the Nation misse that marke. Padua may prove the first place which a Traveller will call upon in his repaire to Venice, where if among the disereet he be pleased to speake in sober termes of St An∣thonio (as at Milan of St Carlo di Boromeo) he will never be dislikt of; for an Italian will converse with a discreet stranger with∣out questioning his particular profession, it being granted among them, that all Tra∣montany (all men beyond the Hills) may be Hereticks; yet giving no offence in their Churches (where no man is compelled to go) lesse to their beds, a man (never so much Tramontany) may live Methusalems days among them, without any troubles at all, except how to drink drunk, for its not in practise among them; revengefull they are against their own Countrymen: they hold it to be an honour, and an imitation of the Poets thundering Jupiter, who hath reserved the sweetest to himselfe, to wit, Vengeance. They make (as before said) a great distinction between Strangers and their Natives, who they would on all occa∣sions, have to proceed as by Mathematick rules, and even on the least, as in going to a
House of a stranger or Neighbour, or par∣ticular friend, the Italian will not enter, though the dore be open, except one can tell him whether the Master may possibly be within. Their leisure must be consulted as if they were all Embassadors, or prime Ministers of state; few words must serve turne with them, and some discourses answered with a shrug or nodding of the head; Oathes mixt with other words are not credited, they affect few examples to support truth. The next delightfull Progresse will be for Venice, that microcosme of all the Ci∣ties which do represent the reliques of a de∣loge, the River Brenta will appear as the best in Eden might have been, if the first Landlord had not been drove out of it, there being such ravishing Palaces, and Gar∣dens planted on both sides: as for Venice it selfe, (that Metropolitan Ark made of stone) there is in it (as the Italian saith) molto bene & molto male, a Prince may live therein, with a couple of Gundoliers, and a couple of Men, one for his Kitching, the other for his bedchamber, so he shun the Horentin horrid Vice, to save Pasquin the
providing of a shield on his back part. And if a man speaks but with civill re∣spect of the Old Madona of Loretta, he needs not to trouble himselfe with his pro∣fession of Faith, they are free Blades, who when King Francis the first of France had threatned Italy, and them in particular, were not affrighted nor moved from their Arsenao, nor Concilio di dieci, by Francis the first his merry reply to his Jester, who after he had askt of the French King, whe∣ther the men of his Great Councell had thought on a way of retreat, as well as to enter the State of Venice, replyed, The Se∣nate had wise heads, but he would put so ma∣ny young French fools upon them, as might be able to disturbe their set day of Councell: But thousands of the young fools, their bones (as yet to be seen about Pavia) could not returne into France. To Florence by Millain or by Bologne, a Princely. Traveller may steer, and he shall find all Ambergris or Jasemin like: in the State of Milan, and in Tuscany, Modana and Parma. But as for Romania and Rome it selfe, though this speaks Roma fuit (and where∣on
the French Poet St Amant hath vented this point of spirit) Rome n'est plus ô mondaine Inconstance! Le marbre y est detruit, et ce qui fuit, an temps fait resistance. In English as neer the words as can be. Rome is no more, O worlds inconstancy! Marble hath there its fall, But what runnes away resists the time and all. Meaning the River Tiber. What remains of old Rome (besides the Tiber) are broken marble Columns, the Pantheon, some Triumphall Arches, and Amphitheaters, and that which at Rome, as among all other Nations, will stick more close then pitch to cloth, is wilfull prating Pasquin, and Morforius: Rome is called la Sancta, Milano la grande, Bologna la Superba, Padua la docta, Venetia la rica, Fiorentia la bella, Napoli la gentilla; yet doth it not prove a receptacle of as much Impie∣ty and dissolutenes as Paris in France, may not London make up the number of three; on which if Pasquino be let alone, he will prate loud at his returne from Hell, for the Italians have printed again his work stiled Pasquino in estasi nuovo é molto viaggio de l' inferno.
All Travellers will do well to observe in Rome, Fide sed cui vide: yet be Amicus uni∣us, inimicus nullius. It will prove a good maxime in them with that Nation, (which hath nothing more rife on its tongue, then No ti fidare, not to trust) as to fix their speculations on that which (without any offence or perill of tell-tales) may please their sight, to wit, the rare carved Statues and Pictures, placed in and about the well built Palaces, and Churches: First as for Pictures (to view them in order) those of Perin del Vago in Castel St Angelo, then proceed towards the plaine (on the which the famous St Peters Church is built) observe there the great Piramide on the left side of that plain, and in the Church, the Pictures of the Ca∣valier Balioni, Pormarancio, Passignani, Del Castello. The Pieté (in Marble) of Michael Angelo, the day of Judgement by the same Angelo, painted in the Popes Chappel, the Altar and Sepulcher of St Sicilia, all of Jaspis, and other rare stone; in the Popes Chambers the matchles pictures of Rapha∣el d' Urbin, thence make towards A Bel Vidor, there see the Lauconte, the Apollo,
Cleopatra, Lantino, and a Marble called el Toiso. Then making his circuit to go out of the great St Spirito repaire to St Pietro Monto, there see the Picture on the great Altar painted by Raphael d'Urbin, and the Figure of Christ in the pillar drawn by Frar Bastiano, a picture of Georgio Vassari, in the Sacresti one of Michael Angelo. Then go to the Capitol, there see Marc Aurelius on Horse-back. In the great room of the Capitol, the Battail painted in Fresco by Josepin. Then to Monte Cavalo there see the two Alexanders with the Bucephalus, one made by Phidias, the other by Parxitiles. Then to Porta-pia, there see the Tombe of Bacchus of Porphyr stone of an extreme bignes and entire peece. Then repaire to the Toure of Dioclesian. To the vigna of Cardinal del Monte, see there a great number of Statues, Pictures and Limnings of Don Julio Clovio. Then go to see il Colsso and the Trium∣phal Arch of Constantin. The Theater of Marcel, at the Cardi∣nal-Saveli The Palace of Farnese; see there the rare Statues called the Hercules, the
Gladiator, the Flora, the ancient Torro, with divers figures in one piece: in the Gallery (above staires) the rare painting in white and black of Hannibal Carasa, and diverse rarities in the Cabinet, a most rare book limned by Don Giulio Clovio. Thence go to Piazza Colonia, see the Colomn of An∣thonio Pio: thence in the palace called Pietro see there the Colomne of Trajan the Em∣perour, all graven with figures about it, then see the famous Pantheca of Marc A∣grippa; the great Market place called Navo∣na, see there the Church called Minerva, and therein the figure of Christ carved by Michael Angelo, then go to the place Fia∣metta, there see a Pallace with rare pictures of Polydor; thence to the Palace of Cardi∣nall Bourgesi, to see a great number of Sta∣tues and pictures, as also very rare draughts, then to Cardinal Oldebrandini, where there are likewise an infinite number of Statues and pictures, then crosse over the way to the Palace of Guisi, there see the rare pi∣ctures of Raphael, then to Monte Giordano, to the Ursins, and see there the works o Bronsino, and many other rarities, then go to Cardinal Cresentio, where are many rare
works of Holbein and Michael Angelo, then the Garden of pleasure of the Cardinal Borgesi, all beset with rare antick statues, and within garnisht with many rare pi∣ctures. You shall see in the prime Churches first in that of Scala, a very rare picture of Gerardo: of Pomerantio, in the Church la Consolation, pictures of Durante, del Bor∣gio, and Tadeo Sucari; in that of St Lauren∣zo in Domo the picture of St Laurence, of Frederico Sucaro, of Grosepi, in the Church of St Silvester (on Monte Cavalo) one of Palma, in the Church called la Madona del Populo two pictures of Michael Angelo Car∣ravagio, of Hannibal and Frobastian del Piombo, in the Church la Trinita di monti, two rare pictures of Daniel di Voltera, some pictures in Fresco on the Walls of Perin del Vago, and Tadeo, in the Chesa nova of Be∣rossi, of Giosepino, of Scipion Gaetano, the Figure of Christ of Michael Angelo, of St Marco of Frederigo, and of Raphael da Re∣gio, in St Gregorio martyro di Sancti of Gui∣rlo Ren, at St Giovane di fiorentino, of Pa∣signani. In the Roman Colledge, an An∣nunciation in fresco of Frederigo Sucari, in the Church called de Lanema of Julio Ro∣mano,
and Carlo Venetian, at the Church la Place, the Sybills of Raphael, of Baldesar di Siena an Anunciation, of Marcelo, Giose∣pino, Mutiano, Albano, the Cieling of Fra∣brastiano, at Sancta Elizabetha of Guido, at the Madona de la consolation of Pomerantio, at St Augustin a Virgin Mary with two Pil∣grims, of Michel Angelo di Caravagio, a St Augustin of Raphael &c. And let not my Princely Traveller think it strange, that the Italians will extoll these Statues and Pi∣ctures, and so affect them as if nothing more glorious and more worth of admira∣tion; the first reason is, that as the Roman Church makes it a Church policy; the se∣cond, that those Statues and Pictures be∣fore mentioned, have been made by the ra∣rest hands of men, as ever lived since the memory of Bezaleel of the Tribe of Juda, and Alolia of the Tribe of Dan, as also Hi∣ram of the Tribe of Nphtali to work in Sculpture in Solomons Temple, by what spi∣rit these Romans wrought since the Gospel was preached, I do leave to those whose vocation it is to treat of hidden Mysteries, only I shall make bold to say, that if my Princely Traveller observes the day of
Judgement painted against the Cieling of the Cathedral at Munster, he will see the Divell represented in a red velvet Chaire with a Crown on his head, and a Scepter in his hand, whom the Painter (sitting one day on his scffold alone busy painting the Divell) was (as the story runs) constrained to paint in that manner, being otherwise threatned to have his neck broak: and that thereon it may be thought, the pain∣ter was not inspired with the spirit of God, except the said representation was to serve for an Embleme, that the black spirit hath an Empire over Legions of men. But with what spirit the Painters of our age, do represent at the belly of a Lyon Rampant (which as the Unicorne is one of the supporters of the Kings Armes) a red thing exposed to the full view of many Vir∣gins, and chast mothers of Children, who cannot well behold such an aspect without a blush, I leave to loose Christians to ex∣pound, I wish others would commānd (I mean the Church wardens) the painter to spare his red colour, and forbeare the fore∣stalling that offensive needles distinction of male and female in such a place, wherein
those who by the Anglican Church are called Idolatrous, do not put any thing but what may move the people to a devotion. The Italians indeed excell in the adorn∣ing of their Churches, and say that the Nation is so much given to their saying No ti sidare, as that they are in Church policy, bound to have those old represen∣tations exposed to the publike view, for that the Italians are promot to reply to the best Orators Non ti sidare, they say words are but copies, and shadows of those Originall objects. Printing was but in pra∣ctise since later Ages, old Manuscripts to be but for the I earned in the Hebrew, Greek, Syriack and Caldean tongues; Ima∣ges and pictures to be the Books of the most Ignorant, and the quality of Quakers not known among them. The more licen∣tious Writers, mentioned in the Epistle to the Reader, will tell you, that Srrangers must not expect from the Roman Prelats, the Hospitality of Old England; Cardinals to have Porta d' intrata e non d'scita; the Neopolitan to be Largo di b ca e streeto de mano: But I must not omit to note, that as for Ceremonies and Civilities, there are
none so formall and neat, as those of the Romans; who would teach any other Na∣tion their good behaviour, and especially English men on the High way when the King happens to pas, for it would be taken as a monstrous disrespect, for men to re∣main in their Coach, or on Horseback, at the Kings coming neer; but answerable to duty, to go forth the Coach, light from the Horse, and bow to him who is the head of a Nation. As for Cavalier-like Civilities, the Gal∣lantry of the Napolitans, deserves the visit∣ing them; as also the Antiquities of Puteoli, where the Apostle St Paul was, where the Inhabitants profer his Medall to Travellers. There is to be observed in the first place, Mont Cenere, a Hill of Ashes, which did rise in the space of 48 howers: Secondly la Sol∣fatera, (as the Cave out of which Mount Cenere did rise) whereof the perpetuall noyse (proceeding from the Sulphureous exhalations) is heard many miles from that place, as the discharge of Chambres on the Kings Coronation day, in that Solfatara a world of Sulphur is made. Then see la Crota del Canic, the Grotto of dogs, wherein
is such an infectious exhalation, as kills a Dog outright if thrust therein, but if im∣mediatly (after he seems to be stak dead blew and black) thrown into the Lake (which is neer) comes to himselfe againe; thence see la Pessina admirabile, which is a most vast building under ground, as big as half Pauls Church, and was to keep water for the military Cohortes, thence see le Cente Camere, la Sepulture de lei Nobili Romani, the receptacle of the Noble Ro∣mans ashes; being a room, the walls whereof within, set with ancient Urnes, wherein the Ashes were put; thence go io la Grota Leone, and to the Elyzian fields, the Baths of Cicero, his Villa, the ruins of the stone Bridge built by Caligula, who riding over the same to crosse the bay, vaunted to have Triumpht over Neptune, and brav'd that God, whereon may be said that Reli∣gion makes not a man more honest. Then see Grotto of the Sibilla Cumana, wherin as yet her resting place, is seen with a gil∣ded arched vault in Mosaick work. Then returne to Naples, see Gaieta, and on its Gate the Tombe of Bourbon, who did scale Rome; read the inscription, and
you shall find, Francia mi da la Vita, Spa∣nia la Forca é la Ventura, Roma la Morte, Gaieta la Sepultura. France gave me life, Spaine force and adventure, Rome my death, Gaieta a Sepulcher. And being satisfied of those parts return∣ing by Loretta, see a Chappell more consi∣derable to the Romans, then the Stable wherein the Saviour of the World was Borne, since this was never said to have been built but by some Mason or Carpen∣ter, that by the hands of Angels, who are said to have brought it where it stands, garnisht within, not with Hay and Cob∣webbs (as many Stables in ordinary Innes are) but with unestimable treasures, Pas∣quin excuseth this to Morphorius, that it is a custome for Women to part from their Children in a mock, but when they appear with the Baby (as in Holland in the prank∣ing room) then all is glistering trickt up and fine. And let my Princely Traveller but re∣member, passing the Gulfe of Leon, and at his arrivall into Spaine, to speak in termes of respect of la Madona de Loretta, he will be said to be a muy buon Catholico Romano,
and not be questioned by the Dons. SECT. IX. LEt not a Princely Traveller suffer him∣selfe to be surprised with a prepossest opinion against the Dons, nor that conti∣nent though with craggy Hills on the one part, yet so fruitfull on the other, as that nothing can be better, the which moved a Traveller (who had not converst with the best of the Dons) to say, that all was good there except what could speake. But as for the mighty Pireneans, they are of more consequence then the wall of China was, for Tartars cannot break through them. It pleased providence for the good of Spaine and France, to place the Pirenean Hills between those two great continents, and to strengthen that: body of Spaine by Rivers of living waters., which for comparison, may be applyed to the blood which runs all along the King of Spaines vaines, that of Austria, besides the Banks of Silver and Gold from Potosi in
the American continent, whereby Spaine is enabled to vvage Warr in divers parts. A Princely Traveller will certainly meet with a Nobility, who puts its own stamp on their forehead, who need not (as Scho∣lars) go to read the saying on the Temple of Apollo in Delphos, they teach it to their striplings, of whom rhey make men from their Adolescency, by infusing Valour into them, and warning them never to fight, so as that when past in the bed of Mars, there may no wound be seen in their back. Their common motto is Mas moros mas ganancia, the more Moores the more is the gain, mea∣ning Enemies. On towards Madrid with this assurance, that whosoever trusts in an old Castilsan, shall ever find him a friend. If to my Princely Traveller, the Escuriall be on his roade, he will see therein a most glorious Pantheon, the receptacle of sacred Ashes of Kings and Queenes of Spaine, it is built under the great Altar, the dores thereof are of copper mixt with ornaments in moldings of massy Gold, the staires of polisht Jasis, the inside walls of White and Green polisht Marble, the Sepulchers of white Marble, placed as the Urnes of the
Noble Romans in the side walls, there are three on the left hand, the First that of the Emperour Charles the 5th, the 2d of King Philip the 2d, the 3d that of King Philip the 3d, that for Philip the 4th is ready pre∣pared; on the right side are the Tombes of 4 Queenes, whereof Elizabeth of Bourbon is one; On the Altar is a great Cross the height of a man, enricht with massy gold, in the midst of this Pantheon, hangs a great branched Candlestick of Gold and Copper to hold 24 Wax lights, on the gate two great figures in the shape of Angells of cop∣per and Gold, holding two Scroules, wherein is carved the words Natura me Oc∣cidit, Spes me Elevat. There is a vaulted place in the coming forth of this Panthe∣on, wherein are the Tombes of the Prin∣ces and Princesses of Spaine, covered with red Velvet, richly embroydered with gold and Silver. There are 36 Altars in the Church, to which appertains all the Ornaments of change for every day in the yeare. There are many pictures of an inestima∣ble value, a true originall of King David. There are 36 crosses of Gold, set with pre∣cious
stones, and an infinite number of Sil∣ver Lamps and Candlesticks, there are in the main body of the Escuriall twelve thou∣sand Windows and Dores, the least of the Dores having cost one hundred pound sterling. There are 17 Cloisters, and 17 Courts, and 85 Fountains, there are 300 Religious men of the Order of St Jerome, all Gentle∣men, the Annuall Revenue is foure hun∣dred thousand Crownes: There is in the Escuriall, one of the Earthen vessels, where∣in (as the Spaniards say) was the miracu∣lous Wine of the Wedding in Cana. As for Madrid it hath ever since the Court of the former Kings was kept at Valledolit bin the place of the King of Spaine his constant a∣boade. The great Feast and Sport of the Torros is that which the Spaniard affects so much as he cannot leave it for the Popes Excom∣munication against such as may come to a fatall end in that sport. The Pompe of the Roman Catholick Church, sheweth it selfe very much in that of la Madona de la Totche, wherein the Do∣minicans have an Altar of Massie Silver, of
an extraordinary bignes, with a Madona of Silver fix foot high, with a Sun of Massie Gold about the head, set with precious stones, the Railes about the Chappell of Massie Silver, there are one hundred Silver Lamps, the least whereof cost 400 Crowns, some cost 12 thousand Crowns. That of Toledo is of the forme of St Pe∣ter in Rome, the Bishop hath 400 thousand Crownes revenue per annum, the Treasure of that Church is of an unestimable value. At the Pardo some miles distant from Madrid, there is in a massy Silver Tombe, a Figure representing Christ, for the which King Philip the 2d did pay one hundred thousand Crownes, it is of wood, but so rarely carved, as never Eyes beheld the like. I have begun with Sepulchers, procee∣ded with Churches, Monasteries, and de∣scribed their riches, more facil to the King of Spaine to compasse, since he possesseth the Gold and silver Mynes, and hath in his Dominions, all the most pretious producti∣ons of Nature. As for Madrid, it is situated under a most pure Clime.
The greatest Palace would not yeeld so much Chimney mony, as a little House of ten pound per annum in England, since by the number of seaven Chimneys, the grea∣test Palace of Madrid is wont to be descri∣bed, they use Silver Brazeros in all their romes of State, and Bedchambers. That which is remarkable in the King of Spaines Court, is the attendance to his prime Mini∣ster of State now the Duke Medina de las Torros, successor to Don Louis d' Arro, who succeeded the Conde Duca d' Oliva∣res, prime Minister of State when Charles Prince of Great Britain was in that Court Anno 1625. The Nobles affect no other clothes then Black Freize all Winter long, plain Taffaty in the Summer time. The Ladies at Court, admit Audiences when demanded, it is in the presence of the King and Queene. The Ladies stand on a row, if the Cavalleros (who have deman∣ded Audience of them) are Grandees, they cover themselves. The late Duke of Buckingham (the Match les of all the Subjects in the World, and who attended the Prince of Great Pri∣tain)
had particular Audiences with the Conde Duca d' Olivares his Lady, on the score of his being Embassador Extraordi∣nary, (the Plenipotentiary for the Treaty of the Match) and her being Camarera-Major, with whom it was necessary to con∣fer during the Treaty of an intended Match by King James of Blessed memory, and the Prince with the Infanta Maria sister to King Philip the 4th. But very loose imper∣tinent, and ill grounded discourses have been made in England, concerning the Duke of Buckinghams correspondency with the said Countes, as if she had been a strum∣pet of Greece, and of those young sil∣ly Court sooles, who are charmed by kind words, who see Babies in all mens Eyes, that look on them, and perswade themselves, that they must not resist those first glowings of Cypres coles, except they would smother those Babies in their tem∣porary Lovers eyes, and loose their Maiden head in a dreame for nothing, when as they pretend by answering their palpable Narcis∣sus to have something more then imagina∣tion in the Bargain. The Duke of Buckingham had other
Fish to Frie, then to make Love to him∣selfe with an old Woman; the good suc∣cesse of a Treatie for an intended Match (by which Gondomar had promised the re∣restitution of a Palatinate) was the golden fleece for which this Matchlesse Jason ex∣posed himselfe (I do not say among Mon∣sters of Africa) but among Juglers, Inter∣lopers, and no lesse then such Embassadors, who with the Character of honest men, do but too often Lye abroad to make good State Policy; exposed himselfe into the at∣tendance of that Matchlesse Prince, in whose preservation three Great Nations besides all his friends abroad were interessed. And when the Duke of Buckingham did find where the Remora was fixt, partly in the calot humour of the Sexe, which is the most tardy to admit reason, because the Sex is the most passionate, and that after long parleys with the slow resolving Spa∣nish Councils of State, the Match was still in statu quo, it was then time as the French say, either Faire bonne mine en manvais jeu, put a good Face on an ill businesse: or to try the uttermost a Camarero Major could or would do (laying aside words Bull∣begger
like damned Hereticks, whereby the zelot Romans, do distinguish the true Chri∣stian Catholicks & others, in the Match of Matchlesse most precious Infanta Maria, who certainly was a Princesse fit to be an Empresse of all the World, as Shee after∣wards became the Empresse of Germany. As for visits to the Spanish, it is not their custome to exchange words or comple∣ments before parties are set in Chaires with Armes. They leave the visitor in possession of their House when the conversation is ended, and for that, go before attending him in his Coach, they are succinct and grave in their Complements, use to speak Proverbs, if to passe Complements on great Holy-dayes (as Christmas and Easter) they only say three words, Las buenas Pas∣quas: they are very carefull to send com∣plements to those of their friends and ac∣quaintances who have been let blood, and ever accompany their complement with a present, which they call la Sangria. They endeavour as much as they can, to send their present by a Servant of their Friend, to prevent presents which their own servants might receive, whereby their
present should become chargeable unto the friend to whom it's sent. As for Titles (which prove troublesome punctillos a∣mong many) King Philip the 2d perceiving that the Nobility of Burgondy, and of the Catholike Netherland Provinces would quarrell about them, did publish in Print, a Formulary whereby to a Duke, Prime Minister of State, Vice-Roy, and Generall of an Army, is given no more then Excel∣lence. So to their Ladies, and no such a∣buse among them as in other parts, where every thing (crept out of Broome-staffs and Cole-mongers Bushels) will be called Ma∣dam, though but striplings, and no such as Earles Daughters. The French call good Rich Merchants Wives Madam, but they joyne to it their Surname; others they call Dame Anne, without the Ma. To Men they give Sir Pierce, or Sir John: To the King Sir as a substantive. they call all men Monsieur with the Adje∣ctive of their Sir name, the Kings Brother Monsieur without any addition: they give no Highnesse but to the Princes of the Blood: no Damoiselle but to the Kings el∣dest Daughter, all others called Damoiselle
is with the addition of their Sirname, and that is more then Madame Marie a Citi∣zens Wife: the Madame without any addi∣tion are Dame Damee, beginning from the Presidents Ladies, vous is spoken (in English you) to all men, and women, the Sove∣raign and the Princes of the Blood excep∣ted; and yet sometimes (as the Marshalling of words will require) a Vous is used to King and Queene, in Spaine never, the Vos being only for Inferiours, vostra Merced to equalls and betters, except to those whom (as before said) Excellency belongs unto. The King of Spaine (Philip the 2d) ne∣ver heard Vos to him, save from the proud cruell Tyrant Due d' Alua, who being on his Death-bed, visited by the King, said, I go where thou wilt come, the King going out of the roome said no more, then I thought I should not escape without a Vos. As for the old Castillan Maxime of State, it is to stick to old pretences, and though an Age was elaps'd, if occasion did profer, they were wont to begin a new on the Old score. I shall not overburthen these Notations with the severall names of Kingdoms, as
Castill, Leon, Aragon, Valentia, &c. Nor with the Names of Cities, among which the maine ones are Valledolid, Salamanca, Sigotia, (where the Mint, and staple of Cloath is) Sivill the great and Rich Mer∣chant Towne. There are matters of lesse note which some Travelers observe, as Steeples and Sun Dyalls, as that of Stratsbourgh in Germany, while those cu∣rious Table-book men do omit the main end of Travell, the Interest of his Native Country, in his improvement, in the open∣ing the Secrets of State, to Ballance them, dive into their Maximes, their Strength or Weaknesse, and having maintained the Inte∣rest of his Patria, returne (well fraughted) with necessaries as my serve to Postetity. It's what the Venetians do mind by their Embassages; yet is it not their Maxime, to keep an Embassador above three years in one place, for fear of Naturalization. By Visits made to them, it will be easy to come to the knowledge of all passages, for they keep certain enterlopers, who find out any thing, though but too much Im∣portune, and Impertinent, in their questi∣oning what the Councill of the King, and
what His Majesty doth. The Polans well accustomed to Pump those forraigne Inqui∣sitors, by setting close mouthed (but all Eare and Memory) Masters of Ceremonies on them, such as are not given to scrape Trenchers at the Embassadors Table, men that can handsomely afford matter of dis∣course, and as the Scripture saith; Sermo vester semper cum gratia sit, sale conditus, ut sciatis quomodo oporteat vos unicuique re∣spondere, Col. 4. v. 6. The Polans were wont to keep off Embassadors, so many dayes, as might serve to discover (by the Master of the Ceremonies) the particular humour and drifts of the Embassador; as during the time of the King of Blessed me∣mory, by the keeping of Sir Peter Rubens, and the Portugal Embassadors, there was gotten this advantage, that His Majesty was ascertained that the Infanta Isabella the Arch. Dutchesse of Brabant her Letter to the Queene was as it ought to be, and the Por∣tugall Embassador, had time to get the King his Masters signature altered, for the Letter of Credence was signed Yo el Rey, as if written to a Subject, the Embassador did put to it de Portugal, which made all good.
Soveraigne Princes are best served by such Embassadors that can (in case of ne∣cessity) hit the mark; that do not on all oc∣casions draw the string of their Bowe to the uttermost, and overdoe their part, as some overpassionate Actors on a stage when they represent a King, Princes (whose heart the Soveraigne of Heaven and Earth doth steere besides their Magnanimous inclinati∣ons) take seldome things as the French say a la pointe de l'espeé, as some Embassadors on the score of their being a Royall Repre∣sentative, which in a Comedy of Viriona∣ries by the French is notably Acted, by one who perswades himselfe to be an Alexan∣der. The example of the Marquis de Senne∣terr, during his being Extraordinary Em∣bassador to King Charles the First of Bles∣sed memory, may serve to prove the perni∣cious consequence of violent proceedings, for that it did cause a rupture between the two Crownes of England and France, the Embassador who was lodged in Durrham House, caused his Bravos to accompany the English Roman Catholicks (who had been at the Masse) with swords drawn from the House to the street, to expostulae with the
Church wardens and Constables, who during the Parliament time, were ordered to keep the Multitude from giving Scandall, when as the Embassadors men offered vio∣lence to the Officers and beat them, and all this on the pretence of the Embassadors standing on the too much stretch Le Roy mon Maistre, who then was at Paris, and not at Durham House. So is it a great Im∣pertinency in Embassadors, to make their Domicilium a Sanctuary but to their dome∣sticks, there being great difference between them and the subjects of a Soveraigne who is Master in his own Land, and whose Laws are to be observed. To conclude this Treaty concerning Travellers, it is certain that whether men Travell or Travell not, whether they satisfy their curiosity or not, whether they follow the Apostles prescrip∣tion to try all or not; they must all dye, as well as the old man of Verona, who did never go out of the sight of the smoak of his Chimney, and so must the Baboons, the Apes, the Parrats, the Crocodiles, and an infinite number of Bruits, for the which many hundred of Leagues of good fruitfull Land in America was not made, nor those
various gifts wherewith it is indued. The Gold and Silver Mines, the Womb for the production of Pearles fixt in that part of Gods Earth, all Aromatick drugs to grow, not for the Nostrils of Sea Divells (so call∣ed by the Americans) but for the use of Rationalls, and that the best use made thereof, might tend to the Glory of the Creator, and the good of Man. FINIS.
