i878a 27139422 110003
royal blazon or coat of arms J2 R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT BY THE Lord Deputy and Council A PROCLAMATION, WHEREAS several Persons disaffected to His Majesties most Serene and Auspirious Government, have of late in a riotous and warlike manner assembled together in se∣veral parts of this his Kingdom, and have contrived and entred into several Associati∣ons, which they have most industriously en∣deavoured to spread and divulge amongst His Majesties Liege People in divers parts of the Kingdom, which We must conclude to have beén made and procured by Persons who desire to disturb the peaceable and established Government there∣of; and which contain, as We conceive, no less offence than that of High Treason, to which We are the more induced t give credit, in regard they have proceeded so far in their Insolencies, as that by fresh Informations which We the Lord Deputy have received, they ha taken upon them to fortifie themselves, by possessing of places of strength, and dividing themselves into Troops and Companies, pro∣viding themselves of Arms and Ammunition in manifest breach of the Laws, and to the great Terror of His Majesties Liege People. And because We are assured that several well-meaning Persons a∣mongst them have beén seduced upon pretence of groundless Fears and Iealousies by fiery Spirits that are Ringleaders of those Facti∣ons, who being broken in their Fortunes as well as their Reputati∣ons, may occasion the ruine of many harmless and well-meaning Men, by involving them in their own Treasonable Designs, and making them partakers of the Crimes that they themselves are guilty of. And We being very sensible of the Misfortune that these Men are like to bring themselves further into, which can be no less than the Forfeiture of their Lives and Estates for Rebellion and Treason, which we are willing to prevent as much as in Vs lieth. And in
order thereunto, and to settle the Peace of this Kingdom, and to pre∣vent the effusion of Christian Blood, which We the Lord Deputy of this Kingdom have hitherto endeavoured to prevent with all the Care and Industry Imaginable, notwithstanding the many Affronts of late offered to His Majesties Government. And to quiet the minds of the People, We the Lord Deputy and Council have thought fit, and do hereby in His Majesties Name strict∣ly Charge and Command all the said Persons so Assembled within this Kingdom, forthwith to disperse and withdraw themselves from those Rebellious Meétings, by repairing to their respective Habitati∣ons, and to betake themselves to their several Occupations and Call∣ings as formerly, upon the doing whereof, We do in His Majesties behalf hereby assure them, and every of them, of His Majesties Pro∣tection and Pardon for their Persons and Estates for any the Of∣fences afore said, and while they continue within the Bounds of their Allegiance and Duty to His Majesty; but in case they shall still per∣severe in their said Crimes, and fail to give due Obedience to these our Commands, We do hereby Declare that we will give direction to His Majesties Attorney General to proceéd against them and every of them according to Law, as in cases of High Treason hath beén al∣ways used, And whereas from these irregular and unwarranted Proceédings of the Associators aforesaid, manifold and great Incon∣veniencies already have and more are daily like to ensue by several Thieves and Robbers, who in confidence of Impunity, do frequently despoil and Rob His Majesties Subjects, by stealing their Cattle in greater numbers than for many years last past have beén known. We do hereby publish and declare, that we will use our utmost en∣deavors, by all Legal ways and means, to bring the said Thieves and Robbers to condign Punishment. And We do hereby require all Iustices of the Peace, Magistrates, Sheriffs, High and Petty Con∣stables, and all other His Majesties Loving Subjects, to use their ut∣most endeavors to discover and bring to Iustice the said Malefactors, hereby charging and commanding all His Majesties Military Offi∣cers and Soldiers of this Kingdom, to be Aiding and Assisting to them in so doing: And we do further recommend to all His Ma∣jesties Subjects of this Realm, to lay aside all Fears and Apprehen∣sions of any Violence to be used to them; We firmly assuring all His Majesties Subjects, of what Perswasion soever, that to the ut∣most of our Power, they and every of them demeaning themselves peaceably and quietly, shall be Protected by his Majesties Government here both in their Persons and Estates, against all Violences and Attempts whatsoever. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin, the 25th. day of January 1688/9. A. Fytton, C. Galmoy, T. Nugent, John Keating, Jo. Davys, De. Daly, Rich. Hamilton, Tho. Newcomen, Garett Moore. GOD Save the KING. by ndrew Crock and Samuel Helsham: And Re-printed at London, by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames-street. 1689.
