J1068 12101593 54130
THE Triumphs of London. Performed on Friday, Octob. 29. 1675. for the Entertainment of the Right Honourable, and truly Noble Pattern of Prudence and Loyalty, Sir IOSEPH SHELDON Kt, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. Containing a true description of the several Pageants, with the Speeches spoken on each Pageant. Together with the several Songs sung at this Solemnity. All set forth at the proper Costs and Charges of the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY of DRAPERS. Designed and Composed, by Tho. Iordan, Gent. LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for Iohn Playford, and are sold at his Shop near the Temple-Church, 1675.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir IOSEPH SHELDON Kt, Lord Mayor Of the CITY of LONDON. MY LORD, SVccession, Election, and Desert, by their Trinity of Power in a Vnity of Consent, are manuductive in your ascension to that Chair of Equity prepared for those worthy Pa∣triots who are to dispense Iustice impartially for the civil support of this great City; for the which dignity, Extraction, Nature, and Edu∣cation, have so copiously qualified your Lord∣ship, that you will be able in your Governing, to satisfie the highest Expectation. It was (not
long since) the expression of an ingenious Gen∣tleman (who honoureth your Name and Family) that, as the Iews chose their first Monarch for the magnitude of his Corporeal dimensions, You might have been more reasonably Elected Lord Mayor for the grandeur of your Animal and Intellectual Expansions: That you deserve (were not the Governing time of the City limi∣ted) to fill the Iustice-Seat of this Emporeum, so long a time as your Predecessor, Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin, a Member of this Company of Dra∣pers; who was the first Lord Mayor of this Antient Famous City, and continued in that Dignity more than 24. years, sans intermis∣sion: Nor is this opinion confined to the in∣dulgence of one single person, but is the Vni∣versal Iudgment of all rational Citizens; and such are the sober thoughts of My Lord, Your Faithful and Humblest Honourer, Tho. Iordan.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS. Gentlemen, YOVR own Vrbanity more than my Desert, hath ex∣alted my humble Genius to the Advancement of De∣signing and Describing this Days Triumph, to which, if, when you have survey'd it, you are pleas'd to object, that I have not perform'd this Duty so exactly as I should, I must in∣genously confess, I have done it as well as I can, in Structure, Figure, Speech, and Melody, all which (in their aptitude) Consent and Concenter in Magnifying the Merit of the Ma∣gistrate, and also elevating the deserved Dignity of the An∣tient and Splendid Society of Drapers. And I hope, that when you shall consider, my subject matter (in point of Trade) is (the great Manufacture of this Nation) Cloth, it may rea∣sonably in the best sense be said, My Wits went a Wool-gathering. But with high intention, that my Muse may like Jason, bring in and magnifie, The Golden Fleece, whose splendour can never be sufficiently glorified, nor this Wor∣shipful antiently famous Company be illustrated by the weak Endeavours of Your most Obsequious Servant, Thomas Iordan.
In proper Habits orderly Array'd, The Movements of the Morning are Display'd. SElected Citizens i'th' Morning All, At seven a Clock do meet at Drapers-Hall, The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, joins, For the first rank, in their Gowns fac'd with Foins. The second Order do, in merry moods, March in Gowns fac'd with Budg and Livery Hoods. In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods thirdly appears, A youthful number of Foins Batchellors. Forty Budg Batchellors the Triumph Crowns, Gravely attyr'd in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns. Gentlemen Ushers which white Staves do hold, Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold. Next thirty more min Plush and Buff there are, That several Colours wave, and Banners bear. The Sergeant Trumpet thirty six more brings, Twenty the Duke of York's, sixteen the Kings. The Serjeant wears two Scarfs, whose Colours be, One the Lord Mayor's, tother's o'th' Company. The King's Drum Major, follow'd by four more Of the Kings Drums and Fifes, make London roar. Seven Drums and two Fifes more in Vests of Buff, March with waste Scarfs and Breeches of black stuff. Two City Marshals mounted and attended, Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended; And (next to th' Drums) do troop it in the Rear, But the Foot Marshal doth the next appear; Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears A shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs; Attended by six persons that dare do, What ere their Marshall may Command them to. Next the Fence-Master Troops, and (to defend him) Divers with drawn broad, bright Swords do attend him. Many poor Pensioners that march ith' Rear, With Gowns and Caps, Standards and Banners bear;
A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor, In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more, With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors, And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors. Being thus prepared: By the Foot Marshals Judgment they are guided, And into six Divisions are divided. Rank'd out by two and two, The first that stirs, Are the poor Company of Pensioners; But in the Front of them orderly be Placed the Ensigns of the Company.' Ith' Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more, Then Pensioners in Coats describ'd before. Persons of worth who do in Martial manner, Bear each of them a Standard, or a Banner. Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear, Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear (As by the Herald Painter is exprest) The draught of their Supporters and their Crest: Six Gentlemen Ushers in order trudg, And after them the Batchellors in Budg: Marching in measur'd distance, and indu'd With Order, This Division doth conclude. I'th' Rear of them six Trumpets do appear, And after them two Gentlemen, that bear Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be To th' City and the Draper's Company. Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears The Golden Chains, then the Foins Batchellors, In amicable measure move like Friends Fill'd with one Joy: So this Division ends. Two Gentlemen in Velvet Coats array'd, March after them with two Banners display'd; Then succeed them ten Gentlemen Ushers more, In Coats and Chains of Gold describ'd before; And, gradually, after them you'll see A very worthy large Society; With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood, And all Lord Mayors in the Potential Mood.
I'th' Rear of these (with silver sounds to fitlye) Do fall in divers Trumpets of the City; And after them two Gentlemen accord, To bear the Arms o'th' City and my Lord: And then the Gentlemen with equal distance That Usher in the grave Court of Assistance; I'th' Rear of them four Drums, six Trumpets be Order'd to bring up the Catastrophe. Three Gallants, Successive, follow them, Bearing the Banners of the Diadem. Kings, Queens, and City Ensigns, which engages Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages; The Masters and the Wardens bring up all, And thus Equip'd, they march from Drapers-Hall To my Lords House, where th' Aldermen and He Take Horse, and rank according to Degree: Which being done, the whole Body in State Doth move towards Guild-Hall, but at the Gate The new Lord with the old Lord Mayor unites, Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires and Knights: Then thus attir'd with Gown, Furr, Hood, and Scarf, March all through Kings-street down to three-Crane-Wharf; Where the Lord Mayor and th' Aldermen discharge▪ A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge At the West end o'th' Wharf▪ and at the East The Court Assistant, Livery, and the best Gentlemen Ushers: Such as stay on shore Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budg Batchellor: Who for a time repose themselves and men, Untill his Lordship shall return again; Who now with several Companies make hast To Westminster, but in their way is plac'd, A Pleasure-Boat that hath great Guns aboard, And with two Broadsides doth salute my Lord. They row in Triumph all along by th' Strand, But when my Lord and Companies do Land At the new Pallace-Stairs orderly all Do make a Lane to pass him to the Hall,
Where having took an Oath that he will be Loyal and faithful to his Majesty, His Government, his Crown, and Dignity, With other Ceremonials said and done, In order to his Confirmation; Sealing of Writs in Courts, and such like things, As shew his power abstracted from the Kings, He takes his leave o'th' Lords and Barons, then With his Retinue he retreats again To th' Waterside and (having given at large To th' poor of Westminster) doth re-imbarge, And scud along the River till he comes Up to Pauls Wharf, where Guns and thundring Drums Proclaim his Landing; when hee's set a shore, He is saluted with three Vollies more By (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Artillery men, under the Conduct of the most accomplished for Arms and Arts, the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Player, Knight, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry; some in Buff with Head-pieces, many of Massy Silver (of whose Honourable Society his Lordship hath been a worthy Member.) There is also the old Warlike Honour of this Nation, bravely revived, and is at this time a most Heroick Rarity; which is, that divers Gentlemen Archers, compleatly Arm'd, with long Bows and Swords, with War Arrows, and Pallisades, with Hats turn'd upon one side, on which are tied large Knots of green Ribon, formed into a Company, march under the Command of the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Peyton Knight, &c. From Pauls Wharf they march before my Lord through a Gallery of the aforesaid Batchellors, and Gentlemen Ushers, who did not go to Westmin∣ster; and likewise the Pensioners and Banners being set in Order, ready to march, the Foot Marshal leads the way, and in the Rear of the Companies up Paul's Wharf Hill into Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertain'd by the first Scene or Pageant, as followeth.
The first Pageant described. A Scene of State, containing an Imperial Throne of Gold, every way richly adorned with several Banners of the Kings, the Cities, the Lord Mayors, the Companies, and Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, &c. On this Throne there sitteth a comely Majestick person, with a chearful look, that representeth TRIUMPH, in a cloth of Silver Robe, a purple scarf fringed with Gold, an Imperial Triple Crown upon a peruke of long fair hair, skie-colour'd silk stockings, on which are Golden buskins, laced up half way the leg, with purple and silver Ribon in surfles; In her right hand she holdeth a Target bearing a Virgin, (the Companies Patroness) and in the other the Golden Fleece. On seats round about her sit the four Cardinal Vertues, viz. Prudence, Iustice, Temperance and Fortitude, all in their Emblematical Illustrations thus described: Prudence, In a Scarlet colour'd silk Robe, a silver Mantle fringed with Gold, black curl'd hair, on which is a Chaplet of flowers, silver buskins laced with watchet ribon; in her right hand she beareth a shield Vert, charged with a Serpent circular OR; and in the centre a Dove volant argent; in her left hand a Banner of the Kings. Iustice, In a crimsin sarsnet Robe, girt about with Gold, a purple man∣tle fringed with Gold and Silver; fair curl'd hair, a four corner'd Cap of Gold let with Jewels, buskins of Gold laced with purple: In one hand a Ballance, in the other a Banner of the Cities. Temperance, In a white silk Robe, a grass green mantle, a brown curl'd hair, on it a chaplet of White Lillies and damask Roses, purple buskins, laced and surfled with Gold; In one hand a Target-sable charged with a Chalice OR, viz. a Gold Cup, in the other a Banner of the Companies. Fortitude, In a Robe of Aurora colour'd silk, a Mantle of Silver, a Sil∣ver Corslet about her neck; a dark brown hair, a Garland of oaken leaves tipp'd with Gold; Silver buskins: On a shield gules a Tower Argent in one hand; in the other a Banner of my Lords. And on four Pedestals, one at each Corner of the Stage, sit four La∣dies, eminently and properly drest, Peace, Purity, Plenty and Piety; all of them bearing proper Emblems, as are significantly made more manifest by description. Peace, In an Olive-green sarsnet Robe semined with silver stars, a Car∣nation
Mantle fringed with Gold, bright brown hair, a Chaplet of Hearts-case, call'd in Latin by Physicians Herba Trinitatis, or Panseys, yellow buskins laced with purple and silver ribon: In one hand a Palm-tree, in the other a Banner of the Supporters. Purity, In a white silk Robe, a skie-colour'd Mantle, starrified with Gold, a dark brown hair, a Garland of white Roses; Orange-colour'd buskins, laced with skie-colour'd and silver Ribon; In one hand a Crystal Globe, in the other a Banner of the Virgin. Plenty, In a Vest of Gold and Silver, upon Roman Bases of Carnation, richly adorn'd with Silver and Gold Lace; a green silk and silver Mantle, Purple Buskins laced up with Gold; on her Head a blackish curl'd hair, about which is a wreath of Fruits, leaves and flowers: In one hand a Cornu∣copia, in the other a Golden Fleece. Piety, In a Sable Robe, a silver Mantle, a fair hair, a Coronet of Gol∣den Stars, Golden Buskins laced with black ribon, bearing a Buckler in one hand, where, on a Mount Vert is a Crucifix proper; in the other a Banner on an Angelical Staff, bearing a Cross Gules in a Field Argent. His Lordship coming to a convenient stand, TRIUMPH makes an Address to him in this Speech. The Speech by TRIUMPH. MY Name is LONDON Triumph, Make me r, Hail to Your Lordship,—I am hither come With my Retinue to attend upon Bow Your Triple-crown'd Inauguration, Which doth an Emblem of your Honour shroud. You are the Sun-beams that break through the Cloud, The Sun in Aries, who are this year Brightly to shine in LONDON's Hemisphere▪ The influence with which you are indu'd, Are Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude.— point to them. To match with these, four bright Beams more are sent ye, Piety, Peace, with Purity and Plenty:— point to the other. These are those Graces which did wait upon Fitz-Alwin, Norman, Capel, Champion; With many such that were Lord Mayors, and Free Of ab' Ancient, Famous DRAPER's Company.
But they are gone down many years ago▪ And all their practis'd Virtues you renew, The beams that set with them do rise in you. The DRAPER's Company, with Ioynt-consent To serve your Fame, have liberally spent In Triumphs for this Day's Accomplishment▪ And wish it may as a good Omen be For the whole year of Your Prosperity: May Trade encrease, may Plenty fill the Fold, That you may turn your Fleeces into Gold. Jason at Colchos gain'd the Fleece 'tis true, But God-bless'd Gideon had his Fleece too▪ One was fictitious, to'ther ye may see Recorded in your Sacred History. But granting both, the Demi Gods of Greece Gain'd not more Fame than Gideon's blessed Fleece. May you in Peace and War so prosp'rous be T' have Jason's Gold, and Gideon's Victory. But I'm a Woman, and in speaking thus Prolix, I fear you'l think me tedious But pertinent; and I hope in Ioy and Pleasure, Your Lordship will allow of LONDON Measure. The Speech ended, the Scene moves through the multitude, and his Lordship with his Right Worshipful Retinue advanceth through Cheapside, where against Milkstreet end, his passage is obstructed, and his Patience invited to behold a second Pageant▪ the particulars of which are mani∣fested in this succeeding Description. The Second Pageant. A Triumphant Chariot elegantly adorned with Gilding and Painting; On the Supreme feat of this Chariot sitteth in great State MI∣NERVA, the Goddess of Arts and Arms, with long thick bright curl'd hair; On her Head a silver Helmet, in which is stuck a tall flourishing Plume of red Feathers, consisting of a sprig, and divers falls, with Silver
Armour, a Corslet of Gold about her Neck, a Golden Gauntlet, Carna∣tion silk-bases, fringed with Gold, a blew silk Scarff trim'd with Silver, a short sword by her side, with a rich Hilt; on her feet silver Buskins la∣ced up with scarlet Ribon: In one hand She holdeth a Lance, in the other a Target bearing the Companies Arms. In a descent, beneath her feet sitteth Vigilance, Valour and Victory, ac∣cording to these Descriptions: Vigilance, Is a beautiful Lady, attired in a yellow Robe, over which is a Sable Mantle fringed with Gold, and seeded with waking eyes, an aburn hair, a Chaplet of Ivie on her Head; in her right hand a Lamp, in her left a Bell. Valour, Hath on his Head a long black Peruke, a Buff-coat, with an imbroider'd Belt, an Orange-colour'd Scarff about his wast, a black Vel∣vet Mountier Cap, with a Plume of White, Red and Black Feathers in it: In his right hand a sword drawn, and in his left a Target, bearing the Golden Fleece. Victory, A Woman of Princely presence, clad all in Gold, and on a long bright hair curl'd, a wreath of Laurel, Golden Buskins laced with willow green, and silver Ribon: In one hand she beareth a silver Helmet, in the other a Crown of Gold. This Chariot is drawn by the Supporters of the Companies Arms, which are two large and lively carved Lions in Gold pellited, which are mounted by two Negro's in Robes of Silver, girt about with skie-colour'd Scarffs, Crowned with Coronets of various colour'd Feathers; the one representing Strength, the other Concord, each of them holding in one hand a Triple-Crown, and in the other the Companies Banner: His Lordship approach∣ing within audible distance is complemented by Minerva, with this Con∣gratulatory Poem. The Speech by MINERVA. I Am the Deity of Arms and Arts, My Soveraignty doth rule in all the parts Of the round Vniverse! 'Tis I, my Lord, That poize your Ballance, and direct your Sword: I guide all Bodies Politick and rule I'th Court, i'th' City, Country, Camp, and School: My Name's Minerva, It is I am she That indue men with Power and Policie:
Without which every thing would be undone, That hath a being underneath the Sun; Born of the Brain of Jove: I was made free, Of the Trasplendent Drapers Company, Before Fits-Alwin died, The first Lord Mayor Of London, who Continu'd in the Chair Twenty four years, and might for ought I know, If he bad never died, sat there till now; He govern'd by my Influence, and so The highest Potentates in Europe do. Jason with Argo and his Gods of Greece, Might have return'd from Colchos, all like Geese, Had not I help'd him to the Golden Fleece. I did without assault make all things hit▪ Not Jason's Buckler, but Minerva's Wit And Love, gain'd him the Prize. 'Tis I that do Assist the Scepter and the Sheep-hook too, Which with these stout Supporters shew I am Protectress of the Lion and the Lamb, Pointing to the Lions. The last, (though Innocent from doing harms) Doth yield Materials for Arts and Arms. In Ceremonial Times, men just and wise The Sheep did for their souls and bodies prize, Which serv'd for Food, Garment, and Sacrifice. I'm sure for Cloathing there may much be said, The Sheep's the Spring of all the Drapers Trade, That fertil Fleece which on his back is curl'd, Hath a great Traffick thorowout the World. Therefore may Trading evermore be free, To keep th' old Honour up of Draperie▪ May you, my Lord, be blest in your Command, May all things prosper that you take in Hand; And may Felicity for ever wait, On Sheldon's Honour'd Name in Church and State. This Speech ended, his Lordship expressed some signalities of appro∣bation, and with the Scarlet Cavalry of the Right Worshipful Aldermen, they Troop it through Cheapside: but by the way, my Lord is Courteously intercepted with a Third Pageant, being a Mountain Royally adorned with Princely Shepherds according to this description.
The Third Pageant. A Green Mountain naturally supplied with wild Bryers, Brambles, Shrubs, and Trees: Gradually ascending from the Base to the ex∣tream height: and on the top of it, is properly erected, a Rustick Structure, whereon sitteth in a stately posture, the Representation of PAN, the fictitious God of Shepherds: In a Robe of bright gray silk, and silver, girt with a gold Belt about his wast, A Peruke of darkish-brown-colour'd hair: And, on his head a Diadem of Wooll richly set with large bright sparkling Jewels: A green Scarf from the right shoulder to the left side, fringed with Gold: And from the left shoulder cross to the right side, a little Belt of Silver, on which hangeth a Silver Scrip. In his right hand he holdeth a Golden Sheep-hook, and in his left hand a Shepherds Golden Pipe. By him sitteth Syrinx (his best beloved Nymph) in a watchet silk, and silver Robe, a bright ash-colour and gold Mantle; a long bright hair, and on it a Garland of green Reeds and Flags, bound up with Water Lil∣lies, Yellow and blew Flowers de lis. In one hand a large flourishing Reed, in the other a Banner of the Companies Arms. At each side, a little below them, sit Two Couples of Princely Shep∣herds and Shepherdesses. Upon his right hand Strephon and Daphne; Corydon and Phillida. On the left hand, Damon and Amaryllis, Amyntas and Phillis. Their Dress. Strephon, In a silk russet and gold Robe, tied about with a yellow silk and silver Scarf, on which is hung at one side, a silver Scrip, on the other, a silver Bottle, of the Shepherd shape. A long curl'd black hair, and about it a Chaplet made of green Grass, in which are orderly mingled Butter Flowers, Daisies, Cow-slips, and other Meadow Flowers: On his Feet, Buskins of Silver, surfld with green and gold Ribons In his right hand a Silver Hook, and in his left hand, a Banner of the Kings. Daphne, In a Robe of grass-green and silver, tied about with a girdle of gold, with fair hair, and on it a Chaplet of Bayes, Buskins of Gold, a golden Scrip by her side, and in her right hand a golden Sheep-hook, in her left hand, a Banner of the Cities.
Corydon, In a Robe of Sea-green silk and silver, girt about with a gold Garter, flaxen hair, a wreath about his head, of Hips, Hawes, Black-ber∣ries, Sloes, wild Plumbs, Crabs, interwoven with their leaves, tip'd with silver and gold, golden Buskins, and golden Scrip, a silver Sheephook in one hand, and a Banner of the Lord Mayors in th' other. Phillida, In a Robe of Poppingjay-green Sarsnet and silver, girt about with a gray silk and gold Garter, on which hangeth a golden Scrip; a long curl'd black hair, and on it a Garland of Wood-bine intermingled with Violets, Primroses, Cowslips, Wood-roses and Eglantine; silver Buskins laced with Gold, a silver Sheep-hook in one hand, in the other the Golden-Fleece. Damon, Is invested with a Robe of French-green silk and Gold, a dark brown hair, a broad green hat faced with silver, button'd up on the left side with a Jewel, a shoulder-scarf of yellow silk and silver; a silver Scrip, green Buskins laced up with gold, a silver Sheep-hook in one hand, and a Banner of the Supporters in the other. Amaryllis, In a Carnation silk and silver Robe, with a shoulder-scarf of skie-colour and gold, a bright brown hair, a broad fine straw hat sil∣ver'd, faced with Carnation silk, and button'd up with a skie-colour'd silk and silver Ribon, silver Buskins laced with purple Ribon; a golden Scrip, in one hand a silver Hook, in the other, a Banner of the Virgin. Amyntas, In a Robe of Scarlet-colour'd Sarsnet and Gold, with a Mantle of purple and silver; Orange-colour Buskins laced up with pur∣ple Ribon, a fair curl'd hair, a straw hat gilt with Gold, fac'd with pur∣ple silk, button'd up with a scarlet and silver Ribon, a golden Scrip, a Sheep-hook of Gold in one hand, and a Banner of the Kings in the other. Phillis, In a purple silk and silver Robe, a Lemon-colour'd silk and gold Mantle, a curl'd black hair, a straw hat died crimson, faced with gold, turn'd up with a green silk and silver Ribon; Gold Buskins laced up with silver, a silver Scrip by her side, a silver Sheep-hook in one hand, in the other a Banner of the City. At the foot of this Mountain, upon the Stage standeth the Companies Crest, a Golden Ram in carved work, for magnitude bigger than the Life, on which sitteth a lovely Angelical Boy in a Robe of willow-green sarsnet and silver, holding a bridle of scarlet and silver Ribon in one hand, and a Banner of the Virgin in the other, tied to a golden Sheep-hook. His Lordship being fixt and fitted for Attention, PAN maketh Appli∣cation to him in this Poetical Composition.
The third Speech by PAN. I Am God PAN, that Deity which doth Secure th' Arcadian Folds, producing Cloth, Which tinctur'd with Scarlet or Purple Dye, Is fit for Regal Robes of Royalty, Wise Magistrates, and those Consular Powers Whom Wealth and Wisdom have made Senators: But hearing that (for Deities know all By Mercury Scout-Master-General Vnto the Gods) that out of Drapers-Hall, An Ancient Corporation should appear A Beam of Government, who in this sphere Should guide the London-Citizens this year, I from Arcadian-Plains made hast this way To add some little lustre to his Day. —Looks about. But which is He?—That question was not wise; Who ever look'd for Phoebus in the skies, Or which was Jove amongst the Deities? Fool that I am! This person must be he, —Looks on him. For I in every part of him can see Th' undoubted symptoms of true Dignity. Then to your Lordship I must now address, Whose great and matchless merit I confess, Is more than I am able to express. These Pastoral Princes with me came to wait —They all rise up. Vpon your Triumphs, and to Celebrate The honour of your Praetorship, and see Your Ancient, Worthy, Honour'd Company. Behold their Crest, a Golden Ram, from which All Drapers do grow consequently Rich. The Wealth of Colchos, by the men of Greece Was summ'd up in one word, The Golden Fleece; And here it is, a Fleece of a large growth Which yields the Draper, Meat, and Drink, and Cloth. No Ram, no Lamb, no Lamb, no Sheep can be, No Sheep, no Fleece, no Fleece, no Draperie.
'Tis not consider'd what the Ram can do, Their very Antleers, when Levites did blow, Batter'd the strong man'd Walls of Jericho. That Ram was a great Sacrifice, My Lord, Which ransom'd Isaac from the falling sword. But I'm too tedious, and I tire your sence I fear, My Lord, with my impertinence; For in brief rules of Regiment and Wit, My Godship to your Lordship must submit. His Lordship moving further, shewing evident signs that he was very well pleased with this Representation and Speech, meeteth another Scene of Drolls near St. Laurence-Lane-end, according to this description. The fourth Pageant. A Forrest or Desart properly accommodated with Herbage, Trees, Bushes, Birds and Flowers; with Sheep grazing: and in it several sorts of common Cotswold Shepherds, and Salisbury plain Shepherdesses in their Frolicks, Clad, some in Russet Gowns, White, Red, and Yellow Wastcoats; Gray, Blew and Green Petticoate, common straw Hats; Green, Blew and Russet Linsey-woolsy Aprons, Leathern Girdles about their middles; small shoulder-belts, on which are tied common Scrips, and Field Bottles, with Dogs, wooden Staves with Iron Sheep-hooks, with Pipes, Recorders, Flagellets, Bag-pipe, and Tumberley Bass; and whilst one part of them play, the other Dance, Tumble and Kiss in Rustick manner, and excellent confusion, which concludeth with a Shepherds Song, composed and adapted for that Scene: To which they all sing the Chorus whilst the Porters beat the burthen. The SONG. WHat an innocent loving life Shepherds do lead, In Grove, Field and Forrest, on Mountain and Mead! Although our low Cottages are thatch't above, Our hearts are well warm'd with the lining of Love: Chor. And when we'r' at leisure we laugh and be merry, With Cake-bread and Ale that's as brown as a berry.
In courting and sporting, we spend all the day, We fear not and care not how time runs away; And yet we can tell ye how nigh 'tis to Noon Or Evening, if we do but gaze on the Sun. But every night we do laugh and are merry, With Cake-bread and Ale, &c. We live as instructed by Father and Mother, Who teach us what we should do one to another, From frighting with fighting we care not a flea, Our Innocence is like a Navy at Sea; Which makes us so jocundly laugh and be merry, With Cake bread and Ale, &c. We multiply not with unnatural heats, Nor kiss by the strength of provocative meats: Our lively plump Issue that spring from our beds, Are fat, fair, and clear, like young Cherubims heads; Which fairly were got when we laugh'd and were merry, By the help of good Ale, &c. We feel not the cares which attend upon Crowns, Live free from the fears of great Cities and Towns; We seek not for Honour with Sword, Pike and Buff, We all are contented, and that's wealth enough: Not crafty, with safety we laugh and are merry, With Apples and Ale, &c. We make men revive, with our Singing and Dances; There's no flesh alive like Fidelia and Frances; At Trap-ball and Stool-ball, Rebecca and Rachel, Stephania doth stop well, and Katey can catch well: They trip it and lip it, they laugh and are merry, With Cheese-cakes and Ale, &c. With wild Curds and Custards, with Cheese-cakes and Pies, With Syder and Sugar, Cream and Straw-berries, Green Tanseys and White pots, with Fish, Fowl and Beast Our Table is spread at a Sheep-shearing Feast: And then w'ar' i'th' humour to laugh and he merry, With Bag-pipe and Ale, &c.
And thus have I giv'n you a tast of our Lives, Our breeding, our feeding, our sports, and our Wives, Our innocence, honesty, musick and mirth, That wait upon us from the day of our birth▪ And how in our humours we laugh and are merry, With Cakes and good Ale that's as brown as a berry. The Song being ended, the Foot Marshal having placed the Assistants, Livery, and the Companies on both sides of Kings street, and their Pen∣sioners with their Targets hung on the tops of their Javelins; in the Reer of them the Ensign bearers; Drums and Fifes in the Front; and hasten the Foyns and Budge-Batchellors, together with the Gentlemen-Ush∣ers to Guild hall, where his Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-Men with three Vollies more, which concludes their Duty. His Land-Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane so made into Guild hall, af∣ter which the Company repair to the Hall to Dinner; and the several Silk∣works, and Triumphs are likewise conveyed into Blackwell-Hall; and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the Pageants there refresh themselves until his Lordship hath dined at Guild-Hall; where (to make the Feast more famous) his Lordship is illustrated with the splendour and presence of their most Excellent Majesties, the Duke of York, Prince Ru∣pert, the Duke of Monmouth, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and all the other Bishops (at this time in LONDON) all the Resident Embassadors and Envoys, all the Lords of the Privy Council, all the Principal Officers of State, all the Judges and Serjeants at Law, and their Ladies. His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the City Musick begin to touch their Instruments with very artful fingers, and after a Lesson being played, and their Ears as well feasted as their Mouths; an acute person, with a good voice, good humour, and audible utterance (the better to pro∣voke digestion) sings this New Droll, Called The EPICURE. Sung by one in the habit of a Town Gallant. LET us drink and be merry, dance, Ioke, and Rejoice, With Claret and Sherry, Theorbo and Voice, The changeable World to our Ioy is unjust, All Treasure uncertain, then down with your dust. In Frollicks dispose your pounds, shillings, and pence, For we shall be nothing a hundred year hence.
Wee'l kiss and be free with Nan, Betty, and Philly, Have Oysters, and Lobsters, and Maids by the Belly; Fish Dinners will make a Lass spring like a flea, Dame Venùs (Love's Gdess) was born of the sea. With her and with Bacchus wee'll tickle the sence, For we shall be past it a hundred year hence. Your most beautiful Bit that hath all Eyes upon her, That her Honesty sells for a hogo of Honour; Whose Lightness and Brightness▪ doth shine in such splendor, That none but the Stars are thought fit to attend her. Though now she be pleasant and sweet to the sence, Will be damnable mouldy a hundred year hence. Then why should we turmoil in Cares and in Fears, Turn all our Tranquillity to Sighs and Tears? Let's eat, drink and play till the Worins do corrupt us, 'Tis certain, that post mortem nulla Voluptas. Let's deal with our Damsels, that we may from thence Have Broods to succeed us a hundred year hence. The Usurer that in the hundred takes Twenty, Who wants in his Wealth, and doth pine in his Plenty; Lays up for a season which he shall ne'r see, The Year of One thousand eight hundred and three. His Wit and his Wealth, his Law, Learning, and sence, Shall be turn'd into nothing a hundred year hence. Your Chancery Lawyer who by Conscience thrives, In spinning of Suits to the length of three Lives; Such Suits which the Clients do wear out in slavery, Whilst Pleader makes Conscience a Cloak for his knavery, May boast of his subtlety i'th' Present Tense, But Non est inventus a hundred year hence, Your most Christian Mounsieur who rants it in Riot, Not suffering his more Christian Neighbours live quiet; Whose numberless Legions that to him belongs, Consists of more Nations than Babel has Tongues:
Though num'rous as Dust, in despight of defence, Shall all lie in ashes a hundred year hence. We mind not the Counsels of such Bloody Elves, Let us set foot to foot, and be true to our selves; Our Honesty from our Good-fellowship springs, We aim at no selfish preposterous things. Wee'll seek no preferment by subtle pretence, Since all shall be nothing a hundred year hence. This frollick being ended, and well approved of, a hearty Cup of Wine is set round the Table; in the mean time, the Musick express their skill in playing divers new sprightly Airs, whilst another Musician with a Cup of Sack puts his Pipe in Tune to sing this ensuing Song. YOV that delight in Wit and Mirth, And love to hear such News; That come from all parts of the Earth, Turks, Dutch, and Danes and Jews. I'll send ye to the Rendezvouz, Where it is smoaking new; Go bear it at a Coffee-House, It cannot but be true. There Battails and Sea-fights are fought, And bloudy Plots displaid; They know more things than ere was thought, Or ever was bewray'd. No money in the Minting House, Is half so bright and new; And coming from the Coffee-House, It cannot but be true. Before the Navies fell to work, They knew who should be winner; They there can tell ye what the Turk, Last Sunday had to Dinner. Who last did cut Du Ruiters Corns. Amongst his Iovial Crew;
Or who first gave the Devil borns, Which cannot but be true. A Fisher man did boldly tell, And strongly did avouch, He caught a shole of Mackarell, That parley'd all in Dutch, And cry'd out, Yaw, yaw, yaw min hares And as the draught they drew, They stunk for fear that Monk was there, This sounds as if 'twere true. There's nothing done in all the World, From Monarch to the Mouse; But every day or night 'tis hurl'd, Into the Coffee-House. What Lilly or what Booker cou'd By Art not bring about; At Coffee-House you'll find a brood, Can quickly find it out. They know who shall in times to come, Be either made or undone; From great St. Peter's-street in Rome, To Turnbal-street in London. And likewise tell at Clerken-well, What Whore hath greatest gain; And in that place what brazen face Doth wear a golden Chain. They know all that is good or hurt, To damn ye or to save ye; There is the Colledge and the Court, The Country, Camp, and Navy, So great an Vniversity, I think there ne'r was any; In which you may a Scholar be, For spending of a penny.
Here men do talk of every thing, With large and liberal lungs; Like Women at a Gossiping, With double tire of tongues. They'll give a Broadside presently, 'Soon as you are in view; With stories that you'll wonder at, Which they will swear are true. You shall know there what fashions are, How Perriwiggs are Curld, And for a penny you shall hear All Novels in the World; Both old, and young, and great, and small, And rich and poor, you'l see; Therefore let's to the Coffee all, Come all away with me. Dinner being ended, and Night approaching; His Lordship being at∣tended by a private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is Con∣ducted to his Mansion-House, wihout that troublesome Night Ceremony which hath been formerly, when St. Pauls Church was standing: when his Lordship is Housed, those that attend on him, depart with Order and Conveniency; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by the Care of the Masters Artificers, lodged for that Night in Blackwell-Hall, till the next day following, and then they are to be conveyed to Drapers-Hall: To close up all, the Artists and the Artificers (each of them deserving ample Commendations) bid you Good-night. FINIS.
