J971A 12244436 56877
Lawyers Vnmask'd. OR, A Discovery of their Matchless Villanies, Intol∣lerable Oppressions, and most accursed practizes in perver∣ting the known Lawes of England from Summons to an illegall Capias for Debt. By which is discovered the great benefit and freedome that will accrew to the people of the Common wealth by the reformation of that destructive Law. With an appeale to the present Pow∣er for regulating the Law. By John Jones of Neyath, in Com. Brecon. Gent. The Contentes wherof is in the next page Luk. 11.46. Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye lade men with burthens grievous to be borne, &c. London, Printed for Thomas Matthewes at the Cock in Saint Paul's Church-yard. 1653.
SEVEN TREATISES IN Reference to the Reforming of the Law and Lawyers. 1. Every mans case, or Lawyers Routed. 2. The Judges Judged out of their own mouths. 3. Eight observable points of Law, fit to be known by every Justice of Peace. 4. The authority of a Justice of Peace. 5. The new Returna Brevium; or the Law returned from Westminster: to which is added the Petition of Right granted by King Charles the first. 6. Jurors, Judges both of Law and Fact. 7. The ry of bloud; or a true an∣swer to those 13 false Reasons of the Filicers, Attornies, &c. for the maintenance of Capias, and Arrest of men's bodies for Debt.
TO HIS EXCELLENCIE OL. CROMVVEL, Lord General of the Army of the Common∣wealth of England. The Humble Petition of John Jones Gent. and others. Shewing,
THat whereas your Petitio∣ner Jones, and another were committed and kept prisoners in the Fleet by the Ba∣rons of the exchequer, for execu∣ting Commissions under the Seal of that Court, and Teste of the Lord Wild for the discovering of diverse lands in diverse Counties forefeited to the Common-wealth, and con∣cealed from them: Which your Pe∣titioners have found out by theOaths of lawful men, and returned as they were commanded, some of them to the said Court upon the expirations of their Commissions. And have another unexpired with the Inquisitions thereupon made & found in their hands, which Com∣missions and Inquisitions that were filed, the said Barons having no∣tice by the Lawyers hired to at∣tend them by the Concealers of the said Lands, that the Petitioner Jones wrot the book called Judges judged out of their own mouthes, and other books which he dedica∣ted to your honour and your Army, against corrupt Lawyers and their unlawful practises, for their own unconscionable gaines and extor∣tions contrary to all Law, Justice and Equity, & in subversion thereof, In their malignity to Jones, looked upon their own Commissions as erroneous and unwarrantable by Law (though presidented by learned and Judi∣cious Lawyers in former ages) which presidents, the now Barons and Lawyers disregarding for the respect aforesaid, have ordered all the said Commissions to be suppressed and no more such to issue. And thosethat were together with the said In∣quisitions thereupon to be vacated, to the dammage of the Common∣wealth found & to be fined
100000. The legallity of which proceed∣ings is a matter of great concern∣ment decidable by Law, wherein (if the Barons have erred in their Commissions, and Commands) The Commissioners that did but exe∣cute the same, ought not to be in∣prisoned and condemned by such Barons, nor the Common-Wealths Interest be determined or waved by them, without Consent of Par∣liament and decision of the law up∣on the matter at large, being too much mischief to be committed or suffered to be done to the Common∣wealth in the general, your Peti∣tioners in particular, and to the Law it self by such dunstable Barons, as dare assume the chair of Judicature, upon the strength of their late un∣reasonable Statute for their excuse by way of misprision. Which is as much to say they may do what they list under the name of mistake. And so they may mistake not onely the Law of England, but also the Law of God in both Testaments. Inall which it is an Infallible Scrip∣ture, Ignorance is no Plea.
The premisses tenderly considered, may it please your honours to mediat to the house that the commitee for the Regulating of the Law be im∣powered to examine the Petitioner Jones and all his proceedings, and the legallity thereof, according to the ancient practise of the funda∣mental Law of England; and al∣so the illegallity and present pra∣ctise of the now Judges and Law∣yers, contrary to the former, and to certifie their opinions therein to the house for Reformation to be had as to Law shall appertain. And that none of the Judges or pro∣sessed Lawyers, who have declared themselves, your Petitioner. Jones his adversaries, be admitted to be his Judges, though members of the house, or of the Committee afore∣said. And that the Warden of the fleet be required to Inlarge your Petitioner Jones upon Reasonable bayle to attend the said Committee, and the house, until his cause be determined. And that the Barons be Commanded forthwith to restore the said Commissions and Inquisi∣tionsto the file, which they have or∣dered to be taken off. And to issue more such Commissions to any that shall require them in the behalf of the Common-Wealth. And that the Commission & inquisitions re∣maining in the Petitioners hands be returned to the said Committee to be determined accordingly. And your Petitioner Jones shall pray, &c.
Dedicated to the Common∣wealth in general with this short epistle, As the voice of the peo∣ple is said to be the voice of God, let the glory of God be the voice and vote of his people. Amen yours Iohn Jones. The case is. THat Right once so known ought to be so continued and maintained to the Right heir by the supream magistrate, who is the Immediat vice-gerent of God the Father, Protector of Right and truth, and hater of deceipts, and falsities, nay is all and always himself nothing but Truth, Right, Justice, Love, Mercy, and Equity, un∣changeable, everlasting, whose vice-Royes therefore ought not to carrry his sword in vain, but defend Right, and cut off wrong at all times, all opposers and oppositions
to the contrary notwithstanding: And to restore and Revive right, if suppressed or mortified by any force or fraud: how or how long soever any false laws, made by false Lawyers, contrary to the laws of God and Nature, and to the great Charter of England notwithstand∣ing, proved by principles of Divi∣nity, maxims of Law, And axioms of Philosophy as followeth. God is almighty Gen. 17.1. yet cannot lie Heb. 6.18. Lawyers can bend their tongue like a bow to speak lyes Jer. 39.5. (In every court at
Westminster nothing more com∣mon, especially Chancery) They have made their statutes of cham∣pertite to deter all men but them∣selves to take any part of poor mens Rights, to recover the rest from their oppressors, that forciblie and fraudulently detain all from them: their statutes of Fines and Recove∣ries to Establish the Right of the oppressed in the oppressor, their statute of Limitation to continue that wrong for ever, that cannot be righted within such a time as to their gain by both parties: They spin out with delayes in Law, andmake the right that it can be but Remediless by their Law for ever. Their Statutes to imprison men for debt, and make all banckrupts to inrich themselves, and many more, which I shall not here speak of in particular, but wish them for all their Inventions in general, to hear the word of the Lord, saying, ye scornful men that Rule his people, because ye have said we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement. When all the over-flowing scourge shall pass through, It shall not come unto us, for we have made lies our Refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves; Isa: 28.15. Therefore thus saith the Lord, I lay in Zion, for a foundation, a stone &c. Judge∣ment also will I lay to the line, and Righteousness to the plummer, and the hail shall sweep away the Re∣fuge of lies &c. And your Covenant with death shall be disanulled &c. When the over-flowing scourge shall Pass through, then ye shall be troden down by it vers. 16.17.18. God is everlasting Deut. 33.27. Immutable in his promise and divine Counsel
Heb. 6.18. his truth endureth to all generations Psal. 100.5.117.2.146.6. But the Vi∣perous generation of Lawyers con∣fine and limit it by their Statutes, that it shall by their consents in∣dure no longer, nor reach further than they please. The lip of truth shall be established for ever. Prov. 12.16. But Lawyers lips and la∣bour run counter. Buy the truth and sell it not Prov. 23.23. But Lawyers sell the Law which in it self is truth, and buy false titles. And purchase to themselves great Reve∣news without Right Psal. 19.8. God is a god of truth Psal. 31.5. Isa. 65.16. Jer. 10.16. 2. Cor. 1.18. And Commandeth his children not to lie one to another, Levit 19.11. Col. 3.9. And a Righteous man hateth lying Prov. 33.5. The devil is the father of lies and liers Jo. 8.44. He that speaketh lies shall not escape Prov. 19.5. but shall perish: vers. 9. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked: Prov 29.12. our Lawyers love lying and make their livings thereof. Whose sons and servants they be, I leave to the Judgement of God and his Saints.
God is a God of peace, yea even the everlasting Father and Prince of peace, of the Increase of his go∣vernment and peace, there shall be no end, upon the throne of Da∣vid and upon his kingdom to or∣der it and to establish it with Judgement, and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hoasts will perform this Isa. 9.6.7. Now my Lord Ge∣neral, and all you valiant and in∣comparable Commanders, officers & souldiers of the hoast of God, rais∣ed and continued by Gods provi∣dence for the Reformation, as well as preservation of this our English, Israel, digest these promises of the Lord of hoasts into your hearts, Act them with your hands, confide in his zeal who telleth you he will perform, & sear not the vain threats of Babling lying Lawyers, who out of the confusion which they find in their Consciences, since they are uncased of their Canting pedlers french, have lately and frequently menaced you behind your backs, that if you should offer to ungown them, they would unsword you: yet perswade you to your faces that their said Statutes and the like were by their predecessours de∣vised, and are by them maintained for preservation of peace. Consi∣der what peace it is that establish∣eth wrong insteed of Right de∣ceipt & falsehood insteed of Truth and Righteousness. Is it a peace for any but themselves and their Adherents, to withhold heir wrongfull possessions from the Right heirs and owners. Doth not the Lord tell you and them, there is no peace to the wicked? Isa. 48.22. And Moses forbid you to seek their peace, Deut. 23.6. Have not you a further promise of God which concerneth not them, saying, the Lord will bless his people with peace Psal. 29.11. Not Scribes and Pharises, the chief Lawyers in Christs time, who denounced eight woes against them. Matth. 27.
Luke. 11. And not such peace as can be separated from Righteous∣ness, for saith the Royal Prophet, Righteousness and peace have kis∣sed each other Psal. 85.10. Believe them nor therefore that have heal∣ed the daughter of my people slightly, saying peace, peace, whenthere is no peace. Were they a∣shamed when they committed ab¦homination, nay they were not a all ashamed, neither could they blush, Therefore they shall fall a∣mongst them, that fall at the time that I visit them. They shall be cast down saith the Lord Jer. 6.14.15. God is a God of Love, and com∣mandeth each child of his, thou shalt love thy neighbours as thy self,
Levit 19.18. Matth. 5.43. Mark. 12.31. were Lawyers Gods children, and loved their neigh∣bours as themselves, how could they cheat them as they do, and possess themselves and their brood by force, fraud and deceipt of all they can of their neighbours rights, and by such means make them∣selves so potent and numerous a generation, as they are in this land. Yet if thou shalt say in thy heart These nations are more than I, how can I dispossess them. Thou shalt not be affraid of them: But shalt well remember what the Lord thy God did to Pharaoh, and unto all Aegypt Jer. 7.14.15. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge and his Statutes, andhis Judgements and his Comman∣dements always. And know you this day, for I speak not with you children, that have not known and which have not seen the Chastise∣ments of the Lord your God, his mighty hand and stretched-out Arm, and his miracles &c. Deut 11.1.2.3. Oh love ye the Lord all his Saints, because he hath set his love upon you. Therefore will he deli∣ver you Psal
91.14. But favour no oppressour, and know that in a ma∣gistrate to spare them is to help them: Which who doth, let him hear what the Son of a Prophet asks such a magistrate, and Answers himself. Shouldst thou help the un∣godly, and love them that hate the Lord: Therefore is a wrath upon thee from before the Lord 2. Chron. 19.2. And learn of a Prophet these ensuing Characters of the ungodly. Who hate the good and love the evil, who pluck their skins from off them, and their flesh from their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the Cauldron (who when they shall be visited) Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hearthem, he will even hide his face from them at that time as they have behaved themselves in their do∣ings, Thus saith the Lord concern∣ing the Prophets that make (his) people err, that bite with their teeth and cry Peace Micah 3.2.3.4.5. More principles of divinity could I alleadge for this purpose, might I think these Joyned with all our experiences should not suffice to describe our Westminster Lawyers, in their own kinds and colours, but believieng thus much will serve for this time, I shall apply my self to the Maxims of the Law of England, which I find conducing to the same end as followeth. First Right cannot dye saith Lit∣tleton, Sect 479. And Cook upon the place fol 279. Yea, although the disseised should Release his Right to the disseisee, or turn Te∣nant, It is inconvenient that the Right should dye, but live Recove∣rable in and to his heir. Which if true (as all Maxims are or ought to be) How can our Recent and pre∣sent Judges and Lawyers, that mur∣ther this everlasting Right with their Statutes of Fines, Limitations,
&c. maintain their predecessors Inventions against the Law of God, the great Charter, and this Maxim, without appearing manifest sub∣verters of the Law of England, which Doctor & Student affirmeth, and the mirrour of Justice proveth punctually by Analysis. And these men themselves sometimes bragg of to be derived from, and grounded upon the Laws of God, and nature, According to the Advise of Eleu∣therius the 3. to King Lucius recor∣ded by Mr Fox & others, and con∣sequently Traitors to the Law and Common-wealth, whose estates Re∣al and Personal ought to be con∣fiscated to the use of the Common-wealth, from which they filched them (as I have proved to be their own censures in my treatise called Judges judged out of their own mouths) And their costly Carrion Carcases, fit to be hanged as 44. of their predecessors were in one year in King Alfreds time, as witness the mirrour page 239.240.241.242.243. &c. Secondly it is a Maxim of
Plou∣den in his Commentaries upon the Law of England, Resolved in the Earl of Lesters Case. That all hu∣mane Laws made contrary, or not consentaneous to the Laws of God and nature, although by Acts of Parliament, are void, and need no Repeal to vacate them: Which if true, how can our filicers maintain their blasphemous Rea∣sons Printed, and published under their hands, and Continue their extortions. And how can the Judges and pleaders of the Law, Countenance or suffer them and their prothonotaries, and the Rest of their ministers, to continue their said extortions, and increase them more than ever before? And do the same themselves without in∣curring the penalties aforesaid. Thirdly it is a positive Maxim of Law declared in the great Charter cap 29. That no freeman of England shall be disseised of his Inheritance or birth-right, without the Judge∣ment of his peeres and vicine neigh∣bours. Which if so, how can any disseisor disseise or dispossess any freeman of
England of his inheri∣tance or birth-right by force or fraud? Or how can any Judge or pleader of the Law countenance, ormaitain, or suffer such disseises unrestored by them to the right heirs without incurring like penal∣ties as aforesaid. Fourthly it is another Maxime declared in the said Charter cap. 11. and approved by the mirrour page. 234. That no Common Pleas shall follow the upper bench (which if true) how can the Judges of the upper bench by Law Commit men for debt, which is a Common Plea? That hath no Relation to fellony, trespass upon the case, trespass vi et armis, or any trespass at all, to their marshallsey, or any bayliff ar∣rest them, or any Gaylor Receive & detain them, upon bills of Mid∣dlesex, and Latitates (which ex∣presly run for Trespass) and fa∣mish them to death (an Incom∣parable false Imprisonment and murther) in the name of Law and Custom because long practised, not onely without any colour of Law, but expresly against it without in∣curring like penalty as aforesaid.
Fifthly it is a chief Maxim of the Law of England, that the Law it self is and ought to be the onely Right, full, and sufficient, Rule ofall Judges and Lawyers, by which they ought to be ruled, and not offer or presume to over-rule their Rule, which if they could but right∣ly understand (saith Cook upon Magna Charta) would never suffer them to err; had Baron Tomlius un∣derstood this Rule, he had not tumbled himself upon his tellclock seat as he did to convay the poor opinion of a pratling Barrester, which stood on his left hand to ano∣ther Baron that sate on his Right, to hasten my Commitment to the fleet, in respect of my books, not my cause or had his fellow Barons known how unlawfull it is that I should be examined upon interrogatories, by or before such Judges as declared themselves my adversaries in their open Court. Or how little I care for their malice, I believe they would not have been so hasty to commit me as they were, but shall Judges and Lawyers, that profess know∣ledge in Law, subvert it when they please, by pleading misprision, that is to say mistake. And their late Statutes made for that pur∣pose, and alleadging, that if they should be hanged, none would be
Judges after them. Did King Al∣fred find it so, did not a heathen King make the Son sit Judge over a cushion, which he had caused to be made of his fathers skin, His Predecessor Judge in the same place, to mind him, that if he would violate the Law as his father did, he would serve him alike? doth not our Law compell men to be Shreiffs and Constables &c. If they Resuse being chosen? And do not we find such Refusers, when they are sworn officers, fittter and honester men than offerers. Are not I gno∣rant intruders without either choise or approbation of their Countries, worthiest to be hanged of all Inter∣lopers, for taking & keeping places of Judicatures from more knowing Justicers; Baron Thorpe insisted much in Court upon the statutes of misprision, whereof a Judge of his name could make no use to save his hanging, nor did his hanging deter the Baron to become a Judge, & an over-ruler of the exchecquer Court, though not half so knowing a Justi∣cer as his names sake, or Wild his foreman. Who is so Just as to detain 500. l. Land a year from the Right heir, without any good title (as is Reported) And therefore thought it Just to wayve and damane his own Commission to Inquire for such things, and punish me for the ex∣cuting of it. To conclude this point, were all prevaricating Law∣yers hanged, honester men would be found for their places. And have they not incurred the said penalty by this Maxim.
Sixthly, it is a Maxim of truth and common reason, chief grounds of our Common-Law, That force, sraud and deceipt are the greatest opposites and enemies to all Just Laws. And that all Just Laws are or ought to be sufficiently power∣full to subdue and supplant them. And that therefore it is that the sword is put into the Magistrates hand not to hold in vain. And wis∣dom put in his head to discern and prevent, or punish frauds and de∣ceipts more dangerous than force, because more clandestinely acted, & under colour of Law, while force thrusteth it self to sight, and defies Justice to her face, chance what will. This is Justice Northyes Reso∣lution, the other Bayliff, and Will∣mot.But do not all such Judges, as prefer wrong before Right, and falshood before truth, Incurr the said penalty. Seventhly, it is a Maxim of Rea∣son, that all nations are or ought to be governed by Just Laws. And that their supream Magistrates should want no Power or means to execute their Laws, so that their Subjects should have Right at all times without delay or partiallity, or more cost than the cure is worth. And thus much was agreed upon between the Kings people of Eng∣land, in and by the great
Charter cap 29. And is not the great Char∣ter confirmed by above 33 Parlia∣ments, corroborated upon the Petition of Right Tertio Caroli, and Ratified by this Parliament, which if it be so, how can it be said that any Statutes made contrary to the Law of God and nature, and the great Charter, shall stand up a∣gainst them, although not expresly Repealed. Or how can they be al∣leadged to bind the supream Ma∣gistrates, that are sworn to do and maintain Right and Justice to all men, at all times, in all places of the land by their proper sub∣ordinates in every County from so doing, but by traitors to God and the Common-Wealth? or how can the Judges at Westminster con∣fine and contract all the Law of England in and to Westminster, and into 4 terms yearly to be onely de∣termined by them, that surcharged with multiplicity & aboundance, end not a Rich cause in 7 years, nor a poor mans while he lives. And when they seem to finish a cause or decree or Judgment, it is more to their gain than their necks are worth, and cost to their Judicated than their causes are worth, (nor do they commonly finish any cause at any time, but leave it upon a quillet, whereupon to revive it at their pleasures without their incurr∣ing like penalties as aforesaid. Eightly, and lastly, It is a com∣mon Maxim, not onely of common reason, but also of the express Law of England. That by the Law of the Land no man is bound to accuse himself; If so, what mean∣eth the Jesuitical Spanish Inquisi∣tion, Introduced to the Exchec∣quer and Chancery of England to
interrogate men against themselves, and imprison them untill (to attain their liberties) many faint-hearts are forced to perjure themselves, to accuse themfelves of things where∣of they are guiltless. That Judges and Lawyers and their Impes may beget causes to extort Fees as well by Innocent mens forced Oaths against themselves, as by their own wilfull and malitious perjuries against all men but themselves. Whereby contrarie to Saint Pauls Doctrine, that an Oath for confirmation is unto men an end of all strife, Heb. 6.15. Lawyers make it a beginning, and contrarie to Gods command∣ment, saying, love no false Oath, Zachar. 8.17. Lawyers love to force, procure, and multiply them. And shall they not incurre the said penalty by this Maxim? So much for Law Maxims for this occasion at this time, to con∣clude with Axioms of Philosophy conducing to this matter.
Health is the greatest happi∣ness man can desire. Sphinx Theo∣logica Philosophica de Medicina, pag. 539. It is twofold, that is tosay, first of the Soul, for which Christ is the onely Physician, who to ease man of his sin, the chief cause of all diseases, both Ghost∣ly and humane, took upon him∣self, that had none, all the sins of the World. And died to re∣deem all penitents from eternall death, the due punishment for sin. The second is of the body, for which the best man Physici∣an called by God to that voca∣tion, and gifted accordingly, is to be honoured before many, be∣cause by his faculty with Gods assistance the Corporal afflictions of many are restored to sound health, the agony of others qualified; And which is most of all wor∣thy consideration, stayes the Souls of many in the prisons of their bodies (by Gods Providence) un∣till longer and seasonable times of Repentance & amendment of their lives. And these are the gifts of God, and endeavours of good Phy∣sicians. Contrary-wise our Judges and Lawyers, and their monstrous ma∣ny headed whelps requite their patient profitablest clients with,
not onely sickness both of souls & bodies, but also the death of both, so far as in their power lieth, as is proved by wofull experience thus. Debters, not able to pay their debts, are committed for their debts upon capiases, Latitates, and out-laries for trespass, by the Judges of the upper bench, be∣ing no Judges in that case, to their marshallsie; become there sickned in their minds and souls upon such their commitments, conside∣ring there is no Law to Warrant such doings, but the willfull Cu∣stoms and practise of the said sup∣posed Judges, to murther men in and under the name of their Law, for their own gain and superflu∣ities, worse than high-way-men that act manfully to relieve their wants. By the name and Custom of Lawless necessity, for which, if convicted of the fact, they sub∣mit to the Law, which Lawyers would defeat by calling their facts misprisions, which in effect are prises less lawfull: than Robbers, and more abusefull to the Law and Common-Wealth, because committed under colour of Law
and Justice. Further the sickness of the minds and souls imprisoned, is aggravated with the considera∣tion of the wants, and miseries which their wives, children and fa∣milies (that were wont to be su∣stained by their libertie to care and provide for them) must indure by their Captivitie, their bodies and their families participating of these and more griefs of their souls. But more sensible of their hunger and thrist, cold, and nakedness when they have sould even their apparrell as well for night as day, to pay their Goalors and their ma∣sters extortions; and prolong their own miseries so farr as their abi∣lities last. And the cruelty of their Goalers (when they fail to bribe them) in crouding them in dun∣geons where they must infect on another, with a necessitated Con∣tagion caused by their Goalers covetousness, to gain by hiring all the Rooms and liberties of the prison, ordained by Law to lawfull prisoners, to cheators, voluntary prisoners, & willfull assumers of the denomination of prisoners, to de∣feate their Creditors of their Rights
by which they live Riotously upon their Creditours charge, & their Cre∣ditours perish for want of their own. Judges, Lawyers, Gaolers live, & flou∣rish by the ruine of them both, grant∣ing liberties to all such said chea∣tours, contrary to all Law, to walk and take their pleasures as they list, some throughout England, and o∣thers to the East and West-In∣dies. And thereby feasting their bo∣dies and their Impes upon the fast of their finders, and thriving in their wickedness till God rebuke them. The Warden of the Fleet I find by Law is no Goaler within the Statute of H. 6. And by experience a Gentleman merci∣full and affable to the poor, satiable and unburthensom to the Rich, compassionate, and comfortable to all his prisoners, so that (by Gods providence and his clemency,) he and we live wholsom in our bodies, and cheerfull in our hopes. I write not this digression in flattery; but in duty to declare truth as I find it. So returning to my tenet, it is the sickness and death of the Souls and bodies of all their Clyents and their Families, (except those of theirConsorts) that the Art of our mo∣dern Lawyers practiseth upon, And if perchance they ease a Rich clyent of some part of his pain for their own extracrdinary gain (ex∣cept their deed be taken for their will) they shall hardly obtain hea∣ven by their merit. These are the instigations of the Devil, & indeavours of bad Lawyers. It is the health of their patients souls and bodies that the art of Physitians worketh upon. And although some Medica∣sters, that have not the art, Intrude into the profession, and kill more than they cure for want of skill, not good will, their will being taken for their deed pleads more in mercy than Lawyers misprisions. It is an Axiom which Theode∣ctes a famous Philosopher, Cited by Stobaeus in his
66. Sermon, That all men endowed with natural abillities desire 2 things before they have them, which many when they have them, desire to be rid of. That is to say old age and wives. Cicero upon Cato Major maintai∣neth the same in effect. The cau∣ses of these 2 desires are twofould. That is to say in good men fordivine ends, In bad men for their worldly pleasures, Their summum bonum, beyond which they have neither hopes nor desires: But for the desires of good men to be old men, Ambrose Hex lib 1. saith, that although old age, in most men, is most subject to corporal Infirmi∣ties, It sooner endeth the mise∣ries of this life, and openeth the gates to a happier. In good man∣ners it is most decent, In Counsel most subtile, in constancy to im∣brace death most stable, in Re∣pressing lusts most strong, and fi∣nally the Infirmitie of the body, is the sobriety of the mind.
In bad men their desire of old age is to prolong their earthly pleasures in their enjoyment of o∣ther mens Rights, which they pos∣sess by force, or fraud or both, and famishing the Right heirs in dun∣geons, while they pamper their own bodies and their Impes in their sumptuos Pallaces, built up∣on their prisoners Inheritances. Living in which Condition we may observe them in their health se∣cure, in their sickness timorous, and Commonly distracted, in theirdeaths desperate, in manners rio∣tous, in counsel wicked, in lusts insa∣tiable, finally the strength of their bodie is the madness of their minds. And are not these the true Characters of our Lawyers and their adherents. To the next point, good men love to meet with good Wives, like Isaac and Rebecca, to be their Consorts, Comforts and helpers in goodness, to propagate Saints as well by their examples of life and Conversation, as by their naturall endowments to ac∣complish the end of their Creati∣ons, that is to say, to fullfill the number of the elect, to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven by the merits of their Saviour. And in the time of their pilgrimage, and way thi∣ther, to indeavour the Increase of the glory of God, and the Peace, Love, and Unity, of his people in this world. Bad men desire weal∣thy wanton mercenary Wives, to be their Companions and helpers in mischiefs, as
Isabel was Achabs. To incarnate and multiply De∣vils as well by their examples of life and Conversation, as by their natural endowments to accom∣plishthe end of their miscreancie. Briefly to cooperate with them in all endeavours to increase the delusions and dominion of the De∣vil, and the sedition, hatred and en∣mity of this world. So that at last they must as brothers in Iniquity, with Antichrist, become possessed of hell, where there is endless sorrow and gnashing of teeth, a place provided for them before the world began, from which God deliver us: But are not these also true characters of our Lawyers?
Popes, that have thought them∣selves as omnipotent as Common Lawyers, never offered to divorce men from their Wives, but where they Judged the marriage unlaw∣full for some Reason, or pretence of Reason in their Laws. But our Lawyers and their Goalors &c by fetching men from the Remotest parts of England to Westminster, and Committing and detaining of them for debts, or most com∣monly for supposed debts or tres∣passes without any colour of Law, while their adversaries (most fre∣quently Lawyers Attorneys) &c. In∣sinuate, sollicite, and at last, bytheir diligence, lies, false messa∣ges from their husbands, and other diabolicall practises, over∣come their feminine frailties, and make them their Whores, get their consents to possess them∣selves of all their husbands estates, reall and personall, consume part of the personall to feast their Whores at the lower end of their tables, where their own Wives sit at the upper, and their families be∣tween. While they contrive Con∣veyances with fines and procla∣mations to assure their prisoners Reall estates to themselves and their heirs, to which their bewitch∣ed Whores give way, and their Imprisoned husbands never hear of the matter till too late to be re∣medied by our Lawyers Law. Is not this more and worse than a po∣pish divice: Others they fetch from nearer parts Prisoners to their Marshallseas, suffer their Wives to boord and bed with them untill they have sould beds and all, and then failing to satisfie extortions, their husbands are dungened and their Wives cast & kept out in the street, except yielding to the lustof a turn-key, such as he liketh, be let in to serve his turn and after turned again to the rest in the street, where often they and their children starve, not daring when they find any scraps to aneer their husbands and parents, to relieve them with any till all be starved. In streets and dungeons Husbands Wives and Children. Creditors look after your debts, what might have payed you part, if nor all in time, had you taken a lawfull Course, Goalers and their partners have parted in fees, usurer dye with grief, not for the loss of thy debters but the debt and boast of thy Revenge, thou hast dice of his bones. Is not this more and worse than the Popes divorce, yet more and worse then this, Judges and Goalers do in diverting and restraining the Saints of God from his service, and hearing of his word preached, by which faith commeth and is maintained, so farr as in them lieth, except when in malice to some Orthodox minister, not love to the prisoners they cast him amongst them, not to the end to better them, but to worse himself.
The premisses considered, Let all men assure themselves, God hath a greater quarrel with this Nation than can be appeased till the land be cleared of such Achans. Par∣liament spue them out, Army drag them out, to quarter them is freer for thee than any free quarter in the Countrey. Because their wealth, filched from the Common-Wealth, ought to be restored to it, and to thee first that best deservest thy share therein Read the Histories of England, and find Lawyers the causes of all our Civil Wars in all ages, observe what success we have at this present by imploying men of that profession to mediate with forriners for Peace, and so souldiers look to your own, and fare well upon your own, which the Law maketh and will maintain to be your own as shall be made good to his death, by your faithfull and loving friend Iohn Jones.
The Generall Case concerning the relief of right Heirs, dis∣possessed of their Estates by force and fraud THat Right once known so to be by Records, or other suffi∣cient testimonies, ought to be so continued and maintained by the Supream Authority, appeareth by the writ of Right both patent and close, both in the Register and Fitz-Herberts Natura Brevi∣um declared at large, commanding inferiour Magistrates to hold right in its right place against all de∣forcement committed by force or fraud, and that without delay, and so righteously and fully, Ne amplius inde clamorem audiamus. 2. That as what is right, is just, & what is just, is right; So the Supream power is bound to maintain both, without deniall, delay, or corrup∣tion, appeareth by the great Char∣ter, which saith, we shall deny, delay, or sell Justice to no man.
3. That not to do right andmaintain it, is in a Magistrate, to do wrong and maintain it, is a Principle of common reason, which is one of the chief grounds of all humane Laws. 4. That all Supream Magi∣strates, are or ought to be bound by Oath to maintain right and truth against force and fraud, to all their Inferiors; and both to restore and defend the oppressed, and punish the Oppressor, appeareth by the Oaths of Kings, and late Co∣venants and Votes of this Parlia∣ment, the performance and pra∣ctise whereof, is all that ought to be wished by any wronged person. 5. That by virtue of such Orths, Votes, and Covenants, & the Autho∣rity upon that Trust setled in the Su∣pream Magistrate, he becometh in∣teressed in all mens Rights; so that when they are wronged, the Party grieved ought to sue for re∣dress, as well for the State, as for himself, as appeareth by the Writ of Deceipt and discourse there∣upon in Fits. Herbert; Natura Bre∣vium, and the Register, and Rastall and Cooks Books of Entires at large.
6. The Sepream Magistrate be∣ing so invested in the right of the oppressed, cannot be disinvested, disseised, expulsed, or outed of that Right by any inferiour, having the posse or Power, not onely of the County, but also of the Law and Common-Wealth, to right and re∣store the Party expulsed to that Right remaining in the Eye of the Law fixt in the Magistrate; so that it can be said to be but intruded upon, and wrongfully detained from him, and not disseised or ex∣pulsed, and the Party grieved and expulsed of his right of possession, hath a right of Inheritance by des∣cent, as appeareth by Inquisitions upon post mortem, where the Party grieved is found Heir to his Father or Cosin; and said, that the Inheri∣tance of right, is descended and come Prout Lex postulat to him, and the Writ of Right determineth as well the right of Inheritance, as the right of possession, as appear∣eth by the judgements thereupon related by both Rastall and Cooks Books of Entries at large.
7. That the late Statutes for Champertie, Fines, and Limitations,reach not to the Supream Magi∣strate, that is sworn to restore and maintain right, without any respect of time, person, or condition, appeareth rational and necessary in constru∣ction of Law, to save his Oath. 8. That they are void Laws, ap∣peareth by three Reasons, ratified by sound and approved Lawyers: First, for that they are contrary to the Law of God, which admitteth of no time or means to bar or keep a man from his Right, but his own Decree upon the merit of the Par∣ty interressed; as the Captivity of the Israelites in Babylon & Aegypt for seasons; or the consent of the Party to devest himself of his Right by slighting it; as Esau sold his Birtht right for a mess of Pottage: Secondly, for that they are against the great Charter which alloweth of no Disseision or Possession gain∣ed thereby: Thirdy, for that, where Deceipts are the Grounds of Fines, those Deceipts found and proved, shake off all Buildings raised there∣upon, as appeareth by the pro∣ceeding usuall upon that Writ in the Books of Entries and Tearms of the Law.
9. That Parties grieved have used to intitle the Supream Power for the time being to their Rights of Inheritance, by Gifts, Grants, and Forfeitures, upon Conditions not performed, whereby to over-power those that over-powred them appeareth by severall Presidents extant. 10. That the Exchecquer, is the proper Court for the intituling of the Supream Power to such rights, appeareth by the Great Charter, which established it severall Ages before the Chancery came to being: and the practice there was never discontinued, as appeareth by Com∣missions granted to inquire, and Inquisitions returned there, and Proceedings had thereupon in all ages. 11. That the Supream Power being intituled, ought not to be suspended or Wayved without his consent, is to be considered. 12. That an Attachement be∣fore summons, is an unlawfull Pro∣cess, especially against such, as of∣fer to appear gratis, appeareth more hasty, than wise in the Procu∣rers.
The premisses considered, and the Weight thereof being matter of Law, and the profit tending to the enabling of the Parliament to pay their debts, and discharge their Trusts to the Common-Wealth, and the opposition made in this case, being but by such as have gained the Estate, and Right of the Com∣mon-Wealth to their own parti∣cular possession by fraud or force, and further gained Acts of Par∣liament contrary to the Law of God, and the great Charter, to set∣tle them in other mens Rights, un∣der pretence of a peaceable way, contrary to the Scripture, No Peace to the wicked, let all honest and right Christians deliberately ponder the matter, and ayd the Truth in what they may, so cra∣veth the well-wisher of all such, Iohn Jones. FINIS.
JUDGES JUDGED out of their own mouthes. OR The QUESTION Resolved by MAGNA CHARTA, &c. Who have been Englands Enemies, Kings Seducers, and Peoples Destroy∣ers, from Hen. 3. to Hen. 8. and before and since. Stated by Sr. EDVVARD COKE, Knt. late L. Chief Justice of England. Expostulated, and put to the Vote of the People, by J. JONES, Gent. Whereunto is added Eight Observable Points of Law, Executable by Justices of Peace. Abusum ego, non usum forensem damno. Ex legibus illis quae non in tempus aliquod, sea perpetuâ utilitatis causâ in aeternum latae sunt, nulla abrogari debet, nisi quam aut u∣sus coārguit, aut status aliquis Reipublicae inutilem fecit.Tit. Liv. lib. 4. dec. 4. LONDON, Printed by W. Bently, and are to be sold by E. Dod, and N. Ekins, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. MDCL.
To the Right HONOURABLE, HONOURABLE; Right WORSHIPFULL, And Well-beloved, the COMMONS, and PEOPLE of England Universally. BEcause Magna Char. Printed in English, An.
1564. and bound up with other Sta∣tutes at large (too Volumi∣nous, and costly for the generality to read, or buy) doth yield less profit than hath been long neces∣sary; I have presumed at the in∣stance of some, to Dedicate this Treatise to you all, as it concern∣eththe good of all that be, or would be good, & the hurt of none that have left any unhurt: where∣in you shall find so many Chap. of Mag. Char. Confir. Char. Art. super Char. and other Statutes at large, corroborating the same; and the L. C. Exposition there∣upon, with some Expostulations, and Queres of mine own, as I thought requisite, or convenient for these times. The rest of the Charter, concerning the Church, (yet unsetled) or the Kings Tenu∣res, (otherways disposed of) I have omitted as useless; desiring that thus much may prove useful to all undertakers of Reformati∣on, as well Martial, as Civil. Whose Servant (to my power) I shall ever be, and continue with due faithfulness, and humility. Jo. Jones.
The Great CHARTER of the LIBERTIES of ENGLAND, Granted to the People of the same, By King HENRY the third; And accorded between him and them in diverse full Parliaments, as followeth, viz. HENRY, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Nor∣mandie, and Guyen, and Earl of Angeow. To all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Provosts, Offi∣cers; And to all Bailiffs, and our faithfull Subjects, which shall see this present Charter, greeting.
Know ye, that We to the ho∣nour of Almightie God, and for the salvation of the souls of ourProgenitours, and Successours, Kings of England, to the advance∣ment of holy church, and amendment of our Realm of England; of Our meer free will, have given and granted to all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and to all Free-men of this Realm of England for evermore. Cap. 1. Liber∣ties. First, We have granted to God, and by this present Charter have confirmed for Vs, and our Heirs for evermore; That the church of Eng∣land shall be free, and shall have all her whole rights, and liberties invi∣olable: We have granted also, and given to all Free-men of our Realm, for Vs, and Our Heirs for ever∣more, these Liberties under-writ∣ten, to have and to hold, to them, and to their heirs, of Vs, and Our heirs, for evermore. Lord Coke upon Mag. Chart. Fol. 1. Here be four rehearsals (saith the Lord
Coke) of four notable causes of the making this Law. First, for the honour of God. Secondly, for the health of the Kings soul. Thirdly, For the ex∣altation of the church. Fourthly, for the amendment of the Kingdom. And all granted to all subjects, and their heirs, from the King and his heirs for evermore; That the great Charter might live, and take effect in all suc∣cessionsof ages for ever. Expost and Quer. The last of these causes which the L. C. in his Preamble calleth the ends for which this Charter was made, being for the amendment of the Realm, was (saith the L. C. up∣on the first chapter of confirmatio Chart. fol. 529.) to amend great mischiefs, and inconveniences, which oppressed the whole Realm before the making of both Charters, viz. This, and the Charter of the Forrest, which (saith the L. C. in his Preface) were declarative Acts of the old Common-Law of the Land, and no introductives of any new Law. If the mischiefs, and inconveniencies of the Realm were great before the said Acts were made to declare the Laws of the land, which formerly the lawyers reserved to themselves, till then undeclared? Were there not greater since those Acts were made, and the Lawes thereby de∣clared, and since the accord of King and People, to keep the same invi∣olable, when, and as often as they were violated by Kings, and their Counsel, learned in the Laws? As hereafter shall appear.
Cap. 8. Debt. Deb∣tors. Suer∣ties.We, nor Our Bailiffs shall not seise any lands, or rent, for any debt, as long as the present goods, and chattels of the debtors do suffice to pay the debt, and the debtor him∣self be ready to satisfie: Therefore shall neither the pledges of the debtor be distrained, as long as the princi∣ple debtor is sufficient for payment of the debt; and if the principal deb∣tor fail in paiment of the debt, have∣ing nought wherewith to pay, or will not, where he is able' enough; Then the pledges shall answer for the debt; and if they will, they shall have the lands, and rents of the debtor, until they be satisfied of that which they before paid for him, except that the debtor can shew himself to be acquit∣ted against the suerties. L. Coke upon M. C. fol. 19.We (saith the Lord Coke) spoken in the politique capacitie of a King, ex∣tendeth to his Successours. And by Bailiffs, are meant Sheriffs, who write Baliva mea, &c. And by the words shall not seiz is expressed the Kings Grace, who by the Common-Law had Execution against his Debtors bo∣dies, lands, and goods. And by the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. cap. 9. The Sheriff is to inquire &c. and to exten all Lands, Goods, Chattels. &c. and
take and imprison the Bodies, as by theStat. appeareth, and as the daily pra∣ctice sheweth. Expost and Quer.If We extend to Successors, even to King Hen. 8. Why not longer? If Magna Charta was to live for ever, Why not hitherto? If the King of his Grace remitted by this Act the exe∣cution which the Common Law gave him before against his Debtors, Bodies, Lands, and Goods, in case of having nought wherewith to pay, through decay of their estates by un∣avoidable necessities; then the Kings Debtors obtained of the Kings Grace as much Liberty for their bodies, as this King gave to all his free subjects by the
29th of this Act, viz. No Free man &c. And for his Estate, as much as the proverb saith; Where nothing is to be had, the King looseth his due. If the King did not remit so much by this Act, then did he gain thereby more than he gave, contra∣ry to the opinion of all Lawyers, that say, All Acts of Parliament are to be expounded for the benefit of the Subject. And what, and how did he gain? but contrary to his Honour, much more to his Grace, when two more of his subjects were hedged inby this Act, as Pledges to pay for his undone Debtor, and to undoe themselves and their families by the bargain. And (their estates being too little to pay their own debts) their Creditours must see the King first served out of the same, to their no small prejudice, if not undoing, where by many are injured through one mans occasion. If therefore this Act ought to be construed for the honour of the King, and benefit of the subject (as I believe it ought, and the L. C. saith, others have thought so) it followeth, That the Statute of the 33. Hen. 8.9. was made (as many more were before and since) against Mag. Chart. and not onely against Kings honour, and grace, but also their Oathes, to the undoing of multitudes of their subjects, which was ungracious for their Counsel learned in the Laws, to give advice, or assent to the ma∣king such Laws, or when made, to allow them, much more to maintain them; being that all Judges are to receive Mag. Chart. for a Plea a∣gainst all Statutes made against it. And all Judgements given against Mag. Chart. are, and ought to bevoid; (as appeareth in the L. C. preamble) And all such Statutes as were made before the 42. of Ed. 3. against Mag. Chart. were then re∣pealed: and (as I conceive) all made so since, are repealed by the Petiti∣on of Right, 3. Car. that restored Mag. Char. to its primitive vigor, and consequently enervated all its opponents. Cap. 9. London &c.The City of London shall have the old Liberties, and customs which it hath been used to have. Moreover We will, and grant, that all other Cities, Burroughs, Towns, and the Barrons of the five Ports, and all other Ports, shall have their Li∣berties, and Free-customs. L. C. upon M. C. fol. 20.This Chapter (saith the Lord Coke) is excellently interpreted by an ancient Author (quoting the Mirrour in the Margent) who saith, that by this Chapter, the Citizens of London ought to have their Franchizes, whereof they are inheritable by loyal Title, of the gift, and confirmation of the Kings, which they have not forfeited by any a∣buse; and that they shall have their Franchizes, and Customes, which are sufferable by right, and not repugnant
to law: And the same interpretation serveth for the Cinque-ports, and other places. Expost and Quer.Doth not this Charter, and chap∣ter sufficiently declare, and Lawyers, (though unwillingly, yet plainly) confess, that London and the rest, had old Liberties and customes, and that they are inheritable thereof, and ought still to have the same, so long and so far, as not repugnant to Law, (which I conceive to be this Law, and not any that have been made since against it?) And do not the several Charters of London, and other Cities and Towns, obtained since this Law, declare further what those Liberties, and Customs were? And if the Kings learned Councel have consented that he should grant, or Professors of the Law advised Lon∣doners, or any other Citizens, to ask things repugnant to this Law, and prevailed with both parties? Have they not misled both parties? And though they have so done often; yet in this case, doth not the Statute of the 19th of Henry 7. chap.
7. help the offendors with less danger than the forfeiture of their Customs, andLiberties, if they offend especially but in those points, which their law∣yers so much misadvised them to ask, and the Kings, him to grant? Ca. II. Com∣mon-Pleas.Common-Pleas shall not follow Our Court, but shall be holden in some place certain. L. C. upon M. C. fol. 22, 23.Before this Statute (saith the Lord Coke) Common-Pleas might have been holden in the Kings-Bench, and all Writs returnable into the same Bench; And because the Court was holden co∣ram Rege, and followed the Kings Court, and removable at the Kings will, the Returns were Ubicun{que} fue∣rimus in Angliâ; whereupon many discontinuances ensued, and great trou∣ble of Jurors, charges of Parties, and delay of Justice; for this cause this Statute was made, &c. And Pleas of the Crown were divided into high Treason, Misprision of Treason, Petty Treason, Fellony, &c. and limited to this Court, because contrà coronam, & dignitatem, &c. So that of these (the Lord Coke saith) the Com∣mon-Pleas cannot hold Plea. But to shew that Common-Pleas may be hol∣den in the
Kings-Bench, he saith, That the King is out of this Statute, and may sue in that Court. Secondly, If a man be in Custodia, any other may lay upon him any Action of debt, cove∣nant, or the like personal Action, be∣cause that be that is in Custodia, ought to have the priviledge of that Court And this Act taketh not away the Pri∣viledge of any Court. Thirdly, any Action that is Quare vi & Armis, where the King is to have a Fine, may be sued in this Court. Fourthly, Reple∣vins may be removed thither. Fifthly, (saith the Lord Coke) Albeit originally the Kings-Bench be restrained by this Act, to hold Plea of any Real action yet by a mean, they may; as when re∣moved by Writ of Error from Common-Pleas, thither for necessitie, lest any party that hath right should be without remedie, or that there should be a failer of Justice; and therefore Statutes are al∣waies to be expounded so, that there should be no failer of Justice. Expost and Quer.Do not the L. C. words, viz. (Be∣fore this Statute, &c.) imply, that af∣ter the Statute, Common-Pleas ought not to be holden in the Kings-Bench, nor all Writs be returnable into the same
Bench? Doth the Re∣gister,or Natura brevium therefore shew any Writ for debt returnable to the Kings-Bench? Doth not Fitz. H. natura brevium fol. 119. h. & k. declare that there is not Writ in Law for debt, but a Justicies, which is a judicial Commission to the She∣riff to determine the matter, Nè am∣plius indè clamorem aeudiamus: So that the Kings-Bench ought not to be troubled with the matter at all? or if an Original returnable to the Common-Pleas? Doth not that Origi∣nal declare it self to be a Summons? And doth not Mr Kitchen in his Ret. brev. fol. 4. Tit. com. bank, declare, that Summons, Atachment, and Di∣stringas, succeslively distant fifteen days one after another, is the onely Proces at Common Law? The
Kings-Bench, and Common-Pleas ought to practise by the Common Law, de∣clared by Mag. Chart. and accord of the King and People; declared and injoyned to be observed in∣violable, and immutable for ever. Did ever any Judge of the Kings-Bench, or Common-Pleas, advise, or consent to the making any Statute, or Law to the contrarie, (being sworn to execute and maintain Mag. Chart.as anon shall appear all were, or ought to be) and was not perjured? Did, or doth any Judge of any Court of Record, observe any such Law be∣ing so made; or practice, or suffer to be practised (where he hath authori∣tie) any suits or proceedings contra∣rie to Mag. Chart. and was, and is he not perjured? Doth not the pra∣ctice of the Kings-Bench still shew, that thence doth issue no other Writ for debt, than a Bill of Middlesex, or Latitat, which express themselves to be for Trespass? Are not those Writs still returnable ubicunquè fue∣rimus, and the Kings-Bench therefore still removeable at the Kings will? whereupon (as saith the L. Coke) ma∣ny discontinuances ensue, and great trouble of Jurours, charges of Par∣ties, and delay of Justice; for which causes (he saith) this Statute was made. How doth this Statute (if therefore made) prevent such discon∣tinuances, trouble, charges, and de∣lay of Justice, but by declaring, that Common-Pleas shall not follow the Kings-Bench? How contradictorie to himself is the L. Coke then, when he laboureth to make Common-Pleas lawfull to be holden in the Kings-Bench?
And if (as he saith) the Pleas of the Crown were divided into high Treason, Misprision of Treason, Petty Treason, Fellonie, &c. & limited to the Kings-Bench, because cont. Coron. & dign. Regis; so that of these (saith he) the Common-Pleas cannot hold Plea. By what Justice can he desire to hold Common-Pleas in the Kings-Bench; unless because more gainfull, (as when he was supplanted by his successour, under colour of prefer∣ment, from the Common-Pleas to the
Kings-Bench, he passionately expres∣sed the difference, saying, That he was called from the warm kitchen, to the cold hall:) and that therefore he desired to reduce Justice to his de∣sire, rather than his desire to Justice? But let us examine his Arguments for that purpose. First, (saith he) The King is out of this Statute. How? out of this Statute, which above all other, the King was sworn to ob∣serve, and obey, and to violate was perjurie, and punishable in all men without regard of persons, and no less in the Lo. C. to say and write o∣therwise? But (saith he) the King might sue in his Bench. And so might he in any Court of Record which hepleased; for all such courts are cal∣led his, and have power under him, to administer Justice to all men, ac∣cording to their Commissions and Charters, as well as the Kings Bench; and therefore he had his Atturneys, and Sollicitours, attending many such Courts. Secondly, (saith he) if a man be in custodia, any other may lay upon him any action of debt
&c. because (saith he) that he that is in custodia, ought to have the pri∣viledge of that Court. Now if a man be in custodia for Fellonie, &c. and an Action for Debt, &c. be laid up∣on him, shall his priviledge in being in custodia keep him from hanging (if he deserve it) till he pay the debt? or if he be hanged, and have any goods, shall the Creditour be paid his debt out of the same; or if he have any lands, out of the Es∣cheat? I believe not. If a man be not in custodia, but a Justice of Peace, or a Grand-Juror, attending Sessions in Cumberland or Cornwall, what priviledge of this Court doth he need? If he be arrested there, upon a Writ of trespass, when he is guiltie of none, is he not more dis∣graced than priviledged by this Court? when he is forced to appear in this Court for trespass, and nothing declared against him for any such matter, ought he not to be dismissed for that matter, with costs, and dam∣mages, answerable to his disgrace and expences, though arrested at the Kings suit? Shall the King do any man wrong? how then doth the Ma∣xim hold, that he cannot? Shall this Court abuse his name, to wrong his Subject? Is not Injustice, Per∣jurie in a Judge sworn to do Justice? Is not all against Mag. Chart. and truth, which is, God himself? If not so dismissed, shall a declaration be admitted against him upon an Origi∣nal for debt, where neither such Writ, nor cause belong? And shall the Defendant be inforced to wait upon his Bail for trespass, to answer that Declaration? is not that more Injustice? And moreover, if that Writ, or the Return thereof be for∣ged, (as all, or most Originals direct∣ed to the Sheriffs of London or Mid∣dlesex, are; aswel by Clerks of this Court, and so filed upon Record here as by Attorneys in the
Com∣mon-Pleas, there;) shall that Decla∣ration be admitted to say, that theDefendant is in custodia, (which is false;) and be made a Record, which would be accounted the next truth to Gospel? And shall not the Defen∣dant be admitted to plead Mag. Ch. against the jurisdiction of the Court, and such lying Records? If not; is not all this more Injustice and Per∣jurie? Shall Judges give Judgements upon false Records (except to burn them, and punish the makers, and causers) and shall not they be count∣ed, and called false Judges, and Per∣jurers; and their judgements false judgements and perjuries? Shall they, that commit Debtors into their Marshals custodie, upon such judgements by their priviledge (as they call it,) say that this Statute doth not take away such priviledges, when the Lo. C. himself saith, that all Statutes ought to be expounded so, that there should be no failer of ju∣stice; and this Statute, being M. Ch. (chief of all Statutes) and all its Confirmations say, that equal justice ought to be done to all men, with∣out regard of persons? What Sta∣tute or custom did, or can give any priviledge to any Court to the con∣trarie? What benefit of priviledgehath the Debtor, that is so commit∣ted by this Court, and its priviledge, but his undoing, and his families, and often his untimely death by famin, and miserie? Is not that so occasi∣oned by the rigour, and illegalitie of this Court, an offence of the highest nature, of Murther and Perjurie? Who gaineth any thing by this pri∣viledge, but the Court, and their Marshal in extorted Fees, to the dammage of both Creditor and Debtor, and often the ruin ob both or either? Why therefore doth the L. C. call it priviledge to the party in Custodie, when it appeareth to be no benefit, but prejudice unto him, and that more aggravated, to have more Actions laid upon him for more debts occasioned (perhaps) by his imprisonment? What law, or reason requireth any priviledge to any man for debt, since this Statute in the 29 chapter, freeth all mens bodies from imprisonment, untill they be lawfully tried by their Peers? and no law, but an abortive Statute made 25. Ed. 3. cap. 17. and repealed in the 42 of the same King (as afore∣said) gave an Arrest against Debtors but Merchants and Accomptants?
and a Statute made in the said 25 year of the said King, gave the Cre∣ditors two parts of all their Debtors lands, & all their goods (except the beasts of their plough) for satisfa∣ction of their debts, which Statute is still in force, and daily executed accordingly? As for Accomptants, Debtors, and Tennants to the King, that are so indeed, if the Court of Exchequer be thought proper for them; why should others that are not such indeed, be sheltered to de∣fend or countenanced to offend un∣der that pretence? And as for Mem∣bers of any Court, why ought not they to sue, and be sued by their At∣turneys in other Courts than their own, since it is unnatural for any bo∣die to suffer any of its Members (though never so corrupt) to be put to any smart, which it may avoid? And may not, nay ought not every just Court avoid such suits, and the suspition of their injustice by enter∣taining them, and proceeding there∣in, by leaving them to the justice of other Courts of competent judica∣ture, as all other Courts do leave their Members to the mercy of the Courts at
Westminster?or may not, nay ought not all Courts of judicature within their jurisdicti∣ons, determine the causes of all such Members of the Courts at Westmin∣ster, as shall be found, and arrested within their jurisdictions, notwith∣standing any Writs of priviledge, or other Writs to remove them, before they be determined; rather than the Courts at Westminster may send for the Members of every Court, to be justified by them? For who can say, he hath ever found any justice there against any priviledged man? And how many that be no Members of a∣ny Court there indeed, are so coun∣tenanced, as subordinate to some ill Member, or other there, and have their Law for nothing, to bring Fees and gain to one or other of those Courts, out of honest mens purses and Estates, against whom they can shew no colour of right any where, but where they know they shall be favo∣red, and their Adversaries oppressed? And how many men of good Estates have been, and daily are, not onely oppressed, but undone by that means? Thirdly, for Trespass,
vi & Armis; Is it but a Common-Plea, and consequently proper to allcourts of Record, and rather to be tryed within that jurisdiction where the offence is committed, than else∣where? And hath not the King his Fines imposed and levyed by the au∣thority of all such courts, as wel as by the Kings-Bench? Fourthly, for Re∣plevins, may they not as well be re∣moved to, and determined by the Common-Pleas, as in the Kings-Bench? Fifthly, what meaneth the Lord by his words, viz. [Originally restrained] but that the Kings-Bench is restrained from having any origi∣nal Writs Returnable thither in Real Pleas,? And is it not as much re∣strained from originals in Personal Pleas, that are as Common-Pleas, as Real, by this Statute? Or by what other Statute, Law, or President, is it inabled to have any originals re∣turnable to it for debt, when the Re∣gister and Ret. brevium have no such Presidents, as aforesaid? Is not there∣fore all the practice of the Kings-Bench for debt, unjust, and perju∣rious, as aforesaid? and moreover a faint Action, &c. as the prisoners for debt in that Court have lately set forth by their Petition to the Lord General, and his Officers concerning this matter.
Caput 14. Ameir∣cia∣ments.A Free-man shall not be ameirced for a small fault, but after the quan∣titie of the fault, and for a greater fault, after the manner thereof, sa∣ving to him his contenement, or Freehold: And a Merchant shall be likewise ameirced, saving to him his Merchandize: And any other Villain than Ours, shall be likewise ameirced, saving his Wainage, if he fall into Our mercy: And none of the said Ameirciaments shall be asses∣sed but by the oaths of honest men of the Visionage: Earls, and Ba∣rons shall not be ameirced, but by their Peers, and after the quantitie of their trespass. No man of the Church shall be ameirced after the rate of his spiritual benefice, but af∣ter the rate of his lay tenement, and the quantitie of his trespass. Lord Cook upon Magna Charta fol. 27.A Free-man here, hath a special understanding (saith the L. C.) and is taken for a Free-holder; and this ap∣peareth by this clause, Salvo contene∣mento suo. viz. Saving his Free-hold, &c. This Act extendeth to Ameircia∣ments, not to Fines imposed by any Court of Justice, &c. Free-men are not intended to officers, or ministers, or officers of justice, &c. The Writ of Mo∣derata misericordia, giveth remedie to the Partie that is excessively ameir∣ced, &c. Albeit the Law of England
is a Law of mercy, yet it is now turned to a shadow; for where by the wisdom of the Law, these Ameirciaments were instituted, to deter both Demandants from unjust suits, and Defendants from unjust defences, which was the cause in former times of fewer suits, &c.
Expost and Quer.If amerciaments were instituted to deter Plantiffs from unjust suits, and Defendants from unjust defen∣ces; and were the causes of fewer suits in former times; how comes the Law turned to a shaddow in the Lord Cokes time? when in the Kings-Beach, and Cmmon-Pleas, amercia∣ments were as frequent, and greivous as in any other time, and suits no fewer, nay more numerous than be∣fore, (as Records of both Courts de∣clare) unless he means that all the Writs in the Register, and Natura bre∣vium, both original, and judicial, (whereby suits were determined a∣mongst neighbours friendly at home) became useless, since Habeas corpus, &c. carried all to Westmin∣ster? And that there injustice shad∣dowed under the name and habit of justice, remunerated the litigious supporters of her being, with suchshares of her spoils, that though she trebled their amerciaments, she made them alwaies gainers; unless when to satisfie their revenge, rather than their purses, they commuted their monies for counsels, and coun∣tenances, to undo the opposers of their malice, whereby both parties became loosers, and often ruined; and injustice onely remained the gainer, and increased her kingdom (as the Divel doth his) by such sui∣tors; and made more suits for West∣minster, than all the Courts of Er∣rors, and their Judges, Lawyers, and Attorneys there, shall wear out while they live, without extraordina∣ry helps of their servants. C. 15. Bridg: Banks.No town, or Free-man shall be di∣strained to make Bridges, or banks, but such as of old time, and of right have been accustomed to make them in the time of King Henry our Grand∣father. C. 16. Banks.No Banks shall be defended hence∣forth, but such as were in defence in the time of King Henry our Grand∣father, by the same places, and the same bounds, as were wont to be in his time.
Both the next precedent chapters sufficiently expound themselves, so
that the Lord Coke speaketh no more to this matter, but that the Mirrour saith, That divers Rivers and their-Banks were in his time appropriated, and blocked up by divers persons, to de∣bar common-fishings, which were wont to be used there in the time of King H. 2. And I believe, there are many more so done, more lately, which Commissioners for Sewers shall do well to look to. C. 17. Pleas CrownNo Sheriff, Constable, Eschea∣tor, Coroner, or any other our Bai∣liffs, shall hold Pleas of the Crown. L. Coke upon M. C. 30.One mischief before this Statute, was (saith the Lord
Coke) That no Court, but the Kings chief Court, could command Bishops to give their clergy to such as ought to have it: another cause was, That the life of a man ought to be tryed before Judges of learning, and experience of the Laws of the Realm; for Ignorantia Judicis, est saepenumerò calamitas innocentis. These are the reasons that the Lord Coke alledgeth, why some Pleas of the Crown were taken from Sheriffs, Castel∣lans, Escheators, Coronors, and Bailiffs, under which names (saith he) arecomprehended all inferiour Judges, Justices, and Courts of Justice: albe∣it (saith he) it be provided by the 9th chap. of Mag. Charta, That the Barons of the five Ports should have all their Liberties and Customs. These general words (saith he again) must be under∣stood of such Liberties and Customs, as are not afterwards in the same Char∣ter by express words taken away, and assumed to the Crown. Expost and Quer.Might not the Kings inferior Courts command ordinary Ministers to give men their Clergie? And might not that serve before Magna Charta, as it is usual fince? For sel∣dom, or never in our memories, did Bishops themselves attend any court for that service: and now, should they be necessary onely for that im∣ployment? So the Kings Court would be onely to command them: put if Bishops may be spared, why may not that Court for that cause? And if by this Charter the King re∣sumed some Pleas of the crown from
hose that formerly had them; doth  follow, that he resumed all Pleas om those that formerly had them? And if under the name of Bailiffs be comprehended all Judges, and Justi∣ces, are not the Judges of the Com∣mon-Pleas and Barons of the Exchec∣quer so comprehended? And are none of them of such learning and experience in the Laws of the Realm, to try the life of a man, as Judges of the Kings-Bench? Or else, why are they sent for Goal-deliveries, as∣wel as Judges of the Kings-Bench are? Was it not provided by the 9 chapter of Mag. Charta, That Lon∣don, and other cities, Burroughs and Towns, as well as the Barons of the five Ports, and other Ports should have their Liberties nad Free-Cu∣stoms? Are all these now resumed by this 17. chap? Who can under∣stand so? Or what meaneth the L. C. by his riddles? Shall Magna Charta contradict it self, though the Lord C. would, and doth here and else where? Are not Commissions of o∣yer and Terminer, usual for Tryal
mens lives, where Judges of the Kings-Bench cannot reach, or dar not go? Doth not London and other Corporations execute their Charter by their Recorders, when the Kings-Bench gives them leave; and the do not the Judges of the Kings-Benchgrant that such Judges may be as learned, and experienced in the Laws as themselves, for the Trying of mens lives? Are not mens lives Tryable for matter of Fact, and not of Law, (except Treasons that reach to thoughts?) Are not Jurors the Judges of matters of Fact? What great learning, or expe∣rience in Law is requisite for a Judge to pronounce the sentence of death, where the verdict hath determined the life? But how many true men have been hanged, and thieves saved by Judges interposing, and obtrud∣ing thier pestifferous pretended learning and experience in the Laws between the weak consciences of ig∣norant Jurors, and the truth? which kind of Jurors they make Sheriffs return for such purposes, when they may have such returned as know the Facts, and have sounder learning and experience in express Law than themselves. C. 23. Wear, &c.All Wears from henceforth be ut∣terly put down by Thames, and Med∣way, and throughout all England, but onely by the Sea-coasts.
L. C. upon M. C. fol. 38.It was specially given in charge by the Justices in Eyre (saith the Lord C.) that all Juries should inquire of all such as Fished with Wears and Dams: and it appeareth (saith he) by Glandvil lib. 9. c. 11. That when any thing is unjustly occupied within the Kings demesne, or obstructed in publick waies; or Rivers, turned off their right channels, or Citie-streets built upon; and in general, as often as any nusance to the Kings holding, or his High-way, or to any Citie, is committed; That is a purpresture, viz. an Inclo∣sure, whereby one inchroacheth, or ma∣keth that several to himself, which ought to be common to all, or many; and every publick River, or stream, is the Kings High way.
Expost and Quer.If Wears be nusances (as I ar sure they are) throughout England and Wales; and if Commissioners for Sewers, and Justices of Peace for want of them, be sufficiently autho∣rized to reform such wrongs, and do not, because chief doers thereof, o sharers in the unlawful gain made thereof themselves: why not Justi∣ces in Eyer imployed to execu their charge, for the general amend∣mentthereof, for the publick good? C. 25. Mea∣sures, &c.One Measure of Wine shall be throughout our Realm, and one mea∣sure of Co, viz. according to the Quarter of London and Haberjects, that is to say, two yards within the list, and as it is of Weights, so shall it be of Measures. L. Coke upon M. C. fol. 49.This Act concerning Measures, and Weights, that there should be one Mea∣sure, and one Weight through England, is grounded upon the Law of God, Deut. 25. v. 13, 14. And this by Au∣thority of Parliaments hat been often enacted, but never effected. Expost and Quer.If Weights and Measures through∣out England ought to be one, and that not onely by the Law of God (as the Lord C. instanceth) but al∣so by this
Charter of Agreement be∣tween the King and the People; Why did not the Lord C. (being chief Justice of England) sworn to do Law, and Justice too, and between King and People, (as partly before did, and hereafter further shall ap∣pear he was, or ought to have been) see this point of Justice, (so highlyrequired by the Law of God, and so mutually agreed upon by the Kings of this Land, and their Subjects) du∣ly executed? Ca. 16. Inqui∣sitiOn.Nothing shall henceforth be given for a Writ of Inquisition, nor taken of him that prayeth the Inquisition of Life, or Member, but it shall le granted freely. L. C. upon M. C. fol. 42.A Writ of Inquisition, viz. De odio & atia, anciently called De bono & malo, &c. which the Common-Law gave a man that was imprisoned, though it were for the most odious cause, for the death of a man, for which (without the Kings Writ) he could not be bailed; Yet the Law fa∣vouring the Libertie and Freedom of a man from Imprisonment, &c. until the Justices in Eyre should come, at what time he was to be tryed; he might sue out this VVrit directed to the Sheriff, &c.
Expost and Quer.If a Writ De odio & atia was gi∣ven by the Common-Law, to a man Imprisoned for the most odious cause, even for the death of a man; and if the Common-Law favouredthe Liberty of a man Imprisoned, so that he should be Bailed for such a Fact, until Justices in Eyre should Try him; Why not such a Writ still? Since odium (which the Lord C. de∣fineth to be hatred) and atia (malice) and Prisoners for those causes are no scanter now, than in former times? And why not Justices in Eyre (made since competent Judges by Commis∣sion without Writs) to determine such matters, which before they could but inquire of by Writs (as the Lord C. saith elsewhere, though he saith here to try them,) imployed for that service? And now if it be Law∣full for a Judge of the Kings-Bench to determine a debt, and to grant an Habeas Corpus for money, to bring the Prisoner before him to put in Bail; Why should he take money for the Writ, and refuse sufficient Bail tendred after Oath made of their sufficiency, without the Plantiffs consent? Nay after acceptation of the Bail, Why refuse to File it?
Ca 2.9. No Free man &c.No Free-man shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or Free Cu∣stoms, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or any way otherwise destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him, but by law∣full judgement of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; we shall sell to no man, we shall denie, or deferre to no man, either Iustice, or Right. Lord Coke upon Mag. Chart. Fol. 46 &c.Free-man extends to Villains both Sexes, &c. Ʋpon this Chapter, as out of a root, many fruitfull branches of the Law of England have sprung. It containeth nine several Branches: First, That no man be taken or imprisoned, but by the Law of the Land; viz. The Common-Law, Statute-Law, or Cu∣stoms of England, &c. Secondly, No man shall be diseised,
viz. put out of his Freehold, that is, Land, Livelihood, or Liberties, or free Customs, such as belong to him by his free Birth-right; unless it be by the lawfull judgement, and verdict of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, that is (to speak it once for all) by the Due course, and pro∣ces of the Law. Thirdly, no man shall be Outlawed, or put off the Law, viz. Deprived of the benefit of it, unless he be Outlawed by the Law of the Land. Fourthly, No man shall be exiled, &c. unless according to the Law of theLand. Fifthly, No man shall be de∣stroyed &c. unless by verdict, or accord∣ing to the Law of the Land. Sixthly, No man shall be condemned, &c. but by the judgement of his equals, or ac∣cording to the Law of the Land. Se∣venthly, We shall sell to no man, Justice, or right. Eighthly, We shall denie no man Justice or right. And Ninthly, We shall deferre no man Justice or Right, &c.
Expost and Quer.First, If no man ought to be ta∣ken, or imprisoned but by the Law of the Land, viz. the Common-Law, Statute-Law, and Customs of Eng∣land? is it not cleared by our Expo∣stulations before upon the 11. Cha∣pter, that Debtors are taken, and im∣prisoned in the Kings-Bench, contra∣rie to the Common-Law of England, declared by Mag. Chart. contrarie to the chief Statute of England, which is Mag. Char. and which the Lord Coke saith, should live (as was ac∣corded by King and people) for e∣ver? And contrarie to the Custom of England declared by Mag. Charta, and also by the Lord Coke, not to ex∣tend to the imprisonment of anyDebtours, but onely the Kings. And are not Debtors, other than the Kings, so imprisoned, as well else∣where, as in the Kings-Bench? Se∣condly, if no man shall be disseised, viz. put out of his Freehold; that is to say, His Livelihood, Liberties, or Free-Customs, such as belong to him by his Birth-right; unless it be by the lawfull judgement, and verdict of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, that is to say, (once for all) by Due course, and Proces of Law. Are not Debtors disseised of their Livelihood, Libertie, and Freedom which belonged unto them as their Freehold by Birth right, when they are imprisoned in London, Westmin∣ster, or elsewhere, by Arrests, and Actions for Debt, whether due, or not, upon meer suggestions of Ad∣versaries, not so much to Judges, as to Catch-pols, without any judge∣ment, or verdict of their equals, and without Due course, or Proces of Law, which should be Summons, At∣tachment, and Distringas, before any Arrest, as aforesaid? Are they not taken in the Countrey from their Ploughs, which are their Livelihood, and their Countreys, and their Free∣holdby Birth-right; by vagant Bum-baylies, and imprisoned there, till they give bail to appear at West∣minster; and thence, instead of being remanded home to their sweet Farm-houses, large fields, and industrious Agricultures; are they not sent to stinking Goals, close dungeons, and idle Monk-cels, whereby they are allowed little more ground to walk upon while they live, than might serve them to lie under, when they are dead? Are not all the Corpora∣tions of England, and their free-cho∣sen Officers, (that should do them justice at home) disseised of their Freeholds by Birth-right, and Char∣ters, before and since Mag. Char. when they are prevented of the ad∣ministration of justice in execution of their Offices to which they were sworn, (and heritable successively from their Ancestours by Custom long before Mag. Char. and since confirmed by the same, and by Charters dated before, and since) by Certioraries, Habeas Corpus, &c. be∣fore Judgement; and pretence of Errors after; and though never any proved, or assigned, yet the causes never remanded, but detained at
Westminster, where the usual correcti∣on of pretended Errours, is not by making any thing that is crooked, straight; but all that is straight, crooked; so that both Plantiffs, and Defendants give their titles for lost in a mist commonly; but he that hath the wrongfull possession, and money, holdeth it; and he that hath the right, and no money, goes to his grave without it? Are not all the People of England disseised of their Freehold, Liberties, Franchises, and Free customs, when they are depri∣ved of that justice which they ought to have administred amongst them at home, by virtue of the Kings Writs (original for Enquiries, and judicial for Determinations) directed to Sheriffs of their own choise, in their own Counties, or Stewards of Hundreds, and Court-Barons, in their precincts, where the Free-holders themselves are Judges themselves, by ancient Common Laws, and Cu∣stoms of England, before Mag. Char. and by it declared, and confirmed unto them as aforesaid? Can Writs of trespass executed for debt; or Capiases, grounded upon counter∣selted Originals, be construed by any
Law, to be due Proces of Law? Third∣ly, Are men lawfully Outlawed upon Exigents for debt, grounded upon a repealed Statute? and are not all Debtors that are Outlawed, so Out∣lawed? Are men lawfully Outlawed, that are Outlawed upon Exigents, grounded upon Summonitus, or Non est inventus, counterfeitly returned by Attorneys, who at the time of the return were no Sheriffs, or compe∣tent officers? and are not all, or most Debtors, and Trespassers, that are Outlawed in London and
Middlesex, so Outlawed? Are men lawfully Out∣lawed upon any Exigents, that are Outlawed without the judgement of the Coroners of the Countie where∣in they are Outlawed? Are the Co∣roners of any Countie now adays, present at every, or any Countie, when, and where men are Outlawed? Are not their names nevertheless re∣turned as Judges of every Outlary unknown to them, for the most part, or all? Are not those Returns false, and forged? and are such proceed∣ings, the due course, and Proces of Law? How many thousands of the Free-men of England are Outlawed yearly, by such means? and how ma∣nyof them undone, before they can reverse them? How many are impri∣soned thereupon, and have all their estates seised for the King, by She∣riffs chosen without the consent of the People? and often such as pur∣chase their Offices, to gain by such means? How many Outlawries year∣ly are so clandestinely carried, that the parties so Outlawed, can hear nothing thereof, before they be im∣prisoned, and their estates destroy∣ed as aforesaid? How many are fur∣ther damnified by such Outlawries, procured of purpose, to debar them of their just suits in all Courts, until they reverse them? How chargeable are reversals thereof? What lawful∣ness is it, or what honour, for the Courts at Westminster, to make un∣lawfull profit of such unlawfull pra∣ctises? Cannot the Judges at West∣minster be contented to have coun∣terfeit Returns of their Originals in London and
Middlesex, but they must also have the like Returns of their Exigents throughout the King∣dom? Are not such Returns false, and perjurious in the Sheriffs that make them? Is it not sufficient for Judges, to perjure themselves, but that theymust animate others to do so too, by not punishing them, when they know that practise? Are not the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and all the Coroners of the King∣dom made liable by this practise to Actions of the Case, and to pay costs and dammages to the parties grie∣ved? Are such Judges, Lawyers, &c. for the Peace, or Profit of the Com∣mon-wealth, that beget, foment, or suffer the causes of such Actions, causelesly, but for their own ends and gains? Are such Courts to be called, or counted Courts of Justice, that maintain any Actions, or Arrests upon unjust grounds, or colour of any mis-begotten Laws, contrarie to
Mag. Charta? Are not Assaults, Bat∣teries, Rescues, Riots, and Homi∣cides, frequent upon such Arrests? Are not many mens lives lost, and more hazzarded, and their estates ruined thereby? And if a Catch-poll be killed for making, or attempting such unlawfull Arrest, do not the Judges use to adjudge it wilful Mur∣ther, though the wronged party doth but endeavour his justifiable de∣fence? And have they not begotten a Statute for officers to plead theGeneral issue, by colour of which they justifie themselves, and their creatures, and condemn the guilt∣less? Are not the causers of Mur∣ther, as worthy to be hanged, as the doers? Are not they that maintain such Arrests, to the same ends as their Predecessors, Imps of the same ge∣neration? Why therefore their ad∣vice desired, or received in such mat∣ters? Are not the Releases of Errors, which Prisoners are forced to seal before they can be inlarged, rather proofs of their guiltiness, than ac∣quittances of such practitioners? Are not their Errors manifest to be wil∣full, and gainfull onely to them∣selves, and hurtfull to the Common-wealth? are such Errors, or Pro∣ceedings, to be called Due courses, or Proces of Law? Then (to speak once for all) is not the Due course, and Proces of Law obstructed, and perverted? and a wrong course pra∣ctised, full of Errors, Lies, Forgeries, Perjuries, &c. (as alreadie appear∣eth, and better shall hereafter) and cannot Law be executed without such practises? Doth not
Mag. Char. and all its confirmations, shew how it may? Are not they sufficient lights,and guids for the Due course, Proces, and Proceedings which ought to be observed, in the right execution of Law? And doth not the Lord Coke confess them to be such, and that they never misguided any man, that certainly knew them, and truly fol∣lowed them? Fol. 526. Fourthly, If no man shall be exiled, &c. Are not Debtors exiled from their Native Soils in Cumberland, or Cornwal, and from all their wordly comforts, of Wifes, Children, Families, Friends, and Estates, both Real, and Perso∣nal when called, and forced by Ha∣beas corpus &c. to attend Duke Hum∣frey in Pauls, or Judge Owen in West∣minster (as good dead as any Judges living) to hear or dispatch Suits by the Law of the Land in any way of Justice, while the Suitors money lasts; or to relieve them with any Alms, when their Purses are spent? And if at last sent to the Fleet, or Marshalsey, where they be pent up as aforesaid; are they not worse Ex∣iled than into Turkie, where they may have more Liberty of Land and Sea, and live in less Slavery than un∣der Goalers in England, and have more hopes to return home again
(like Sir Thomas Shirley, and many others) than from these Hells, whence few find Redemption? Had Henry of Bullingbrook been Imprison∣ed for Debt here, (as such now are) when he was banished to France could he have hoped to be King of England, except he had made all his Judges, and Goalers, the best sha∣rers of all his Usurpations, as all the cheating Prisoners in these places do theirs, as they and their Creditors can best tell, by dear, and daily ex∣perience? Fifthly, If no man shall be destroyed, &c. unless by Verdict, &c. Are not all Prisoners for Debt, who are first forced themselves to destroy their small Estates to buy bread to eat in Idleness, and to pay Fees to Goalers, &c. and at last to Famish in the Fleet, or Marshalsey, &c. de∣stroyed both in Lives, and Estates, and their Families to boot, without any Verdict given, or intended for their Lives? Nay are not all the Free-men of England, that are, or may be subject to Debts, consequent∣ly subject to the like destruction? And worthy so long as they suffer the Laws of England, (contained in the glorious Fabrick of the
Great Char∣terof the Liberties of England, built by their Ancestors for a perpetual Monument of ther care of their Po∣sterity, and their Liberties for ever) to be thus destroyed by an Hypocri∣tical Generation of Pharisaical Pre∣tenders to the onely knowledge of these Laws, which by that pretence, they thus pervert, to destroy all ho∣nest men whom it should save, and to save all whom it should destroy or punish; and that for unlawful re∣spect, and considerations tending onely to their own profits, and ends. Sixthly, If no man shall be condemn∣ed, &c. but by the judgement of his e∣quals according to the Laws of the Land; Are not all Debtors that are Famished as aforesaid, Condemned for their Lives in effect, though but for their Debts in appearance, with∣out any Verdict of their equals, so in∣tended, contrary to the Law of the Land? Seventhly, do not all the Judges at
Westminster, sell Justice, when they sell Prisoners for Debt, their Writs of Habeas Corpus, &c. for money, when the King would have all his Writs of Grace to be given to his Subjects Gratis, and no Judge to take any Fee, or Reward for anything but of himself? Eightly, Do they not deny Justice when they de∣ny such Writs
Gratis? Ninthly, Do they not defer Justice, when they detain poor men that are Bailable in Prison, while they have sufficient men ready to tender for their Bail, till they be forced to borrow money of other friends, and to send far, and stay long before they can receive it to loose their Bail in the interim, and be forced to seek others; by which delays, their Goalers Fees increase, and their Dyer, Lodging, and Ex∣pences draw charges, which they might have saved to find Bread for their Wives and Children at home; who perhaps are forced to fast by that means, and to sell, or pawn their Cows, or Clothes for this mo∣ney, this damnable money, thus ex∣torted by a Judge, for scribling his Infamous name to a Writ, which doth but wrap a man, and his cause, faster in his clouches? O Merciless, Miserable, Mercinary Judge! that can neither give, nor lend so little as his name, to so much goodness in Policie, (if not in Charity) to give a man Liberty to breath, and take leave of his Home, upon security ofmore advantage both to Court, and Party, than his imprisonment to re∣turn to his Pinfold. Radamanth him∣self abhorreth such foolish covetous∣ness. Do they not defer Justice, when by their Writs they cause In∣dictments, Informations, and just Suits Commenced in other com∣petent, and more proper Courts in all parts of the Kingdom, to be re∣moved to Westminster, and there de∣tained without any Tryal these 40 years? How many thousands of Pa∣pists, and heinous Malefactors that should have been punished in, and by their Counties, and Courts at home, have by this means found Westminster, and its Courts, their onely Sanctuaries, and Pri∣viledges for none but Eminent, Opulent, Impenitent Offendours? But is not Justice denyed, when any Bailable man is denyed to be Bail∣ed? Or more, when Bail is accepted upon Oath for its sufficiency, and is denyed to be Filed, and the Party so Bailed in Law, detained Prisoner still, at the Judges, and Plantiffs pleasures? Briefly, Is not the Administration of all the Law, and Justice in England, Ingrossed andMonopolized at Westminster, where the Judges and Courts assume to be chief, and do exercise a plenary ju∣risdiction over all others, so that they suffer none but themselves to erre, or to abuse Law; nor any to accom∣plish any Justice, or to reform any Errors, but onely themselves, who do pretend to correct all in their Ex∣checquer-Chamber, where instead of correcting any, they confirm their own; which must be all as aforesaid. Lastly, is it unknown that they were wont to Buy their Offices of the Kings Servants, and therefore to Sell their Under-Offices to their own Servants, Attorneys, &c? And was not this the Buying and Selling of Justice that is yet unpaid for, & had need to be Reformed? Is it any reason that any should Buy Justice, and not Sell it for gain by the Bar∣gain? Is it not Bought to that end? Is it not to that end, Judges neglect to give Attorneys their ancient Oath, whereby they were wont to be Sworn to do no Falshood, nor cause any to be done in their Courts; and if they knew any, to give know∣ledge thereof to the Judges, &c. that they should increase no Fees,
&c. (asyou may read it at large in the latter end of the Attorneys Academy. Is it not to the same end that Judges neg∣lect to give all Plantiffs for Debts or Trespass, their Oaths that the Debt or Trespass amounteth to 40 or more or else let the Suit be Tryed in the Sheriffs Court at home, according to the Stat. of Gloc. 6. Ed. 1. c. 8? And is it not likewise to the same end, they neglect to take security of all Plan∣tiffs, to prosecute all Actions with ef∣fect, or pay Costs and Damages to the Defendants, if they prove not their Issues? which Judges ancient∣ly used to do, and still ought, before any Declaration be admitted, or Plea required, as saith the Mirror of Justice? fol. 64. b. Is it not to the same end the Chancery neglecteth to take the Oath of all Complainants to make good their Bills in all points, or pay Costs and Damages in case they fail, and that before any Sub-poe∣na be granted them, according to the Statute 15. H.
6. cap. 4o? And were not all well ended, if all the end were that none were forsworn for Injustice, but the chief Justices? (though comfortless for them to be so wretched as to have no associates,)is it not the worse for the People, that their Ministers which ought to be Sworn as aforesaid, are not? Whereby old Attorneys without ha∣zard of Perjury, lead young Judges Sworn to what they know not, to do what they should not? as when so many subtil and lying Mercuries, direct so many covetous and blind Cupids to shoot forth their arrows, that they may stick them where they please, and commend the shoot∣ers for hitting the marks that yield them the best sprots of the gain? The rest of this Charter I shall o∣mit as aforesaid, for the reasons a∣foresaid, and shall conclude this with the beginning of another, made in Confirmation, Renovation, and Per∣petuation thereof, by King Edward the first, in the 28 year of his Reign, as followeth: viz. EDWARD by the Grate of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guyen. To all Arch-Bishops, &c. greeting. We have seen the great Charter of the Lord Henry our Father, of the Liber∣ties of England in these words:And so beginneth the Charter as aforesaid, and endeth this, and it together, saying,
We ratifying and approving these gifts, any grants aforesaid, confirm, and make strong the same for us, and our Heirs perpetually, and by tenor of these presents renew the same, Willing, and granting for Vs, and Our Heirs, that this Charter, and all and singular its Articles for ever∣more, shall be stedfastly, and invio∣lably observed; And if any Article in the same Charter coneined yet hi∣thirto peradventure hath not been observed, nor kept; We will, and by Our Authoritie Royal command from henceforth firmly they be ob∣served. These, &c. being witnesses. Given at Westminster under Our own hand the 28 of March, in the 28 year of Our Reign. Again, where the L. C. maintaineth the Statute of Marlebridge made 51 Hen. 3. cap. 5. which saith, The great Charter shall be observed in all its Ar∣ticles, as well in such as pertain to the King, as to others, and that shall be en∣quired of before the Justices in Eyre in their Circuits, and before Sheriffs in their Counties when need shall be, and Writs shall be freely granted against them that do offend, before the King, or the Justices of the Bench, or before Ju∣stices in Eyre, when hey come into those arts, &c. And the offendors when hey be convict shall be grievously pu∣ished by our sovereign Lord the King,  form above mentioned.
Expost and Quer.I shall but ask, Why not Justices in Eyre still? And why not Writs Gratis sent to the Sheriff of every Countie, to enquire of offences, and offendors against the great Charter? And doth not this Statute prove, that Sheriffs ought to have such Writs, and to make such enquiries? And that the King referred himself, as well as others, to the judgements, as well of Justices in Eyre, as of the Justices of the Bench? and that he would have his Writs granted as well against him, as others, and that Gratis? doth it not futther prove, that Kings accounted the Justices in Eyre, his Justices, and their Court, his Court; as well as the Kings-Bench? how therefore doth the Lord Coke hereafter call them new Justices, and their Court, new Court? But more of that in its place. Now having done with so much of Mag. Charta as I promised: and with the 5 Chapter of the Statute of Marlebridge: and the 8 of the Sta∣tute of Glocester. Here ensueth the Confirmation of the great Charter, made at London 10 Octob. Anno
25. Ed. 1. three years before that whichis Printed before it, because that containeth all the Charter in 38. chapters at large, and this but 7. In the First of which it confirmeth both Charters, and every Article thereof; both made 9o H. 3. in general words, as followeth, viz. Cap. 1. Char∣ters.Edward by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Guyen. To all those that these pre∣sent Letters shall hear or see, Greet∣ing: Know ye, that We to the Ho∣nour of God, and of Holy Church, and to the profit of Our Realm, have granted for Vs, and Our Heirs; That the Charter of
Liberties, and the Charter of Forrests, which were made by the Commonalty of the Realm, in the time of King Henry Our Fathers, shall be kept in every point without breach. And We will, that the same Charter shall be sent under Our Seal, aswel to Our Iustices of the Forrest, as to others; And to all Sheriffs of Shiers, and to all Our other Offi∣cers, and to all Our Cities through∣out the Realm, together with Our Writs, in the which shall be contain∣ed that they cause the foresaid Char∣ters to be published; And the Declare to the People, that We have confirm∣ed them in all points. And that Our Iustices, Sheriffs, Maiors, and other Ministers, which under Vs, have the Laws of Our Land to guid, shall allow the same ChartersPleaded before them in Iudgement, in all their points,: That is to wit; The Great Charter, as the Common Law; And the Charter of the Forrest, for the Wealth of Our Realm. L. C. upon Conf. C. f. 526.The Title of this Statute (saith the Lord Coke) is Confirmationes Char∣tarum de Libertatibus Angliae & Forrestae, viz. The Confirmation of the Charters of the Liberties of En∣gland, and of the Forrest: And true it is (saith he) that hereby the said Charters are expresly confirmed; but they are also excellently interpreted, (which is a Confirmation in Law) for here is nothing Enacted, but it included within Magna Charta. And by the Commonalty (saith he) is to be under∣stood, by the consent of all the Realm, by Authority of Parliament: and many times by the Commonalty of England, is signified an Act of Parliament, &c. before Printing, and before the Reign of King
Hen. the 7th, Statutes were Ingrossed in Parchment, and by the Kings Writ Proclaimed by the Sheriff of every Countie: this was the ancient Law of England, that the Kings Com∣mandments issued, and were published in form of Writs (as then it was.) An excellent course, and worthie to be re∣stored,&c. This Clause (saith he) is worthie to be written in letters of gold, viz. That our Justices, Sheriffs, Ma∣jors, and other Ministers, which under us have the Laws of the Land to guid them shall allow the said Charters in all points, which shall come before them in Judgement. And here it is to be ob∣served, That the Laws are the Judges Guides, or Leaders, according to that old Rule, Lex est Exercitus Judicum, viz. The Law is the Judges Armie: Tutissimus Doctor, viz. The safest Teacher: or Lex est optimus Iudicis Synagogus, viz. Their best Synagoug. And Lex est tutissimus cassis, viz. Their safest Fortress. There is an old legal word (saith he) called
Guidagi∣um, viz. Guidage, which signifieth an Office of guiding Travelors through dangerous and unknown ways. Here it appeareth that the Laws of the Realm, hath this Office to guid the Iudges in all causes that come before them, in the ways of right Justice, who never yet misguided any man that cer∣tainlie knew them, and truly followed them. The sence of the words, That the great Charter is to be holden for the Common Law, is, that it is a Common Law to all, in amendment of theRealm; that is, of great mischiefs, and inconveniencies, which oppressed the whole Realm, before the making there∣of. Expost and Quer.Doth not the Lord Coke by all this his expression, commend this Statute very highly? Why did he not in his duty cause it to be observed in his time? And had not Iustices of the Forrest, and other Iustices, Sheriffs Majors, and other Ministers of his time (had they received the Great Charter with the Kings Writs) power thereby, as well as he, to cause the said Charter to be published to the People, and that the King had con∣firmed it in all points? Why did he (by neglecting his duty to send the said Charter and Writs unto them ac∣cordingly) make them fail of their duties? Doth not the Lord Coke con∣fess by this clause,
Worthie, (as he saith) to be written in letters of gold, That Sheriffs, Majors, and other Mi∣nisters, as well as Justices, and other Justices as well as those at Westmin∣ster, have, or ought to have the Law of England to be their guid, and ought to allow Magna Charta in all points, which in any Plea shall be before them?Why then do the Iustices at West∣minster by their Habeas corpus, and other Writs, (as aforesaid) disturb, and prevent all Sheriffs, Majors, &c. to exercise their Offices, before Judg∣ment, or after, without proof of In∣justice, or manifest Errors commit∣ted by them in their Iudgements? Why do not the Iustices at Wistmin∣ster (when they have Persons, and Causes brought before them by vir∣tue of their Writs) allow Mag. Car. to be Pleaded before themselves, since they will suffer no others to hear it? How can it be true, (when they do not) that the Law is their guid? Do not they assume the sole Guiding, Learning, Interpreting, Exercising, and Over ruling of the Law to themselves, when they suffer no other Iustices, or Ministers of the King, but themselves to have any Judgement therein, as aforesaid? Why do they bely the Law so much, as to call it their Guid, their Teacher, their Army, their Synagogue, their Fortress; when it is manifest, That their Attorneys, their Sollici∣tors, their Catch-polls, and their Goalers, are their Guids, Teachers, Supernumerous Armies, and Invinci∣ble
Fortresses, (as they trust, but may be deceived) all whose ways are to Injustice as aforesaid? How can that Law be called Common to all, which They, and these their Creatures, Mo∣nopolize, Ingross, and Appropriate all to themselves as aforesaid? C. 2. Judge∣ments.And We will, That if any Iudge∣ment be given from henceforth, con∣trary to the points of the Charters a∣foresaid, by the Iustices, or by any o∣ther Our Ministers, that hold Plea before them against the points of the Charters, it shall be undone, and hold∣en for nought. L. Coke upon Con. C. f. 527.Whatsoever Judgement it given a∣gainst this Statute of Magna Charta, &c. is made void by this Act, and may be reversed by a Writ of Error, be∣cause the Judgement is given against the Law; for this Act saith, Soir de fait & pur nienttenus, viz. as the Stat. Englisheth it self, It shall be undone and holden for nought. Expost and Quer.If so? Why should not all Iudge∣ments (appearing as aforesaid, to be contrary to
Mag. Charta) which are given for Arrests, and Imprisonment of mens Bodies for Debt, be undone,and held for nought? Why did Mr. Garland lately trouble the most High Court of Parliament (where∣of, by so doing, he shewed himself an unworthy Member) with a ridi∣culous useless Act of his drawing, for the Enlarging poor Prisoners for Debt? Why did not he, (if he did ever read this place of the Lord .) mind the Parliament to command the Judges (who seem, if they have read it, to have forgot it) to reverse their Erroneous judgements against Debtors, so far as they extend to their Imprisonment, and to send their Liberate to all their Goalers, to set open all their Goal dores, and let forth so many of the Prisoners for Debt, as they have left alive? The poor, because they have no Estate whereof to pay; the rich, because they have Estates sufficient for all, or part; against which Estates, so much of their judgements may stand, as concerneth that, and not their Bo∣dies: and Executions may be taken thereupon, by Elegit, or Fieri facias, according to the Statute of Westmin∣ster the 2. cap. 18th. agreeable to Magna Charta, and the Parliament not to be troubled, except to Im∣power
the Iudges by an Order, to re∣ctifie their judgements according to that Law which is in force, and so forgo their Errors, and Repealed Statute of the 25th of Ed. 3d c. 17th. which ought to be no Guid, Leader, or Teacher, to learned and grave Judges, that can never be misguided by the right Law, if (as the Lord C. saith) they certainly know it, and be pleased truly to follow it. And by this course, as well the Creditors of the rich Debtors, as the poor Prisoners for Debt, (that have been wronged by the Judges Erronious judgements, and proceeding against Mag. Char∣ta) may be partly redressed, and so rest satisfied, until the Parliament be pleased to right them further (as shall appear hereafter they may.) So like∣wise may that Prisoner, (which is Im∣prisoned again after his inlargement by Garlands Act) be Enlarged again by the same Judge that Committed him, without troubling the Parlia∣ment, or People with any such Ap∣peal, as is lately divulged; or suffer∣ing the Apprentices Out-Cry to run so far, That now it will never be stopped till the Thieves be taken.
Cap. 4. Excom. &c.And that all Arch Bishops, and Bishops, shall pronounce the Sen∣tence of Excommunication against all those that by word, deed, or counsel, do contrary to the said Charters, or that in any point break, or undo them; And that the said Curse be twice a year Denoun∣ced, and Published by the Pre∣lates aforesaid: And if the same Prelates, or any of them, be re∣miss in the Denunciation of the said Sentences; the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury, and York, for the time being, shall Compel, and Distrain them to the Execution of their Duties, in Form afore∣said. L. C. upon Confir Cart. f. 527.This Excommunication the Prelates could not pronounce without Warrant by Authoritie of Parliament, because it concerned Temporal causes. Was not the Authority of this Parliament sufficient Warrant for Prelates to pronounce Excommuni∣cation according to the Tenor, and limitation of this Act? Doth not the Lord Coke say before, That this Act is not onely an Express Confirmation of Magna Charta, but also, a Confirmati∣on of it in Law? Doth he not say be∣fore that; That Magna Charta should live forever, and in all Successions of Ages for evermore? Is not the sub∣stance
of the Excommunication gi∣ven by this Act to the Prelates to pronounce? Had the Prelates any more to do therein, but to pro∣nounce an Excommunication? What meaneth Ipso Facto in the Act, but to let all future Ages under∣stand, That the breach of Mag. Char. which is a Declaration of the Funda∣mental Laws of England, is such an Offence as deserveth an everlasting Curse inflicted by the Law it self up∣on the Breakers for ever? Which Curse receiveth no more strength from the Pronouncer, than a Sen∣tence of Death from a Iudge, who doth but tell a Fellon whom the Law condemneth, what shall be the manner of his Death. If any Excom∣munication was ever pronounced by virtue of this Act (as there were two in two several Kings Reigns) were not those Excommunications in force, and so to continue as long as Magna Charta it self? the Prelates, and their Successours neglect of their Duties, by discontinuing such De∣nunciations twice yearly, afterwards notwithstanding? If so? Are not those Excommunications still in force, except Absolutions be produ∣ced,
granted, and given by equal Authority to that whereby those Excommunications were Denoun∣ced? If so? Are not Excommunica∣tions, until Absolutions, of the same accompt, and validity in Law, as Out-lawries, until they be rever∣sed? If so? Are not all the Lands, Goods, and Chattels of all Excom∣municats, now the States, as formerly they were the Kings, and so Seiza∣ble, Sequestrable, and Convertible to that use, until Absolution? And ought not satisfaction precede Abso∣lution? Ought not that satisfaction extend to every particular man that hath been wrong'd in this case, which (as the L. C. saith) is a Temporal case, and so called, in respect of the inte∣rest of all men, called by the Clergy, Temporal, for distinction from them∣selves, that would be called Spiritu∣al? And so (as I believe) not to be commuted by a Prelatical Sentence, to a trivial Pennance; nor pardoned by Parliament, without excepting every particular Interest. And what Parliament can Pardon, or Absolve Offendours against Magna Charta, but by the Rules of Magna Charta, without offending Magna Chartathemselves, and incurring the same Excommunication, as they have in∣curred that would be Absolved? If Excommunications be no Terrors to Atheistical Judges, Justices, &c. who neither Believe, nor fear, Hea∣ven, Hell, God, Justice, nor Laws, (though they cannot in nature and reason, but know that such there are, and are to be beleived, feared, and obeyed) shall nor Excommunicati∣ons be sufficient Warrants for Chri∣stians, English Christians in England, (being warranted not onely, as the L. C. saith, By Authority of Parliament, but of many Parliaments, such Parlia∣ments of such Infallibility as were those wherein Magna Charta, and all its Confirmations were made, and grounded upon the Common-Laws of England, which, as all Lawyers profess, were grounded upon the Law of God, the Word of God, the God of Christians, Christ Jesus, the God of Truth, even Truth it self,) to put them in Execution? If not? To what ends are Parliaments, or the Laws of God, and man, to such as dare not, or will not, if, and when they may? Doth not the Statute of Ano. 1o. P. & M. cap. 12o. which
made it Fellony for twelve English persons, or above, to assemble toge∣ther of purpose to break any point of the Laws of England, imply it to be Warrantable for all the People of England to Assemble together, to cause the Laws of England, made by all their consents, to be observed, and to punish not onely the Breakers, but also the onely begetters, and causers of all the Breakers, and Breaches of all the Laws of Eng∣land, the onely assumers of the knowledg thereof, and concealers of that knowledge from the People; so that none but themselves, can know∣ingly break the Laws, because they will not let them know them? Last∣ly, If Excommunications be no∣thing formidable to Lawyers, to make them care whether they incur, or shun them, but as their profit guids them? Let us see what the L. Coke saith, fol. 536. concerning the conclusion of this Act, and the Seals that were put to it, and the Oaths of the King and Parliament, then and for ever, for the Ratification of it, omitted in the Stat. at large, in Print, but to be seen in the Tower, Rot. Parl. 7o.
Hen. 4th. no. 60. begin∣ingwith the word Simile, &c. Note (saith he) the Solemnitie of this Act, in that all the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Earls, Brons, &c. did put their Seals thereunto. A rare example, which was done for the obliging of them the more firmly to the observation of this Act, which concerned the Laws, Liberties, and Free-Customs of their Countrey; and for their greater Obligation for the due Ob∣servation of this Act, they took a voluntary Corporal Oath.
Expost & Q.And let us note, that if the Judge∣ment of God, and this Parliament, hath made the Prelates sensible of their slighting of their Predecessors Excommunications, seals and oaths? by what justice, or excuses, shall Lawyers avoid the same Judgement? And though the Ignorance of Mag. Charta, and the Law (which Lawyers have begotten & caused by conceal∣ing the same from them as aforesaid) can be no safe Plea for any with God, or man, without prayers for Remission, and manifestation of Re∣pentance; yet is Ignorance a better subject for mercy, than knowing wil∣fulness; and the people, while igno∣rant of Mag. Charta, are more capa∣bleof grace for the breaking of it, than when they know it, if they put not the Iudgements of it, in Executi∣on, against the causers of their of∣fence. Now I shall let you see, that there were two Excommunications de∣nounced against the breakers of Mag. Charta, according to this Sta∣tute; as followeth. Exco∣munic. prim.The Year of our Lord One thou∣sand two hundred fiftie three, the third of May, in the great Hall of the King at Westminster, in the presence, and by the assent of the Lord Henry by the Grace of God, King of Eng∣land; and the Lord Richard Earl of Cornwall his brother; Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, Marshal of England; Humphrey Earl of Herford; Henry Earl of Oxford; John Earl Warren, and other estates of the Realm of England: We Boniface, by the mercie of God, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England; T. of London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W. of Norwich, P. of Her∣ford, W. of Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of Excester, M. of Carlile, W. of Bath, E. of Rochester, T. of S. Davids, Bi∣shops, apparrelled in Pontificals, with tapers burning against the breakers of the Churches Liberties, and of the Liberties, or other Cu∣stoms of the Realm of England, and namely of those which are contained
in the Charter of the Common Liber∣ties of
England, & Charter of the For∣rest; have denounced the sentence of Excommunication in this Form: By the Authoritie of Almightie God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and of the glorious Mother of God, and perpetual Virgin Mary; of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul; and of all Apostles, and of all Mar∣tyrs; of blessed Edward King of Eng∣land; and of all the Saints of heaven; We Excommunicate, accurse, and from the benefits of our holy Mo∣ther the Church, we sequester all those that hereafter willingly, and maliciously deprive, or spoil the Church of her Right; and all those that by any craft, or wiliness do vio∣late, break, diminish, or change the Churches liberties, and Free-cu∣stoms contained in the Charters of the Common liberties, and of the For∣rest, granted by our Lord the King to Arch bishops Bishops, and other Prelates of England: And likewise to the Earls, Barons, Knights, and other Freeholders of the Realm; and all that secretly or openly, by deed, word, or counsel, do make Statutes, or observe them being made, or that bring in Customs, or keep them be∣ing brought in, against the said li∣bertis, or any of them, the Writers, Lawmakers, Counsellors, and the Executors of them, and all those that shall presume to Iudge against them. All and every which Persons before mentioned, that willinglyshall commit any thing of the Pre∣mises, let them well know; That they incur the foresaid sentence Ip∣so sacto, first upon the deed done. And those that commit ought ignorantly-and be admonished, except they Re, form themselves within 15. daies af∣ter the time of the Admonition; and make full satisfaction for that they have done, at the will of the Ordi∣nary, shall be from that time forth, wrapped in the same sentence. And with the same sentence, we burthen all those that presume to perturb the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of the Realm. To the perpetual memory of which thing, We the aforesaid Prelates have put Our Seals to these Presents. Expost and Quer.What though the Form of this Ex∣communication be Popish? Is not the Substance the maintenance of Eng∣lands Liberties? And is not that all which the meaning of this Law re∣quireth? If Judges and Prelates, as well since King
Hen. 8. as before, have neglected their Duties in Itte∣rating the charge of their Functions, the first, in pronouncing Sentence, and the other in Executing it; doth not once Pronouncing, & once exe∣cuting of such one Sentence of Law, as concerneth all Ages, Sexes, andConditions of People to learn and remember, no less for the Preserva∣tion of their lives, and livelihoods, than Scriptures for their Salvation, take away the plea of Ignorance from all men? Shall any man com∣mit that sin which he knoweth to be once so Declared by the Law, and think to avoid punishment because not often so Declared by Law-Pro∣fessours? Are not all men bound to search the Scriptures, and learn the Laws at their perils therefore? If Ig∣norance were a plea, shall knowledge be excused? Professors of knowledg? nay, such as ingross that Profession from all others; nay more, such as are the onely causers and punishers of all other mens Ignorance? It appeareth that this Sentence was Denounced in the time of King Hen. 3d. Now followeth another, Denounced upon the said Confirma∣tion made in the 25th. year of King Ed. 1o. viz.
Excom. 2.In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, to the Honour of God, and Holy Church, and for the commonProfit of the Realm, hath granted for him and his Heirs for ever, these Articles above written. Robert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, Admonished all his Pro∣vince, Once, Twice, and Thrice. Because that shortness will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the People of England of these Presents in Writing: We there∣fore injoyn all persons of what E∣states soever they be, that they, and every of them, as much as in them is, shall uphold and maintain these Articles, granted by our Sovereign Lord the King, in al points; And all those that in any point do resist, or break, or in any manner hereaf∣ter procure, counsel, or any wise as∣sent to resist, or break those Ordi∣nances, or go about it by word, or deed; openly, or privily, by any manner of pretence, or colour: We the foresaid Arch-Bishop by our Au∣thority in this Writing expressed, do Excommunicate, and accurse, and from the Lord Iesu Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and from all the Sacraments of Holy Church, do sequester, and exclude. Expost & Q.Doth not the word, Hereafter, ex∣tend to all successions, and implie a Duration, as long as there be a Mag. Charta, and a breaker of it? Do not Parliamentarie Oaths, as well as their Laws, include absents, and futures,
as well as present? If neither Oaths, nor Excommunications be obligato∣rie to Atheists, shall not their hands, and seals, bind them and their Heirs, and Executors after them, as com∣mon Bonds signed and sealed be∣tween private parties, commonly do? And more specially, such as take up∣on them the sole Execution, and Administration of the Laws, Liber∣ties, and Freehold of England? Shall not Charters of Parliament, made, signed, sealed, and confirmed by Authoritie of Parliaments, bind all Subjects, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, as well, and as far, as private Charters of Feofments shall bind their Contractors, and their Heirs, &c. Nay, as far as Acts of Parliament can bind, till repealed? Is not every Court called Curia, of the Care it ought to have to execute that charge it undertaketh? and not to exact, and raise Fees, &c. for dis∣charging themselves of all their said Obligations to do even Justice to all men, and to force men to pay those exactions, even for doing injustice? If all before written be not sufficient to discover that to be true, and that therefore the Lives,
Lands, & Goods, possessed by Judges, Lawyers, all, or most of them, are in the States power to seize into their hands, to the use of the Common-wealth, as aforesaid; let us look a little further, and we shall find more that may. Stat. of Artic. on the great Chart. A. 28. Ed. 1.And first, the Statute cal∣led Articuli super Chartas, viz. Arti∣cles upon the great Charters, made 28. of Ed. 1. viz. the same year as the Confirmation at large (which consisteth of 38. chapters of Magna Charta) was made; proveth further, as followeth. Pream∣ble.For as much as the Articles of the great Charter of the Liberties of Eng∣land, and of the Charter of the Forrest, the which King Henry, Father to our Sovereing Lord the King, granted to his People for the Weal of his Realm, have not been heretofore ob∣served, ne kept, and all because there was no punishment executed upon them which offended against the points of the Charters before men∣tioned: Our Sovereign Lord the King hath again granted, revived, & confirmed them at the requests of his Prelates, Earls, & Barons assem∣bled in His Parliament holden at Westminster in the 28 year of his Reign. And hath ordained, enacted, and established certain Articles a∣gainst all them that offend contrary to the points of the said Charters, or
any part of them, or that in any wise transgress them, in the form that ensueth, viz. First of all, That from henceforth the great Charter of the Liberties of England, granted to all the Com∣monaltie of the Realm, and the Charter of Forrest in like manner granted, shall be observed, kept, & maintained in every point, in as am∣ple wise, as the King hath granted, renued, and confirmed them by this Chart. And that the Charter be deliver∣ed to every Sheriff of England under the Kings Seal, to be read four times in the year before the people in the full County, that is to wit, the next County day after the Feast of S. Michael, and the next County day af∣ter the Feast of the Circumcision, and after Easter, and after the Feast of S. John Baptist. Justi∣ces of Oyer &
Term.And for these two Char∣ters to be firmly observed in every point, and Article (where before no remedy was at the Common Law) there shall be chosen in every Shire Court by the Commonaltie of the same shire, three substantial men, Knights, or other lawfull, wise, and well disposed Persons to be Iustices, which shall be assigned by the Kings Letters Patents under the great Seal, to hear, and determine (with∣out any other Writ but onely their Commission) such plaints as shall be made upon all those that commit, or offend against any point contained in the aforesaid Charters, in the Shires where they be assigned, as wellin Franchises, as without, and as well for the Kings servants out of their places, as for other. And to hear the plaints from day to day without any delay, and to determine them without allowing the delays which be at the Common Law: And the same Knights shall have power to punish all such as shal be attainted of any Trespass done contrary to any point of the two said Charters (where no remedy was before at the Com∣mon Law, as before is said) by Im∣prisonment, or by Fine, or by Amer∣ciament, according to the Trespass. Nevertheless the King, nor none of his Councel that made this Ordi∣nance, intend that by virtue hereof, any of the foresaid Knights shall hold any manner of Plea by power, for to admit any suit in such cases wherein there hath been remedy provided in times passed, after the course of the Common Law by writ. Nor also that the Common Law should be prejudi∣ced, nor the Ch. aforesaid, in any point. And the K. Willeth, that if all three be not present, or cannot at all times attend to do their Office in form a∣foresaid, the King commandeth that two of them shall do it. And it is Or∣dained that the Kings Sheriffs, and Bailiffs shall be attendant to do the commandments of the foresaid Iu∣stices, as far forth as appertaineth into their Offices. And besides these things granted upon the Arti∣cles of the Charters aforesaid. The King of his special Grace for redressof the grievantes that the people hath sustained by reason of his Wars, and for the amendment of their Estate, & to the intent that they may be the more ready to do him service, and the more willing to assist, and aid him in time of need; hath granted certain Articles, the which he supposeth shall not onely be observed of his leige people, but also shall be as much pro∣fitable, or more, than of the Article heretofore granted. L. Coke f. 537, 538, 539.One of the causes for the making this Act, was (saith the Lord Coke, as in the Preamble is suggested) that there was no certain punishment i many points established by the said Charters against the violators of the same; which also by this Act (saith he) is remedied: And the word, People here (saith he) doth include all the Kings Subjects, &c. And again, the word, Pain ne fuit estable, some (saith he) Pain ne fuit execute, that is true in effect; but the Original is, Pain ne fuit estable; that is, pain was set down certain: And (saith he, fol. 539.) This Act had but force of a Charter, until confirmed  this Parliament, the 34th Ed. 1. that these Charters should be read  times in the year, in full County, here
an order taken for the publishing. And O remedie ne fuit avant, &c. is to be construed (saith he) where no Action was given by the Kings Writ, to be pur∣sued at Common Law, &c. Again, here (saith he) for the better Execution of those glorious two Lights, Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, a new Court, and new Justices were ap∣pointed, &c. Again (saith he) these clauses against the Kings Servants out of their places, as well as others: And to hear the Plaints without delay, day by day, and to determine them without admitting such delaies as be at Common Law, was the first ground of the raising of the Justices called, Trail Baston, and their Courts so called, in respect of their precipitate proceedings from day to day, without such convenient leisure and time, as Common Law allowed, &c. they in the end had such Authoritie, as Justices in Eyer; but albeit they had their Authoritie by Act of Parliament, yet if they erred in judgement, a Writ of Error did lie by the general Rule of the Common Law, to reverse the Judge∣ment in the Kings-Bench; which being once resolved, and known, and their Jurisdiction fettered with so many li∣mitations, their Authoritie, by little and little vanished.
Expost and Quer.Was there any certain Pain establi∣shed by this Statute, against the vio∣lators of Magna Charta, other than by Commission in Eyer, that the Ju∣stices might determine, and punish the Offendors by Imprisonments, Fines or Amerciaments, according to the Trespass? Ought not the Ju∣stices of the Kings-Bench to have so punished all such as were Indicted before Sheriffs, or Justices in Eyer, who had power to inquire, and certi∣fie them of all such Offendors, and Offences against Magna Charta, by the Statute of Marlebridge? 51. Hen. 3d? Doth not the Lord Coke say else∣where, That all Statutes ought to be construed so, as that there should be no failer of Justice: should not the Justices of the Kings-Bench have con∣strued Magna Charta so? Doth not the 14th chap. of Mag. Charta ex∣presly direct;
That all offendors ought to be Amercied by their equals, accord∣ing to the quantitie of the Trespass? Doth the Lord Coke speak truth, when he saith, this Statute gave any man Remedie for the certaintie of the punishment, other than Magna Char∣ta did before? Was it not made more uncertain by referring it to the Justi∣cesin Eyers discretion, whether A∣merciaments, Fyne, or Imprison∣ment? Doth he not confess plainly, (when he saith, It is true in effect, that the Pain was not Executed, as some read, instead of the Pain was not Esta∣blished,) That it was the fault of the Justices of the Kings-Bench, in not Executing the Pain of Amercying, &c. (as they might, and ought to have done) was the cause of Impo∣wering the Justices in Eyer, (who were but Enquirers before) now to determine, and punish such Offen∣dors, and Offences, as they did for∣bear, viz. The Kings Servants, with whom by this time, they of the Kings-Bench tampered for their Offices? And was it not for the same cause, the people were Declared to be choosers of Justices in Eyer? And doth not the Lord
Coke shew a great spight between himself, and his bre∣thren; whom he would have to be ancient; and the Justices in Eyer, whom he calleth a new Court, and new Justices? And shew his Memo∣ry to be weak, as his Envy was strong, when he is forced to give himself the Lye, (either here, or in his Exposition of the Stat. of Marle∣bridge,where he saith; They were then Justices, and a Court, though but for Inquirie? And upon the 23th Chap. of Magna Charta; he saith, they used before that time to give charge to all Juries concerning Wears &c. Doth not the Lord Coke say, fol. 235. That Bracton wrote before the making West. 1. which was 3. Ed. 13 And doth not Bracton lib. 3. cap. 11, 12, and 13. say, Justices in Eyer were be∣fore his time? Doth not Camden in his Britannia, pag. 104. say, They were Instituted by King Hen. 2? Doth not Hoveden in his Annas, part. poster. fol. 113. b. confirm the same? And add that K. Hen. 2. divided the Realm in six parts, & setled three Ju∣stices in Eyer to every part, whose names he relateth? And doth not the Mirror of Justice lib. 3o. Tit. 1o. Justice in Eyer, declare their power at large? And as for their Election by the people, doth he not say, fol. 538. That Magna Charta, &c. containeth the substance of all that is contained in these Articles? And doth he not say in his Preamble, That Magna Char∣ta is an Act declarative of the ancient Laws, and Customs of England before it, and no introductive of any new?
And fol. 558. That of ancient time, before the making of this Act, all such Officers, or Ministers, as were institu∣ted, either for Preservation of  Peace of the County, or for execution of Justice (because it concerned all the Subjects of that County, and they had a great interest in the due and just exer∣cise of their places) were by force of the Kings Writs in every several Coun∣ty, chosen in full and open County, by the Free-holders of the same County? Again, (saith he,) So it was then, and yet is, of Coroners, and so it was then, and yet is, of Knights of the Shire for Parliaments; and of the Vedors of a Forest, and likewise it was of ancient time of the Sheriff of the County, and restored by this Act: but this is alter∣ed by divers Acts of Parliament. Now were not Justices in Eyer therefore that were before
Magna Charta chosen by the peole, as they were Ministers of Justice, wherein the people were concerned? And were they by this Act but restored to their ancient jurisdiction, as (the Lord Coke saith) Sheriffs were? Was not that alteration which was made by divers Acts of Parliament, made by such Acts as were contrary to Magna Charta? And are not, or ought not all such Acts to be void, (as the L. Coke hath elsewhere said?) Doth not these contradictions de∣clare the Lord Coke to have been di∣stracted with spight and envy against ustices in Eyer? And where in this leaf, he would perswade the people to suspect Justices in Eyer, of corrup∣tion, and Monopolizing justice to wrong the people that chuse them; can the people believe that these Ju∣stices (who are to be chosen by them, and to be displaced by them, when, and as often as they see cause) will, or can wrong them more, than those chosen by the King and his Servants, without their consents, unless they can believe that they may be per∣swaded to give their consents to wrong themselves? Is it not a Bull of less formality than ever any Po∣pish Bull was, (keeping a man off with his Horns, That he shall have no hold of his tail) when he saith, That the clause, where no remedy was before, &c. ought to be expounded, where no Action was given by the Kings Writs, to be pursued at Common Law? Since by the Statute of Mar∣lebridge, Justices in Eyer were toinquire by the Kings Writs; and now are, by express words of this chapter, not onely to inquire, but al∣so to determine by virtue of their Commissions, without the Kings Writs? And what cause could they, or can any other Court determine by virtue of their Commission, without the Kings Writs, but is Actionable by the Kings Writs? What doth this Statute give by virtue of this Commission, if all things Actionable by Writs, be not determinable by these Commissions, without Writs? And what doth this Statute avail, if not constructable as others, so that there should be no failer of justice? Where was the failer of justice, but in the Kings Courts, and Iudges, in not executing justice upon the Of∣fendors of Magna Charta? Doth it not therefore appear that the said clause (Where no Remedy was before) ought to be expounded, where no remedy was given before by Iustices in Westminster against the Kings Ser∣vants, and themselves, that were the greatest contractors in the breaches of
Magna Charta? Were not the Iustices in Eyer therefore inabled with a power to supply their de∣faults,and to do right to the People, against the King himself, and all his Servants at
Westminster, that wilfully failed in their justice and power? And where he saith; The Justices called, Trail Baston, had like autho∣ritie as Justices in Eyer, and commit∣ted Errors, & upon pretence thereof, had all their proceedings transported to the Kings-Bench; doth it not appear by the Statute called, Ragman, that those Iustices were made by the King, without the consent of the People, and sent abroad (perhaps of purpose) to err and abuse the peo∣ple, to give colour to the Kings-Bench, to send their Writs of Error, for the proceedings of the Iustices in Eyer (upon pretence of like Er∣rors) so to suppress all Iustice against themselves, and their Creatures? Doth not the Lord Coke herewithal prefer the chargeable delaies of causes (spun out by Termes, and Years,) before speedy justice done day by day, at mens own doors, which he calleth, Precipitat? Doth he not ground this course, for sup∣pressing speedy justice by Writs of Errors, upon the resolution of the Iudges at Westminster, which he al∣leadgethas sufficient to maister Au∣thority given by Act of Parliament? And is it not the resolution of all Lawyers, that no power but Parlia∣ment, is equal to Parliament, and no Parliament to be so impowred as to cross Magna Charta, and its Confir∣mations? Doth he not further (fol. 599.) alleadge the resolution of all the Iudges of England, against the King and his Councel, for an Errone∣ous Act, when they had chosen a Sheriff for Lincoln in a case of necessi∣ty, without the consent of the Peo∣ple? But to hasten this Treatise to an end, I shall end this Statute for this time, with few chapters follow∣ing, viz. Cap. 8. Elect. of She∣riffs.The King hath granted unto his people, that they shall have Election of their Sheriff in every Shire (where the Sheriffalty is not of the Fee) if they list. I shall say no more to this, than hath been said before.
C. 15. Sum∣mons & A∣tach.In summons and Attachements in Plea of land, the Writs from henceforth shall contain 15. days full at the least, after the Common Law, if it be not in Attachement of Assizestaken in the Kings presence, or of Pleas before Iustices in Eyer, du∣ring the Eyer. Expost and Quer.Upon this I must ask, Is not a Writ of Debt, Summons? Should not that be given to the party which ought to be summoned? Should not an Attachement follow by distincti∣on of 15. days, as this Statute pre∣scribeth? Shall the repealed Statute of the 25th of Ed. the 3d, serve Law∣yers turns to make a distinction be∣tween a Plea real, and Personal? And shall that Writ of Summons be counterfeited, either in it self, or in its return, as aforesaid. Ca. 16. False Retur. of Wr.Such Executions shall be done of them that make false Returns of Writs, (whereby right is deferred) as it is ordained in the 2. Statute of Westminster, with like pain, at the Kings commandment. L. C. upon Ca. 16. f. 568.This is an Act of Confirmation, Whereby the Statute of Westminster the 2d. cap. 39th. touching false re∣turns, is confirmed.
Expost & Q.Doth not the 2d Statute of West∣minster cap. 39. say, That the King hath commanded that Sheriffs shall bepunished by the Justices once or twice if need be for such false Returns? and if they offend a third time, none shall have to do therewith but the King, &c? Doth not the Court of Kings-Bench assume the King to be always there in Person? And what they speak, to be his own speech? Is it not they therefore that should punish Sheriffs for their false Returns, the third time of their offence? But is it not in∣deed they, and their Creatures, as well as those of the Common-Pleas, do make false Returns in the names of the Sheriffs of London, and
Mid∣dlesex, and do consequently make those Sheriffs liable to Actions, as a∣foresaid? How can they punish those Sheriffs for those false Returns, which they themselves suffer their Clerks to make, unknown to the Sheriffs, as aforesaid? And who but they cause, or suffer all Sheriffs falsly to Return Exigents with the words, Per judicium Coronatorum, and the Coroners names, who know no such thing? And if any man be Out-lawed without the judgement of the Coro∣ners of his County, or any mention made thereof in the Sheriffs Return, is not that Outlawry as injurious tothe Party, Perjurious in the Judges who admit such a Return, and pro∣ceed upon it, and as Illegal in the Sheriff that makes such a Return, and as different from due Proces of Law, as the other? And do not those false Returns filed upon their Re∣cords, make all their proceedings thereupon, false, and faint Actions as aforesaid? And if all before writ∣ten be not sufficient to make it ap∣pear to the world, that they are not onely Forgers, Perjurers, and A∣nathema's themselves, but also the onely causers of all others to be, or be accompted the like? And that their Lives, Lands, and Goods, are in the immediate dispose of the pre∣sent State, by the judgements and confessions of their own mouths? Behold their Oath, which they vo∣luntarily take when they assume their places, whereby they binde themselves further, before God, and man, as followeth, viz. The Oath of the Kings JudgesYe shall Swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our Sove∣reign Lord the King, and his peo∣ple, in the office of Iustice, and that lawfully ye shall Counsel the King to his business, and that ye shall not
councel, nor assent to any thing which may turn him to dammage, or disherison, by any manner way, or colour. And that Ye shall not know the dammage, or disherison of him, whereof Ye shall not do him to be warned by Your self, or by other. And that Ye shall do even Law, and Execution of right to all his Sub∣jects, rich, and poor, without ha∣ving regard to any person. And that You take not by Your self, or by other, privily, nor apertly, gift, nor reward of gold, nor silver, nor of a∣ny other thing which may turn to Your profit unless it be meat, or drink, and of small valure, of any man that shall have any Plea, or Proces, hanging before You, as long as the Proces shall be so hanging, nor after the same cause. And that Ye take no Fee, as long as Ye shall be Iustice, nor Robes of any man, great or small, but of the King himself. And that Ye give none advise, nor Counsel to no man, great nor small, in no case where the King is party. And in case that any of what Estate or Condition they be, come before You in Your Sessions with Force, and Arms, or otherways against the Peace, or against the form of the Statute thereof made, to disturb Execution of the Common Law, or to manace the people that they may not pursue the Law, that Ye do their Bodies to be Arrested, and put in prison: and in case they be such, that Ye may not Arrest them, thatYe certifie the King of their names, and of their Misprision hastily, so that he may thereof ordain a coven∣able remedie: And that You by Your selfe, nor by other, privily, nor apertly, maintain any Plea, or quar∣rel, hanging in the Kings Court, or else-where in the Countrie: And that Ye denie to no man common right by the Kings Letters, nor none other mans, nor for none other cause; and in case any Letters come to You, contrarie to the Law, that You do nothing by such lett, but certifie the King thereof, and go forth to do the Law, notwithstand∣ing the same Letters. And that Ye shall do, and procure the profit of the King, and of his Crown, with all things where Ye may reasonably do the same. And in case Ye be from henceforth found in default in any of the points aforesaid; Ye shall be at the Kings Will, of Body, Lands, & Goods, thereof to be done as shall please him: As God You help, and all Saints. Anno, 18. Edward, 3. Stat. 3.
Expost and Quer.If Atheists can perswade Christi∣ans that this Oath was no binding for them that had taken it, (even the Wise, Learned, Reverend, Judges, Sages, Scientissimous Inter∣preters of the Laws of England,) sufficient to keep them within the compass of their Oath, Law, andKnowledges? Shall not Christians perswade themselves, that it is a suffi∣cient Confession, Declaration, and judgement of their own mouths that made it, that their forfeitures, viz. their Lives, Lands, and Goods, in case of their breach of any point of this Oath, are now immediately in the power of the State to dispose of to the publique use, at their plea∣sures, without any further Proces, or proceedings in Law, but onely to give Order, and Warrant to Arrest the persons of such Offendors to stand to their censures; and to Se∣quester their Estates, and to divide them to the said use, accordingly? Did Lords ever use any more Law than their own Wills, when they Se∣questred, and punished their villains? Had Lords any more Law, Right, or Reason, to Sequester, and punish their villains at their own Wills, but for that their villains did take their Lands upon conditions to do those services which they and their Lords agreed upon, and gave their Lords their Oaths (as their greatest bonds) to perform those conditions, or in case of breach, to suffer their Lords to repossess their Lands, with theforfeitures of their Goods, (which they gained) and their Lives (which they sustained) upon the same? Was the Oath of a Villain (though made by Parliament, to the end that Lords should be well served by their Slaves in their private and meanest Offices) of as considerable conse∣quence to be observed, or in default thereof, their forfeitures to be exe∣cuted, as the Oath of Judges, made and Confirmed by several Parlia∣ments, to the end, that the com∣mon-wealth should be well served by their Justices in their publike, and most honourable (if rightly ser∣ved) Offices of Judicature, and ad∣ministration of Justice? Are not such Villains, as dare incroach, not onely upon their Lords Lands, and Estates, but also upon their Lives, and Liberties, dangerous, transcend∣ent, Hyper-Prelatical Usurpers? Are not such Usurpers intollerable mis∣chiefs in a Common-wealth? Who being sworn servants to the Com∣mon-wealth (as by this Oath it ap∣peareth the Kings Justices were) make all the Common-wealth their servants, to attend their Trains at Westminster at their pleasures? Andall Prisoners for Debt, not onely their own Villains, but also Villains to their Villainous Goalors, and Slaves to their Slaves? Are not the meanest of the Free-People of Eng∣land, interessed in the due executi∣on of Justice, to which these Judges were sworn? (as well to them, as to Kings) and consequently ought they not to be such Lords as dare, and will take the forfeitures of such Vil∣lains, as do them daily Injustice? Is not this Oath a sufficient Evidence in it self, that the takers of it, have, & do dayly break it? & cause all others that have, or do break it, to do so likewise? Since Kings and People have wholly referred themselves, and their Estates, not onely to the Ju∣stice of their Judges, but also to their fatherly advertisements, and admo∣nitions (whereby they ought not to suffer any that depend upon them, to err through ignorance) and they (contrariwise) admonish none not to offend, but suffer, and cause more to offend than willingly, and wit∣tingly would; and so do, for want of such admonitions, much more increase, and enhance the Markets of their Justice, by suffering no o∣therJudges to admonish, or Justifie any offendors at home, and ingross∣ing all to themselves at Westminster, or before such as they send to frip∣per for them, in Assizes, Goal-Deli∣veries, and Nisi priuss. Have not some present Grafts of the old stock Judges of Assizes in possibility for the
Coun∣trey) & their Agents in Chancery, pro∣cured several late Injunctions to be dissolved in Chancery, without the pri∣vity of both parties whom they con∣cerned, to the end onely to beget work for them in the Assizes, lest they should want better? Did our late Judges lawfully counsel King Charls in his busines, when they gave their Resolutions for him concerning the Ship-money? Did they not assent to a thing, or things, that turned to his dammage and disherison, and over∣turned him, and his Posterity out of three Kingdoms, and his life to boot, when they assented to Ship money, and Monopolies? Did not the Kings Councel and other Serjeants, and Lawyers, draw (if not plot) all such Patents? Got they not more by their Fees, for their advise therein, (which were present pay) than the King did by his reservations for interest inthose Grants which are yet in Ar∣rear? Was any thing reserved to the King thereby, but what his Councel learned thought fit, and ad∣vised him to take, and the Patentees to give? Did not those Judges, that had the keeping of both the Kings Seals, assent to all those unlawfull things, whatsoever they Sealed? Briefly, doth not this Oath in every point evidence the Judges at West∣minster, and their brethren to have been the chief betrayers of Kings and People in their chief trust, to guide and hold both in the right way, and did they not lead both wrong? And thereby are the chief Authors of all the blood spilt, and e∣states ruined in these three King∣doms, in and by these late Wars, which were undertaken for Refor∣mation, onely of such deformities in Law, and Government, which (you see) they had power to keep in form by their lawfull judgements, or admonitions to the right, or not consenting to the wrong? Do not our Records, and History testifie, that all the Civil Wars of
England, were alwaies undertaken for Refor∣mation of Injustice, evil Govern∣ment,and corrupt Lawyers that were alwaies the causers thereof, by breaking, and causing to be broken the Liberties of Magna Charta, which the People sought alwaies to reco∣ver? Were not Hugh D'Burgo, Chief Justice of England, Walter D'Lancton, Lord Treasurer of England, Brember, Trisilian, Bellknap, Thorp, &c. exam∣ples of their times in that case? If so few examples will not serve to make all Judges mend, should not all such Judges be made examples, to serve posterity to see that such evils are not necessary for Common-wealths? Shall such Extrajudical Judges, such lawless Lawyers, &c. as will not be tied by Oaths, made in, and by Parliaments; Excommunications denounced by Authority of Parlia∣ments; Charters Signed, Sealed, and Confirmed in, and by Parliaments; nor by Acts, Laws, and Statutes made by full and free Parliaments; be suffered to sit with Christians in Parliaments to make Laws, Votes, Oaths, and other Obligations upon Christians, which shall be none to themselves? But let us see further, what an other Act of Parliament saith to this Oath, as ensueth, viz.
The Statut. 20. E. 3. Pream. Letter. Justice.Edward by the Grace of God, &c. To the Sheriff of Stafford, greeting. Because that by divers complaints made to Vs, We have perceived that the Law of the Land, which We by Our Oath are bound to main∣tain, is the less well kept, and the execution of the same disturbed ma∣ny times, by maintenance, and pro∣curement, as well in the Court, as in the Countrey: We greatly moved of Conscience in this matter, and for this cause, desiring as much for the pleasure of God, and ease, and qui∣etness of Our Subjects, as to save Our Conscience, and for to save and keep Our said Oath, by the assent of the Great men, and other Wise men of Our Councel: We have ordein∣ed these things following, viz. Cap. 1.First, We have commanded all Our Iustices, that they shall from henceforth, do even Law, and execu∣tion of right to all our Subjects rith & poor, without having regard to any person, and without letting to do right for any letters, or command∣ment which may come to them from Vs, or from any other, or by any o∣ther cause.
Letters.And in that any letters, writs, or commandments come to the Iustices, or to other, deputed to do Law and right, according to the u∣sage of the Realm, in disturbance of the Law, or of the execution of the same, or of right to the parties; the Iustices, and other aforesaid shallproceed, and hold their Courts, and Processes where the Pleas, and matters be depending before them, as if no such Letters, Writs, or com∣mandments were come to them. And they shall certifie Vs, & Our Coun∣cel of such commandments as be con∣trarie to the Law, (as before is said) JusticeAnd to the intent that our Iustices should do even right to all people, in the manner aforesaid, without more favour shewing to one, more than to another, We have done Our said Iustices to be sworn, that they shall not from henceforth, as long as they shall be in office of Iustice, Fees. Roabstake Fee nor Roabe of any man, but of Our self. And they shall take no gift, nor reward by themselfs, nor by other, privily, nor apertly of any man that hath to do before them, by any way, except meat and drink, and that of small valure; and that they shall give no counsel to a great man, nor small, in case where We be Partie, or which do, or may touch Vs in any point, upon pain to be at Our will, Bodie, Lands, and Goods, to do thereof as shall please us, in case they do contrarie: And for this cause We have increased the Fees of the same our Iustices, in such manner, that it ought reasonably to suffice them.
Expost and Quer.Doth not the King say here, He is bound by his Oath to maintain theLaws of the Land? Doth not the Lord Coke say before, That a King in his Politick capacitie cannot dye? Did not, or ought not all Kings of
Eng∣land take the like Oath as this King did? Were they not therefore bound to maintain the Laws of England as well as he? and to be advised, and ruled by their Judges, how to main∣tain them? as the Oath of the Judges, this Statute, and others, do manifest they were? Are not Judges as Im∣mortal as Kings in their Politick ca∣pacity? Are they not bound by their Oaths, not onely to maintain, and execute the Laws of England against all men, without regard of Persons, but also to advise their Kings to maintain them, and how so to do, and to hinder, or not consent with their Kings to break them? Were not the maintenances (whereof the King here complaineth, and the procurements as well in Court, as in Countrey, whereby (he saith) the Laws, and the due execution thereof were disturbed) the remainders of the Factions of the Spencers, and o∣thers, who in Edward the 2d his time had made such Judges, as had put all Laws out of all order; sothat this King, being Edward the 3d. could not reform what had been de∣formed hitherto? but now endea∣voureth to do it by means of this Oath made in Parliament in the
18th. year of his Reign, and this Act made in the 20th. If Kings en∣deavoured to perform their duties (as this King did, and Judges would not) should not such Judges suffer, as in this Kings time divers did? If Kings, and Judges, (contra∣ry to their Oaths, and Offices) om their duties (as this Kings Father, and his Judges did) should not such Kings and Judges suffer for their de∣faults, as he and they did? If Kings and Bishops did lately neglect their duties, (contrary to their Oaths, and Offices) and were punished for their defaults? why not such Judges  were the greater Delinquents for suffering them so to offend? and more for consenting thereto? And more than that, when they advise the same? If the secret Sacriledg of one Achan deserved Gods indig∣nation against all his People of Isra∣el, until they discovered, and puni∣shed him, and his Offence? Wh doth the manifest extortion (a sin  less prohibited than Sacriledge) of so many Achans, merit of Gods Judgements against the whole Nati∣on of England, if they prosecute not, or leave unpunished, their Offences, which are more than Extortions; as Perjuries, Forgeries, Sacriledge it self, and divers others spoken of be∣fore. Judge, O People? Judge, your selves, O ye People, least ye be Judged. FINIS. POST-SCRIPT. IF it please the Parliament to require more proofs than common experience of the common breach of all the Common Law of England, by our common Mercinary Judges, they may cause Com∣missions in Eyer, or other Oyers, and Terminers to be issued to clear the matter by more particular evidences.
Eight Observable POINTS OF LAW; Executable by Justices of the Peace in their Counties, and Magistrates in their Corporations. Necessary to be known to the COMMON PEOPLE. 1. The choise of all Officers of Peace and Trust, anci∣ently in the People, cōfirm∣ed by Magna Chart.1 COunties and She∣riffs Turns, were ancient Courts in the time of King Arthur, & before; And in the Turns were tried all Pleas of the Crown; & in the Counties all Common-Pleas un∣der fourty shillings without Writ; and above, to any value with Writs, according to the Law maxim, Quod placita de Catallis, debitis &c.
quae summam 40f. attingunt, vel excedunt secundùm legem & consuetudinem An∣gliae, sine brevi Regis plaeitari non debent. See the Lord Coke upon the 35th Chap. of Magna Charta; and upon the Statute of Gloucester fol. 310. & 312. Hundreds, and Court Barons have the same power, and rights, and neither Sheriffs nor Ste∣wards are Judges, but suiters onely, fol. 312. And so all men were to have Law and Justice at home, cheap and near, and not to fetch it from West∣minster, far and dear. And the Con∣servators, otherwise called Guardians of the Peace before Magna Char∣ta, and since; had all necessary po∣wer to govern their Counties in Peace, and to execute all Laws con∣ducing thereunto, and to command the power of their Counties to assist them; and were chosen (as all other Officers of Peace and Trust were) by their Counties, as the Lord Coke af∣firmeth. 2. This Mutuatus is usual in the Kings-Bench, and Common-Pleas, to fetch poor men not worth 40. s. from York or Cornwall to London, for 5. s. debt or less; and to Outlaw him in the Common-Pleas, if he come not; which example other Courts of
Record follow too much.2. As Superiour Court ought not to incroach upon Inferiour, so the In∣feriour ought not to de∣fraud the Superiour, o those causes that belongto them: viz. Neither ought a man be sued in any Court of Record for debt not amounting to 40f. by way of mutuatus, and other lawless tricks dayly used by Attornies; nor in any inferiour Court for debt of 40 shillings, or exceeding, by di∣viding it into Actions under 40 shil∣lings. In which cases the Defendant ought to be admitted to plead to the jurisdiction of the Court, and to have a Prohibition to stay the suit: see the Lord Coke, upon the Stat. of Glouc. fol. 311. And all Courts were to dismiss all Actions entred without sufficient bail to prosecute, answer∣able for costs and damages. If non-suited, or cast; and not Jo. Do. and
Rich. Ro. as is used. See F. H. Just. P. the Register, and Fitz. H. Nat. brevium at large. And no Court of Record was to proceed in any action of debt, before the Plantiff swore his said debt to be 40s. or more, and his damage in trespass to be so much at least: And if Battery, that he was beaten indeed, to his uncurable hurt to that value. See the Stat. of Glouc. and the L. Coke upon it, with his reason for the discontinuance of this practice. 3. Doth not the de∣nial of an Habeas Corpus, to bring a prisoner before a Judge without Fees, (both to Judge and Attorney) include the sale, delay, and deni∣all of Justice, while the prisoner is unpro∣vided to buy it.3. All the Kings Writs for the doing justice and right to all men feely and speedily, without de∣lay or denial, ought to be granted, and had freely at the Kings cost: And justice ought to be done freely, with∣out sale; fully, without denial; and speedily, without delay: whereby (saith the Lord Coke) it appeareth that justice must have three quali∣ties, viz. To be Free, because no∣thing is more vile, than what is ve∣nal; Full, and perfect, that it may not halt; And speedy, because delay is a kind of denial. See the L. Coke upon the Stat. of Marlbr. chap. 80. Thus to have and do, was the Common Law of England, and the Liberties, and Right of the People before Mag. Char. and saved unto them by it: and the best Birth-right they ever had, or can have; whereby their Lands, Goods, Wives, Children, Bodies, Lives, Honours, and Estima∣tions ought to be protected from in∣juries. See the L. C. upon the 29 & 38 c. of M. C.
4. All defaults, & offences of Sheriffs, Coroners Escheatours, &c. inquirable, and punishable by Justi∣ces of Peace.4. Therefore Magna Char. ought to be read, and published to the People in all Cathedrals twice yearly: And all breakers thereof are excommu∣nicated ipso facto, and so twice pronounced by two Acts of Par∣liament, Tit. confirm. & excom∣mengmt. in Rast. abridg. fol. 65. and 148. And it ought to be read in full County in every shire, four times yearly, and all the breakers thereof inquired of there; and further inqui∣red of, and punished by Fines, Impri∣sonments, &c. by Justices in Eyre, two of every Counties chusing, whereby 12. or 14. may serve in cir∣cuits throughout England, and Wales, divided into six or seven Provinces, as twelve did serve for all
England divided into six. See, and compare Rast. abridg. fol. 65. and Rog. Ho∣veden parte poster. Annal. fol. 548. The not reading, and publishing of Mag. Char. is the default partly of Sheriffs not requiring it; partly of the Clerk of the Crown, &c. not sending it to them under Seal. All defaults of Sheriffs, &c. are inquira∣ble, and punishable by Justices ofPeace; as Lamb. Fitz. H. Cromp. Dal &c. affirm at large. 5. Observe the peo∣ples choice resumed by this Statute, when the King presumed to make Justices of P. and under that speci∣ous Title to impower them, first to affront, and by degrees to sup∣press, and at last to extinguish the larger power of Conserva∣tours. A Prerogative imposture devised by Lawyers for their own advantage, when they got the King to confer this creation of Justices of Peace, up∣on his Chancellours, and Keepers, to whom their creatures be∣came obliged to sub∣ject all England to Westminster, con∣trary to Mag. Char.5. Justices in Eyre are discontinued long since, and not onely for that they were interrupted, and wearied out by the Prerogative Judges, and Courts at Westminster by their Certioraries, Corpus cum causa, Errours, and other Writs (as the Lord Coke confesseth in his Exposition of the Stat. called Art. super Chart. fol. 540.) but also for that Justices of Assize, Justices of Peace, and all Oyers, and Terminers by their Commissions, and Magistrates of Corporati∣ons by their Charters, were enabled & sworn to hear and determine all Trespasses, Contempts, Oppressions, and Misde∣meanours, according to the Laws and customs of
England, as appear∣eth in, and by all Commissions of the Peace, Oyers, Terminers, and Charters that have Oyer and Termi∣ner, and by the Stat. made for thefirst institution of Justices of Peace, in the 18th year of Ed. 3d. in which year was also ordained the Oath of all Judges, and Justices of Oyer and Terminer for the due execution of justice, without sale, delay or denial, which the thrice reverend Judge Anthony Fitz Herb. admonisheth them that consider it, and their du∣ty to God, and their Countrey, not to break upon any conditions, Nat. brevium fol. 240. d. but now the common practice is otherwise.
6. Justices of Peace ought not to be sedu∣ced to transgress M. C. and the Petition of Right, by any Stat. that contradicts them, nor to lose the publike interest for a∣ny Prerogative usur∣pation, but to re-as∣sume their authority frō People, to act as con∣servatours of the an∣cient peace, and pro∣fit of the Common∣wealth: as in cases of Remitter, men stand to their best Title.6. Any that Will, ought to have Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for all Extortions, Oppressi∣ons, and Misdemeanours of Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, Escheatours, Bayliffs, Clerks, and all other Of∣ficers: See Cromp. Just. Peace, fol. 51.8. Fitz. H. Nat. br. fol. 112. d. And Justices of Peace, and all other Commissioners that ought by their Commis∣sions, and Oaths, to punish all such of∣fences, & do not, are no less than per∣jurers, and the greatest malefactours of all other, themselves. Nor can anyWrits of Certiorari, Corpus cum causa, Errour, Supersedeas, or putting out of Commission, excuse or supercede them to finish their Judgements, and Executions in all such causes brought in question before them: See and compare the Stat. of 2. Ed. 3. and 14. Ed. 3.14. and the 20. Ed. 3.1. and the Procedendo thereupon in Fitz. H. Na. Bre. fol. 240. where it is said; They shall proceed to justice ac∣cording to law, notwithstanding any Letter, Commandment, Prohibition, Writ, Privy-Seal, or Great Seal to the contrary. And if any such things be granted by the King, or any of his Judges, or Coutrs, such a Procedendo ought to be granted by the Keeper of the Broad Seal to countermand them; and to command justice, judgement, and execution to be done, even against the King, much ra∣ther against Judges, who under co∣lour of Authority and justice, delude and wrong Kings, and People: For (saith the L. Coke upon the Stat. of Marlebridge, cap. 5.) there is no grea∣ter injustice, than when under colour of Justice, men are injured: but Writs of Certiorari Corpus cum causa, and Errour, ought to be had, and granted,
upon proof of malice, partiality, in∣justice, or errour in matter, commit∣ted by any inferiour Court, but not upon suggestions, or bare suppositi∣ons, as is used: See and compare therefore all the said Statutes in this case, together with M. Dearhams Manuel, p. 25. Nor by any Superiour Judges or Courts that are parties, or concerned in the cause. See the L. Coke upon Art. super Chart. 7. These oppressi∣ons are daily commit∣ted by mercinary law∣yers, by colour of Sta∣tutes of their own de∣vices against Mag. C. which Stat. ought to be repealed, & the long∣er execution thereof resisted by all, or any necessary means.7. The granting of Writs, or Commissions to do injustice by, or to stay, or delay justice, where it is done, or do∣ing; or to deny Writs or Commissions to cause or further justice to be done, (which always was, and yet is the practice of the Prerogative Judges at Westminster; not onely to cross, & interrupt Com∣missioners legally chosen in, and by their Counties, (as Justices in Eyre were) and such, and all Justices of Peace, and Officers of Trust, and concernement in, and to the Com∣mon-wealth, still ought to be) is the worst of all Oppressions, and a ge∣neral destruction of Law and
People,committed by colour of an usurped Authority, as saith the L. Coke up∣on the Statute of Marlebr. cap. 5. To prevent which (his Lordship further saith) It is lawful for the Peo∣ple to take up Arms, or for Inferi∣our Judges to commit their Superiors and that before any Verdict, or Judge∣ment, because they worthily loose the benefit of Law, who intend to subvert it; and Subordinate authority is more to be obeyed, and assisted in the execu∣tion of Justice, than the Supreamest to be indured to obstruct it. All this, and more, is to be read in effect, in the L. Cokes Exposition upon Art. su∣per Char. and the Stat. of Marlbr. which if executed by Justices of Peace in their Counties, and Ma∣gistrates in their Corporations, would soon regulate abuses, settle Peace, and much inable the State, and Common-wealth to pay publike debts, and relieve distressed Soul∣diers: For it is Law it self, as virtue it selfe, invirtuateth, dignifieth, and authorizeth her true servants to exe∣cute her precepts; and confoundeth, expulseth, and turneth out of her service all her unjust Stewards, and underminers: As Jacob, and David
were preferred before their elder brethren; and Saul, Jeroboam, &c. were confounded by, and for their own Apostacies. 8. As in all these cases, &c. all Justi∣ces of Peace should be carefull to observe their Oaths, and per∣form their duties to the Common-wealth (whereof they are e∣minent members) So, no doubt the Free∣men of England, would be ready to as∣sist them in the re∣gaining and preserva∣tion of their ancient Birth-rights, Laws, and Liberties. Deus Faxit.8. Under the Titles of Trespases, Contempts, Oppressions, Misdemea∣nours, are comprehended all breaches of Magna Char. and all Offences a∣gainst all Statutes in force, and concurrent with Mag. Char. and the
Petition of Right, which all Justices of Peace, and Magistrates in their se∣veral jurisdictions, are Authorized, and sworn to hear and determine, without fear, favour or respect of per∣sons. How then to be excused, or delayed by any Writ, or command of any Superiour? And how are the Judges of the Kings-Bench (whereof the cheif was the Kings Deputy by Writ) now Superiour, or equal to any other Judges, or Justices? If that ma∣xim be true moritur Actio cum Per∣sonâ? But the Office of a Deputy dyeth with its Master, as a Letter or Warrant of Attorney, with its ma∣ker:the King-Bench may be spa∣red as well as his person? And all causes in this Common-wealth, be called Common-Pleas, and tryed by the Common Law of the land, and Verdicts of common people, and Free-holders of every County, and Corporation, before the Free Judges, & Magistrates freely chosen by the said Common and Free-Peo∣ple, to justifie them at home, and not before mercinary makers, expoun∣ders, and sellers of all Lawes, and Liberties, as they please at Westmin∣ster. And doth not the said Stat. of 28. Ed. 3. warrant Justices of Peace, or any two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) to call and keep Sessions as often as they see need to do justice to their Countrey? See the Stat. at large, and Cromp. I. P. fol. 112. and F. H. I. P. fol. 10.
Whereunto adde, That as Magna Charta compriseth all the Law of this land agreed upon by Kings and People, and would be read and pub∣lished in English (as aforesaid) for the better understanding thereof by all English People, to the end, that the ignorance of their Law, should be no excuse for any of them totransgress it: So how needless it is, if not pestiferous, to have this Com∣mon-Law reduced to a private mer∣cinarie Trade, or particular science exceeding the seven Liberal, by such professours thereof, as have, and do endeavour to disguise, mask, and hide it from all but themselves, in base French, and Latine intricacies and obscurities, to the end to make all persons offendors thereof, and none excusable, but by their resolu∣tions of their own Riddles, which are alwaies answerable to their Fees (be the cause right or wrong) where∣by the cure of Law becometh an in∣curable disease, until that superflu∣ous mercinary profession be abolish∣ed, or regulated, so as the best and soundest Lawyers may be used in Parliaments (as in former times) to sit upon Wol-sacks, to answer to what that high Court shall be pleas∣ed to aske them, and not as mem∣bers of that Court, to make Lawes, and Oaths for others, which they never observe themselves but for their own gain, and the peoples da∣mage: To which end, they alwaies preamble their inventions against Mag. Char. with titles of Acts for the
good of the people, when in their subsequents they hurt all but them∣selves; As (passing by all former) their last Acts for the inlarging of poor prisoners for debt, sufficiently witness; whereby neither creditor nor debtour are any way relieved, but both further entangled, and Lawyers Fees more procreated; Vi∣deat experientia. Conclusivè; That there can be no firm peace, or end of Wars, till there be an end of mer∣cinarie professours of Law, less needful, or useful for Parliaments or People, than Bishops, or such as might be used there, or elswhere, for saying, or reading prayers; while these neither pray, preach, nor stu∣dy, but their own lucrative magnifi∣cence every where upon the peo∣ples purses. Adde lastly; Such Justices of Peace as will not execute
Mag. Char. with its confirmations, and the Petition of Right, and desert, and wave the exe∣cution, and practice of contradicto∣ry Statutes, (for zeal to their Crea∣tours, or fear to be unmade by those that made them) ought to be de∣serted and waved by all good Patri∣ots of their countrey, as excommu∣nicatedpersons, and breakers of M. Cha. And such onely as will execute Mag. Ch. &c. ought to be confirmed by the choise of the People in their Counties respectively, whereby they may act as the ancient Conser∣vatours of the Peace did by the Common Law of England before Mag. Char. and since, which was, to conserve the Peace of England by all necessary means, word, or sword; un∣limited by Prerogative Statutes de∣vised by mercinary Lawyers, to steal from the People their birth-right Authority in the name of the King, unto themselves, to sell, delay, and deny it at their pleasures; which to do, is apparently contrary, not onely to Mag. Char. and the Common Laws of England, and also to common rea∣son, but chiefly to the divine Provi∣dence of God: for neither Law, Rea∣son, nor Divine justice, would or∣dain a man to conserve the publike peace of Gods people (which peace, as they, is his own) without giving that man an unlimitable power, by which he may execute his Office, and without which he cannot. FINIS.
THE PEACE of JUSTICE, OR, The Authoritie of a JUSTICE of PEACE: Anciently established amongst the first Principles of the funda∣mental Laws of England, un∣der the the names of Conservators, &c. Continually Confirmed by Parliaments from time to time; but eftsoon over-born by corrupt superiorities, till now restored to its pristine Libertie, by The Keepers of the Libertie of ENGLAND by Authoritie of Parli∣ament: and lately set forth by their several Commissions under the great Seal of England, directed to the Chieftains of the several Counties, Cities, and Liberties thereof: One of which, being for the Liberties of West∣minster and S. Martins le Grand London, is herein Englished, Interposed, and Post-scribed with some reasons extracted out of Statutes, and other Authours, for the better under∣standing, and satisfaction of all whom it may concern. By JOHN JONES, of the Neyath, in Com. Brecon Gent. Nulla salus Bello, Pacem te posennus omnes. London, Printed by W. Bentley, for W. Shears at the Bible in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1650.
To the HONOURABLE COLLONEL THOMAS PRIDE, One of the Justices of the Peace for the Countie of Mid∣dlesex, Liberties of West∣minster, and S. Martins le Grand Lond. &c. SIR,
HAving dedicated my former Trea∣tise, intituled, Judges Judged out of their own mouthes, to all the people of England universally; now in respect of the integritie I have foundin your self, in behalf of them all, to cause that to pass the Press, for the view and good of all; I thought my self bound in dutie to devote this Tractate of Peace to your self that are one of the Ju∣stices of Peace, named in the Commission which I have here chosen to English, and to Comment upon, to my best abilitie, in so short a time as I had since it came to my hands, to dispatch it before your departure to your Ren∣dezvouse.
Sir, I beseech you be plea∣sed to give me leave to pass it under your name, & vouch∣safe to accept so simple a gift, of an heartie giver: Thesubject concerneth both Peace and War, and cannot be safely protected from the Enemies of either, (whereof Peace hath too many) but by a man eminent for his power, and interest in both, with this difference observed by Craesus king of Lidea, That in times of Peace, Sons bu∣ried their Fathers, but in times of War, Fathers buri∣ed their Sons. And so much precedence to be given to Peace before War, as to Mercie before Justice, nei∣ther of which can subsist, one without the other, but well consist both together, as the God of Peace, and Lord of Hosts, are but the self same
Deitie, united in the Spirit of God, which wheresoever it is, there is Libertie, 2. Cor. 3.17. Which Libertie God grant England. So wisheth and prayeth, Your daily Oratour, JOHN JONES.
The Commission. THe Keepers of the Liberty of ENGLAND, by Au∣thoritie of PARLIAMENT, To William Lenthal Speaker of the Parliament; Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General of the Army raised for the Parliament; John Bradshaw, Lord President of the Councel; Boulstred Whitlock, Richand Keeble, John Lisle, Lords Commissioners of the great Seal of ENGLAND; Robert Earl of Warwick; Charls Earl of No∣tingham; Willam Earl of Salisbury; Ba∣sil Earl of Denbigh; William Lord Gray of Wark; William Viscount Monson; Henry Vane the elder, Knight; Henry Rolles, Chief Iustice assigned to hold Pleas before us in the upper Bench; Oliver S. John, Chief Iustice of the Common Pleas; John Wild, Chief Baron of the publick Exchequer; Ed∣ward Prideaux, Attorney general of the Common-wealth; Edward Powel Knight and Baronet; Humphrey Foster Baro∣net; John Danvers Knight; Henry Vane the yonger, Knight; John Hippesley Knight; John Thorowgood Knight; Henry Holcroft Knight; Humphrey Ed∣wards; Laurence Whitaker; John Brown; Henry Scobel, Clerk of the Parliament;
Edward Birkhead, George Manley, Roger Hill, John Trenchard, Michael Oldsworth, John Moor, Thomas Latham, John Hook∣er, Thomas Pride, Thomas Herbert, Tho∣mas Falconbridge, John Helyn, Edward Carter, Silvanus Taylor, John Humphreys, William Powel, Arthur Squib the young∣er, and Samuel Gooken Esquires. Know you, that we have assigned you, and every of you, together, and apart, Iustices, for Conservation of the Peace within the Libertie of the late Dean and Chapter of the Colle∣giate Church of S. Peter Westminster, for the Citie, Burrough, and Town of Westminster, in the Countie of Middlesex: And for S. Martins le Grand London. And to keep, and cause to be kept, all Ordinances and Statutes made, and provided for the good of the Publick-Peace, and for the Conser∣vation thereof, and for the quiet rule and government of the People in all and singular the Articles therein contained, within the said Liberties, as well within Libertie as without, according to the Force, Form, and effect of the same.
And to Chastice and punish all and singular Delinquents against the form of the said Ordinances, or Sta∣tutes, or any of them, within the said Liberties, as according to the form of the said Ordinances, or Statutes is ordained to be done. And to cause to come before you, or any of you, all those which did, or shall threaten any of the people to hurt them in their bo∣dies,  to burn their houses, to find sufficient securitie of the Peace, or Good-behaviour towards all men; and if they refuse to find such securi∣tie, then to cause them to be safely kept in Prison, until they find such said securitie.
Interp.Thus far this commission extend∣eth to the execution of such Ordi∣nances and Statutes, as onely con∣cern the Peace, and Good-behaviour, of which there are very many, and some of them executable by one Ju∣stice, and some not; but in case of ne∣cessitie, for the speedie prevention, or suppression of unlawfull Assem∣blies, forceable Entries, Riots, and Outrages, and for the correction of Ale-sellers, Gamesters, Profaners of the Lords day, common Swearers, Drunkards, &c. one Justice next at hand is soonest had, and most bound, required, and authorized by the words, you or any of you, in this Com∣mission, to do that duty: And also by the words of the Statute, 34. Ed. 3.1. upon which this Article is grounded, to bind to the Peace, or Good-behaviour any that shall threaten violence to others, by sword fire, or other means: see Crom. J. P. fol. 128. And thus far, and furtherdid extend the authoritie of Conser∣vatours of the Peace before Mag. Chart. or any Laws were written in these cases, the fulness of which au∣thoritie was supplied (in what it wanted, by the express words of such a large Commission as this,) by implication of a few words, in a short one, as you may read in the beginning of Lamb. J. P. briefly im∣porting, that no power or authori∣tie of law, ought to be wanting in any Justice of Peace, to perform the duty of his office, for it is Law it self, that no man shall want the means, to perform that which the law requi∣reth to be performed by him: So that if Peace could not be maintain∣ed without War, a Conservatour of the Peace, had the power of his Countie, to inable him that way, and so a Justice of Peace hath still. And Edward the 3d, that first chan∣ged the name of Conservatours to
Ju∣stices, and assumed both the naming and chusing of such officers from the people (who formerly chose them, and all other officers of trust in their full Counties, in every Shire, and Kings onely granted Commissions to such as were so chosen, and alteredthose Commissions at the peoples re∣quest, whensoever they pleased to al∣ter their officers;) did make his choice of such Justices, (although to his own ends, yet very wisely,) of such persons, as were best affect∣ed by the people for their known in∣tegrities amongst them, and most re∣solute and able to keep under his Laws, and Rule, those Lords and former Superiours both of Law and Justice, whom he had subjected more by his sword and policie, than right at that time; and therefore joined these Justices in Commission with Lords and Judges, that they might be their equals in government so long as they behaved themselves well, and their superiours by the same power to govern and chastise them, whensoever they misbehaved themselves: for Lords, Judges, and Justices of all sorts may, and too of∣ten do transgress the laws, as other men, and so of equals or Superiours, become subject to the justice of their associats in Commission (repu∣ted otherways their inferiours;) be∣ing transfigured from Superiour Jud∣ges of the Law, to Inferiour Tres∣passers against it, Indictable by theirPeers, of the Counties, wherein they offend, and punishable in the Court, where their Indictments are taken, as you may read in the Stat. 2. Ed. 3.8.18. Ed. 3.3. and 20. Ed. 3.1. a∣bridged by Rast. fol. 227. which (though rarely practised) can be no more strange to Lawyers, than when for false judgements 44 Judges, were hanged in one year, whose names and causes in brief, you may find in Horns Mirror of Justice, P. 239.
240. 241. and 242. Nor for Divines, than when an Arch-Angel, was by verdict of his Peers, and equals, the rest of the Arch-Angels, and judge∣ment both of them, and of the An∣gels that were his inferiours, doom∣ed from Heaven to hell, from perpe∣tual joy, to everlasting torment; and transformed from an Angel of light, to a Prince of darkness. Nor need it be a wonder to any that know the lawfull descent of inheritance, from the elder brother, that dies without issue of his bodie, to his next living brother; for what is a Judge that ceases to do justice, or doth injustice without re∣gard of his oath or conscience, but a dead man in his judgement? whose judicature thereupon descends, andspirit passes (as Sauls to David) to the next chosen vessell of justice, that neither will nor can but judge him∣self to death, when detected to him∣self, to be thereof worthy, as David did when discovered by Nathan, how he had trespassed against Ʋriah. Well therefore did Edward the 3d call them Justices in abstracto, whom he as∣signed to do justice in Concreto, & not Justicers or Judges, as Glandvil saith, their ancient name was Justices, to mind them not onely to do, but to be justice it self to all men without respect of persons, otherwise than to value them for their Crimes, and those so much the greater by how much the Actors are, and would be so esteemed. Justices of Peace there∣fore sworn and authorized to be Ju∣stices indeed, and to proceed accor∣ding' to the force, form, and effect, of the Ordinances, Statutes, Laws, and customs of England, so far as this Commission declareth they are, ought to be so sincere and severe in the execution thereof, as to perjure themselves for no man.
Com∣miss.We have also assigned you, and every two, or more of you, (whereof we Will William Lenthall, Thomas Lord Fairfax, John Bradshaw, Boulstred Whitlock, Richard Keeble, John Lisle, Robert Earl of Warwick, Charls Earl of Notingham, William Earl of Salisbu∣ry, Basil Earl of Denbigh, William Lord Gray of Wark, William Viscount Mon∣son, Henry Vane the elder,
Henry Rolls, Oliver S. John, John Wild, Edmund Pli∣deaux, Edward Powel, Humphrey Foster, John Danvers, Henry Vane the younger, John Hippesley, John Thorowgood, Hen∣ry Holcroft, Humphrey Edwards, Law∣rence Whittaker, John Brown, Edward Birkhead, George Manly, Roger Hill, John Trenchard, Michael Oldsworth, John More, Thomas Latham, John Hooker, Thomas Pride, Thomas Herbert, Thomas Falconbridge, and John Helyn, to be one,) Iustices, to inquire by the oath of honest and lawfull men, of the said liberties, by whom the truth of the matter may be known, of all, and all manner of Felonies, Witch∣crafts, Inchantments, Sortileges, Art-magick, Trespasses, Fore-stal∣lers, Regrators, Ingrossers, and Extortions whatsoever. And of all and singular other Malefactours, & offences, of which Iustices of Peace may, or ought lawfully to inquire, by whomsoever, and howsoever dont or committed, or which hereafter shall happen to de done, or attempted within the said Liberties. And also of all them which within the said Li∣berties in Conventicles against the Peace, in perturbation of the Peo∣ple, or by force of Arms, have gone,or ridden, or hereafter shall presume to go, or ride: And also of all such who there, to the threatening of the Nation, or to kill them, have laid in wait, or hereafter shall presume so to do. And also of all Hostlers, and o∣ther persons whatsoever, which in abuse of weights and measures, or in selling victuals contrary to the forms of the Ordinances, or Sta∣tutes, or any of them, thereof for the common utilitie of England, and the people of the same, made, have of∣fended, or so attempted, or hereafter shall presume so to offend, or attempt, within the said Liberties. And also whomsoever Bayliffs, Stewards, Constables, keepers of Goals, and other Officers, within the execution of their Offices, concerning the pre∣mises, or any of them, have unduly behaved themselves, or hereafter shall presume so to do, or have been fear∣full, remiss, or negligent, or hereaf∣ter shall happen so to he within the said Liberties. And of all and singu∣lar Articles, circumstances, and o∣ther things whatsoever, by whomso∣ever, and howsoever, within the said Liberties done, or committed, or which hereafter shall be done, or at∣tempted in what manner soever, con∣cerning the truth of the premises, or any of them. And to behold all In∣dictments whatsoever so taken, or to be taken before you, or any of you, or before any of the late Iustices in the said Liberties taken, and not yet
determined, And to make and con∣tinue all Proces thereof, against all manner of persons so Indicted, or which before you shall happen to be so Indicted, untill they be taken, yield themselves, or be Outlawed. And to hear and determine all and singular Felonies, Witch-crafts, Sortileges, Arts magick, Trespasses Fore-stallings, Regratings, Ingros∣sings, Indictment aforesaid. And all and singular other the premises, according to the Laws and Statutes of England, as in such cases was used to be done, or ought to be heard and determined. And to chastise and pu∣nish all the said Delinquents, and every of them, for their offences re∣spectively, by Fines, Ransoms, A∣merciaments, Forfeitures, and other means, as according to the said Laws and Customs of England, or the forms of the said Ordinances, or Statutes were, or ought to be done. Provided always, that if any Case of difficul∣tie upon any Determination of any the premises before you, shall happen to arise, then to give judgement, un∣less it be in the presence of one of the Iustices of one Bench, or other, or one of the Iustices of Assize assign∣ed in the said Countie, you shall for∣bear to proceed. And therefore we Command you and every of you, that to keep the Peace, Ordinances, and Statutes, and all and singular other the premises, diligently to attend, and at such certain days, and places, which you, or any such said two, ormore of you shall appoint as afore∣said, you shall make inquiries upon the premises. And all and singular the premises you shall hear and deter∣mine, and the same you shall do and fulfill in form aforesaid, being to do therein what appertaineth to Iustice, according to the Law and Custom of England; Saving unto us our A∣merciaments, and all other things unto us in this behalf belonging. We command therefore by the ten or of these presents that you, or any such said two, or more of you, as aforesaid, shall make known the same to the Bayliffs of the said Liberties, that then they shall cause to come before you, or any such said two, or more of you, as aforesaid, such and so many honest and lawfull men of the said Liberties, as well within Libertie as without, by whom the truth of the matter in the premises may be best known and enquired. Lastly, we have assigned the said John Bradshaw Keep∣er of the Rolls of the Peace within the said Liberties: And that therefore thou at the times, and places afore∣said, cause to come before thee, and thy fellows, the Writs, Precepts, Processes, and Indictments afore∣said; that the same may be perused, & duly, and finally determined as is a∣foresaid. In witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be made Patent. Witness Our selves at Westminster, the 15 day of February in the Year 1649.
Post∣script.Here are some particular Trespassers & Trespasses, instanced with an inde∣finite conclusion of all others, which Justices of Peace may or ought to en∣quire, by whomsoever, or howsoever committed or to be committed. Now what act of injustice can be but is a trespass? What Trespasser can be, but is included in the word whomsoever? What manner of Trespass can be, but is comprehended in the word how∣soever? And what Justice of Peace can be, and be sworn as aforesaid, to execute this Commission, and the Or∣dinances, and Statutes therein men∣tioned, according to the force, form, and effect thereof, that can omit to enquire of, and punish all Trespas∣sers and Trespasses, within his jurisdiction accordingly, without committing that damnable sin of Perjurie, prohibited by the second Commandment? It is true, all of them live not always within their ju∣risdiction, and some that do, are of∣ten imployed upon other publick services, on the like Oath, and some may be sick, &c. so that many may be often lawfully wanting in this; are not therefore any two or more, of so many named in thisCommission sufficiently authorized, and strictly injoined by it, not onely to enquire, but also to hear and de∣termine, all and singular Trespasses aforesaid? And doth not the same Statute, that appointed them quar∣ter Sessions, also allow them as many Sessions as they shall see needfull to hold, to perform their duties? Then what Remora can stay, or Luci∣fer fright them all, so that not so ma∣ny as two of them be ready at all times to serve the Common-wealth in their office, and to discharge themselves really in that behalf? Me thinks I hear some answer; Writs, and Commands from Higher powers: I say, this Dilemma is cleared before in Lucifers own case: Yea, but (say they) this pra∣ctise holdeth; and if not obeyed, Justices of Peace, like servants, are by their Masters, the Lords Keepers, or Chancellours, turned out of their Commission. I confess it is too often true; but are not they mad Masters that turn their servants out of their service for doing it? and are not Bride-wels, and Bedlam as fit for mad Masters, as for unruly Servants? are not the Laws powerfull, and plenti∣full
for the ordering of Masters, as well as servants? (Two Justices of Peace in my native County, Brecon, offering to break the peace with their daggers drawn one against the other, in presence of a Consta∣ble (that was servant to the one, and more inferiour to both, than a∣ny Justice can be to any Lord Chan∣cellour) who arrested them with his sword, till they gave him bonds to keep the peace, which was the du∣ty of their office, and his, and re∣turned their bonds to Sir John Crook then Judge of that Circuit, who commended the Constable, and told the Justices (then sitting with him upon the Assizes) they ought to be Indicted of Perjurie.) If higher Justices transgress justice, is not their case the same? It is want of that worth therefore that becometh this Authoritie, and not a Writ sur∣reptitiously obtained, or granted ex improviso, (which cannot determine Justice, although it may oppose it, while Justice in the interim may have the better opportunitie to deter∣mine Injustice) sometimes maketh some Justice of Peace desist in the due execution of his Comission, andincur Perjurie, as aforesaid. For suppose a Catch-pol, or a Goaler be indicted, imprisoned, and arraigned for Extortion in a Session of Peace, and procureth a Certiorari, Habeas Corpus, or Corpus cum causa, to re∣move himself, and his cause to one of either Benches, or a supersedeas to proceed any further therein, or in the Commission of the Peace at all; it is true, that those Courts, and o∣thers, may grant such Writs, and o∣thers, and too often do, upon meer suggestions of injustice done, or like to be done, or some partiallity shew∣ed by some Justice of Peace, &c. to either parties; but (say the Statutes) 25. Ed. 3. cap. 4. Stat. 5. and 37. Ed. 3. cap. 18. and 38. Ed. 3. cap. 9. and 42. Ed. 3. cap. 3. and 17. Rich. 2. cap. 6. the sum of all which you may see in
Rast. Abridgement it. Accusation, fol. 5. Such suggesti∣ons ought not to be received, but the Suggestours punished, and the Traduced righted; so that the grant∣ers of such Writs ought to have good causes for the granting thereof pro∣ed, before they grant them; or else they incur so many Perjuries, as reaches of the said Laws, and there∣upon ought to be Indicted, and judged by Justices of Peace of that limit wherein the offence is commit∣ted, who ought not to desist in their proceedings for any such said Writs (as hath been formerly shewed) unless they commit wilfull Perjury in so o∣beying, as the granters do in so granting, who ought not to grant a∣ny such Writs, but for the causes set down for every writ in and by Fitz. N. B. and the
Register, in their seve∣ral titles, upon due proof made of those causes before their grants, (as aforesaid) and a causam significes ought to be sent to a Justice of Peace for himself to certifie why he obeyed not the Certiorari before any other proceeding (than a Plures) be had a∣gainst him; whereupon, if he certi∣fie any lawfull cause for him to pro∣ceed, as that he knoweth, or findeth by due proof, the justice and merit of the cause depending before him, and that he is authorized and sworn, (as aforesaid) or findeth the Writ to differ from the Record; then what∣soever power proceedeth against him, without proof of injustice done, or partiallity shewed by him in that cause, sheweth it self parti∣aland unjust in so proceeding, and fit to be overpowered by the strength of the Countrey, if otherwise it will not. And whatsoever lawfull Com∣mission such Injustice shall offer to supercede, Law and Justice warrant to be executed, any such
Supersedeas notwithstanding, as the Statutes be∣fore cited declare at large. There∣fore let me proceed in the case sup∣posed; An extorting Bayliff indict∣ed, imprisoned and arraigned, pro∣cures a Writ to remove or stay his cause; the Justices may and ought to proceed to judgement and execu∣tion, and their certificate of the cause of their non admission of such Writs, ought to be a sufficient satis∣faction to the Granters, for there∣by the Offendour hath that justice he ought to have, by the hands of the said Justices, who onely ought to give it him, and are sworn and au∣thorized so to do, (as aforesaid;) and the Granters who are sworn not to delay, or hinder it, have their law∣full and timely prevention from so great a mischief, as (if they proceed further, or otherwise upon such Writs,) is no less than manifest In∣justice, and wilfull Perjury, both in∣quirable,and punishable by Justi∣ces of Peace within their limits, by this Commission, and the Statutes be∣fore mentioned; and the Statutes of 5. Eliz. 9. 14. Eliz. 11. 27. Eliz. 11. and 28. Eliz. 5. See Cro. I. P. fol. 17. and 116. And if indicted, the Justi∣ces of the Peace before whom such indictments happen to be, have full power to issue their Writs, viz. ve∣nire facias to the Sheriff of the Coun∣ty, or Bayliff of the Liberty, which if he return with a habet, then distringas ad insnitum; if with a nihil habet, then a Capias, which if he return with a non est inventus, then an Exi∣gent, and ut legat. to arrest and impri∣son the indicted wheresoever found. And then a Habeas Corpus to bring him thence to his tryal where he was indicted, and the offence commit∣ted. And then if any evidence be wanting to convict or attaint, a Certi∣orari to fetch any Record, or the te∣nor, which may conduce thereunto out of any Court whatsoever. And thereupon n Alias, Plures, and
At∣tachement &c. So that it is not the supposed superiority of any Court, must hinder justice to be done by an Inferiour, but the justice it self, and the worthiness and publick concern∣ment, and necessity thereof that pre∣ferreth the Judge that is just, and of a competent jurisdiction in Law and reason, to do it before him that neglects it in his place whatsoever. As David before Saul, and the Keep∣ers of the Liberty of England before the Destroyers of it. Howsoever it was otherwise conceived and practi∣sed, when Privy Councellors, Judges of Star-chamber, &c. would permit none to be made, or continue their fellow Justices of the Peace, but such as wore their blue-coats upon St. George his day, and became their servile fellow Perjurers all the year after, ready to do whatsoever they willed by Word, Writ, or Command whatsoever. But some suppose that in reason the Courts at Westminster, vulgarly called the
Higher, have Prerogatives, and Priviledges above other Courts, whereby their Judges, and their proceedings ought not to be looked into by any Court of judi∣cature, commonly accounted their Inferiour. This supposition is suffici∣ently answered before, but I further ask, can any man be so mad, as to suppose that any Court of justicecan or ought to have any preroga∣tive, or priviledge to commit any Iniustice, or any Cessour, or Failer of justice in it self? or to cause any such defaults to be committed by a∣ny other Court? and that the Supreme power of England consisting in the Free-people thereof, universally concerned therein, can want the Prerogative and priviledge to punish, or cause to be punished any such Court, and the Iudges thereof, though never so highly reputed, but themselves, and their creatures; and to cause the Laws and Statutes of England to be so construed, and practised, that there shall be no In∣justice, Cessour, or Failer of justice used therein? Do not the Statutes of 2. Ed. 3. cap. 8. and 20. Ed. 3. cap. 1. Sufficiently warrant, and ab∣solutely command that it shall be so? and is not the granting of such Writs without proof of Injustice commmit∣ted, or partiallity shewed by the Iudge that hath the cause depend∣ing before him, clearly Injustice, Cessour, and Failer of Iustice? and so fully implyed in and by the said Sta∣tutes of 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. 37. Ed. 3. cap. 18. 38. Ed. 3 cap. 9.
&c.?And is it not wilfull Perjurie, by the Oath made for Iudges, 18. Ed. 3. Stat, 3? Do not such Writs so grant∣ed, give colour of excuse to some Iustices to whom they are directed, (if they be no wiser than the grant∣ers) to Perjure themselves for com∣pany in committing Injustice by ces∣sing, or deferring to do justice, con∣trary to the said Statutes, and the duty of their office by their Commis∣sion? Yea, but the Iudges of those higher Courts are more learned in the Laws, and therefore know how to do Iustice better, and sooner than others, (and this seemeth to be implied in the proviso specified in this Commission, advising the Iusti∣ces of Peace in cases of difficulty to be advised by the Iudges
&c.) and Attorneys and Bayliffs that attend them, ought to have more priviledge to be justified by them than others? Yea, but doth not experience tell us, that some of them are no more learned in Law, or otherwise, than o∣ther long roabed tell-clocks; and that they advised King CHARLES who acted nothing without them in any of his Monopolies) to become as Perjurious as themselves, but notequal in cumpunction to that King and Judge that contrived the Clock and Jacks at Westminster (lately trans∣formed from gowned Judges, to Souldier-like Halberteers) to mind them when it strikes, to measure their howers by their honesty, and that by their Oaths, &c. And that Indictments removed before them 20. years past, remain amongst their Records, and so are like to continue in a perpetual discontinuance? And do not Scriptures tell us, that God found it necessary that the sons of
Eli should have other correctours than their father, and so must the Supreme power aforesaid, have other Chastisers of Attorneys, Bayliffs, and Goalers, than the Iudges at Westmin∣ster: or else it is to be feared, that God himself, who is the Supremest of all Iudges, and Power, and even Justice itself, will proceed to judge∣ment against this Nation, in this cause in suit already in his highest Consistory, where needs no Certiora∣ri, nor can be Supersedeas admitted, but a Corpus cum causa most certain∣ly granted, to bring every Prisoner to the Bar; where, whom he onely justifieth by his own onely righte∣ousness,and mercy, he receiveth into his endless glory, and rewardeth according to their imputed merits, with a bountifull, beautifull, ever∣lasting inheritance; whereof, let all such as sit upon transitory Tribunals, endeavour (by way of Justice done amongst us without cessation, fail, sale, delay or denial, but mixed with mercy, so that Peter may have time to hear the Cock crow) to be happy partakers: Or else roul Ju∣stice, roul through the Laws Sub∣version to thine own Confusion, with a garland of Delusion; and mercy be unto them that desire to practise it. AMEN. FINIS.
Post-script. WOuld it not be an acceptable service to God, if the
Justices of Peace of the Countie of Middlesex would call a speedie Sessions, and there∣in inquire, hear, and deter∣mine according to the Law of God and Magn. Charta, &c. and this Commission, (theirs being the like) who are most guiltie of the Gentlemans bloud that was most wilfully murthered, by the six Catch-pols, near the Ducking-ponds in Isling∣ton Fields, on the sixth of April, 1650. Whetherthe Judges that granted a Writ to Arrest for Debt? or the Murtherers that ex∣ecuted it with such barba∣rous butcherie? or the per∣jured Jurie that saved them contrarie to two Verdicts? or the Judges that so advi∣sed them, contrarie to all Law, but such a bloudie one as their Predecessours lately contrived, to justifie such actions. Can it be any difficultie for Justices of Peace, to find Law enough, both Di∣vine and humane, to hang all the said Actors? shall any Judge of either Bench, &c. be thought fit or indif∣ferent to advise in this matter? FINIS.
THE NEW Returna Brevium, Or the Law returned from WESTMINSTER And restored in briefe to its Native, Antient, and Proper Ha∣bitatio Language, Power, Puritie, Integrity, Cheapness, Brief∣ness, Plainness. Whereunto is added the Pe∣tition of Right, granted by Par∣liament in the third yeare of King Charles the first. And confirmed by the last Parliament. Written by John Jones of the Neyath in Com. Brecon Gent. He hath shewed thee O Man, what is good And what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. London, printed for Tho: Mat∣thewes at the Cock in St Pauls Churchyard. 1653.
TO The right Honorable Oliver Crumwell LORD Lieutenant of IRELAND, &c. Heroïck Sir! LOng and earnest have been the de∣sires and prayers of many thousands of faithfull hearts for your safe and happy return
into England, which God for his own glory, your honour, and our comforts, hath now opportunely brought to passe with such testi∣monies of his blessings upon your actions, ma∣nifested by your succes∣ses in his battails, as may be justly terrible to all his, and your Ene∣mies; and truly joyfull to all his servants, and your friends; of whom it is to be feared, that asGod hath but few firm in his election, so you have but few faithull in your assistance. Be plea∣sed therefore that it may be inquired in the As∣sembly, whose promises to your self, and your de∣pendants, whose Votes in publick, and Vowes in private have most wilfully failed you and yours: I shall not pre∣sume to inquire what breaches have bin made of performances in mat∣ters
most nearly concer∣ning you, and your Ar∣mie, best known to your selfe: but what hath been performed of those promises made to you and your Army, for the relieving of your dai∣ly Orators, Prisoners for Debt, wrongfully re∣streined, contrary to Magna Charta, and all the true Laws of the Land, which men sitting in Parliament publickly profess, and have oftensworne to maintein: what ridiculous Acts even those men have made to delude you and your Orators, their own and all Gods people, to cross those Laws more than before, and to sup∣port their extortions, & mercenarie practices in all the waies of Iuju∣stice, in an higher mea∣sure than their Predeces∣sors: what Justice can be expected from such Justicers? what merciecan bee exspected from God to continue upon that Land that shall suf∣fer such Mountibanck-mock-lawes to live, much more to sit, and be Legis-lators amongst them? oh! let such buy∣ers & sellers of Law and Justice be thrown out of the Temple, and the House of the Lord be purged of such abomi∣nations. The valiant and Religious Patriot Collonel Pride (in yourabsence) indeavoured to work some proportion of grace into those men, to foresee and prevent their owne confusion; but the Adders would not hear: O make them (Sir!) make these subtile Serpents innocent a∣gainst their wills; un∣sting them, unskin them; for their Cases are far more precious than their Carkases. I have here following demon∣strated their uselessnessin this Common∣wealth? which may it please your Honor to peruse at your leisure, protect in your favour, correct in your wis∣dome, and act in your Justice; so God shall fur∣ther prosper you & your posteritie, the Common∣wealth honor you and them, and with the rest of your Orators, and theirs, I shall bee ever yours to Command du∣ring life, John Jones.
THE NEW Returna Brevium OR The Law returned from WESMINSTER, &c. DIvers are the Speeches of divers Contrivers of a pretended
Reformation of the Law of England, according to the diversitie of their opinions and self-ends premised therein; for the effecting whereof, they would have their severall Propositions disputed; some for Alterations, othersfor Additions, others for Sub∣stractions; all for Corrections; but few or none knowing how to mend Magna Charta more than Magnificat; nor real∣ly studying, but how to marre both. Observe how the worke directeth it selfe how it would be done: For as saith the Mir∣rour of Justice written by Horn in King Ed. the 1. his time pa. 8. It was ordeined (viz by King Alphred long before Mag. Chart. or the Norman Conquest) that Right should be done from
15. dayes to 15. dayes, before the King and his Iudges: and from moneth to moneth in the Counties if their largeness re∣quired not a longer time:) And that every three weeks, right should be administred in other Courts. And every free Te∣nanthad ordinary Iurisdiction, &c. And before pa. 1. The Sheriffs and Bayliffs caused the Free Tenants of their Baily∣wicks to meet at the Counties and hundreds, at which Ju∣stice was so done, that every one so judged his Neighbour, by such judgement as a man could not else where receive in the like cases, untill such time as the Customs of the Realme were put in writing, and cer∣tainly established. And al∣though a Free-man commonly was not to serve without his assent; neverthelesse it was as∣sented unto, that free Te∣nants should meet together in the Counties, Hundreds, and Lord's Courts (if they were not specially exempted to doe such Suits,) and there they judgedtheir Neighbors. And againe pa. 8. It was ordained, That every Plantiffe have a remediall Writ from the King (who reserved all Pleas of the Crown, and above 40 s. to himselfe) to his Sheriffe, in this forme. Questus est nobis, &c. viz. Com∣plaineth to us A. that B. doth him such and such wrong, We therefore committing to thee our Turn in this behalf, command thee to hear and determine that cause. Their Jurors were Judges: And why do Judges now at
Westminster (that can be no more absolute Judges by their Commissions, than Re∣corders of Cities by their Charters, Sheriffs in Counties, and Stewards in liberties were by their Writs, at this time when Free English men under∣stood their Laws then knownand practised in English) usurp more than those Judges did, or those ought? viz. to bee more than onely pronouncers of the substance of Jurors verdicts as∣well for Law as Fact; which pronunciation, is and ought to bee but as a Declaration of Kings assents to the due execu∣tion of that Law, which they and their people agreed upon in the great Charter, and its confirmation; to let the people know by these Judges, that then were, and still are, and ought to bee called the Kings or the States, as authorised by their Writs and Commissions to pronounce their Masters con∣sents for their parts to convict the partie guiltie as the Judges of the people (viz. the Jurors doe by their verdicts, which areor ought to bee their true say∣ings both for Law and fact for the peopel's part and their own; which consents of Kings or States now called Judgements (because a full conviction of the guiltie of both parts) if de∣nied or delayed after verdicts, to bee pronounced there accor∣dingly, by the Judges called the Kings or States. A Writ to command them to proceed to Judgement, and an aliàs plur and Attachment ought to bee granted by the Chancery-States, as you shall find in Fitz. nat. br. fo.
143. to imprison them till they doe it, which is not usual∣ly done by themselves in every cause in Court, but by the Pro∣tonotarie of course entred up∣on Record, unlesse respite bee required upon good cause shew∣ed.And the execution which ever issueth in the name of King or State relateth to the Judgement, Conviction, which implyeth both the Judgements of King or States and people as aforesaid. Would not therefore the common practice of the Lawes and their pleadings in English as at first they were bee more commodious and usefull to in∣struct all understanding Eng∣lishmen for their owne good to become experimentall suffici∣ent Lawyers in their owne cau∣ses, than the moderne custome of hotch-potch French and Latine imposed by Lawyers for their owne gaine to instruct few o∣thers of their owne generation, to cheat the universalitie of the Nation of their rights and un∣derstandings,
and make them∣selves and their Counsels most learned in others affairs? And againe, That every one have a Remediall Writ from the Kings Chancery according to his plaint, without difficultie, and that every one have processe from the day of this plaint, without the Seale of Judge or par∣tie. And again pa. 10. That af∣ter a plaint of wrong be sued, that no other have Jurisdiction in the same Cause before the first plaint be determined, &c. And again that all the King's Courts should be open to all plaints, by which the had originall Writs without delay aswell against the King or the Queen, as against any other of the People, for every Injury, but
case of life, where the plaint hel without Writ: Why al at Westmin∣ster fit not between terms? And ll elsewhere all the yeare long? ertiorari's, Corpus cum causca, ppersedeas, &c. issued thence, till e Judges at Westminster can bee ere at leisure to determine all atters, which the multiplicitie f rich mens causes so monopo∣zed thither cannot afford the ore to end theirs while they ve commonly. And againe page 11. That l free Tenants shall bee obe∣ent, and appeare at the sum∣ons of the Lord of the Fee; And  a man caused another to bee mmoned elsewhere than in es of the Avowants, or oftner an from Court to Court, ey were not to obey such summons. Why then should y Free-holder of the Coun∣ of
Middlesex, or any libertiethereof (except Westminster, and St. Martins le grand London) ap∣peare upon Summons at West∣minster-Hall, which lately was the Fee of the Dean and Chap∣ter of St. Peters, and now is at the States dispose, to whom they please. And againe page 12. That the Lords of Fees might sum∣mon their Tenants by the Award of their Peers to the Lord's Court, or the County, or the Hun∣dred, at all times that they detein, or deny their services in deed or word; and there they shall be acquit∣ted, or forfeit their allegiance and all their Tenancie with the appur∣tenances, by the judgment of the Suitors. And per contra, the Lords doing wrong to their Tenants, shall forfeit their Fee to the Chiefe Lord, by the same judgement. Ob∣serve
the Free-men of every liber∣tie then were, as still they ought to be, Judges of their Lords for their Fees, aswell as their other neighbours for their Tenancies, and to end their differences there within their proper Fees respe∣ctively; and why not so still? And so let the chiefe Officers, Justices of Peace, and others of the Li∣bertie of Westminster suffice for Judges for that precinct. And page 13. That offendors guilty of death should not be suffe∣red to remain among the guiltless. Why Convicts for felonies, &c. in Newgate, &c. amongst priso∣soners for debt?
And that the Goods and Chattells of Usurers should Escheat to the Lord of the Fee. This law restored, would enrich the Common-wealth, purge it ofmany moths and Cankerworms, and teach men to live by their own labors, and not by others. And pa. 14. That none should bee ordained Ministers above the member of Churches; and that the poor should be susteined by Parsons, Rectors, and Parishioners, so that none should die for want. How many die so daily now adai within every parish and Parsons view? So much and more af∣firmed by Master Horn to bee the Common unwritten Laws and Customes of England be∣fore Magna Charta; the Lord
Coke in his preamble to his In∣stitutions upon it, saith, It is but a written Charter, or De∣claration in writing of the an∣tient laws of this Land, agreed upon by King and People to bee published, and preserved invio∣lableon both parts for ever, and no new law made. Hereby further appeareth what hath been said of the agreement be∣tween King and People, that none should be judged by the Kings Judges but by verdict of their Peers, called in this Charter due process of Law. In and by the 9th Chap. of which charter, it is declared, That the city of London shall have the old Liberties and customs which it hath used to have; Moreover we will, and grant, that all other cities, Bur∣roughs, Towns, and the Ba∣rons of the 5 Ports, and all o∣ther Ports shall have their Li∣berties, and free customs. Are not all these Liberties and customs grown obsolete, and daily over-ruled at Westminster? And in the first confirmation of the said Charter 25. Ed. 3. ca. 2. It is further declared, That all Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, and other Ministers having the Law to guide them, (viz. Mag. Chart. Forest. then writtten and publi∣shed) shall allow the said Char∣ter to be pleaded before them in Judgement: and cap. 2. That if any judgement shall be given henceforth contrarie to the points of the great Charter, it shall be undone: whereupon (saith the Lord Coke) the Laws of the Realm have the office to guide the Judges in all causes that come before them, in the wayes of right Justice, which never yet misguided any that certainly knew them, and truly followed them.
By these Collections of MHorn before Magna Charta, and confessions of the Lord Coke since, sufficiently appeareth That the Laws (if published to the people as they ought) would be sufficient to guide them all, in all the right wayes of Justice. But the Justices at Westminster that would guide the Laws, as Popes Scriptures, by their own Interpretations, ha∣ving purposely disguised them in Pedlers French, and barba∣rous Latine, that few but themselves can construe; and forms so errorable as they can devise for themselves to mend when they list; which hapneth somtimes for the rich, but rare or never for the poor; and thereby denying, delaying, and elling Justice at their own ates; And their Frye, sitting
in the house, are the subverters of the Laws, as their Prede∣cessors alwayes were, and there∣by the continuall causers of all the civil wars of Eng∣land; and besides all that, (under colour of Justice) murtherers of more English men than all the Wars, Plagues, and Famine, which reigned in their times, destroy∣ed without them: Witness their Statutes made and main∣teined against Magna Charta, for their murthering of Deb∣tors in Prisons, with tortures and famine, when their extor∣tions and their Gaolers have left them no means to buy bread: And for the unlawfull divorcing, scattering, and starving of their Wives and children by the bargain, androbbing their Creditors of those means that should pay their Debts in part, or all; and for protecting of Cheators, that take their Prisons for Sanctuaries, to leave so much of other mens estates with the right owners curse and their heirs, to their posteritie, as their judges and Gaolers extortions and their own riot cannot consume in their own time; As also their last Acts formerly mentioned for release of Priso∣ners, which intangle their bo∣dies and souls more than be∣fore; And many other Statutes to intricate the Laws with such contrarieties, as none but such as have the Genius of their makers can reconcile: which when it is done, tendeth wholly to make themselves
great and rich, and the People their slaves and beggers. For Remedy whereof, it is to be desired in the name and right of the publick, that the House would be pleased to be swept and clensed of such cobs, and cob-webs, and to vote and vomit out of the sanctified bow∣ells of that sacred Senate those execrable excrements that poison their intrailes, and deliver them to publick Justice, which their ravenous lives, and extorted pos∣sessions suffice not to satisfie; but may in Gods mercie appease his wrath, stay his Judgement, and expiate this Land of that wickedness which they have wrought among us, and accu∣mulated upon us. This done, The work fol∣loweth, and teacheth it self
how it would be done as afore∣said; declaring it self that fru∣strà fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora: vain is the labour of many workmen, where few may serve the Turn with far less charge, and more conveniencie. And breifly, vain, expencefull and too burthensom to this common wealth are the seve∣rall Courts hereafter mentio∣ned, upstarted over us, one after another, since the first publish∣ing of Magna Charta, as Here∣sies sprung immediately after, if not with the first preaching of the Gospel:
viz. Out of the Court lately called the Kings Bench, issued the Common-Pleas, and the Eschequer, which took their leave of it in Magna Charta, and left it to follow the King; and so I conceive itought to do still, for that there is no use rightly to be made of it, but to hear and determine the Pleas of the Crown, which the Lord Coke upon Ma∣gna Charta saith were wont to be determined by Stewards in their Leets, Sheriffs in their Turns, Recorders in Cor∣porations, and countrey Jud∣ges in Signiories, which had ju∣ra Regalia; all which now, Ju∣stices of Peace having more power in matters determinable by common Law, than Justi∣ces in Eire had (if rid of the sovereigntie usurped over them by their fellow-Justices, their
Certioraries, &c.) may ease of much labor. Moreover, the chief Justice of this Court ought to be but the Kings de∣putie by writ; and no King inbeing, no such Deputy can be. Hugh de Burgo Earl of Kent, chief Justice under King Henry the third, took his oath with his Master, to observe and main∣tein Magna Charta, and soon after persuading the King to break it, became the first Per∣jurer of his place in that point; as the Lord Cook upon Art. sup. Chart. declareth at large. Since which time, the practice of this Court, being but to murther debtors over whom it hath no jurisdiction, and con∣sequently perjurie and injurie to the Common-wealth; why may it not be spared as well as the King? While (as saith the Lord
Coke afore-said) all Majors, &c. have the Law to guide them, and now Englished unto them, where then can bethe defect of Justice, but in the Justices (as before) that will not execute them? since it is Law it self that the Laws are to be interpreted so, that there shall be no failer of Justice to the people. And few or no Laws besides Magna Charta, and it's confirmations, will serve to do that without those superfluous number of volums which Lawyers have contrived for their own Reports of Cases, and crafty disputes, arguments, and cavils pass'd among them; but to be used by such as have minde and leisure to reade them, as Divines may the Works of the wantonest Po∣ets, to pick out their flowers for their Pulpits, and leave their scurrilities to others of their Autor's genius. Or as Interludes,
in which all parts were not all bad, and though all prohibited to be publickly acted, yet may Terence be read in Schools. And may not those Statutes that relate to the
Justices of ei∣ther Bench, &c. bee executed without them, aswel as those that relate to the Bishops, are without them? And this Court thus spared, will spare the Common-wealth in Fees and extortion above five hun∣dred thousand pound per An∣num, besides unknown bribes, and their known salarie of 4000. li. per Annum, as Sir John Lenthal and his 4000 prisoners or thereabouts, between Thule and Callicute; and Mr. Henly with his hoste of Scribes, whose Van is at Michael's mount, and Rear at Barwick, (if convented,and compell'd to confess truth) can declare at large. The Chancerie was no Court of judicature, nor personated by a Lawyer, but commonly by a Monk, or Bishop, (as wee have seen lately in England and Ireland) whose office was to follow the King with the Seal, and to seal Writs gratis at the kings cost, as the Lord Coke affirmeth, and Rast. fol. 65. citeth the Statute of Art. super chart. and sheweth that the breaches of those Articles were the first thing given to the power of the Chancellor to judge of (who being likely a Bishop, had charge as a Bishop by virtue thereof, to excommu∣nicate the breakers thereof:) In the 36th year of the reign of king Edward first, cap. 4to from
which little fountain sprung that Nilus that ever since over∣floweth all England, not onely once every seven years, but seven times at least in every year. The Chancery (a Court of Conscience forsooth) raised up∣on pretence of equitie, and re∣lief to such as complained of oppressions against the breakers of this Statute, which was the first confirmation of Magna Charta; and no sooner thus rai∣sed, but it despised both its rai∣ser, and the cause, extolled it self, and over-topped all the Courts of England; difusing to grant the antient Commissions in Eire to whom their Coun∣ties chose; and of Oyer and
Terminer to any that had oc∣casion to use them, as lawfull was according to Fitz HerbertNat. brev. fo. 112. and Cromp. sep. fol. 51. and all Writs to any without excessive Fees, and extortion, contrarie to all Laws, the Oath of a Judge, and the practice of the office it self, as it was formerly gratis: and neglecting to send Magn. Char. to every Sheriff yearly, to be read four times in full Counties, and to every Church to be read twice yearly: And the writ set down by the Lord Coke to bee issuable to all Sheriffs to apprehend all sub∣verters of the Law, and to com∣mit them to the common Gaol; which I confess is politickly forborn, lest Chancellors and the rest of their brother Jud∣ges should bee taken for the chiefest delinquents in that kinde, and carried from
West∣minsterto Newgate as (I dare swear) they have often deserv'd: But when I consider how ready their
supersedeas's are to She∣riffs, Justices of Peace, &c. when they please and their Injunctions to stay Suits at common Law, (most proper to be determined there) and the disregard they make of the late Statute of 15to Hen. 6. 4to which forbiddeth them such matters, I confess no need they have to fear She∣riffs to displease them; but mar∣veil how they can be so uncha∣ritable, as to separate mercie which they call equitie, from Justice, being that as Justice without equity is merciless rigor, so Equity without Justice (if any such could be) would be an unjust iniquity, and both these (notwithstanding they wouldseem to divide Equity from justice) are found individuals in Chancerie, as Equitie and justice were in Courts of com∣mon Law, before Chancerie was; and so ought to be still, as Mercie and justice ever were and will bee in the individuall trinumine chief Iustice of heaven and earth, whose mercy is a∣bove all his works; but Chan∣cellor's works are commonly a∣bove all mercy, when they can finde no time, nor means to end any Cause, till both parties finde the end of their money, and their time lost to gain Lord∣ships to Chancellors and their Heirs; for who saw a Lord Chancellor but had a Lord
Ba∣ron at least to his heir, except Sir Francis Bacon? and who saw a gainer to himself, or his heirby a Suit in Chancerie, except it might be John Johns the cunning Merchant, or one that had less right to land then Kee∣per Coventrie could think fit to purchase in his man's name, and yet gained a precious decree a∣gainst the right owner? Where∣fore this two-door'd or double-leav'd Court of Chancerie and Rolls, being most perni∣cious to this Common-wealth, which it generally beggereth to enrich it self by encroaching up∣on all mens liberties, and draw∣ing all those matters to West∣minster which might be decided at home, with far more speed, justice, equity, and conveniency; and less charge, pains and at∣tendance to both parties, where they are best known, or to beknown in their own Court. Let this Court be spared, with the other, and the Common∣wealth will be further spared of the treble charge of the for∣mer yearly, as the Warden of the Fleet and his prisoners, (as numerous as the Kings Bench men) and the numberless Arma∣do of Chancerie caterpillars can sufficiently witness, if they please: whereof one thousand pounds per annum would be a competent salarie for a Keeper of the Seal, and fiftie pounds per annum for his man to attend it: And another thousand pounds
per annum to ten Clerks to do the office of six, (antient∣ly blew bonnets, two thousand pound per ann. a piece or more) with allowance of Parchment, ink, wax, candles, firing, lodg∣ing,and a fit office to write all necessarie Writs for all the Com∣mon-wealth. And the Clerk ships of the Crown and Hanaper may be united in one person, (as in Ireland they were in Mr. Edg∣worth, and since in Mr. Carleton) who may be thought worthie of five hundred pound per annum, and all accommodation for his office, without any fees; and fortie pound per annum a piece for three under Clerks to assist him to dispatch all businesses belonging to either of the said offices, without fees like∣wise.
The Court of Common pleas at Westminster would be aswel spared as any, for that all Common-pleas are common to all Courts in Cities, and Coun∣ties, and ought to be triedthere, (as the Lord Coke upon Magna Charta on the County Court confesseth) which spa∣ring, would spare the Common wealth per annum no less than the greatest of the former two. The Court of Exchequor re∣duced to it's proper jurisdicti∣on, officers, and fees, concern∣ing the publick Revenues, may be continued for that service onely, and suffice to maintein the Warden of the Fleet, and some of his men, to walk be∣tween the Fleet and the Court, to guard Chequer-Accomptants to their Quietus, and this would spare the Kingdom another Ten thousand pound per annum, as the wardens of the Fleet the two Remembrancers, and Mr Long can tell.
Courts and Justices of As∣sizes, Nisi prius and Gaole-deliveries, are as necessarie for England, as Landlopers for the Netherlands, where the Boars claw their backs, and their dogs bite their shins for their intrusions: or as droans are to Bee-hives, whence the Bees have good cause to chace them, for devouring their honey. For all matters of Assizes and Nisi prius belong to countie courts, Hundred-courts, courts Baron, and Corpora∣tion courts (as the Lord Coke confesseth as aforesaid) and Cromp. affirmeth in his juris∣diction of Courts, fo. 240.) and matters of Gaole deliverie belong to Sheriffs turns, Leets and Sessions of the peace, as the said Autors affirm, and
the commissions of the peace and charters of corporations can prove and warrant. Wherefore those three courts spared (as well they may and ought) the com∣monwealth will be further spa∣red of two annual Visitations of severall swarms of Westminster locusts, the charge whereof I refer to the consideration of them that bear it, and usually pay it.
The court of the Marshalsey raised to that exorbitancie that King James and King Charles did, may and ought to follow their fortunes, and their housholds; and more I shall not say of it, but that it is full of extortion and injustice, being never owned by Law beyond the verge, and that being va∣nished with the Kings person,so ought that Court. The sparing of this Court would spare the Commonwealth a great deal of charge more then I can calculate; but Mr. Say an honourable Member of the House may advertise the rest thereof, with the advice of Mr. Serjeant Green, and others late Judges and officers of that Court.
The sparing of all these courts, and the charge thereof amounting to, if not sur∣mounting three millions per annum, and the confirmation of Mag. Cart. and the Petition of Right, once more by this Par∣liament, would also spare to the commonwealth, and its better service, the lives and imployments of many thou∣sands of able men wrongfullyimprisoned for debt, and con∣vert the lives and imployments of many thousands of Attornies, Sollicitors, Gaolers, Catch∣pols, Decoyes, Setters, &c. To better uses both for their souls and bodies, and for the pub∣lick benefit. Then Sheriffes Turns, Hundred Courts, Leets, Court Baron, Sessions of peace, and Corporation-Courts, re∣stored to their ancient and right jurisdiction, which fall to them of themselves, which when those aforesaid are taken away, would be all sufficient, and onely necessary to hear and determine all the causes of England, reserving Appeals to such as shall have cause, to Parliament or Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer to be assigned, as Fitz H. and Cromp. affirm anciently lawfull, andusual, proof being made first of the partialitie, or injustice of the proper Court, and no bare accusation, allegation, or pre∣sumption to serve for the issu∣ing of such Commissions as now is used. Except causes pro∣per for Coroners, Escheators, Pipe powder Courts, & Clerks of the Market; of whose misde∣meanors, Justices of Peace have power to hear and determine but not to hinder in due execution of their Offices, which are all necessary in their kinds in eve∣ry County, and specially Co∣roners and clerks of the Mar∣ket, the first for discovering of murthers, &c. whereof God re∣quireth an exact account, (as Scriptures and Reynolds Histo∣ry sufficiently witness. (And the other for the punishing of
frauds in weights and measures, which Solomon saith are abo∣minations to God; yet nothing more common amongst us, the more fearfull his judgements upon us without timely repen∣tance and future amendment. And for the superintending of the defaults of those that have power to correct such offences, and do not.
All these Courts Officers and Offices that are thus necessary will be no more chargable to the Common-wealth hereaf∣ter, than alwaies they have been heretofore, but as usefull now as ever; and more profitable to the Common-wealth now, than ever before, because that in this time of Reformation, these Officers, as others, being cho∣sen of approved persons fortheir Integritie, will endeavour (like their Superiours) the amendment of all offences, which they have power to chastize; whereas their Prede∣cessors (imitating their Supe∣riors) to their own ruin, in∣tended their own private gain by publick transgressions, and to that end increased iniquities in themselvs and others.
If any offer to plead, or ob∣ject the customs and usages modernly observed time out of minde, against this reducement, and restauration of the Law, and its practice, to their anti∣ent usages; I answer, Mala Consuetudo non est observanda: An evil custom is not to be con∣tinued; and Customs against Law are unlawfull to be used: And to what end is Reforma∣tion,but to take away such cu∣stoms? And Statutes lately made to support them by those that raised and used them, for their own gain and others dam∣mage? contrarie to all the Laws of God and Man, and especially of Magna Charta, and its confirmations, wherein ap∣pear the right and Primitive customs and usage of this land, agreeable to them, claiming therefore to be restored, as in Justice they ought, and the o∣ther to be abolished, as like∣wise they ought. And being come to speak of antient customs to be resto∣red, and modern to be abolish∣ed, I cannot chuse but remem∣ber the
Poor, (as most men do) in the last place: for it was a custom as antient as Christi∣anitie,for Christians to give lands, moneys, and goods in a large measure to relieve the poor, till Monks, Friers, and other Abbey-lubbers (as unsa∣tiable, as idle) dulled mens cha∣rities with their continuall beggings in the name of the poor, and grew sacrilegious, robb'd spittles, made that which was common to the poor, as well as themselves, proper to themselves, and gave out of that which was none of their own, for assistance to counte∣nance that Sacrilege, the first Fruits, Tenths &c. to the Pope, who had as much right there∣unto by their gift, as the De∣vil; and consequently King Henry the eighth as much as the Pope, and his successours (whe∣ther Kings or States) as muchas he. Whosoever conceive's I write too boldly, or speak too plainly herein, let him read (not onely Histories forraign and domestick, but) the Re∣cords and Statutes, extant and in force amongst us, videlicet, That of Carlile de Asportatis Re∣ligiosorum 35to. Ed. 1. And that de terris Templariorum 17o. E. 2 And those of the dissolutions of Hen. the 8th. between which first and last he may finde many more to inform his conscience, so that his heart may think, his tongue speak, and pen write much more than I do in this matter. All that I desire is, that the poor may be looked upon, if not with an eie of pitie, yet with an eie of wisdom, taking notice that if the wedge of
A∣chan be not enquired for, dis∣covered,and recovered, the Na∣tion may rue it: And that Popes, Kings, Bishops, &c. that cared not how lean they made the poor, while they might make themselves fat with their provisions, and those that ex∣spected their reversions, have cause by this time to be sensible of their Sacriledge.
And that therefore the Spi∣rit of Reformation would be manifested in the works of Charitie; and if such as have griped the patrimony of the Church into their claws, can finde in their hearts to restore to the poor no part of that in∣terest which all the said Statutes and manie more, and all the writings of the Fathers, and many of our own modern Bi∣shops (who unjustly detainedall they could from them) a∣bundantly confess and testifie they ought to have in all Ec∣clesiasticall possessions, not as the Alms of the Incumbents, but as their own rights by the express wills and donations of the Primitive Founders of Churches, Hospitals, &c. and other devout Donors, and Be∣nefactors to such places from time to time so excessively bountifull to the Clergie and Corporations for the poors sake, that the Statutes of Mort∣main were made to restrain them. All which notwithstanding the Clergie possessed no less than a third part of England and France (as Sir
Walter Rawleigh and Sir Nathaneel Brent have written) but not totheir own uses (as they wick∣edly converted it) but as Ad∣ministrators to and for the poor, as the same Autors, all the Fathers, and Littletons Te∣nures de frank Almonie, and
Te∣nant in common, sufficiently witness. Yet may the Parlia∣ment be pleased that Commis∣sions for charitable uses be granted to discreet persons throughout England and Wales, not without Fees, wages, and accommodations for them∣selves and their Officers, com∣petent for their attendance in that service, and loss of time in their own affairs, being Charitie beginneth at home, and no man can or ought to neglect his own charge to fol∣low others profit gratis, which maketh the Commission nowin London and elswhere ill ex∣ecuted, as the distressed of Ire∣land by wofull experience can lamentably verifie. Nor let the number for a Court exceed 3, for the ease of the charge, which must be either charitably al∣lowed and paid by the State, or deducted (s the late Lord Privie Seal in the book of or∣der approved by the Councell Table 6to. Car. and the Addi∣tional Act for the Sabbath, &c. declare to be lawfull for pro∣secutors) out of the poor's right. Nor let such Commis∣sions be limitted by the Sta∣tute of
43. Eliz. 4. as now it is, which Statute appeareth by its exceptions and jurisdictions reserved to Bishops and Chan∣cellors to be a Prelatical Chan∣cerized confederacie to de∣ludeand defraud the poor at their pleasures; witness the heaps of lost labored decrees made thereupon, remaining unexecuted in the Petty-bag Office. And Philip Thomas his experiment in the carriage of many thereof in Abbots, Lauds, Coventries and Littletons reigns; which he may declare the freer since the death of those Lions. Nor let the Clerk of the Crown for such dam∣nable Fees, and extortion of 50. s. or more, as is now used for a Commission for every County, be allowed, but as it is used for Commissions of the peace, which if done gratis, would be more charitably done for the poor, than for Justices; and he may shorten his labor by making one Commissionfor severall Counties for cha∣ritable uses, which he may not do for the peace for divers rea∣sons. Nor let such Commissio∣ners want power in their Commission to put their Or∣ders Judgements, and Decrees in execution (as all other Oyers and Terminers have) without relation to any other Court than Parliament for any alteration whatsoever. Nor power to punish vagrants, &c. and set such as are able, to work.
This granted, the poor of England, which to the shame thereof, beyond all other Countries Christian or Heathen daily perish in streets, fields and ditches, defrauded of larger provisions made for them by Laws and Legacies, than anyother Nation can parralel, and deluded like Tantalus for his ap∣ple may by this means be inabled to catch into their empty, vain, gaping, begging mouths, and hungrie panches, some crums of some Alms-houses, to pro∣long their daies, to direct their prayers for their benefactors, to ascend like sweet incense to the Lord, in stead of the unsavou∣riness of their putrified mem∣bers, to annoy their oppressors and offend others; And such as are able to work, may be im∣ploied for benefit to themselves and others, and so the streets and fields be cleared of those loathsom sights and importu∣nate clamors which Forrainers admire, and Domesticks abhor, yet neither help: All which I humbly submit to all hono∣rable,charitable, and religious considerations, which God guide for his own Glory, and their own good. Amen.
Postscript. I Hear I am charged wth using other heads than mine own in these my poor labors. Truly I cite my Autors as the onely heads I dare trust to defend me & mine from the hands of their degenerate succes∣sors, & such others as (regar∣ding their il-gotten wealth more than their souls) ma∣lign my endeavours in seek∣ing to restore those springs that flow from my said autors (the pure heads thereof) to their proper Chanels, & dis∣may such heads & hearts as might and would give me helps, or write better them∣selves; so that all the helps I can get of them, is but to tel me, that they would not write
so plain as I do in this mat∣ter for thousands of pounds.
Wherto I answer, they have so much to lose, and I but my life & labor, which for truth, and its plainness, I am ready to sacrifise to Gods provi∣dence, which I find not care∣less of my protection, having raised me honorable friends without any merit or exspe∣ctation of mine, but only of their own worthines, amongst whom the right nobly mind∣ed, aswel as descended Gen∣tleman William Steward of Loken Heath in the County of Suff Esq affecteth me for my affection in particular to himself, in general to all, heartneth me more than ma∣ny to proceed in my work,not for its workmanship, but its meaning, not for its plau∣sibility at present, but its pos∣sibility in future, not for its dictaste to angeltong'd Law∣yers, corrupt-lung'd Gaolers, &c. whose exorbitances, not persons, are distastefull to him, & all good Christians; but for its seasonableness, ti∣mously to inform them to mend themselves speedily, or submit to be mended by more indiferent judgments; not for any profit that may ther∣by redound to him in private more than shall to al in pub∣lick; not for any praise he de∣sireth (w•h I must witness he deserveth above many thou∣sands) to himself; but for the glory of God, which he zea∣lously
lously intendeth in al his stu∣dies & actions, & honor of most worthily-honored per∣sonages (of his kindred and alliance) wch he conceiveth will be much improv'd by their accumulating their merits in the accomplish∣ment of this work of Refor∣mation religiously begun, & indefatigably pursued by them, continually promised by others, universally exspe∣cted by al (except those pro∣misers that never meant to be performers) and particu∣larly pointed at in this trea∣tise, & my former, so far a humbly conceive necess for Law, & Officers need for the Commonwealth: For which vigeat, floreat, dure shalbe my daily praiers. A∣men again.
Anno III. Caroli Regis. THE PETITION Of Right granted in the third year of the late King, and confirmed this present Parliament for the good of the Common-wealth. To the Kings most excellent MAjESTIE. HUmbly shew unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spi∣ritual & Temporal and Com∣mons, in Parliament assem∣bled,
that whereas it is declared and enacted by a statute made in the time of the reign of king Edward the first, commonly called, Statutum de sallagi non concedendo, That  Tallage or Aid shall be laid  levied by the King or his he in this Realm, without the good will and assent of the Archbishops Bishops Earl Barons, Knights, Burgesses and other the Freemen of the Commonaltie of this Realm And by authority of Parlia∣ment holden in the five and twentieth year of the reign
King Edward the third, it is declared & enacted, That from henceforth no person should be compelled to make any Loans to the King against his will, because such Loans were a∣gainstreason, and the Fran∣chise of the Land. And by o∣ther Laws of this Realm it is provided, that none should be charged by any charge or Imposition, called a Benevo∣lence, nor by such like Charge, by which the Statutes before mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm your Subjects have inherited this Freedom, That they should not be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not set by common consent in Parliament. Yet nevertheless of late, divers Commissions directed to sundrie Commissioners in several Counties, with instru∣ctions have issued; by means your people have been in di∣vers
places assembled, and re∣quired to lend certain sums of money unto your Majesty, and many of them upon their refusal so to do, have had an Oath administred unto them, not warrantable by the Laws or Statutes of this Realm, & have been constrained to be∣come bound to make appear∣ance, and give attendance be∣fore your Privie Councel, and in other places; and others of them have been therefore im∣prisoned, confined, and sun∣drie other waies molested an disquieted. And divers other charges have been laid and le∣vied upon your people in seve∣ral Counties, by Lord Lieu∣tenants, Deputy-Lieute∣nants, Commissioners in Musters, Iustices of Peace, And others, by Command and Direction from your Majesty, or your Privie Councel, a∣gainst the Laws and tree Cu∣stoms of the Realm. And where also by the Sta∣tute called The great Charter of the Liberties of England, It is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Free hold, or Liberties, or his free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawfull Iudgement of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.
And in the eight & twentieth yeer of the reign of King Ed∣ward the third it was declared and enacted by authority of Parliament, that no man ofwhat estate or condition that he be, should be put out of Land or Tenements, nor ta∣ken nor imprisoned, nor dis∣herited nor put to death with∣out being brought to answer by due Process of Law. Nevertheless against the te∣nor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws and Sta∣tutes of your Realm to that end provided, divers of your Subjects have of late been im∣prisoned without any cause shewed: and when for their de∣liverance they were brought before your Iustices by your Majesties Writs of Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receive as the court should or∣der their keepers commanded to certifie the causes of their detainer, no cause was cer∣tified,
but that they were de∣teined by your Majesties spe∣cial command, signified by the Lords of your Privie-Coun∣cel, and yet were returned back to several prisons, without be∣ing charged with any thing to which they might make an∣swer according to the Law. And whereas of late great Companies of Souldiers and Mariners, have been dispersed into divers Counties of the Realm, and the inhabitants, against their wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to suffer them to sojourn against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the great grie∣vance and vexation of the peo∣ple.
And whereas also by auto∣rityof Parliament, in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and enacted, that no man should be fore∣judged of life or limb against the form of the Great Charter, and the law of the Land: and by the said Great Charter and other the Laws and Sta∣tutes of this your Realm, no man ought to bee adjudged to death, but by the Laws esta∣blished in this your Realm, ei∣ther by the customs of the same Realm, or by Acts of Parlia∣ment; And whereas no of∣fender, of what kinde soever, is exempted from the proceed∣ings to bee used, and punish∣ments to bee inflicted by the Laws & Statues of this your Realm: Nevertheless, of late time divers Commissions nder your Majesties great
seal have issued forth by which certain persons have been as∣signed & appointed Commis∣sioners, with power and unto∣rity to proceed within the land, according to the Iustice of Martiall Law against such Souldiers or Mariners, or o∣ther dissolute persons joyning with them, as should commit any murther, robberie, felo∣nie, mutinie, or other outrage, or misdemeanor whatsoever, and by such summarie course & order, as is agreeable to Mar∣tial Law, and as is used in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the tryal and con∣demnation of such offenders, and them to cause to be execut∣ed, and put to death, according to the Law Martial.
By pretext whereof some ofyour Majesties Subjects have been by some of the said Com∣missioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes of the land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they might, and by no other ought to have been judged and exe∣cuted.
And also sundrie grievous offenders by color thereof, claming an exemption, have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and sta∣tutes of this your Realm, by reason that divers of your Of∣ficers and ministers of Iustice have unjustly refused, or for∣born to proceed against such of¦fendors, according to the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretence that the said offenderswere punishable only by Mar∣tial law, and by autoritie of such Commissions as afore∣said. Which Commissions, and all other of like nature are wholly and directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.
They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent Ma∣jestie, that no man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or such like Charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament. And that none be called to make answer or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be con∣fined, or otherwise molested, or disquieted, concerning the same, or for refusall thereof. And that no Freeman, in any such manner as is before men∣tioned, be imprisoned or de∣tained. And that your Maje∣sty would be pleased to re∣move the said Souldiers and Mariners, and that your peo∣ple may not be so burthened in time to come. And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by Martial Law, may be revoked and annulled; And that hereafter no Com∣missions of like nature may issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever, to be executed, as aforesaid, lest by co∣lor of them any of your Ma∣jesties Subjects be destroyed, or put to death, contrary to the Laws and franchise of the Land.
All which they most humbly pray, of your most Excellent Majestie, as their Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And that your Ma∣jestie would also vouchsafe to declare that the Awards, do∣ings, and proceedings to the prejudice of your people, in a∣nie of the premisses, shall not be drawn hereafter into con∣sequence or example. And that your Majesty would be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your people, to declare your Royall will and pleasure, That in the things aforesaid, all your Officers and Mini∣sters shal serve you, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as they tender the Honor of your Majesty, and the prosperity of this King∣dom.
VVhich Petition being read, the second of June, 1628. the Kings An∣swer was thus deliver∣ed unto it.
THe King willeth, that Right be done, according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm; And, that the Sta∣tutes be put in due Execu∣tion, that His Subjects may have no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppressions, contrarie to their justRights and Liberties: To the preservation whereof, He holds Himself in con∣science aswel obliged, as of his Prerogative. But this Answer not gi∣ving satisfaction, the King was again petition∣ed unto, that he would give a ful and satisfactory Answer to their Petition in full Parliament.
Whereupon the King in person, upon the seventh of June, made this second ANSVVER. My Lords and Gentlemen! THe answer I have alreadie given you, was made with so good de∣liberation, and approved by the Iudgements of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined, but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to a∣void al ambiguous interpre∣tations,
and to shew you that there is no doubleness in my meaning, I am willing to pleas you in words, as well as in substance; Read your Petition, and you shall have an answer, that I am sure will pleas you. And then causing the Petition to be distinct∣ly read by the Clerk of the Crown, The Clerk of the Parliament read the Kings Answer there∣to in these words, Let Right b done as de∣sired.Soit droit fait come est desire.
Which being done, the King in Person said thus, THis I am sure is ful; yet no more then I granted you in my first Answer; for the meaning of that was, to confirm all your Liberties: Knowing, according to your own Pro∣testations, that you neither mean, nor can hurt my Prerogative: And I assure you, my
Maxime is, That the Peoples Libertie streng∣then's the Kings Preroga∣tive,and that the Kings Prerogative, is to defend the peoples Liberties. Yee see now, how ready I have shewed my self to satis∣fie your Demands, so that I have done my part; Where∣fore if this Parliament have not a happie Conclusion, the sin is yours, I am free of it.
AND On the last day of the Session;June 26. 1628. His MAIESTIES Speech to both Houses, Before His Royall as∣sent to the Bills, was this. My Lords and Gentlemen!
IT may seem strange that I come so sud∣denly to end this Session: therefore before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the Cause,though I must avow that I ow an account of my Actions to none but God alone. It is known to every one, that a while ago the House of Com∣mons gave me a Remon∣strance; how acceptable eve∣ry man may judge; & for the merit of it, I will not cal that in question, for I am sure no wise man can justifie it. Now since I am certainly informed that a second Re∣monstrance is preparing for me, to take away my profit of Tonnage and Poundage (one of the chiefest maintenances of the Crown) by alleging that I have given away my right thereof, by my Answer to your Petition.
This is so prejudicial unto me, that I am forced to end this Session some few hours before I meant it, being wil∣ling not to receive any more Remonstrances, to whieh I I must give a harsh answer. And since I see that even the Hous of Commons begins already to make false Con∣structions of what I granted in your Petition, lest it be worse interpreted in the Countrey, I will now make a Declaration concerning the true intent thereof. There Profession of both Houses, in the time of ham∣mering this Petition, was no waies to trench upon my Pre∣rogative,
saying, They had neither intention nor power to hurt it. Therefore it must needs be conceived, that I have grant∣ed no new, but only confirm∣ed the ancient Liberties of my Subjects: Yet to shew the cleerness of my intentions; that I neither repent, nor mean to recede from any thing I have promised you, I do here declare, That those things which have been don, whereby men had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the Subjects to be trencht upon (which indeed was the first and true gound of the Pe∣tition) shall not here∣after be drawn into Example
for your prejudice: And in time to come (in the word of a King) you shall not have the like cause to complain. But as for Tonnage and Poundage, It is a thing I cannot want, and was never intended by you to ask, never meant (I am sure) by me to grant.
To conclude, I command you all that are here, to take notice of what I have spoken at this time, to be the true in∣tent and meaning of what I granted you in your Petition: But especially you, my Lords, the Iudges, for to you onely, under me, belongs the inter∣pretation of Laws; for none of the Houses of Parliament, joynt or separate, (what new doctrine soever may be rai∣sed) have any power, either to make or declare a Law without my consent.
Here followeth the Con∣firmation of the said Pe∣tition by this pre∣sent Parliament (as it is to be read in the Act, Intitu∣led, An Act for the de∣claring unlawfull and void the late proceedings touching Shipmony, and for the vacating of all Records and process con∣cerning the same,) in these words, viz.
BEE it declared and enacted by the Kings most Excel∣lent Majestie, and the Lords and Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament assembled,and by the autoritie of the same, That the said Charge imposed upon the Subject for the providing and furnish∣ing of Ships, commonly cal∣led Ship-mony, and the said extrajudicial opinion of the said Iustices and Ba∣rons, and the said Writs and every of them, and the said agreement or opinion of the greater part of the said Iusti∣ces and Barons, and the said Iudgement given against John Hampden, were & are contrary to and against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Right of Proper∣tie, the libertie of the Sub∣jects, former Resolutions in Parliament, and the Petitionof Right made in the third year of the Reign of his Ma∣jestie, that now is. And it is further declared, and enacted by the Autoritie aforesaid, That all and every the Par∣ticulars praied or desired in the said Petition of Right, shal from henceforth be put in Execution accordingly, and shalbe firmly and strictly holden and observed, as in the some Petition they are prayed and expressed.
Observe that the greater part of Iustices and Barons, used to direct Writs and A∣greements, & give their O∣pinions and Iudgements con∣trarieto and against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Right of Pro∣perty, and the liberty of the Subjects. And why there∣fore suffered longer so to do? and their unanimous ani∣mals sit in Parliament to make Laws by their advice to their own ends, and publick mischiefs? FINIS.
JURORS JUDGES OF LAW and FACT: Or, certain Observations of certain differences in points of Law between a certain reverend Judg, called Andr. Horn, and an uncertain Author of a certain Paper, printed by one Francis Neale this year 1650. styled, A Letter of due Censure and Redargution to Lievt. Col. JOHN LILBURN, touching his Tryall at Guild-Hall, London, in Octob. 1649. subscribed H.P. Written by JOHN JONES, Gent. Not for anie vindication of Mr. Lilburn against anie injurie which the said Author doth him, who can best vindicate himself by due cours of Law; if not rather leav it to God whose right it is to revenge the wrongs of his servants. Nor of my self, but of what I have written much contrary to the Tenents of this Letter; and for the Confirmation of the free People of England, that regard their libertie, propertie, and birth∣right, to beleev and stand to the truth that I have written, so far as they shall finde it ratified by the laws of God and this Land; And to beware of Flatterers that endevor to seduce them under colour of good counsel, to betray their Freedoms to perpetual slavery. Hostis vera dicens amico ad gratiam simulanti omnino praeponendus est:Eus. An Enemy speaking truth, is to be always prefer∣red before a flattering Freind. London, Printed by W.D. for T.B. & G.M. at the three Bibles in Pauls church-yard, near the west end
To the POLITIQUE BODIE, And Unanimous Fraternitie of the ARMY of ENGLAND; Officers and Souldiers, Ioyntly and severally.
HOnored and Honora∣ble: Commanders and Commanded: Wise and Prudent: Grave and Valiant: Seniors andJuniors: Souldiers all: Un∣known to most, Cherish∣ed by som, ingaged to ma∣ny; I presume to write to you all, concerning what most concerneth us all: To Honor God: To love his Children: and hate, and quell his enemies, are his own Commandements: And although the two first be the greatest, yet is the third none of the least du∣ties required of us all, as appeareth by that accountgiven by David saying, Psal. 139.21. & 22. Vers. speaking to God, Do not I hate them that hate thee? And am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, and count them my enemies. And the affliction of Saul for spar∣ing Agag, was a full exam∣ple to us in that case. Nay, an Heathen could tell Cha∣rislaus King of Sparta, he did not his office when heforbore to punish dishonest men. I confess, you have fought a good Fight, and declared your selvs con∣stant workers in the waie of our Reformation, in our Land of Promise: promis∣ed by many, performed by none, endeavored by too few. And I also ac∣knowledg that you are now upon service conducing in order to secure & maintain the model to be perfected in time, from which ex∣peditionI desire not to di∣vert you, (as I have writ∣ten formerly to his Excel∣lencie the Lord General) but to give you to under∣stand you have left behind you more pestiferous, dan∣gerous, obnoxious, ma∣nifest, sedulous, and con∣stant enemies to God, your Countrey, your selvs, and us all, then you have or can have, before you, un∣less that for sparing those at home unpunished, as youmight before you went, God will raise afflictions a∣gainst you abroad, to make you minde your error be∣fore you return; And let you know Achan and his Wedg must be discovered, and he and his Familie pu∣nished at home, before you can expect prosperitie a∣broad, for it is usuall with God to send forraign Cor∣recters to punish the Ma∣gistrates of his People that neglect the punishment oftheir domestique wicked∣ness. Many were our A∣chans, even most of our Lawyers and Judges, that in the late Kings time Sacri∣legiously, and daily by se∣cret briberies, and open extortions, exhausted the treasure of the people, even the whole estates, real and personal, of many thou∣sands of the free-men of England, consecrated to the said free-men, and e∣stablished upon them even
by God himself, and his then Viceroy's, and the great Charter of England, attesting their agreement thereupon. And this to be done (saith the Lord Cook somtimes Chief-Ju∣stice) under the Colour of Justice, is the greatest kind of Injustice, and the cunningest Robberie that can be in the World. And do none of you know that we have still such as do the same? in comparison ofwhich and whom, Achan was but a sole, sillie, filch∣ing thief; and his single Wedg, but a poor trifling theft, nothing valuable to the least share of the mean∣est undertaker for draining Lincolnshire Fenns, and that is nothing in respect of the constant draining of the purses of the rest of that Countie, which also is no∣thing in respect of the rest of all England and Wales, more perfectly and con∣stantly
drained by the Ar∣tists of Westminster, then any Fen is or can be by Mr. Henley, and his partners. Nay, the extorted Fees for Habeas Corpus's from the Kings Bench and Fleet, yearly amount to a richer Wedg then Achans, which was no more then he could carrie to his Tent of the spoile of Jericho. Less loss to the
Israelites that were at libertie to fight for more, then what is dailyand hourly carried by many of the price of starv∣lings bread, to the sever∣all Chambers of severall Westminster Judges; so loss∣full to hungrie Prisoners, that manie thousands of them lose their lives by that means, before they can procure their libertie to speak with their Creditors. Have we not had more men lost so in dungeons in Eng∣land and Wales, wrong∣fully imprisoned and mur∣theredby Judges and Gao∣lers, then you have lost in the field, hurt by the hands of your enemies? And were not too many of those (so lost under the hands of Goalers and dooms of Judges) souldiers that re∣turned safe from the mouths of Cannons, and the Swords of enemies, whose widows and father∣less children crie to men in vain for Justice and relief in this case? And shall notGod hear the crie of the poor, and of the blood of so many Abels? when men will not? I beseech you lay these things to your hearts, and consider in time; And let it not be said that any of you accept bribes of Law∣yers, to dispence with their bribing, extorting and murthering of whom and as many as they please of your Friends, kindred and Coun∣trey men, whose case ano∣ther day may be your own,if you timely prevent it not. Som do inform you that they are beneficial men un∣to you; those are fals coun∣sellors, for what can they give unto you, but what is none of their own? Nay more, but what is your own? forfeited and ad∣judged unto you amongst the rest of the Common-wealth, and so confessed even by their own mouths, (as I have written and proved formerly) be there∣forepleased to make your selvs Masters of your own whiles it is in your power, or expect it shall be told you the Virgins Lamp is out. If your present in∣gagement will not permit any of you to see this done, cease not to sollicit his Ex∣cellencie to write to the Hous, to desire them to put out of their assembly al mer∣cenarie professors of Law that poison their Counsell, no less then their predeces∣sorsdid the King, making them to do the same things wch they condemned in him; to the more grief of the People, that were promised Reformation, and are paid in more and wors deforma∣tion of their Laws and Li∣berties then they were be∣fore: witness amongst ma∣nie more abuses, the Fen Project of Lincolnshire, &c. condemned in the late King, yet supported by more Malignant Royaliststhen in respect of Justice, he himself could be any, who are Judges, Parties and partners of the prey made by themselvs of other mens Rights, of whose service and affections, both Parliament and Army have had no less experience, then of their defects and delinquencies: And move his Excellencie to desire the House further to command the keepers of the great Seal to issue forth∣with Commissions of Oyerand
Terminer (as by Law they ought to all parties grieved, that shall demand them, directed to such Commissioners as the grie∣ved parties shall nominat, to enquire hear and de∣termine the extortions, op∣pressions and misdemea∣nors of Sheriffs, under She∣riffs, Gaolers, and other Officers subject to popular offence. And lastly, to de∣sire the said House to pass an Act for the setling of theLaw hereafter (in that plain∣ness, shortness and cheap∣ness) as hath been often de∣sired in divers Petitions of Londoners and others and by my last Letter to his Ex∣cellencie, bearing date a∣bout the beginning of this Month, according to the propositions of 12 heads of Law there inclosed which I understand in Scotland were delivered to his Excellen∣cies hands: So God him∣self shall bless you andyour Actions, and the peo∣ple present and future, and even your selvs and your Children have cause to re∣joice in your work, and be thankfull to God and your industrie for so great a fa∣vor. So shall Your Faithfull servant John Jones. From my Lodging at Mr. Mundays hous in Clarkenwel, this 29. of July, 1650.
JURORS JUDGES OF Law and Fact: SIR! HAving casually met with and perused your printed paper, styled, A Letter of due Censure and Redargution to Lieute∣nant Collonel John Lilburne, touching his Triall at Guild-Hall
London: in October last 1649. I could not chuse but take hold of your first Lines, wherein you say God's strict Injunction obliges us all to reprove sin wheresoever we finde it. And thereupon I must tell you, that whatsoe∣ver you finde in Mr. Lilburne, I can finde in you no less then sin against God, whose name you abominably abuse, to re∣prove truth, and call good e∣vill, and evill good: against Mr. Lilburne, whom you make but your Instrument to play upon, while you wound others through his sides, yea, even those most, whom you flatter most: Against the true and Ordinarie
Judges of the Land, the Jurors, whose ver∣dict is the effectual Judgementwhereby all men are judged by their Peers, aswell for their Lives as Lands, without which Judgement, the Law of
England cannot be Lawful∣lie executed: And generally a∣gainst all the Free People of this Common-wealth, whom you endeavour to blinde and enslave by your sophistrie unto usurped Authorities, per∣swading (as much as in you lyeth) all your Countrie-men to submit, and give away their Lives, their birthrights, Liberties, and Freedoms (for the preservation whereof all their just Laws, and Civill Wars, and especially this last, were made) to the in∣satiable Tyrannie of their incroaching Impostors, as shall appear following, viz. Page3d, of your
Letter (or rather Libell) in the second head of those things for which you say Mr. Lilburne is liable to re∣proof, you tell him he laid hold of divers shifting Cavills, and shufling exceptions in Law, which were onely fit to wast time, and procure trou∣ble to the Court; Sir! if Law alloweth Exceptions, called delatories, and lawfull Traverses as well in Pleas for Land as for Life; as you may finde it doth and ought in Mr. Hornes Book called the Mir∣ror of Justice, written by him in French in Edward the First his time, as you may observe in the Margent of the 6th page thereof, and excellently trans∣lated into English lately by William Heughes Esquire,a discreet and learned Lawyer living in Grayes Inn, of which kinde of Exceptions, some be Pleas for Actions and Ap∣peales, the Presidents where∣of are briefly and diversly, ac∣cording to the diversity of their causes, natures, and uses, demonstrated unto you in the said Book, from p. 129. to p. 143. and thence to 146. are Exceptions, or Pleas to In∣dictments; the summary rea∣son of all which is not as you call it, to waste time, and to procure trouble to Courts, but to bestow time as it can be no better bestowed (especial∣ly in Cases of life) then to search out the truth of every Cause, that mens lives be not rashly lost, which cannot be recovered if condemned and
executed, how be it, wrongfully, or carelesly: so, that to be care∣full, circumspect, and well ad∣vised in a Court is not to trou∣ble it, for it is its duty to be exercised as it is significantlie derived à Curando; that is, a Court of Care, or Cure, Indifferentlie either, or rather both, as it is Ordained Care to be troubled to hear and determine the Cares and trou∣bles of all men within its verge, for Controversies of Law, (that vex & trouble an whole hundred of Friends and neigh∣bours to see but two of them undoe themselves in suits at Law, or kill one another) with Care to examin them tru∣ly, and to Judge them justly; And likewise to cure the Mal∣ladie of the Consciences, or atleast the intemperance of the Litigious spirits of Plaintiffs and Defendants, by ending their differences (as may be most available for their Peace, and the Common-wealth. And as it is the duty of a Court to be troubled to end troubles, so saith Mr. Horne p. 58. not to accuse any for matters of Crime and Life, though a known offender, learning of Christ in the Case of Magda∣len: Nor to countenance Bloody Accusers, but to mol∣fie their Rigour, as Christ did in the same Case; for Judges that represent God, and should imitate his mercy as well as his Justice, ought not to
desire the death of a sin∣ner, but rather that he may return from his wickedness,and live; and Conveniens ho∣mini est hominem servare vo∣luptas: Et meliùs nullâ quae∣ritur Arte favor. Nothing more Convenient for Man, or acceptable to God, then to save Penitents, whom he came not to destroy, but to call to Repentance: Nor is it the part of a Judge (as in p. 66. of my said Author) to con∣demn one for the same, or the like offence, as the Judge knoweth himself guilty of. And therefore Exceptions are law∣full, to the Power of a Judge, as in p. 133. to his person; as in p. 135. and to his condi∣tion, as in p. 59. And those that are granted to be lawfull to be propounded against his Power p. 133. are the same in substance, which you say Mr. Lilburne made use of, & yet call them shifting cavills, & shufling exceptions, & reprove him for using them in defence of his life. I pray compare them toge∣ther, & then consider what and whom you reprove; & you can not chuse but finde that for the matter, it is not a shifting cavil, or shufling exception, but the so∣lid fundamentall Law of Eng∣land, affirmed by all men that truly understand it, to be most Consentaneous of all Laws, to the Law of God; And for the Persons, it is not onely Mr. Lil∣burne that desired thereby to preserve or prolong his life, but all the sage makers, & religious observers thereof, whereby you perswade all your Countrimen present & future, to disesteem such exceptions (even to save
their lives) and consequently to cast themselves away upon the wils, and hast of Commissa∣rie Judges, who may be the onely, or chief Accusers, or Adversaries the Party questi∣oned for his life can have; which for any such Partie to do, were to be more then mad, and even the Author of his own death, and of Gods Wrath upon his soul, which if he so wilfullie lose, what is it to him to gain a world in lieu thereof? And why do you (more falsly then Caiphas that told one truth in his life unknown to himself) offer to perswade us to becom wil∣ling to sacrifice our selves one after another, to the lying bloody constructions of that Generall, and true PositionSalus Populi, &c. The Health of the Nation; is the chiefest Law; which you vaunt to be the empress of all your Maxims, whilst you construe it to the destruction of the Nation (as they are very sensible thereof,) and make it onely healthie to rotten Commissarie Judg∣es, and corrupt Lawyers, whom you make the sole Judges thereof; for what Christian can bee so sensless as to believ, or conceiv, that the sacrificing of any one man in that manner onely, for the suspition (perhaps of no more then the Judge that findes himself most guilty of the Cause) as of bing more able then another to raise or cause War against us; can avail us: For Sir! God delighteth not
in bloody and dead sacrifices, but in our humble, penitent, and lively Prayers, who are, or ought to be his living sacri∣fices; And he that is as well the Lord of Hosts, as the God of Peace, is our loving Father, and he will heare us when we call upon him in his Sons Name, and open his gate of mercie unto us when we knock as we ought, and whatsoever good we ask him in that name, he will not onely give it us, but moreover strengthen us as he did Jacob, to wrastle with himself, and to overcom his Anger, which an Heathen could understand and say: Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus: Gods Anger stoopeth to his Childrens Prayers: And none but he can raise any warr against them; nor will he fur∣ther then their sins deserve his punishment; and so farr; Is there any evill in Israel, but it is he that doth it? What do you therefore but shew your self diffident of his merci∣full omnipotence, and rob him of his Glory, when you attribute his power to man, to make War or Peace, and make your self wiser then he, when you think to prevent his will by your policie? and stronger then he, if you could destroy whom he would save? And therefore (saith Me∣lancton) Men are but fooles
Vincula cùm tendunt imposu∣isse Jovi: when they suppose they can Chain the Dietie. And who can but see, that if it be granted you, that every free man of England, whom you, or a Commissarie Judge, or a∣ny other, as bad, shall suspect, or be pleased to accuse for su∣spition, of what you think good to invent, you may ac∣cuse whom you will, and hang whom you list, and leave none to live, but at Lawyers discretion, whilst the truth is, that so farr as any one man or more of any kind of men, whatsoever, can be called or accounted raisers or causers of War in England, the Lord Cook, Mr.
Horne, and other found Lawyers tell you they ever were, and will be corrupt and mercenarie Lawyers, that sell, delaie, and denie Ju∣stice, and the benefit of the great Charter of England to the People thereof; the duepunishment of whom, & of all Sycophants that sooth them up in their Errors, would be Salus Populi; for they are a considerable Army that have over-powred us these 500. years, Hyperprelaticall Spi∣rits; Domineering Nimrods; Undermining Pioners, (so that what was said of Rome since the Popish Prelacy ru∣led it, may be said of England since Lawyers overswayed it, viz. Servierant tibi Anglia priùs domini dominorum, ser∣vis servorum nunc miseranda subes. O thou that wert the Lady of Lords, art the Slave of Slaves.) And a subtle and viperous generation that add Policie to their Power, to gnaw their Mothers bowels, and use to make dissentions
and Factions between even their own Brethren, to make work for themselvs to recon∣cile them, or most commonly by the strength of the weakest, to destroy the strongest, till they be able to Master both, and by right seldom, and wrong constantly, to make and keep themselves rich, who∣soever be poor, to accuse and condemn all their superi∣ors for tyrannie, to make way for themselves to be the onely superviving supreme Tyrants, and compleat Dio∣nysians. The onely Monopo∣lizers of Law, to sell, delay, and denie Justice to the Free Men of England their Slaves, at their wills and pleasures in their Congregational Ex∣change
Westminster Hall. Andwhereas you say those shifting cavils & shufling exceptions wch Mr. Lilburne made use of, to waste time, and procure trou∣ble to the Court, were far from making any defence for him: I pray you what defence could he desire thereby but to save his life? And was not that done by the Verdict of a Jury, that heard what he said for himself, received all the E∣vidences that were given a∣gainst him, and were Char∣ged and sworn to give their Verdict according to their E∣vidence: was not that Ver∣dict confirmed and ratified by the right Honorable the Councell of State, by the as∣sent of the most Honorable and Supreme Court of Parlia∣ment? without which ei∣therby an implicit generall Warrant, or a speciall Ex∣press: no man can be so mad as to think they would inlarge him? was not this as Full and fair a Triall as Mr. Lilburne could wish, or any man (Questioned for Treason) had these 100. years, or since Juries, (that understood Law no better then you) were con∣tent to be bafled by Commis∣sarie Judges, and give what Verdict they pleased, as well for mens lives as their lands: did not his Exceptions and pleadings (whatever you call them) come near enough (how ever the Court liked them) to make him a suffici∣ent defence in that mater? doth it not follow, that by your said saying, you makeyour self a naked lyar? and can so apparent a lyar be a Creditable reprover of sin? the Devill he can as soon: doth it not further follow, that Mr. Lilburne hath his Action of the Case against you, for questioning him for the same offence that he is acquit∣ted of by so due a Course of Law? Doth it not moreo∣ver follow, that by traducing that Verdict and acquittall, you consequentlie traduce, not onely the Jurie, but also the Councell of State, and the Parliament that Confirmed the same as aforesaid? And are not you therefore lyable, not onely to the severall Acti∣ons of everie Juror, but also of Scandalum magnatum? But what need you care, you
are too cunning for them all, in Concealing your name at large from them whom you slander at large, and send your Book to them with a sine me Liber ibis in urbem; so that they know not when, where, or how to finde you out by that uncertain notion, or mark of H. P. Which for any thing I know, may fignify some Soap∣stuff, as well as any mans name; but take heed least John smell you out, and con∣temperate you in his Com∣pounds for some simple corra∣sive ingredient which he useth (not to any intent of malice, but to eat off som of your proud flesh, and not to de∣stroy any sound part in you, as you say in the title of your Book you use your reproof tohim) to make a speciall kind of soap to wash the brains of such Orators as perswade men to becom such fools, as to make no use of Lawfull exceptions against their Jud∣ges (especially Commissaries) to save their lives: and the tongues of such Sycophants as under pretence of reproving the meanest, and weakest sort of sinners; approve, and improve the greatest and strongest kinde of Murtherers, Traytors, Perjurers,
&c. viz. Commissary Judges in gene∣rall, in their practise at large. But more to the matter, where you say in your 5th head, in the same 3d page of your Li∣bell: The 5th thing you say deserveth a keen reproof of all honest men, was Mr. Lil∣burnesassayling the sinceri∣tie of his Jury: and page 21. you say he promoted his 12. men, &c. and caused them to imploy their new given Juris∣diction, onely to the advan∣tage of the giver. Truly Sir! I must confess, that if Mr. Lilburne assailed the sinceritie of his Jury, he was to blame: but I cannot find by any thing you prove, that he did so, for the Clamor of the People (who were not his disciples as you belie them and him too) were not in his power to stop, more then in yours, or mine, had we been there; for if they would not obey the Crier of the Court, they would not have obeyed us more then him, who desired (as he need∣ed) rather to be heard, thendisturbed, and distracted with Clamors. And for his blan∣dishments to his Jurie, good Language became him to give, and them to receiv, but not such adulations as you give all Commissary Judges: And to use all the lawfull means he could to inform them, and all his Auditors that knew him not, nor his innocence in that Cause, and merit in others; and thereby to prolong his life in the Land which the Lord his God hath given him, and to keep himself a living sacrifice to, and for his God, untill it please his Dietie to call him to his mercy by the Ordi∣narie way of common death, or to inspire him to fight again in his Masters Battell and Countries service: wherebyhe may dye an extraordinary death, more to his Masters glory, and his own honor, then by casting away his life (to becom a dead sacrifice to the malice of men, whether Commissary Judges, such as you plead for; or other flat∣tering Sycophants, such as you make your self) I con∣ceiv to be no fault in Mr. Lil∣burne. In the next place, where you say Mr. Lilburne promoted his 12 men to a new Jurisdiction; I am sure, that is another Lie of yours, for you may read in the Lord Cooks Institutions upon the 35 Chapter of Magna Car∣ta: That County Courts, Court Barons, Sheriffs-Tur∣nies, and Leets, were in use before King Alphreds time;
In all which Courts the Jurors were the Judges, & their then untraversable Verdicts were the Judgments in all Causes: And Sheriffs and Stewards, who were the Kings Commis∣sary Judges in their Turnies, and Leets, as now they are the States, were, and still are but the suitors Clerks in Counties, Hundreds and Court Barons, to enter their Judgments, and do executi∣on thereupon by themselvs and their Bayliffs, as pub∣lique servants, or Ministers of common Justice to their Ju∣rors, and the rest of the Com∣mon Wealth: See Mr. Kitch∣en Fo. 43. yet were they as ab∣solute Commissary Judges by vertue of their Writs, when they have them for matters a∣bove4 s. as the Judges at Westminster ever were, or can be by their Commissions: And all Common Pleas be∣tween Party and Party (and the King, Queen, and Prince were accounted but Parties as other Plaintiffs and defen∣dants in such Pleas) were hol∣den in the County Court from Month to Month, un∣till for the ease of the People, especially husband-men to fol∣low their business; The King with their assents divided the view of Frank pledg from the Sheriff who by all the Peoples assent in Parliament 9. Ed. 2 was to be thence forth assigned by the Chancellor, the Kings Commissiary Judge in his Turnies, (called before the Kings own Turnies) to see
Justice done from County to County; And all the free pledges of every County toge∣ther, once every 7. years, which is since to be done by Sheriffs twice yearly) and gave them to Lords of Man∣nors, so, that their Tenants and Resiants should have the same Justice in their Leets and Court Barons, as they had in the Sheriffs turnies and County Courts at their own doors without any charge, or loss of time? And for the same reason (saith the Lord Cook in the same place) Hun∣dreds were divided from Sheriffs, viz. that none should be troubled further, or out of their Lords Court at all, at which Courts (saith Mr. Horn p.
7.) Justice was so done,that every one so judged his neighbor by such Judgment as none could elswhere receiv in the like cases, untill such time as the Customs of the Realm were put in writing. And as the County Courts, Hundred Courts, and Court Barons were of one Juris∣diction, so were Turnies, and Leets, and so all of them are, and ought to be still; therefore you must consider that there be three sorts of Jurisdictions, viz. Soveraign; assigned, and
ordinary: of these you may read in the Mirror? p. 7. in these words, viz. It was assented unto, that these things following should be∣long to Kings, and the right of the Crowne, viz. Soveraign Jurisdiction, &c. which is now fixed in the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by vertue whereof among other things all Writs, Commissions, warrants, Commitments, & Li∣berates or discharges run in their names as they did in the Kings, so that none are Im∣prisonable, or dischargable, but in their names; consider therefore again that this assent was the Peoples, whereby Kings, (who before, and without this assent, were not Kings, but ordinary men, that could have but ordinary Ju∣risdiction as others) had So∣veraign Jurisdiction, as now the Keepers of the Liberties of England have by the Authori∣tie of Parliament, which is the Representative of the People, given them by the Peoplewith a reservation of their or∣dinary Iurisdiction, viz. re∣served in, by, and unto them in King Edward 1 his time, and ever before and since; by reason also of which soveraign and Royall Jurisdiction, as you may further read Mir∣ror, p. 287. Kings were called and counted (as now the Keepers of the Liberties of England ought to be) foun∣tains of Justice, and ordained because they could not be al∣waies every where themselvs, as Moses did by Jethro's Councell, Institute Captains over hundreds, Fifties, &c. and now the Keepers of the Liberties of
England do, and must ordain Commissary Judges, viz. Commissioners or Judges, by their Com∣missionsor Writs to supply their presence, and do their office in their stead, which in Courts, is but to give their assents to the verdicts, which are the judgments of Free∣men upon their Peers, where∣by those Judgments being so compleated, the executions thereof did do, and must run in the name of the Soveraign Jurisdiction of the State; And so Iustice may be administred in all places, in their perso∣nall absence, who are to be accounted present in their Commissaries, who no more then their Masters can be counted Iudges of the people, because parties against them, and so made and named in, and by all Indictments, Writs, &c. as aforesaid. Observeagain, that Commissary Iudg∣es, being ordained by their Masters to do Iustice; if they fail of so doing by their par∣tiallitie, wilfullness, or any other consideration, as
Pilat (who was Caesars Commissa∣ry) and others did (whom you aptly compare to som of them) then they have no jurisdiction, or ordination at all, so that they may be disgracefully, and that lawfully pulled, and thrown out of their abused places: but in civilitie and re∣spect of their Masters may be better forborn, and referred to their Censures. And what is dissenting, or not assenting to Iurors verdicts, but a de∣nyal, which is more then a failer of Iustice, for the speed∣ing whereof they must haveno negative voice: for ordi∣narie Iurisdiction that was the supreme i that gave the Sove∣raign (which is superior to e∣very singular person) to Kings, (as now to the Keepers of the Liberties of
England) is still the superlative Iurisdiction beyond all comparison, that can be inferior to no authori∣tie, but Gods, that gave it to his people, to his Children, not to be given by them, to any above them in their gene∣ralitie, but himself, from whom they have received, and to whom they must re∣store themsevs and all that is theirs, but to be contrived, and substitued by them unto the worthiest men amongst them, to be imployed for and under them, as they might finde most convenient for their worldly peace and subordi∣nate government; to which end they deputed Kings, as now the Parliament hath don Keepers of the Liberties of
England, reserving so much of their ancient ordinary Iu∣risdiction to free men, that none but such may be Iurors, and none but such may be their Iudges for their lives, lands, and estates: And there∣fore as the Keepers of our Li∣berties are subordinate to the Parliament, so are their Com∣missaries to them, and both in their Iudgments, to the verdicts of the Iurors, which is their true saying of the whole matter, as well for Law, as Fact; and so is the full Iudgment of it, both inLaw and effect, wanting onely the assent of the Soveraign Iu∣risdiction, which is the onely party supposed to be against the party guiltie, or so repu∣ted, and hath that Majestie (or if well considered, that vassa∣lage) given unto it, as to do, or command to be don Exe∣cution; which, if the hang∣man refuse upon the Sheriffs command, the Sheriff him∣self must doe; and if he re∣fuse, or neglect, the Com∣missarie Iudge must, for as there is a Writ de procedendo ad judicium, and an Alias, plures; and Attachment to compell him to give his judg∣ment, or, more properly, his assent (as aforesaid) to the Juries verdict: So that if he delay, denie, or faile to do,
or cause Execution to be don, there is another Writ de exe∣cutione Judicii, and an Alias, Plur', and Attachment upon that, to be had against him; whereupon, if a Commissary Iudg must be Attached for not giving his assent, (com∣monly called his Iudgment) to a verdict for Fellonie, &c. or having given his Iudgement to the verdict, shall denie or delay execution, except in special things hereafter touch∣ed, let him not onely be an hangman for his Fellows, but be hanged himself; for such was King Alfreds Iudgment in all Cases of injustice in his Commissary Iustices, as you may read in the
Mirror from p. 239. to p. 245. when he hanged 44 of them in oneyear. But it is observable how Commissary Judges for Gaol deliveries do now a dayes use in the conclusion of their judgments upon Fellons; convicted by Iuries verdicts, and their assents, to command Sheriffs to see execution, and so to end their Sessions; and get themselvs gon out of that County with all expedition, and let the Sheriff and his hangman agree as they can bargain, for doing the exe∣cution, while the Commissary imposter proceedeth in his Circuit, attributing all that he findeth the people conceiv to be injustice, to the Sheriff, or Iury, or both, but calling all judgments and proceed∣ings (that are pleasing to the people throughout his peram∣bulationand the Ambit there∣of, even the Cirquit it self,) his own; because the people assented to such Commissions, as the devill doth the world his own, because God gave him leave to compass it; And as proud are such Lords justi∣ces of their Lordships in a kinde, as he can be of his; yet in right ought to be ac∣counted but servants to their Masters, as he to his. And therefore whereas you say p. 24. though the verdict be given in upon the whole matter, and so inclose Law as well as Fact, yet the binding force of the verdict as to matter of Law, may be derived from the sanction of the Judges, not from the Iurisdiction of the Inquest: And it may well be
supposed that the Iurors may err in a matter of Law, in which case the Iudges must al∣ter the erroneous verdict by a contrary Iudgment, and that Iudgment questionless shall nullifie the erroneous verdict, not the erroneous verdict the Iudgement; whereby it plain∣ly appears, That in a verdict upon the whole matter, there is no new Iurisdiction acqui∣red by the Iurors in matter of Law, nor left to the Iudges; sorasmuch as the Iudgment stands good, and obligeth not as it is rendred by the Iu∣rors, but as it is confirmed by the Iudges. Can a Man that would seem so Cornucopiously learned and wise as you do, be such a fool, as to make such a medley of nonsense; surelyshould you but tell such a con∣fused storie in one of the Inns of Chancerie, the puniest At∣turney there would hiss you out of his mooting School. What error can be in the sub∣stance of a true saying, but in the form there may, and that the Iudges and the Clerks as∣sume to be their office to make in Latin, and such is the form, and Latin they usually make thereof, that every word, or second are commonly er∣roneous, and that of purpose for themselvs, to make work for themselvs, by spinning the Cause in suites and vain plead∣ings, somtimes to seven years time, that might have been begun and ended in a day, and by beggering both parties to inrich themselvs by dam∣nableFees and extortions, all that while? Can the verdict which is the true saying of 12. Men upon the whole matter of Law and Fact, be alter'd by a contrarie Iudgment, (as you expressly say you can) but that must be fals and an untrue saying, for what can be con∣trary to a true saying, but a fals? And which of them ought to be altered? you say the verdict. Whereupon let all men judg whether you are not a plain liar therein, but suppose (since you goe by suppositions) that the saying of the Iurors is not true, and therefore no verdict, such as Iudges receive, or rather ar∣rest, and cause to be given them for verdicts by Iurors impanniled by Sheriffs, byIudges directions for that pur∣pose. Can the Confirmation of a Commissary Iudg, by his Iudgment make that good? Its a Maxim in Law, that what is naught in the foundation, can never be made good by Confirmation: but I confess many an honest man is hanged by such supposed verdicts, and devilish Iudgments. Can such Lies be called verdicts, or such Iudgments be called true, more then you can be called a just reprover, or a due Censurer, that reprove truth, and justifie lying? Can the Devill be a worse Censurer or Reprover? What Iudgment (mean you) stands good in Mr.
Lilburnes Case, who had no Iudgment at all passed upon him, but that verdict that saved him, and the assent of the Councell of State, and Parliament that confirmed it? And what ver∣dict or Iudgment do you finde fault with in all your Book over but that? Surely you were in a frenzie when you wove this stuff not so good as Linsey Woolsey; but if you would know what should be done, in case a Jury should give in an untrue saying, in stead of a verdict? (that being made to appear to a Commis∣sary Judg by the Partie grei∣ved, or his Councell learned to be undeniably true; such a seeming verdict, in case of life, or land of Free-hold, is traversable; as also any ver∣dict made defective, inform∣ed by Lawyers as aforesaid,and thereby sounding defect∣ive in matter, and so counted erroneous by them that made it for that purpose, to linger the matter for their own gain, as you may read in Mr. Horns Mirror, as aforesaid, and in the Statutes of 41. Edward 3. fol. 5. and 6. of Henry 7. and 19. Henry the eight. How∣beit for bloodshed in Leets there is no traverse; because the fact is a manifest wrong, and if laid upon a wrong per∣son, he may have his Attaint against the Jury, and reco∣ver treble damages, by the ver∣dict of
24 better Jurors; which remedie every party wronged by any Jury hath be∣sides his Traverse. And in case of life, which may be lost (by the malice or ignoranceof som Juries purposly return∣ed by som Sheriffs for their own ends) if executed accor∣ding to their saying, and is never recoverable by Law: The Commissary Iudg upon true information and proof thereof, and not otherwise, ought to stay Iudgment, or execution, or both, untill he can likewise inform the Keep∣ers of Englands Liberties of the truth of the Cause, and repriev the Prisoner untill their pardon or Tollerance be obtained for him, as was wont in the Kings time in like cases, so, that afterwards the Prisoner may have his Attaint as he ought against such a Iu∣ry, whose Iudgment is terri∣ble enough for example to o∣thers, and sufficiently satis∣factoryto the Party,
viz. to repair his wrong, and pay him treble damages: To for∣feit their lands and goods to the Lord of the Fee; to have their houses demolished; their woods rooted; their bodies imprisoned during their lives: And Iurors ought to try At∣taints without Fee Ex officio, as you may read in the Mir∣ror, p. 64. And so let so much serve in this place to in∣form you that the Iurisdiction of Iurors is to be Iudges and Verdictors of all controver∣sies given them in charge upon their Oaths, as well for mat∣ter of Law as Fact; and as an∣tient as, and more permanent then Commissary Iudges; for when Commissary Iudges had abused their places, so thatthey were beaten out of them, and Civill Wars therefore grew between Kings and peo∣ple before Magna Charta: and since, untill the said second agreement made between Ed. 1. and them, whereby Coro∣ners and Sheriffs were reor∣dained (for they had been or∣dained before, as appeareth by Magna Charta, and long before that) to defend the Country when they were dis∣missed of their guards, &c. for till then guards continued for the breach of Magna Charta, begun by Hugh de Burgo's means, and then Captains and Leiutenants became She∣riffs, Coroners, &c. and Centinels, Bailiffs, &c. But alwayes the Free men judged their neighbours constantly;And therefore Mr. Lilburn neither did, nor could give his Iurors any new Iurisdiction, nor promote them to any pre∣ferment more then of right they had, (as you most falsly and maliciously, however ig∣norantly accuse him, and a∣buse both him and them to in∣troduce the rest of your un∣truths which follow, for next you say, that thereby you perceiv his Levelling Philoso∣phy is, that Iudges because they understand Law, are to be degraded, and made ser∣vants to the Iurors; but the jurors because they understand no Law, are to be mounted a∣loft, where they are to admi∣nister Law, to the whole Kingdom: the Iudges because they are commonly gentle∣men
by birth, and have had honorable education, are to be exposed to scorn; but the Jurors, because they be com∣monly mechanick, bred up illiteratly to handy Crafts, are to be placed at the Helm, and consequently Learning, and gentle extractions, because they have been in esteem in all Nations from the begin∣ning of the world til now, must be debased, but ignorance, and sordid births must ascend the Chair, and be lifted up to the eminentest Offices, and places of power; Coblers must now practise Physick in stead of Doctors, Tradesmen must get into Pulpits, instead of Divines, and Plow-men must ride to Sessions instead of Iusti∣ces of Peace. Sir, I shall notmeddle with Mr. Lilburns Philosophy, but shall con∣ceiv it more reasonable, and therefore more tollerable then your sophistrie, seeing it ap∣peareth by your own setting forth, his endeavour was not to degrade Judges because they understood Law, but to inform them better, because he conceived they understood not Law in his Case, till they would be pleased to be better instructed by his learned Councell, which (as he aledg∣ed divers presidents for) might have been as Lawfully allowed him, as those that had them, for (as saith Mr. Horn 65 p. they are both necessarie and allowable to such Clyents, as understand not Law them∣selvs. And for none so ne∣cessarieas for their lives I think) neither doth it appear to be his purpose to make Judges servants to Jurors, be∣cause they understood no Law, but to remember them to be servants to their own Masters, to give their assent to the Iudgment of Jurors that he conceived did under∣stand Law: And what won∣der were it that these men, who by themselvs and their predecessors did put the Laws of England (that had been in the English tongue intelligi∣ble to all men whom it con∣cerned) into uncoth Gibe∣rish of their own making, should understand their own contrivance better then others who do understand Latin, French, Greek and Hebrew,better then most professors of Law do, and English as well: What subversion of the Law can be more then so to trans∣late it, that those whom it most concerneth, can neither understand it, nor be excused by their ignorance in not un∣derstanding it, and so make it their net (whose libertie it should be) and all to the end, that those whom it concern∣eth least, or not at all, may elevate themselvs by means of so unlawfull and prestigiato∣rie, and illiberal an Act, (no∣thing so harmles▪ nor so free and cheap as Canting), from little or nothing to great∣ness, from
Lourdeyness to Lords: And what can the subversion of the Law (espe∣cially such a subversion) be less then treason against all the English Nation? But truly Sir! if Mr. Lilburn should de∣sire that Iudges should be ex∣posed to scorn, because com∣monly Gentlemen by birth, and honorably educated, I know none that will agree with him in that, nor can I believ it to be his desire, that is known himself to be a Gen∣tleman born, honorably ex∣tracted, Civilly bred, marti∣ally disciplin'd, and very ra∣tionally endowed beyond the capacities of ordinarie Law∣yers. For learned, vertuous, and upright Judges howsoever born or bred, are to be ho∣nored for their vertue, because
Honos est virtutis praemium, Honor is the reward of vertue, and the better their births, andeducations be, the more fair and fortunate are their Orna∣ments: but Quamvis Caesare∣os enumeratis Avos: though descended of Caesar, and e∣ducated in his Court: They are not all of Israel that are of Isaac: And golden Calvs are not to be adored. And if corrupt and vitions, you say Gods strict injunction oblig∣eth us all to reprov sin where∣soever we finde it: behold how you contradict your self, when you would have all Iudges, because wel-born, because well bred (though as wicked as Pilat or Caiaphas, as you say elswhere) to be ho∣nored by all men: And yet you would have sin to be re∣proved by all men wheresoever they finde it
oportet mendacemesse memorem: recover your self by som distinction, or rea∣son of policie, or els you are faln deep: Tende manus So∣lomon, &c. I remember you say
Jehojada did forbear Atha∣lia untill he gained more abi∣litie, and better opportuni∣tie to accomplish his desires a∣gainst her; I conceiv then you would have none to re∣prov Judges but your self; nor will you, till you have more advantage of them then you have yet; so the respit you give, is but till you have more advantage against them; not unlike that Iesuiticall te∣net, which Ignatius never taught his Disciples, but they learned it of his Master the devil: And therefore let the King of Spain take heed of it,for the Pope and they wait but opportunitie to swallow his Catholick Majestie into his ho∣liness bowels, when they preach one vicar in earth for one God in heaven: And let Judges take heed of your flat∣terie which they may discern by your obligation, to reprove sin wheresoever you finde it; and by your forbearance to reprove Judges (though never so sinfull) untill you get op∣portunitie, and by your apt∣ness to fall down and worship them, all without distinction of good or bad; when som of them know themselvs no wor∣thier to be worshiped then he that our Saviour bad get be∣hind him. And what shall they be the better for your re∣proof, if they dye before they
have it? when you ought to speak, de mortuis nil nisi bo∣num; nothing but good of the dead; therefore Paul more graciously reproved Peter to his face, when and where he found him faulty. As for Ju∣rors placing at the Helm be∣cause mechanick, &c. you touch not Mr. Lilburn for his Jurors (as all others in Lon∣don ought to be) were impan∣neled by the Sheriffs of
Lon∣don, or their secondaries, who knew them to be honest lawfull men, such as their pre∣cept required, and had the Judges any cause to suspect, refuse, or chang them, they had done by them all, or ten at least as they did by one of them, take in others for them: And you say that Mr. Lilburnexcepted against them all, and desired to be tried by a Jurie of Surrey, where he lived when the Fact was supposed to be committed, (and if by him, likliest to have been there) where a Jurie might be had of no mechanicks, but God, who (as you say elswhere, and that truly, as the devil, to be believed in more, useth to tell som truths) is present in all Courts, was really, though not visibly present there, and had fore-ordain∣ed better for his servant, then he knew how to desire; A Jurie of Mechanicks, whose per∣sons or Estates I know not, but their carriage and Resolu∣tion in that matter declare them knowing and under∣standing Men, Confirmed intheir Verdict, first by God himself then doubtlessly not onely present in the Court, but in their hearts and consci∣ences: And afterwards by the Councell of State by assent of Parliament: A President for Jurors, and a memorable example of undantable, im∣movable, consciencious Judg∣es of life and death, for the present, and all future ages to imitate: yet traduced by you, and in them God him∣self the Author of the work, and the State, and their Coun∣cel Cooperaters therein. And no mervel for al that, since you cannot be content to calumni∣ate all that had a hand in the matter, but also the generali∣tie of all the constant Inhabi∣tants of all Cities and Corpo∣rationsin England and Wales, of whom not one in a Million, ever knew Mr. Lilburn, or heard of his Cause, all Me∣chanicks: For what Trade, or mysterie of Merchandize can be, but hath its original from som handicraft? What Mer∣chant so easie or carless, but somtimes useth the help of his own hand, or servants to mea∣sure, or weigh his commodi∣ties, for which he ventureth his life, or others, and his Estate to boot, to fetch them from the Indies, and why should he scorn to put his fin∣ger to retail them to his cu∣stomers by true weights and measures? And so I conceiv writing is but an handi-craft taught a Lawyer before mooting, and necessarie tobe used by him when he is a Judg, whose (dutie as the Lord Cook upon the 29 chapt. of Magna Charta saith, is, de∣cernere per Legem quid sit justum: to descern what is just by the rule of Law; and so to make the Law his rule, his line, his measure, his weight, his yard and ballance, which (saith the same Author in the same place) is called Right it self, And Common Law; be∣cause it judgeth common Right, by a right line, which is the Judg of it self and its oblique. And in another sens (saith he) the Law is called Right, because it is the best Birth-right the Subject hath, whereby his goods, lands, Wife, Children, bodie, honor and estimation are pro∣tected
from injuries, and so a better Inheritance cometh to everie one of us by the Law, then by our Parents: but when appropriated by Law∣yers to their own constructi∣on and benefit, how is it to be called common Law?) and when a Commissarie Judg like Pluto's Radamanth, maketh his will his Rule and line, and thereby squaretth and mea∣sureth the Law as he pleaseth, and as Virgil discribeth him: Grosius hic Radamanthus habet durisima regna, &c. Casti∣gátque Auditque dolo, subi∣gitque fateri leges fixit pre∣cio atque refixit, &c. First he punisheth, then he heareth, and compelleth to confess, and so maketh and marreth Laws as he pleaseth for hisprofit: such are the Commissa∣ries I desire to reprov, and you to flatter: but I wish them to observ Crysippus his Picture of Justice described in a Latin Diologue thus, viz. Quae Dea? Justitia: at quid torva lumina flectis? Nes ia sum flecti, nec moveor pretio. Ʋnde genus? Coelo. Qui te genuere Parentes? Mî Modus est genitor, clara fides Genitrix Auriū aperta tibi cur altera, & altera clausa est? Ʋna patet justis, altera surda malis. Cur gladium tua dextra gerit? Cur laeva bilances? Ponderat haec causas, percutit illa reos. Cur sola incedis? quia copia rara bonorum est; Haec referunt paucos secula Fabritios. Paupere cur Cultu? Semper justissimus esse, Qui cupit, immensas nemo parabit opes.
Englished by me thus. What Goddess art thou? Ju∣stice: why so stern? No force shall make me bow; nor brible me yearn. Whence sprung? from heaven. What parents gave thee breath? Indifference was my Father; Mother, Faith. Why open'st one ear, shutt'st the other still? One hears the good, the other's deaf to ill. Why right hand sworded? scald the left appears? One weighs the Cause, the other cuts guilts ears. Why art alone? because few good there be; Scant one Fabritius in this age we see.
Why poor in Robe? because who would be just, No vast estate or Wardrobe purchase must.
But I observ that as the meanest handicrafts man, when he groweth rich, turns Merchant, that he may live Lazier, and gain more by buy∣ing and selling merchantable Commodities, then by his labor, yea, and the craftiest Merchant of all; or as lately the poorest Schollars being at∣tained unto Wealth, became Bishops by the same means, and for the same reason; yea, and the precisest formalist of all, so the simplest mooter in the Inns of Chancerie, being being past his Apprentiship, admitted to the bar, and but botching Jorneyman in thetrade of Law, furnished with money friends and fortune, proceedeth Sergeant at Law, and ascendeth som Chair, or Bench of Judicature in a day, and declareth himself present∣ly the Pragmaticalest Judg of all, yet but a Commissarie Judg, such as you extol in the generall, and I except against in som particulars, as for mak∣ing the Law a mercenarie trade, or a merchantable commoditie, which ought to be free and liberall to all men; and in assuming a Mastership therein, whereas he is and ought to be but a servant to the Common-wealth; yea, even a Clerk (though you seem to repine at it) to say Amen, viz. to pronounce his Masters assent to the verdictsof Jurors who by their ordina∣rie Iurisdiction are the abso∣lute Judges of their Countrie, as before is proved. Yet shall I be content to follow your Follies a little further for your better satisfaction touching Mechanicks, who buy and sell but what are vendible and merchantable wares, and law∣full for them so to do, which if by unreasonable penni∣worths, their reasonable Customers may take or leave as their occasion requires, and reason guides them: whilst Lawyers Clyents must buy such Law as they can finde, at such rates as they can get at Westminster, or perish in their Causes: different from those times, when Mr. Horn, and others tell you, they had
better brought to their own doors with little charge, and less pains: and when to see it so administred and executed by Sheriffs, Recorders, and other Countrie and Citie Judges, that were the Kings Commissaries in their respect∣ive places, and derived their Commissions and authorities as well as any at Westminster ever did, or can, from the same fountain, viz Kings and people, so that (as the Lord Cook saith) Omnis derivata potestas habet eandem juris∣dictionem cum primitivâ: their jurisdictions were the same within their precincts, as the Kings at larg; yet Kings went along with their Com∣missaries, or rather Deputies, for their own Bench, from
Countie to Countie, once e∣very seven years, to oversee, and examin how Justice was distributed to their Subjects, and to give their Royal assents to the verdicts of Juries which were not assented unto by the ordinarie Countrey Commis∣saries since the last Size: which Commissioners therefore one∣ly, and not the Countrey in generall, (as now to Assizes, nisi prius, and Gaol delive∣ries) or so much as the Jurors were called, or troubled to bring in any account of what they had done since the last Eire, but those Commissarie Officers onely for that they had not done were charged to bring in their Records, where∣upon such verdicts as were found unassented unto and
compleated by them, might be assented unto and perfected by the King himself, or his Commissarie Judg, or depu∣tie, called his chief Justice of his own Bench; or by the Justices in Eire, who went somtimes without the King, or any of his Justices, who when and where they came, had the prerogative of all Courts during their stay, which was but for short Sessions) & gave forth process of execution up∣on them, and medled not with any mors Causes, but onely within his verge, by the verdicts of Iurors inhabiting within the compass, as you may read in the Mirror, Lambert and others at larg. And why now all must come to
Westminster four timesyearly; and no cause, whe∣ther over or under 40 s. can be ended in any part of the King∣dom but there; for if under á Mutuatus shall lift it over, and all under colour of that Chapter of Magna Charta, which saith Common Pleas shall not follow the Kings Court (as his Bench, Chan∣cerie, and his Exchequer then did and ever might) but shall be kept in a certain place; which came to be Westmin∣ster-Hall since it was the Kings pleasure to have that Court (which was their pre∣rogative superindendent Court of Common Pleas, viz. for Appeals in such Pleas, by such as found themselvs grieved by partialities or delaies of their Countrey Commissaries, un∣to
that Court) kept in their own Hall, of their then dwel∣ling Mansion, as it continu∣ed untill White-Hall came in∣to the hands of King Henry 8. by Cardinall Woolsey his de∣linquencie, which (pleasing him better) he made his Court; and gave not onely Westmin∣ster-Hall, but also all the Pallace of
Westminster (that his Ancestors from Rufus to him, contented themselvs to dwell in) to be the Consisto∣ries of all his Courts, when he found it chargable to re∣move them, though he and his successors gained least by them. But now no King be∣ing, no Court that depended upon his Person, or his depu∣ties, or Commissaries, in re∣spect of their prerogative Ju∣dicaturereputed transcendent remedies for som transcendent Injuries committed and suffer∣ed amongst the people, can be necessarie, because triennial or more frequent Parliaments, and speciall Commissions of Oyer and Terminer to be granted them, when and as their Causes require, may better supply them and with more speed and Justice, and less charge and expence finish their Causes at or near their homes, then all, or any the Courts at Westminster ever did or could. But if the Keep∣ers of Englands Libertie be pleased to have any one or more Courts, or Judges to be superintendents above all o∣thers, besides Parliaments, and speciall Oyers and Termi∣ners,
Then they are to be de∣sired, to be also pleased to al∣low, and pay them sufficient Wages at their own cost, and not the peoples, as Kings did when their Commissarie Judg∣es were to have of never so many Parties in one Cause, but 12d to be divided amongst them, and that after the end of the suit, and not before: And a Pleader (though a Ser∣geant at Law) was sworn to plead as well as he could for his Master (now called his Cly∣ent, and counted his servant) and to abuse the Court with no fals, or more delatorie then necessarie Pleas, And was to have for every such Plea pleading, but six pencel; and for his sallarie or Wages, for his attendance in every Cause fromfirst to last, beginning to end, as the Court should think fit, considering the greatness of the Cause, and merit of the Pleader, &c. as you may read in the Mirror, p. 64. Now to return to your Mecha∣nicks, commonly (as you say) brought up illiterat: surely it cannot be unknown to you, that there are most common∣ly as many (if not more) Ma∣sters of Art in London that use Trades and handicrafts as practise Law at
Westminster, and compleater Retoritians, Logitians, Musitians, Arith∣metitians, Geometricians, A∣stronomers and Phisitians, all which are the severall liberall sciences, and the very Ency∣clopedie and summarie of all good and necessarie Arts andlearning: How then do you make it your consequence, that if all Commissarie Judges be not adored as you would have them; all learning and gentle extraction must be de∣based, but ignorant and sor∣did birth must ascend to the Chair? as if there were no learning but in Pedlers French and Law-Latin, the very dis∣guises of the Law, which hath no such need of them, as a foul face of a Mask, or an hangman of a Vizard; but contrariwise, much necessarie to be rid of those Curtains, which hide both the beautifull Shape, and material substance of it, from us, that it may appear (even to our under∣standings) more gloriously, more learnedly in plain Eng∣lish,
then in that Canting more obnoxious then that of beg∣gars, which would but cheat us of necessaries to sustain their lives; whilst Law-Cant∣ers cheat both us, and them, of all our livelihoods and li∣berties, to surfet themselvs with superfluities; by mak∣ing us all starvlings, pined with that extream of wants, the want of Justice: for put the case that those hotch-potch French, and Quelquechose La∣tin were banished, and the Law rendred in English (as Scriptures are which were hidden from us by Prelats, as our Law by Lawyers) would not all learning, and argu∣mentations in Law be as ne∣cessarie for the continual pre∣servation of mens lives and e∣states,and therefore continu∣ed in English as Sermons in Pulptis, and disputes in Schools and Universities, requisit for the salvation of our souls are? Nay would not School-Masters (to read and teach the Law in com∣mon Schools) beas ne¦cessarie in London, as Stu∣dents in the Inns of Court, or Chancerie, or as such have been (as you may read in the Lord Cooks Preamble upon Magna Charta) and did read upon Magna Charta, when it was read twice yearly in Churches, and 4 times yearly untill full Counties, untill the same King that assented to the making, and was sworne to the observing of Magna Charta, in the 9 year of hisRaign, by the advice of his Chief Justice Hugh d'Burgo (whose advice and his follow∣ers ever led Kings to ruine, and Subjects to hazards) by his special Writ in the 19 year of his Raign, prohibited the said publick reading, and teaching, (as you may read in the same place.) Did not the Eunuch understand the Language he read, yet want∣ed Philip to interpret the meaning? And did not God send Philip to that end? So no doubt (although the Law be Englished) the most part of English people will be Eu∣nuchs in their understanding of it so fully as they ought, untill, and but whilst there be Philips to expound it? for it is too great a Studie for men
otherwise imployed, to be ex∣pert in; to resolv Causes which you call Intricate, As you would make it for Coblers to dilucidate texts, which many call hard Scriptures: And who can doubt it to be Gods spe∣ciall gift and vocation in Law to som, to be just and learn∣ed Lawyers, as to others to be sincere and Orthodox Di∣vines, while the world shall consist of bodies necessarie to be regulated, as of souls to be disciplined. And then for your gentle extractions, may not they be as they were ever wont (since Marriages were ordained in Heaven, may not a Judg bestow his daughter upon a Citizen, and a Citizen his upon a Judg, or an Earl, (as we have seen usuall): butby your allegation that there is a general disesteem of gen∣trie more now then from the beginning of the World, which Mr. Lilburn can be no cause of: It is manifest you charge the present Govern∣ment as faultie for suffering such a disesteem to be among the people, wherein you do but traduce and wrong the State, that neither desire, nor countenance any such thing, but when gentrie (for the most part) grows dege∣nerat, and nobilitie debas∣eth it self, Corruptio unius est generatio alterius: when Lords turn Boors and simplicians, let Clowns turn Lords and Politicians; And let him that will carp at the Vicissitude of things, which divine provi∣dence
hath ordained, blame neither State in generall, nor persons in particular, but conceiv rather, that Ablatâ Causâ tollitur effectus; when vertue faileth, the honor fol∣loweth; when God took his holy Spirit from Saul, both Spirit and Majestie were trans∣ferred to David in a larger measure; and therupon be you further answered by an Hea∣then: Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis: Times are changed, and we therein: By whom, is manifest; but how, and when, are Arcana Dei: Forbidden secrets, im∣putable by such as suffer there∣in, to their sins; and there∣fore you shew your self in this point, not an Alter Ca∣to, but an
Altercator: not awise man but a wrangler: Whilst you might observ further, that God never took his holy Spirit from whom he gave it, but for their abusing, or not using that power which accompanied it, as they ought, whereby they provoked him, as when he said: It repent∣eth me that I have set up Saul to be King: 1 Sam 15.11. When Saul spared Agag, and his fat Oxen, &c. which God commanded to be destroyed: So when
Englands Kings and Lords made wrong use of their Judicature and power which he and his people had given them; was it not time for God himself, to justifie himself and his people? When they and their subordinate Judges connived togetherwith such men as God describ∣ed by his Prophet Jeremiah to be his enemies, saying: Among my people are found wicked men, they lay wait, as he that setteth snares, they set a trap, they oath men, and as a Cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of de∣ceits, therefore they are be∣come great and waxen rich; they are waxen fat, they shine; ye, they overpass the deeds of the wicked, they Judg not the Cause of the Fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needie do they not Judg: shall I not visit for these things (saith the Lord)? shall not my soul be avenged upon such a generation as this? Jer. 5. v. 26. were there ever in Israel such waylayers, snare-setters, trap∣setters,
& men-catchers, as were the Scribes & Pharises, who concealed the law (wch God made for his people) from his people & assumed the exposition there∣of to be proper to themselvs only, and thereby snared, trapped, and caught the peo∣ple as they pleased; made way for themselvs to becom great, rich, fat and shine; which exposition was but of their own naturall language, which their Countrey-men understood, or might as well as they, yet our Saviour cal∣led them a generation of vi∣pers, &c. that laid heavie yoaks upon their brethren, &c. Did not our Judges and Atturneyes in England ex∣ceed them, that not onely concealed the Laws of God,and this Land, made for this people, from this people? though partly published in English (as our Statute Laws are) whereof nevertheless they assume the exposition to themselvs; howbeit rational English-men may understand them as well as they; but al∣so barbarized that part of our Law which is called, and ought to be common, so that they have made it proper to themselvs onely, because no other linguist (howsoever learned) can understand it, but onely they that made it such for that purpose, where∣by they snare, and trap all men as they list, and their Legion Gaolers, Catch-poles, setters, &c. (who glorie e∣ven in those names, and are
rich by those meanes) catch, and imprison all Debtors, and most of them to death, con∣trary to all Law, but what they made and procured against Magna Charta, and maintain (though repealed) against the Petition of Right, and above 20. Statutes, all Confirmati∣ons of Magna Charta. Do the Judges of England, judg the Cause of the Fatherless? the Orphans of London can tell you no. Do they judg the right of the needie? the Wi∣dows, the Fatherless, and all that sue in formâ pauperis, nay they that beg, rob, and steal to boot, with those that starv for need, can tell you no. And shall not God be as good as his word? Shall not his soul be avenged upon this genera∣tion?yea, no doubt, and therefore Judgment began at the House of the Lord, which King, Lords and Bish∣ops, that parted the peoples spoyls, neglected Achan and his Wedg; made all covetous gripers more griping, Regis ad exemplum; and all men more offenders because the greatest most thrived, and were never punished. There∣fore Kings, Lords, &c. whose extractions for Gentrie were ever esteemed best; And ma∣ny Bishops well descended, laying aside their vertues, who shall blame God for lay∣ing their honor in the dust? but let all that love the present State, and Government of England, wish the Keepers of the Libertie thereof, take heedin time they do not the same things themselvs, they have condemned in others, of whose punishments God hath made them his Instruments; for we are sure that the Judg∣ment of God is according to truth, against them which commit such things; 2. Rom. 2. Let them not overpass the deeds of the wicked, by not punishing them which they finde to be such, yea, and e∣specially the wickedest of them, even such as none can be so wicked; Judges that persevere in injustice, who by suffering such offenders, be∣com not onely the committers of their offences, but superla∣tive offenders, whom God hath none above them to cor∣rect, but himself, which hetherefore usually doth, by raising Wars against them, and enemies unto them, as well of their own Nation, nay their own Children, as others; and as well Insideators of their wayes to, and at their dores, and assacinates in their houses, as adversaries in the Field. And as for your self Sir, may not we say of you, as Jeremie said of som in his time: A Wonderfull and hor∣rible thing is committed in the Land, that Prophets Prophe∣sie falsly, &c. For what do you els when you say, you are obliged, as all men are, to reprov sin wheresoever you finde it, and yet you justifie and magnifie such Judges as the true Prophet reproveth. Take heed therefore how youuse your tertiam Linguam (as Walterfensis cals it) which by lying and slandering, either by way of adulation, as you do the Judges, or detraction, as you do Mr. Lilburn: the partie that so doth, abuseth three persons at once, viz. the Speaker, the hearer, and he that is spoken of: And such tongues (saith the same Au∣thor) had the Prophets that were slain; Doeg, that was re∣jected, and Saul that slew himself: And such tongues St. Bernard cals triplicit, for the same reason; and saith, that such Sycophants as use them, have the Devil in their tongues, and Auditors in their eares, and a consenter in their hearts. And for sordid births (except I knew yours) I know
not what to say to you; but suppose the tree may be known by the fruit, and well do I know, that as London, and other Cities, ever had Mechanicks of as great and noble extractions, as England yielded, so the Barrs at West∣minster ever hitherto had long-roabed men of as pro∣miscuous originals, as huma∣nitie afforded: And of Lon∣don births at this present, there be vertuous and honorable Chair-men at Westminster, as e converso, there be of Judg∣es sons, hopefull Apprentises in London. Where you finde
Coblers in Pulpits, it is be∣cause the Divines are out. And where you say Plow-men ride to Sessions instead of Ju∣stices of Peace; there can beno Sessions without both, viz. Knights or Esquires to be Justices, and Plow men, (which are the best kinde of free men in England) to be Jurors. And as Jurors are there, and elswhere the more real Judges, so is their calling far antienter, for sokmen were long before Justices of Peace in England; And soccage was ever a better tenure then
Esucage, or Knights service. But a Justice of Peace, and a Plow-man do well together, not onely in Quarter-sessions, but in constant hous-holds; and the eminentest, best ex∣tracted Knights and Esquires, as they have ever been the best hous-keepers, so they have been the bountifulest cherishers and countenancersof their Plow-men in their most necessarie calling for the Worlds sustenance: and have not scorned to put their hands to their own plows, as Kings, and Lords have vouchsafed their names, and associacions to their Subjects, in their trades and handicrafts, to countenance, commerce and traffique. So not finding any more of your Pamphlet necessarie for me to answer, as this much was, for my reason given you in the title page thereof. I bid you heartily farewell. From my lodging in Mr. Mondays house upon Clerkenwell-Green, July 1650. FINIS.
THE CRIE OF BLOOD: OR, A Confutation of those Thirteene Reasons of the Feli∣cers at Westminster, for the mainte∣nance of their illegall Capias for Debt. By which is discovered the great benefit and freedome that will accrew to the people of the Common wealth by the reformation of that de∣structive Law. Luk. 11.46. Woe unto you Lawyars, for ye lade men with burthens grievous to be borne, &c. By Joht Jones of Neyath in Com Brecon. Gent. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Matthewes, at the Cock in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1653.
To his Excellence OLIVER CROMWEL, Lord General of the puis∣sant Armie of the PARLA∣MENT of ENGLAND. Renowned Sir!
AS your Com∣mand is gene∣ral, so are your cares, troubles, sufferings, actions and endeavors allgeneral, for the general good of this Nation in ge∣neral: Nor is the case and number of the Prisoners for Debt in England and Wales, for whom you have been, and are a sol∣licitous, although yet im∣prosperous mediator to the Hous of Parlament so small a particular, but that as the prudent King
Philip of Macedon, who accompted his bodie but small to the rest of his en∣dowments, and knewit to be mortal, desired to be dailie remembred he was mortal, to the end he should not more glorie in what he had well done, than persevere in well-doing, and fi∣nishing his wel-begun enterprises; that so he might immortalise his fame, and illustrate the faculties of his immortal virtues, that posteritie might speak of him, not like Pythagorists of their master, ipse dixit, but
ipsefecit; nay more, ipse per∣fecit. I hope likewise your Excellence will not be offended with me one of the heartiest, though of the meanest of your Honors wel-wishers, to mind you of the neg∣lected miseries of the said prisoners now, more then ever, likelier to be continued and increased then relieved, or abated by the generation of Lawyers overswaying the mildeness of thoseParlament Members that have long promised you to be merciful to such Prisoners, and to hasten their enlargement out of their wrongful imprisonments; which, if you see performed, as hereafter is desired, wil be an action of no less Divinitie then Charitie, and no lesse profit then Honour to your self in particular, and the Common-wealth in general. The Officers inLaw have latelie presen∣ted the Parlament with 13. Reasons the maintenance of Arrests and Imprisonment for Debt, contrarie to Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right, as I have oftsoons proved elswhere, and re∣pugnant even to Reason it self, as I have here fol∣lowing farther declared in answer to their said Reasons in the Prisoner's behalf; in which, and whose names I likewise humbly dedicate the same to your Honor, with a copie of the said Reasons hereunto first annexed as it came to my hands, and next an answer to their preamble: and afterward particular an∣swers to their particular Ratiocinations: and lastly, the Prisoner's humble Petition to your Honor; all which I could not have readie be∣fore Colonel Pride's de∣parture (whom Godprosper in your Service, and the Common-wealth's, whose welfare hee preferreth above all worldlie ends) but have now presumed to send them unto you; beseech∣ing your Honor that your Lieutenant General, Colonel Fleetwood, (a man of no less worth then eminence) or some other like publik spirit may act in this matter, and others of the like nature in your Honor'sabsence according to your directions, and the people's necessitie from time to time, that no op∣portunitie bee loft, and more lives of Prisoners bee saved, and your care thereof to the uttermost expessed. The Lord President of the Council of State, and Col. Martin are con∣ceived to bee no less willing then able to procure such a Commission as the Petitioners desire, and Law would afford, if your Honor would be pleased to write to them, which I humblie submit to your Honor's consideration. So wisheth your dailie Orator, John Jones.
REASONS for the con∣tinuance of the process of Arrests, for the good of the Common-wealth.
THe proceedings by waie of Arrest at the King's Suit; and in all actions that were Quare vi & Armis, between the subjects, are as an∣cient as the Common Law of this Land; but the process for the people in other Actions, was Summons, Attachment, and distress, which Cours, as to re∣cover Debts, did prove dela∣torie,and manie times fruitless, to the great hinderance of Mar∣chandise, and other Commerce in this Nation; and therefore former Parliaments did pro∣vide as appears by divers Sta∣tutes) the writ of Capias to an Arrest as a full remedie, and most necessarie for this Common-wealth. 3 Rep. 12. Herbert's Case. 52 Hen. 3. in Accomp. 1267.25 Edw. 3. c. 17. An. Dom. 1350. 1. Becaus attaching the per∣son doth secure the Petitioner's debt, either by present paiment, or causing other satisfaction, which the proceedings by sum∣mons do not; and as a man will give all for his life, so hee will do much for his libertie.
2. When men are deteined upon the Arrest (which is but seldom, for few are arrested in comparison, and then) it is ordi∣narilie but for a short time, until they have given securitie to an∣swer the Action, or som warrant to appear. 3. If men may not proceed by Arrest, it will much hinder Trade, and other dealings; for men will not adventure to trust, where there is much libertie for the debtor to stand out; and Merchants, and Trades men manie times look upon the Per∣son as the best securitie, and the remedie by Arrest, the speediest to gain their debts; without which Trade will necessarilie decaie.
4. The process to Arrest, doth end most suits before the Person bee attached, and before appearance, as experience doth shew; for when men will not regard a summons, they will take cours before they will suffer an Arrest, 52 Hen. 3. cap. 23. 5. Men will take occasion from the summons (as formerlie they have done) to be gon from one Countrie to another, and to make awaie their estates, and though the Plaintiff know it, yet hee cannot help himself, which the Arrest doth prevent: And the Law-makers of this Land have ever held it more reasonable to provide for the satisfaction of the Creditor, then the libertie of the Debtor.
6. England is an Island compassed with manie Port Towns, where there are manie Merchants, and men that go abroad, and trade by Sea, who buie wares upon Credit; there wil bee continual occasion of suits against divers persons of this sort, who will not much regard the summons, but will betake themselves, and their e∣states, to Sea again, and the Creditor can have no remedie; whereas if the parties maie bee Attached, they wil make satis∣faction.
7. Whereas divers trades∣men subsist upon their Credits, and take up great summes of Monie, for which they can give no other securitie then theirpersons, and by advantage thereof, manie times attin to great estates; but if the pro∣cess of arrest bee taken awaie, they can hope no more to bee in∣trusted, which apparentlie tend's to their ruine. 8. And that proceedings by Arrest maie not seem at all cruel, or unjust; wee find both presidents, and approbation of the like, and greater severitie in the Old and New Testament; as selling the Debtor, his wife and children, and all that hee had to make paiment, and of taking, and casting into prison for debt, until the utmost farthing were paid: And yet this cours was not condemn'd amongst the
Romanes, (so much they lovedJustice) nor by Christ himself in the New Testament, who bid's agree with thy adversarie before thou com to the Judg: And God, who will have that which is right to be don among men, was verie careful that his own people should paie their debts; and therefore if anie were indebted, though they were poor, and could not paie, yet the Creditor might take the Debtor, and his Children to bee his ser∣vants and bond-men; and might take their Garments from them, and the bedding whereon they did lie, from under them, which was a far greater punishment then our light Ar∣rests; for the Prison, with us, is but a gage, or pledg, until
the defendant take cours to an∣swer the Action. Mat. 5.25. Mat. 18.30. 2 Kings 4.7. Levit. 25.39. Prov. 20.16. Prov. 22.27.
9. Men ordinarilie begin Suits upon necessitie, and Deb∣tors generallie are called upon before anie suit is commenced: which indeed is in the nature of a summons; but yet neither this, nor the writ of summons doth drive men to take anie cours, un∣til the process of Arrest issue forth, being more compulsorie, and a more speedie remedie for the Creditor, then the milde, and gentle summons was found to bee, (as appear's by sundrie Statutes, 19 Hen. 7. cap. 9.) which are more provisional forthe Creditor, who is alwaies out of his monie, then for the Deb∣tor, who seldom well spent it, or hath care to repaie it.
10. And if by anie new waie, upon meer summons onlie, and default, Judgment shall bee had before appearance, (which cours the Law doth not countenance) then the grand pillar of our Common Law, the Trial by 12. Men (which the Law doth much honor and favor) will fall to the ground; for much business will rest whollie upon the Affi∣david of a summoner, or the like, which will bee a means to multi∣plie suits, and is an unsure cours, and will induce more perjurie into this Nation, then our Law would ever before this timegive an inlett unto: And therefore former Parlaments providing against delaies by summons, did not give Judg∣ment upon default, but found out a speedie remedie by Arrest to bring the Defendant to his answer.
11. By the Law a Capias ad satisfaciendum, doth not lie, but where there is a Capias ad satisfaciendum first: and there is as great reason and e∣quitie for the Arrest to answer before Judgment, as for the Arrest to satisfie after Judg∣ment, becaus the Capias ad respondend. doth compel the defendant to take notice of the action, to which hee maie plead, if hee will, and doth secure himhim that hee shall not start, so that when the Capias ad satis∣faciendum doth issue forth, there is left no color of just ex∣ception for the defendant: but on the other side, if Judg∣ment shall bee entred upon a sup∣posed summons, there will bee manie grievous complaints, and the succeeding evils will hardlie bee redressed; manie will bee undon, and suits will bee multiplied.
12. Experience doth shew that the benefit of the process of Arrest hath been verie great to this Common wealth: and all the Statutes have mentioned it from time to time, and have given a lar∣ger extent unto it, then be∣foreit had, and none have abridged it in anie thing, which is now of great anti∣quitie, having been for ma∣nie Ages the best remedie (for the People to recover their Debts, and to compose other differences) that our An∣cestors could devise. Anno Dom. 1267, 1350.
13. Lastlie, The subtiltie and subterfuges of Debtors having made the process of Arrest now more neces∣sarie then formerlie, there will be reason rather to add to the remedies provided for the Creditors in former Parlaments, then to dimi∣nish them: And if anie in∣conveniencie by this so ne∣cessariea cours happen to the Debtor, yet will the taking it awaie prove more preju∣dicial to the Plaintiff, who is the partie inju∣red, and in reason his case to be pre∣ferred, and fa∣vored.
THE CRIE of BLOUD. THE first part of this Preamble is far from the matter: Wee confess, Ar∣rests by Capias, without Summons, for Trea∣sons, Murthers, Felonies, and Trespasses, don Vi & Armis, or
Contra pacem, or Formam Statuti, as Extortions, and all Frauds, and Injustice, don under color of Office and Justice, to bee lawful, and as antient as the Common Law of this Land; and more antient too, becaus such offences were committed beforethe Laws were written, or made in those cases, or thought upon, upon, to punish the past, and prevent the future. By the Law, wee know the sin that was be∣fore it; and by the due cours of Law, the cours of sin ought to bee staied or corrected. But what is this to a debtor, which groweth neither vi & Armis, nor contra Pacem, nor contra Formam Statuti? for recoverie whereof, against able debtors, the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 18. And the Common Law before that, provided remedies, the process, or proceedings whereof were by summons, at∣tachment & distress, (as our ad∣versaries confess) which cours, if Antiquitie can meliorate, is far antienter then the Capias for debt, which they make no elder then the repealed Statute that gave it, 25
Ed. 3.17. which thesame King annulled the 3. and
17. years next after, viz. 28. and 42. of his Reign. The delato∣riness alleged in the cours of Summons, is a deceitful infor∣mation, and an untrue report made to the High Court of Par∣lament; which were it to an inferior Judicature, deserveth no less punishment, then the Informers, to bee imprisoned a year, silenced for ever, and fi∣ned, and ransomed at the State's pleasure, Westm. 1. cap. 29.3 Ed. 1. For the truth is, there can bee no speedier waie devised, considering Actions of Debt by Common Law, and many Sta∣tutes, ought to bee laid in the proper Countie wherein the Defendant dwelleth, and hath, or hath not wherewith to paie; where the Sheriff having his Ju∣stices, which is the onely proper writ for debt, is a Commission tohold plea above fortie shillings, and is to summon, attach, and distrein, and do execution ac∣cording to the verdict of the Jurie, if in an Hundred Court, in three weeks, allowing fifteen daies, as Law requireth, between Process and Process; which three weeks between Court and Court, may fully afford, and that is no long delaie, in com∣parison of what is usual at Westminster: or if in the Coun∣tie Court, three moneths, or twelv weeks doth the same. But if the Action bee laid in, or re∣moved to the Common Pleas at
Westminster, (which ought not to bee don, or suffered, with∣out injustice, or partialitie, pro∣ved, not alleged in the Sheriff) they cannot determine the Acti∣on under three Terms, which is not the fault of the cours of Summons, which requireth butfifteen daies between Process and Process; but the fault (more then delatorie) of the cours at Westminster, which requireth long Vacations between Term and Term, and removeth more Causes thither in one Term, or Vacation, then they can end in seven.
And where they saie, Sum∣mons are many times fruitless; that is never, except the Debtor hath nothing to bee summoned by, & so ought not by any Chri∣stian Law, to bee looked after, but with eies of charitie. And why Merchandise and Com∣merce in this Nation should bee hindered for want of a Capias, to arrest and imprison non-sol∣vents to death, cannot bee tru∣ly demonstrated by any Christi∣an reason, since all men know, that all other Nations as well Heathens, as Christians, who never admitted so impious a re∣medie to recover debts, as the Capias, finde no hinderance of Trade or Commerce amongst them, but onely the Trade of Lawyers and Liers, whereof the fewer make the better Common-wealth.
That former Parlaments pro∣vided the Capias for debts, as a full and most necessarie remedie for this Common-wealth; and that divers Statutes affirm so much, appeareth to bee these men's additions to their former mis-informations, and endea∣vors, to abuse this Honorable Parlament: For it was but one Statute that ever provided this Capias, and that is long since repealed as aforesaid, and so continueth by more then thir∣tie three Parlaments and Sta∣tutes. Neither doth that Statute shew any caus for its provision,making, beeing, or necessitie of its continuance, or hath any Preamble at all (as all necessa∣rie Introductions of Law usual∣ly have) but pinneth it self to the Statute made for Accompt∣ants, viz. Lords, Bailiffs, Rent-gatherers, and servants, that cheated their Masters of their rents, and monies committed to their trust, to collect and ac∣compt for, contrarie to all Laws, Justice, Equitie, Mercie, and common honestie; all which they falsified, and conver∣ted their Master's monies to their own use; which to answer unto by due cours of Law, they com∣monly durst not abide, for shame, more then for the debt, and therefore became Fugitives from their acquain∣ance: so that the Capias was necessarie to staie, and fetch them to accompt with their Masters.But this pinning, or relating this Statute to that, seemeth to bee (as Master Cook writeth thereof) the work of som cor∣rupt Lawyers, Members of that Parlament, that passed it unexa∣mined, except by a Committee, which they over-ruled; and that is in a few words, so hud∣dled up amongst other things, as they might bee as soon forgot∣ten by the hearers, as read by the Impostors: which practise they have used for the unspea∣kable advantage in all Parla∣ments that trusted them; God bless this from the like, and grant it bee not too late wish∣ed. Howsoever, that venerable Judge, and Autor of the Mir∣ror of Justice, pag. 283. ca. 5. sect. 7. condemneth this Capias, and de∣clareth it to bee contrarie to Law; and sheweth reasons therefore, both there, and
p. 108.where the Action for accompt is debated, and declared to bee mixt, in regard of the trust and deceit of the Accomptant, de∣serving therefore to bee prosecu∣ted so far, as to bee forced to an accompt: but for the debt, more then hee hath wherewith to satisfie, the Law requireth nothing of him that hath no∣thing; and giveth no recoverie, nor other remedie then revenge, which God calleth his own. And both this Author, and the Lord Coke, in the Third part of his Institutes, agree, that the acting and mainteining of things contrarie to Law, as Law, or lawful, is a subversion of the Law, and that is no less then High Treason against this State and Common-wealth; which case is our adversaries, whom wee hereby impeach thereof, and crave direction and
assistance, to indict and prose∣cute them according to the known Laws in that behalf; So far as they may not lose the honor of their Antiquitie, which they press so much for; and wee confess, that for the mysteries of its craft, it hath exceeded the Sciences of all their Progenitors in their several fa∣culties; for in the art of men∣catching, there are of them ma∣ny one, who exceed, 1. Three Bum-Bailies, who by virtue of their Capias, can com∣monly catch but one by the poll at once, nor that without vi & Armis, and loss, or hazard of lives, by the furie of their pas∣sions, while our Chamber-Offi∣cer can make threescore Capises to catch five times threescore persons without any danger of his own, except by the wrath of God, which few of them
ever feared, but are all embold∣ned by his patience, to attempt the catching of a whole Par∣lament of most wise Senators at once, to becom subject in them∣selvs, or their posterities, to this Purs-net, perswading them to father, and maintein this Ba∣stard Capias, which knoweth no difference between a Parlament∣man, and another, or between his friend and his foe. 2. In the Art of Ambition, they exceed their Father the Devil, who did but attempt to bee Lord of Hosts, whilst these men becom Hosts of Lords, and still covet to enlarge their Do∣minions. 3. In the Art of Murthering, they exceed their brother Cain, who killed but one Abel in all his life time, and for that one offence, had the curs of God upon him and his seed for ever;
while these men daily murther many of their brethren with fals Judgments, and solace themselves with Angels, desile their hands, and fill them with bloud, yet would bee heard in Parlament, when God telleth them hee will not hear them, Isa. 1.15. and bid's them fill up the measure of their Fathers, that upon them may com all the righteous bloud of the Earth, from the bloud of Abel, &c. Mat.
23.32.35. and Luke 11.50, 51. concluding v. 52. Wo unto you Lawyers, for you have taken away the key of knowledg; you entred not in your selves, and them that were entring in, you hindered: Which Scripture, wee conceiv, may bee fitly applied to our English Lawyers, who have taken away the English of our Laws, which was the key of our know∣ledg therein; And entred notinto the truth thereof them∣selvs; and them that would, they hindered, until this hap∣pie Parlament righted us in that, sore against their wils, and will as wee hope, and they fear, fur∣ther right and free us from their bondage, finding that now they have filled the measure of their Fathers, that upon them may com, and from them may bee required all the righteous bloud of prisoners for debt, from the bloud of the first Free-man of England, imprisoned for that caus, to the bloud of the last that shall perish in prison for the same.
4. In the Art of Treason, they exceed Judas, who with one kiss, betraied but one Ma∣ster, to a death fore-ordeined by God's Providence, for the life of the world, except his desperate betraier, and other un∣believer'schildren of perdition; while these men by their daily prevarication, and changing their notes, since they have de∣serted the Canonical Organs, and Psalmistical Harmonies, to the tune of the Organical Canons, shrill Trumpets, and ratling Drums, siding with the strongest Faction in Warrs, as with the richest partie in Peace, till they have betraied three Common-wealths to manifold deaths, avoidable by the mercie of God, and Praiers of men, except these impenitents that harden them∣selves in their wickedness, do stir up others to second them of seditious and implacable spirits, sons of Belial. 5. In the art of Impostors, they exceed the Pope, and
Ma∣homet, who by their impostures endeavored but to counterfeit Christ's Miracles, and make thosecounterfeits sailable at high rates, thereby to disestimate his truth, and prefer their own in∣ventions, and to eclips his kingdom of grace, that they might ostentate themselves in too of Vain glorie; whilst these men having disguised our Lawes in Forraign languages, made them vendible to our selves at their own prices, and thereby have subjected the seven liberal Sciences, and three free King∣dom's of several free Nations, to their unlimitable impudence, which being over-ruled for the language they intend to main∣tain, and augment in price and jurisdiction, and settle them∣selves in one tyrannical Monar∣chie, as arbitrarie, as intolerable, and as slavish, as mercinarie. And contrarie to Magna Charta, and were ever since the Court called the Upper Bench, hath imposed
its judicature in matters of Debt, and other Common Pleas, ex∣preslie forbidden them, and taken out of their jurisdiction; and both it, and the Common Pleas, impose their Judicature in cases of Tithes, expreslie taken out of their jurisdiction by several Sta∣tutes, and given to the spiritual Courts, which (though now suppressed) their jurisdiction ought not to bee resumed but by the Parlament, nor executed without an Act for that end. 6. In the Art of Perjurie; they infinitelie exceed
Peter, who forswore himself but once, and when he heard the Cock crow, went out from the Maid that urged him, wept bitterlie, repen∣ted him of his sin, and resolved to do so no more: whilst these men forswear themselves dailie; and when they hear their Pockets ring, go in to their Wenches,with whom they interchange deceitful imbraces, and seem to laugh merrilie, persevere in their wickedness, and implore a Parlament to countenance, and continue them in condition to do so still.
7, 8, & 9. In the several Arts of Extortion. Bribing, and Pre∣varication, they exceed the no∣torious Judges, De'Burgo Tre∣silian, Bremble, Thorpe, &c. as well in their takings, as in their num∣bers; for as those were few to their manie, and Thorp's taking was but 100 l. from manie hands; how manie hundred pounds taketh one of them from one hand? wee can witness too well, and others may compute by the increas of the price of an habeas Corpus, Error, &c. And the necessitie of divers parties to make frequent uses those in∣struments, more to avoid Justice,then to desire it: whereby the prevarication, Ambodextership, and Legerdemain of these men dailie appeareth more and more by their impairing of their Cli∣ents to improve themselves; manie men of manie thousands beeing brought suddenlie to nothing, and most of them from nothing to manie thousands per annum. 10. In the Art of Commuta∣tion they exceed both Cano∣nists, and Civilians, who com∣muted corporal penances to pe∣cuniarie, paiable out of perso∣nal estates, while these men change Treasons to trespasses, and Trespasses to treasons at their pleasure, and make debt guiltie of death, surer, though somtimes slower then Treason, or Misdemeanor whatsoever, and men's estates as well real, as personal whollie their own.
11. In the Art of Transfor∣mationthey exceed Chamelions, who can bee of anie colour but white, expressed in Scripture to bee the immaculate investiture of Angels: These men can seem of all colours to suit with all pre∣dominations, though never so divers, and all contraries, and turn the Law for all their turns, and arrogate most trust when they are most treacherous, and face themselves with the truth of Saints, when they are as fals as Devils. 12. In the Art of Counter∣feiting, they exceed both Alchi∣mists, and Coyners, of whom the first counterfeit, but Gold, and Silver, and turn more Gold to brass, and Silver to lead, then Copper to Gold, or Lead to Silver: And the second Coun∣terfeit, but Pictures, whilst these men counterfeit Justice, Equitie, and Lawes, more concernable
then Metals, to God and Man; and fix mens substances, more considerable then their pictures, upon themselvs, and their heirs. 13, & 14. In the Arts of For∣gerie, and Fraud, they exceed all Coiners of fals Monies, and Counterfeiters of Letters, and Tokens; whom, if they catch with such misdeameanors, they somtimes severelie punish, and somtimes pass over sleightlie, or excuse artificiallie, as may most conduce to their profit, or con∣cur with their practise, whilst they themselvs make it a chief part of their office to forge the returns of Sheriffs and Coroners of several Writs, and to file them for true Records, and due pro∣ceedings of Law; whereupon follow Judgments, Executions, and Imprisonments to manie thousands, to their utter undo∣ing
and for want of summons, Attachments, and exigents dulie executed, and returned by those Officers who never see them, yet are answerable by Law for those fals Returns made unknown to them, and the Forgers thereof, as of all other faudulent deeds which cannot be drawn, ingros∣sed, antedated, and contrived advisedlie without them, or som of their Counsels, ought to bee punished for the same, for which they are never questioned; but contracting the greatest Forge∣ries, wherein they are actors, pass for good deeds and online those trifles that want their skill, and privitie, are made great, or dear offences. 15. In the Art of Lying they exceed the men of Creet, and Cho∣zeba, who (as is written, 1 Chron. 4.22.) were also Ancient, as these men would be accompted;
for those but as Men and Hea∣thens, lied but to men in hu∣mane things, whilst these men, as Devils, lie unto God, and in contempt of his Divine Word, and Deitie, as shall appear here∣after. 16. In the art of Simonie, they exceed Simon himself, who would have bought, for his monie, the Gifts of the Holie Ghost, and intending the Apostles fa∣vor, purchased their indigna∣tion: whilst these men have, with their Monie's, purchased their Offices, and all the said gifts of the Devil, to execute them, and by the same endeavor to acquire the favor of manie o∣ther corrupt members, who (as wee hope) shall not bee suffered long to abuse the rest of this hap∣pie Parlament.
17. and 18. In the arts of Ra∣pacitie, and Tenacitie, th Catchpols and Gaolers exceed Lions, and Tygers, and their Gaols and Dungeons Hea∣ven, and Hell, for Lions will favor their friends, and Ti∣gers their neighbors. And Heaven wll neither take, nor receiv, anie but God's Elect; nor Hell anie but Reprobates; but Catchpols, Gaolers, and their Gaols catch, and receiv all men they can sue, and count all too few, and keep them in their pawes, and caves, while they are worth a farthing. And thus having suppeditated their Proëm with eighteen de∣scriptions of their properties that appropriate to themselvs all our proprieties, and so super∣numerated their 13 fals Reasons for the supportation of their innumerable falsities, wee shall descend to sift those Reasons as followeth.
1. The first is all fals; for the attaching of persons secureth no part of the Plaintiffs debts by paiment, or other satisfaction, but commonly their debtors bo∣dies to miserable deaths, and their estates from their heirs and creditors, to Lawyers and Officers: For the proceedings by Summons, wee have answe∣red before. And for Prisoners that are able to give for their libertie ot their Gaolers, they have as much as they desire and paie for out of their creditors rights; and their own Frie, and not the Plaintiffs, or their heirs, have their Gaoler's leavings.
2. The second is like the first; for it is not a few, that are de∣teined for debt, when Sir Jo. Lenthal hath in his custodie or list one thousand persons; the Warden of the Fleet as many, the Gaols of London, Westminster,and Liberties adjoining, few less; and in the rest of all the Gaols of England and Wales, will bee found many more. They that accompt so many few, de∣clare their desire is to have all the Free-men of England and Wales (except themselves) in the same case; why? and with whom els do they make the comparison, but becaus they conceiv there are more persons out of prison, then in; their detention is not seldom, but frequent, and so are murthers, and hurts, committed as well before, and at, as after arrests; by reason thereof, they are not deteined for a short time, but ordinarily till death as aforesaid: Warrant of Atturnie, if they need any Atturnies, they ought to give to whom they pleas, and not to whom any Court appoin∣teth. And for appearance, no
Free-man oweth it to any Court out of his Decenarie, Hundred, or Countie.
3. The third is but a block∣head-ship's Proëm, as untrue as the former, and so demonstra∣ted in our answer thereunto be∣fore. No Trade but Lawyers, nor such, but Westmonasterians, will bee hindered by taking away the Capias. It was the lawless use thereof, that caused more Usurers then Merchants, to look after men's persons: It ne∣ver was, nor could bee the spee∣diest waie for Plaintiffs to gain their debts, but the most dela∣torie to recover, and the most readie and usual to lose them; so as the repetition of the decaie of Trade, if the Capias were taken off, is but tantologie for want of reason, and an abuse of Parlament, to bee offered such untruths, to hear, or lookupon, punishable as aforesaid.
4. The fourth is as bad as all the former; for the attach∣ing of a man's person, where hee hath neither means to paie, nor friends to bail, produceth no end but Imprisonment, Sum∣mons, and Attachments of men's goods, where they have to paie, conduce to the speediest end between Debtor and Cre∣ditor: Hee that hath of his own to paie, will regard Summons, lest if that hee bee attached, hee shall lose all, and if submitted to his Creditor's mercie, hee may save som. Hee that hath enough, or more then sufficient to paie his Creditors, of his own estate, will neither regard Sum∣mons, nor fear Arrest, but de∣sire it, beeing sure of what li∣bertie hee pleaseth, paying his Gaoler, and to leav what his Gaoler leaveth, to whom heelist, as aforesaid; whereby more Creditors are cheated, then by any other deceit, and more un∣don, then debtors of that kinde, who commonly live too plenti∣fully, and leav somthing, when their Creditors have nothing whereby to live, or whereof to leav.
5. The fifth is as untrue as the rest; for a debtor that is worth the Summoning, can live no where better then in his Decenarie where hee is best known, and hath his pledges answerable for his honestie; nor can hee transfer his estate to any other Countie but to his loss: And his avoiding the due cours of Law, is a misdemeanor that depriveth him of the benefit depriveth him of the benefit thereof; which beeing certified by a Testatum, a Capias of cours ensueth, to pursue him from Countie to Countie, till hee beefound, or outlawed; which was ever lawful against such as waved their Law and freedom, to answer it in its due cours; and such a Certificate of the Sheriff of that Countie whence hee fled, ought to make to the Chan∣cerie, whence hee had his Justi∣ces to determine the matter; and the Chancerie ought to send the Capias to the Sheriff in whose Countie hee doth latitare, & discurrere; and so the
alias Plures, Exigent, and Outlawrie, till hee bee forced to return him∣self to the first Sheriffs, to have his caus determined there by his Peers, as it ought: all which, affording fifteen daies between Process and Process, is feasible in half a year; and what hee shall bee then found to have left of his personal estate, his cre∣ditors must have all, and two parts of his real; with less thena tenth part of the fees and de∣laies used at Westminster: which old cours of Law beeing resto∣red, and so known, will make everie able debtor submit to Summons, and farther Process, especially Outlawries, more ter∣rible and odious then now, when they are but scare-crows, rever∣sable and extinguishable by their grantors, for their gain at their pleasures: For the debtor that is not worth the summoning, up on the Sheriffs return of
Non est inventus, & nihil habet, the Law is ended (as aforesaid) until God enable him. And in the interim, wheresoëver hee lurk∣eth, or liveth, by lawful endea∣vors, Cantabit vacuus coram la∣trone viator, no debtor justly in∣debted, can, or ought to bee suf∣fered by any just law, or equitie to make away his estate, before hee paie his just debts, for it is nothis own, but his creditor's; and such Conveiances ought to bee adjudged fraudulent, although the fraudulent makers of that fraudulent Statute, have inser∣ted the words bonafide, for them∣selvs, and their imps, who ne∣ver had good faith or honestie to expound for their profit, as a∣foresaid; for good faith can do no man wrong, but fals Law∣yer's interpretations thereof, and of the Law, commonly wrong all men, and enrich onely them∣selves. The Lord Coke in the Third part of his Institutes, upon the Writ de odio & atia, decla∣reth these men to bee liers that charge the Law, or its makers, with more regard of men's debts, then their liberties. 6. The sixth is of the same stuff, and in substance answered before. Do more Merchants trade out of
England by sea, be∣causit is an Island, then into it out of larger and Forrain lands, where the Capias for debt was never known? Do not these men buy wares upon trust, and trade to sea as often as the English? and having no Capias, have their creditors no Laws to recover their debts? is it not better to attach their debtor's goods, or their, then their bodies? And so hath London used to do by Cu∣stom, and other Towns and Ports ought to have don so as∣wel; and the Law of the Admi∣raltie hath its cours of Justice within its jurisdiction. Wil com∣mon Lawyers have no Law but their bastard the
Capias, to range about by Sea and Land, like its its Grandfather the Devil, seek∣ing whom it may devour? Nay, are not the words of the Writ of Summons, at the CommonLaw, directed to the Sheriff, which any Major, or chief Ma∣gistrate of any Corporation, may upon complaint direct to Sheriff or Sergeant; praecipe, &c. per bonos summonitores; that is, I command thee to summon A B, &c. by good Summonitors, &c. and have their names, &c, and this Writ before mee by such a daie: And to what end? but that the Summonitors beeing two, or more of the ablest Free∣men, or Pledges of the Jurisdi∣ction, undertaking the Sum∣mons, undertake the goods till the Attachment ensue, if they cannot end the matter before, as neighbors bound in charitie so to do. But these Westmonasteri∣ans abhor that, and seem neither to know, nor willing to admit any charitable end, or other Law, but their Capias to catch and bring all fish to their net.
7. The seventh is but a chip of the sixth, and answered be∣fore, with this addition. Is there no trust, but where the Capias is, or can thrust it self? If it bee the caus of trust, Ju∣stice, Equitie, &c. and such a caus, as without which none of these can subsist (as they saie it is) and both legal and neces∣sarie for this Common-wealth, that it seem's the onely Trustee thereof? Why is it not warran∣ted, or suffered by these men themselvs to peep into their Inns of Court, and Chancerie? pla∣ces pretended to bee egress and ingress of Law, Justice and E∣quitie, and known to take upon trust more then all the Mer∣chants of England can tell how to recover by the Capias against their persons, who make their Inns, and their Gaols of the up∣per Bench, and Fleet their San∣ctuaries,
more privileged then those that were so called and used by such debtors as made fraudulent gifts, feoffments, &c. and afterwards withdrew them∣selvs thither, untill the second Statute made the second year of Richard the second, granted a Capias to ferret out such Lati∣tants out of such Latebras; Such a ferret conceiv wee now, to bee necessarie for the Common-wealth, and especially for many undon Londoners, by trusting such debtors, or rather cheat∣ers, to fetch them out of their profane Asylums, the Fleet, Marshalsey, their Inns, &c. instead of that by them commended for the use of the Common-wealth, and yet commanded not to med∣dle with themselvs, or their ha∣bitations; as if they concluded themselvs and theirs, to bee no part thereof, though well knownto bee all forfeited thereunto. But how irrational they shew themselvs, when they offer rea∣sons to a most wise and circum∣spect Parlament, to persuade them that can onely bee profitable to all, which is so unwelcom to them, that they cannot endure their own beagles that carrie it abroad, to bee their Inmates an hour longer then while they slave and pump them, and so make them as fit to bee their Mass-Priests, as their prolling Proctors.
8. The eighth sheweth these men's desires, as well to pervert the Word of God, as to subvert the Laws of England, and decla∣reth their right as well to the Faggot, as to the Halter, and their fitness as well for Hell, as the Gallows. They blush not to saie, that they finde presidents and approbations in the Old andNew Testaments, of like pro∣ceedings, and greater cruelties against debtors, amongst the Jews, then is used by them and their Capias here: And those (saie they) were condemned, neither by the Romanes, that lo∣ved Justice, nor by Christ. The first Scripture they cite, is Matth. 5.25. where whosoëver is angrie with his brother without a caus, is advised to leav his gift before the Altar, and bee reconciled to his brother first, and then offer his gift, lest at any time the Adversarie de∣liver him to the Judg, and the Judge deliver him to the Officer, and hee bee cast into prison; where Christ saith unto him, Verily, I saie unto thee, thou shalt by no means com out, until thou paiest the utter most farthing: wherewith agreeth Lu. 12.58.59. and both with the Parable of the non-solvent ser∣vant,
Mat. 18.25. & all these placesconclude with the rest of the Scriptures, that the debt here meant to bee punished by impri∣sonment, was not a debt of monie borrowed for need, and lent for love, prophefied to bee don. Deut. 15.6. and commanded Matth. 5. and 42. And therefore beeing no action of sin by the Old and New Testament, was liable to no action of Law, ten∣ding to personal punishment or imprisonment; but the debt meant here, was indeed the du∣tie of the Usurer, Extorter, De∣ceiver, Hypocrite, &c. to for∣give their debtors their debts so accrued: But Usurie, Extortion, Briberie, &c. which were such heinous offences amongst the Jews, as still they are, or ought to bee with us, that they incur∣red mixt actions in Law wor∣thie of arrests and imprison∣ments, till the uttermost farthingwere paied, or restored, with amends; Levit. 6.2, 3, & 4, ex∣poundeth this debt to bee such cleerly, and no other. Our pe∣nal Laws for those offences, which make the principal debts void, and give the Plaintiff tre∣ble for damages, or according to the Judge's discretion, carrie shadow of that Justice. The Context in Matth. 5. decla∣ring our Savior's speeches to the Scribes and Phariees, elswhere called Lawyers, Extorters, Dis∣semblers, &c. and here redargu∣ed of their unrighteousness, and breaking of the Commande∣ments, which they adjudged death to others; accompting killing onely such as was don with the sword, and him to bee subject to the judgment, where they knew; that by their own law, men that killed in their own defence, had sanctuarie, & that theword Judgment emphatically proceeded with the word The, is always used for the general Judgment of God: wherefore Christ telling them, that killing extend's to him that is angrie with his brother without caus, and elswhere to him that suffe∣reth his brother to perish when hee may save him; much more then to Fals Judges, Extorters, Usurers, &c. who may finde them∣selves sufficientlie described in him to whom his Lord forgave all his debt; (which in the last vers of this Chapter (as fre∣quentlie elswhere) is called as well trespass, as debt, becaus mixt, and compounded with sin, more then borrowing, or lend∣ing of monie) until hee extorted from his fellow-servant, who ought nothing to him, but to his Lord, upon whom he had not like compassion, as his Lordhad upon himself, but grew an∣grie with his fellow-servant without caus, and cast him into prison; which, when his Lord heard, he was wroth, and deli∣vered the mad Extortor, not the meek Debtor to the tormenter, &c whereof let Extorters, U∣surers, &c. take better notice, and applie the said Scriptures to themselvs, and know that the Devil, called here emphaticallie the Adversarie, is he that deli∣vereth them (as the common accuser of sinners whom hee se∣duceth thereunto) to the Judg of Judges, and King of Kings, the God of Truth, Justice, and Mercie, who (except they say, and resolv to pay all, viz. re∣pent, and have like compassion upon their brethren, as they expect from him) will deliver them to the Officer, as saith
Mat∣thew the 5. Tormentor, as saithMatthew 18. viz. the Devil again, who supplieth all such offices, and delivereth all that are deli∣vered to him, to Hell, whence is no Redemption, till the utter∣most farthing bee paid, which is never to be don after the oil is out of the lamp, and the dore shut: Where contrariwise the Law of the Jews (which Christ saith hee came not to destroie, Mat. 5.17. and neither did, nor would alter, as appeareth,
Mat. 18.25.) did not imprison mo∣nie debtors at all, but sell them, and their wives and children, and all they had to their credi∣tors that were bound by the same law to keep, and finde them in their houses, and imploiments, not in prisons, and dungeons, without, and from all imploi∣ment but wickedness, as our Gaolers do us; nor as these men impiouslie allege, and belie theHolie Ghost, saying, That their creditors might take their deb∣tor's cloaths, and bed-cloaths from them; where the Text they cite, (Lev. 25.39.) saith, they must use them as brethren, hired servants, and sojorners (which we finde all the Old Testament over, had the trust, and charge, not onlie of their Master's estates, but of their children, and their wives, and wanted nothing suta∣ble, not onlie to their own ne∣cessities, but also to their ma∣ster's credits, and imployments. And debtors were to be kept so by vertue of their sale, but till the year of Jubilee, which, when it fell within seven years in the time of Moses, restored them to their libertie; for with∣out it, the seventh year they were to be restored, as appeareth, Deut. 15.1. &c. And in Jeremie's time, at the fixth years end, Jer.
34.14. Now doth the Capias, Arrests, and Imprisonments used by these men, hold anie analogie with the mercie, justice, susten. stentation, freedom, and hope of libertie in few years, which the Jewish law afforded to those debtors they sold to their Cre∣ditors? Compare, and finde as followeth: There the debtors had the mercie to be no Priso∣ners at all, but as hired servants, and sojorners: The Justice, to bee no bondmen which masters might use at their pleasures: The sustentation; to have food and raiment enough, and com∣potent to their conditions, and their masters callings: The freedom; to live, and love hus∣bands, wives, and children all together; to pray, feed sheep, and work comfortablie together in their masters houses, fields, vineyards, &c. with no less goodinstruction, and recreätion to themselves, then profit and plea∣sure their masters, and hope of full libertie to make use of those good instruments for their own best advange at six years end, if a Jubilee freed them no sooner. Contrariewise; here the poorest debtor hath the cruellest impri∣sonment; that is the rule of these men's mercie: The greatest cheater hath the greatest favor; that is their Justice: The susten∣tation wee would buy for our selvs at the best hand, while our monie last's, our Goalers take, or keep from us, to force us to buy half so much, and nothing so good of them, while wee have a pennie left; and after to starve; when others, for our Custom, would prolong our lives, with trust for a time, they will trust no poor man for a farthing; nor rich, but to fetch his monie. Our Freedom is not to the nextWard, nor in our own, to enjoy wives, or children, longer then they bring fees to the Gaoler; that when we have sold our cloaths, and bed-cloaths to feed our bloud-suckers, our common bed is the bare ground, till wee fa∣mish here, and our wives and children in the streets, and dit∣ches, do the like; hope of liber∣tie wee have none, but by such deaths; for our livelihoods are too little to pay our Fees from the dayes of our Arrests, to our Funeral: if anie attein to liber∣tie by some casualtie, hee is the wors while hee liveth for his Gaol education. Our Law is derived from the Romanes, who (as these men say) condemned not the Law of the Jewes con∣cerning Creditors, and Debtors; wee wish ours were as merciful; and so it was before and since Magna Charta, when it medled not with men's bodies that had
not wherewith to pay their debts, but relieved, and imploied them according to their endea∣vors, forgiving their debts, and believing that of our Savior; if you forgive not men's trespasses, neither will my Father forgive yours, Mat. 7.12. But these men that dare abuse the everlasting Word of the everliving God, and the fundamental Laws of this Land grounded thereupon, to mis-inform a Parlament to their own ends, notwithstanding they know wee have abundance of sound Divines to expound Scriptures, and some honest Lawyers, though no professors to explain Lawes. What shall wee think of these men's sinceri∣tie to be trusted with the making up, and keeping of Records con∣cerning the whole estates of the Common-wealth? but submit the consideration thereof to all interested therein.
Their 9. Reason pursueth the former in its Coin; for most untrue it is, That men alwaies begin suits (meaning by way of Capias, and Arrest) upon neces∣sities of injustice, that is to say; when no other trick will serv to bar men of their libertie to prosecute just suits for loss of lives, or estates of most concern∣ment; or for Treasons, felonies, or trespasses most notorious, committed by night, and defen∣ded by injustice, what is more common then to arrest the pro∣secutors for supposed debts of thousands of pounds, more then they are able to find bail for, until Trials, and Judgments bee carried against them in the cau∣ses they should follow by the same hands of Power and Justice, that they should prosecute, but cannot, being so prevented. And how manie are now imprisoned for supposed debts, which they never ought, or if they did, have paid, or which were not due at the time of the Arrest, &c. And what necessitie of Justice was to begin such suits? And what murther more wilful, more ma∣nifest, and more cruel, then to imprison men so till they die? And where they say, that most commonlie debtors have notice before any suit be commenced, why then do they debar sum∣mons, which is the right process of notice? How come Justices of Peace, and Grand Jurie men, that alwaies attend Assizes and and Sessions, to be arrested by bills of middle Latitats, and Outlawries, before they can hear of anie suits against them? which case is common. And for their alleging of manie Statutes, or Parlaments, that approved of their Capias, let them name one more then that of 25 Edw. 3.17. which gave it, and was repea∣led,
28 Edw. 3.3. and 42 Edw. 3. as aforesaid. What Statute, or Par∣lament, ever since revived it in express terms? It is true, That of 19 Hen. 7.9. ordeineth process upon Actions of trespass upon the case to bee no more delatorie then that practised for debt. And wee grant that actions upon the Case, being mixt acti∣ons, ever ought to have been by Capias before that Statute, however neglected by such as ever left undon those things which they ought to have don, to do those things which they ought not. And that summons is a milder way, and not so compul∣sorie: as the Capias, wee con∣fess, and hold more Christian; for the Capias compelleth men that are not able to pay their debts, and that never ought anie, to be imprisoned, starved, mur∣thered: And no just debt to bee paid so soon as summons, all the
world knoweth thereof, and therefore no Nation but English admitteth a Capias for debt. The 10. is as deceitful an in∣formation as anie before that; for wee desire no new way upon summons, to hasten Judgments before Attachments and distress, by affidavit of a summoner: but that summons may go by Writ, as it was wont, to the Sheriff of the Countie wherein the debtor dwelleth, requiring him by good summonitors (which are the words of the Writ) to summon the partie to bee at the return of the Writ, in the Court whence it issued, whether the Sheriff is to return both the writ, and the summonitor's names, in that ought to be substantial free-hol∣ders, and free pledges of the same decenarie as the debtor, who, if they return
summonitus, are answerable for so much as they finde him worth, till At∣tachmenttaketh it into the She∣riff's hands, or sureties for appea∣rance. If the return bee a nihil habet, then (as aforesaid) the Law ought to look no further after him, till God make him able: for (as the Proverb was) where nothing was to be had, the King was to loos his due. And if the return bee non est inventus, his shunning of the Law maketh him a malefactor, subject to a Capias upon a Testatum directable to the Sheriff of the Countie wherein he lurketh, and so from Countie to Countie, till hee bee taken, or out-lawed. Again, if the return be summonitus, At∣tachment, distress, and Judgment follow of cours, legallie, and speedilie, and are the onlie due process of Law, as wee have de∣clared before; and so is not a Judgment by
nihil dicit, stolne by connivence of Attornies, un∣known to the Defendant, al∣thoughhis warrant of Attornie bee had to appear for him: a common feat countenanced too much by the Law at Westminster, to thousands undoings, and their own gain. For trial by Jurie, Issues joined, cannot bee tried o∣therwise, Nihil dicits, & Arrests by Capias use them not: For mul∣tiplicitie of Suits and Perjuries, they were things never found fault with at Westminster these 200 years, till now. And now if the Chancerie grant Justicieses to Sheriffs and Stewards, as they ought, gratìs; and Corporations proceed by their Charters, West∣monasterians need not fear to bee troubled with multiplicitie of Suits; and those growing fewer, so will their perjuries. 11. The eleventh is a toie; for wee grant that a
Capias ad respondend. beeing unlawful, that ad satisfaciend. is groundless, and both most lawless, and useless;the due process of law for debt being as aforesaid, summons, &c.
12. The twelfth is a Riddle and a Paradox, wherewith these men would amaze us with som wonders of their experience hapned by this Common-wealth by the benefit of their Capias, which they call the Process of Arrest, Anno Domini 1267, & 1350. They might have don well to declare their particu∣lars, that others that know them not, might judg thereof as well as themselvs. Wee con∣fess, and they know the Ar∣rest, Imprisonment, Exile, and Hanging of Traitors, Ex∣tortioners, &c. as were the Spencers, Father and Son; the Judges Hugh d' Burgo, Tresilian, &c. who seduced Kings, as these men would Parlament, were beneficial to this Common-wealth; and wee hope it will bee so again, though wee knownot how long the Devil may help his servants: but of poor debtors wee can remember no arrest that was ever beneficial to any one person of this Com∣mon-wealth, but have sufficient∣ly proved the Negative.
13. Lastly, for the subtilties, and subtersuges of debtors, wee know none more then these men; and their predecessors taught such as grew indebted, and by their natural inclinations, assist∣ed with these men's advices, and devices, far more subtle then their own, to cheat men of their Lands and Estates; and by the credits of their sureties, that took them to be honest men, until too late, they found the contrarie. Wee confess it is true, that such debtors by the helps of such teachers, became so sub∣tle, as to get in their hands all they could of their Creditor's rights, and conveied them towhat uses they pleased; and procuring themselvs afterwards to bee arrested, where they might bee brought, or removed to the upper Bench, or Fleet; made those places their sanctuaries and subterfuges, where they are many thousands in list, but few in custodie, riding, rioting, and spending their Creditor's and Suretie's Estates, somtimes at their own doors, who want for their sakes those blessings to re∣liev them, which they vainly con∣sume to out-brave them; and somtimes in parts remote and Forrain, more active against this Common-wealth, then for it.
The premises tenderly consi∣dered, and for that these men, by these their endeavors declare themselvs, and their Judges, and the rest of their rabble, to bee of one fraternitie; and all parties in this matter of our wrongful imprisonments, and guiltie ofall the Extortions and Oppressi∣ons concurrent therewith, and livers, and thrivers thereupon; and therefore no fit Judges in these causes, as further appeareth by their lothness to submit, or give waie to the Hous, whereof they are over-ruling members, to perform their promises to your Excellence in our behalfs, made many years past, or to re∣store us, and themselvs, to our birth-right, liberties, and free∣dom, whereof they have robbed us, but are ashamed so to do like thievs and intruders, to deliver their possessions to the right ow∣ners. May it therefore pleas your Honor, in our further be∣halfs, to caus the Hous once more to bee moved to grant a Commission under the Great Seal, directed to indifferent Commissioners, that shall bee no professed Lawyers, Atturnies, &c. or persons engaged to pub∣lickemploiments, Martial, or Civil; but men of understand∣ing, and discretion, undoubted honestie, well-affected to the pre∣sent Government, to bee nomi∣ted by us, and approved by any two, or more Parlament-men; autorising everie two, or more such Commissioners, (not excee∣ding twelv in all) to deliver all the Gaols of England and Wales, of all prisoners for debt, forth∣with without delaie, compel∣ling all that are able, to paie all or part of their just debts, to paie accordingly, so far as all their goods, (except the beasts of their plough, tools of their trade, and necessarie cloaths and bedding) and two parts of their Lands shall extend, notwithstanding any Conveiance of any such Lands since the debts grew, (ex∣cept distributions between real Creditors.) And to hear and determine all wrongful Impri∣sonments,
Extortions, Briberies, Usuries, Perjuries, Forgeries, Frauds, Deceits, Trespasses, or Oppressions whatsoëver, con∣cerning such prisoners onely, committed, or to bee committed by any person or persons what∣soëver, against them, or any of them, or by any of them against any of their Creditors, through∣out England and Wales, according to the antient Laws and Customs of
England, confirmed by the great Charter, and Petition of Right, to endure for three years from the date thereof; allowing everie such Commissioner 300 l per annum, above his necessarie expences, for his salarie, in con∣sideration of his pains, and loss in his time, and private affairs; and such fees, and allowances to their Clerks, Messengers, and other necessarie Ministers, as any three of them shall think fit, not exceeding the presidentsof other Courts, in like cases, to bee deducted out of such fines, amerciaments, issues, profits, and perquisits, as shall grow due to the Common-wealth, by their service, as other Courts use to do; and the rest to bee accomp∣ted for, to such other publick uses, as the Hous shall appoint: Which beeing don by your means, the Land shall bee pur∣ged of much iniquitie, the Lord's wrath for the same much appea∣sed, your Excellencie, and your Armie gain much happiness, love, and honor, divine, and humane, temporal, and eternal; the Common-wealth regain a Million of monie picked out of their purses by Extorters, Usu∣rers, and common Deceivers; and your Petitioners bee at li∣bertie to fight for their Coun∣trie, and safegard of those lives of their own with courage and comfort, which as yet they have
no hope but to lose with care, and sorrow. And they, and theirs, as in dutie bound, shall ever praie, &c. A Case concerning a matter of Ju∣stice. TO the premises I must add another Case of no less per∣spicuitie and manifestation of our Lawyer's actions, then the former, briefly thus; A Gentle∣man of Drurie-lane, ever faith∣ful to the Parlament's service, and an adventurer of his life and for∣tunes therein, imparted for their use and the Common-wealths, 3600 l readie monie, upon con∣dition to bee repaied, with law∣ful consideration, in convenient time, to supply his own occasi∣ons, much subject to oppressions and injuries offered unto him by Lawyers, and their Clients; in
which respect it pleased the Par∣lament to take him into their protection, which hee conceiveth Lawyers sitting Members in the Hous, advised or consented to bee don, and granted as a lawful and just thing; or had it been otherwise, would have advised the contrarie, and never consent∣ed to the same. Now the Gen∣tleman (having received none of his monie, nor any consideration for any part thereof, is forced to borrow monie upon hard terms, of Use, and other Engagements, to buie his Leases late held of the Bishoprick of Elie, to pre∣vent others to deprive him there∣of, beeing his main subsistance,) can have no benefit of his pro∣tection, from any of them that granted it, or of those Courts wherein they are imploied, and eminently autorised; and the Gentleman and his Estate daily and unduly questioned, yet desi∣rethhee no more then his own, to defend himself from injustice, or to bee protected therefrom, until hee hath his own, and ju∣stice with it, or for it; or that hee may bee satisfied how neces∣sarie it is, or can bee to this Par∣lament and Common-wealth, or either to have these men, these Counsellors, these Advisers, or rather Devisers of frauds, and subtleties to delude Truth and Justice, that will counsel, advise, devise, or consent things to bee granted, which they will not justifie to bee performed by them∣selvs, (except that as in cases of common concernment, wherein the partie most suffering ought to have negation from all) Strata∣gemes are tolerable in war, con∣tinued or tolerated in place or power, to mis-guide Parla∣ments, as their predecessors have don Kings in times of peace, or to bee sole Judges or Interpretersof their own inventions; no less dangerous to this Repub∣lick, and their Estates, then the Exposition of Papistical Impo∣stures, while it was left to the autors, was to our predecessors and their souls. All which is humbly submitted to your Ho∣nor's further consideration, with the rest as aforesaid; by the same Your Honor's faithful servant, and observant, Jo. Jones.
A Case concerning Tythes. FOR the further manifestation of the lawless Imposture, and u∣surpation of Jurisdiction, Arbitrarie proceeding, and destruction of Pro∣prietie, exercised daily, and generally by Judges, and no Judges at
West∣minster, and in their Circuits to the deheredetation of many, and hazard of all; may summarily appear in that one Case lately adjudged by no Judges legally authorised thereunto, between Sir Matth. Lister Knight, Plaintiff, and Lionel Gelson, De∣fendant, published in print, partly by Petition, partly otherwise, by the modest and discreet wife, and fellow-sufferer of the Defendant, in the Caus of Ann Gelson: the brief whereof is this; the Plaintiff beeing posses∣sed of the Tythes of a Rectorie, called Burwel, in the Countie of Lincoln, an Impropriation, somtimes parcel of the dissolved College of Tottersalin the said Countie, by virtue of a Conveiance derived from a Grant of King H 8. in which it is mentioned that the said King gave that Recto∣rie (cùm pertinentiis inter alia) to the then Duke of
Suffolk, and his heirs. And becaus it is there fur∣ther mentioned, that the said King gave also to the said Duke the Pre∣sentation of the Rectorie of Walms∣gate, which is a Parish of it self in another Decenarie, and Wapentack of the said Countie, distinct from, though neighboring to that of Bur∣wel, and founded by the Lord of the Manor of Walmsgate, who then was (as yet the Defendant who clai∣meth from him, is) Lord of all that Parish in Fee-simple, and gave the Tithe thereof (as well his own, as his Tenants at will) to the Rector for the time beeing, and his succes∣sors for ever, reserving to himself, and his heirs for ever, the Patronage and Presentation; so that when there hapned a neglect of Presentation inhim, or in his heirs, the right thereof fell by laps to the Bishop of Lin∣coln, and upon his neglect, to the King; which beeing so then, in King H. 8. hee might grant for that time to the said Duke: But saving for that time, or the like relaps, the in∣heritance descended to the Defen∣dant. Now this Inheritance from the Defendant, and Tithes from the Incumbent, and his Farmor, are adjudged to the Plaintiff, by Judges and Jurors, according to the cours of Common Law, (as they pretend) whereas by the Statute 2 Ed. 6.13. and many presidents, no right of Tithes ought to bee tried but by Ecclesiastical Judges, and Courts according to Ecclesiastical Laws; which, though now abolished, the said Statutes beeing not repealed, the Ju∣dicature is obeied, and yet undispo∣sed of by the Parlament, which onely can dispose thereof. But in the inte∣rim, such Judges and Jurors, as as∣sume jurisdiction to trie the rights ofTythes by Common Law, are no Judges, but offendors in Premunire; such trials, no trials, but arbitrarie and lawless Disseisins, and destru∣ctions of men's properties; and con∣sequently (if not timely remedied) of the common libertie, rights, and birth-rights of all the Commonaltie of England; And the Defendant can but fear to bee deprived by the same cours, of his whole Manor, and subsistence, as well as hee is of part. FINIS.
