L1306 11832368 49721
THE Shammer Shamm'd: In a Plain DISCOVERY, Under Young TONG'S Own Hand, OF A Designe to Trepann L'ESTRANGE Into a Pretended Subornation against the POPISH PLOT. By Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brome at the Signe of the Gun in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1681.
The Shammer Shamm'd. &c. IT is no new thing for L'Estrange to be Baited by the Mer∣cenary Agents of a Seditious, and Schismaticall Faction; and 'tis hard to say, whether the Scurrilous Libells, or the Obscure Authors of them be the more Contemptible: But yet this is a Case, wherein I cannot; either with Honour, Safety, or with Good Discretion be Silent. In short; There is a Knot of Little Fellows (but under the Government of better Heads) that are now at work to Revive the Old Story of my Tampe∣ring with Young Tonge, to Invalidate Oates's Evidence; and Se∣verall Lies and Scandalls are Printed in favour of that Impo∣sture. My Purpose in these Papers is, in the first place, to lay open, the Notorious Falshood, and Malice of this Practice. And 2ly, to prove that very Design, which is charg'd VPON me, to be managed AGAINST me. It will not be amiss to Enform the Reader by the way, that in October, 1680. Upon two full hearings before his Majesty and Councell (in despight of all that Oates could say, and Tong Swear against me) I had the Honour to be twice acquitted by the Unanimous Judgment of the whole Board: The Particu∣lars of which Proceedings may be seen in a Dialogue under the Title of L'Estranges Case, &c. which I caused to be Publish'd upon that occasion. I shall now, as briefly as I can, set forth how the same Calumny comes to be started again. On the Third of January last past, The Loyall Protestant-News-Paper had this following Passage in it concerning Tong, but mistaking Samuel, for Simson. Whereas Mr. Samuel Tonge, Son to Dr. Tonge deceased, has formerly Sworn, That his own Father was the Chief Contriver of the Popish Plot; Discovered by a Man who then went under the name of Dr. O—; Now the Religious good party, seemed at that
time to be much dissatisfied, that an Intrigue so well layed, and so effectually managed, (tho never so ill Contrived,) should be thus miscarried, and then fell upon young Tonge, and declared that he was an ill Man for offering to charge his Father with such horrid Crimes, after so many Men suffered upon the account of the said Plot, and though that it were but a Contrivance of his Father and Dr. O— (so call'd then) that it was an advancement to all Protestant Dis∣senters in England, Ireland, and Scotland, and used many mode∣rate Reasons with the said Tonge, that at last Mr. Tonge Complyed with the Request and Prayer of the good party; and when he was sent for again to come before the King and Council, utterly Denying all that he had sworn before; but since being touched with Remorse of conscience, offers to justifie what he had Sworn unto by his own Testimony alone; but by such Papers, circumstances and wit∣nesses, as he is now able to produce, without hopes of favour or Re∣ward, but as a penitent Sinner, that expects mercy from God Almighty. Young Tong was so hot upon this Publication, that the very next day, he directed a Paper to Mr Thompson by way of an Advertisement under his own hand, in Confirmation of what was there publish'd: though it was not Notified by Thompson till Jan. 19. and in the words following. Mr Thompson, I have read your Intelligence of the Third of this Instant, and do acknowledge that all you write concerning Me is very True, and I will Justify it to my death;and I do believe that the Great Poverty and Misery that I lye under, is fallen on me, by the Just Judgment of God, because I was Seduced by the Enticements of my Uncle, and Others, to deny the Truth; but you mistake my name; for I am not Samuel but Simson Tonge. He speaks Truth as to his Miserable Condition; for there was not a Poorer Creature in the Prison; and Cutting of Pegs for shooes; (and working hard too) for Three-half-pence a day, was the best part of his Entertainment. It was Thompson's Paper of Jan. 3. that gave the Alarum, and stir'd up the Charity of some of the Well-affected Brethren
to hearken a little after him. He was taken one day out of the Prison (as he said) by a Printer; and at his Return talk'd of some∣thing to be Publish'd toward the Middle of the next Week con∣cerning L'Estrange. This Visit put him presently into Cloaths, and Money in his Pocket, by a Providence, which must be left to Time and Further Scrutiny to Un-riddle. Upon Thomson's First Publication of Jan. 3. Out comes the Buffoon-Courant, of Jan. 6. with these words in't. [Has not this very Young Tonge set forth at large how he was at first tre∣pann'd so suggest that Story against his Father, in a Book Printed by Mr C—in the New Exchange; but for I know not what Reasons stifled, and never suffer'd to be Publish'd? Has not this Young Tonge a hundred and a hundred times with tears in his Eyes, be∣wayl'd, and repented of that Unnaturall Villany? Nay but a fort∣night ago, he Voluntarily declar'd that the Sense thereof lay so heavy upon him, that if ever he got out of Prison (where he was like to starve, and had scarce Cloaths to cover his Nakedness) he would forthwith Transport himself to the West-Indies; for his shame for that False and Wicked Accusation was so great, that he should not be able to walk in the streets. And is this Pittifull Fool Furbish'd up to make a New Attacque? But on the Contrary; What if this be only a Contrivance of the Popish Traytors, and their Implement Nat? What if herein he most in pudently abuses, both Old Tonge, and Young Tonge and the Publique? Then no doubt his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councell, the Judges, and all Inferiour Ma∣gistrates, and every Protestant English-man will think it Necessary to Punish Exemplarily the Villain that in Print has Broach'd such a Horrid Scandall on the Honour, Justice, Prudence and Safety of the Nation.] [Truly I do hope, and wish, with all my heart, that the Government may, and will proceed against all Cheats of this Kind, with the most Severity Imaginable: But how comes Care to know more of Tongs Doings then Tong does of his own? for Every syllable which Thompson says of Tonge, Tonge says of himself: And the Question is not here, whether it be True, or False; but whether or no Tonge sayd it. The matter rested here till Jan. 19. Upon which day, came forth Tong's Advertisement in Justification of Thomson, and Tong's Pretended Vindication, in Contradiction to that Advertisement. 't
was publish'd by Curtis; and the Author of it may be as well known by his Paw, as by his Face: The Pacquet, and the Vindi∣cation bearing all together the same Style, and Design, and, in many Particulars, the very same words. So that the Courantier, the Vindicator, and Simson Tonge are all one and the same person. It carries the Title of [Mr. Tongs Vindication, in answer to the Malicious and Lying Aspersions thrown upon him by Thomson, and the Observator.] As to what concerns the Observator [Being deeply Sensible (says Tong's Deputy-Vindicator) of what Evil Consequence this Notorious Lye may be; I do Solemnly declare that what was Prin∣ted by Thomson, was done without my knowledge, or Consent, having some time since given a True, and Full account of those Persons (that would have trepan'd, and Endeavor'd to make me Swear, that my Father and Dr. Oates wre the Contrivers of the Popish Plot) in my Case, which was Printed by Mr. C—in the New Exchange in the Strand; but by some Indirect means or other, was stifled, and never suffer'd to come abroad: In which Narrative, I have discover'd nothing but the Naked Truth, with the several Arguments and Inducements they made use of, to make me accuse my deceased Parent, and yet notwithstanding all this, Thomson and the Observator have the Impudence to affirm the Contrary, &c. Observe first, that the Printing of it [without his Knowledge or Consent] is no denial of the thing said. 2ly, Neither Tonge, nor Care or Curtis, in His name says One word in Opposition to the Truth of Tong's Advertise∣ment, in Affirmation of what Thomson deliver'd. 3ly, Take notice, that the Case or Narrative which Cur∣tis'es Libell says, was Printed by Mr C—and Stifled; was layd up in Lavender, for the Opportunity of Imposing an A∣buse upon the Oxford-Parliament, as appears by the Title-Page, and the appointment for the Printing of it, bearing date, Feb. 2. 1681. And I am likewise Enform'd, that Se∣veral Copies of it were dispers'd to divers Members of that Convention.
4ly. That Pretended Narrative and Case was Printed for Langley Curtis, with this Express Authority for the Printing of it. I do Appoint Langly Curtis, to Print This my Narrative, and Case: Witness my hand, this Second of February, 1681. Simson Tonge. 5ly. Beside that, the Narrative is False, and Libellous, it is Undoubtedly the same hand with the Pacquet, and the Vindica∣tion; and three Cheats put upon the Publique, by One and the same Person. 6ly. It is remarkable, that there is a New Title-Page clapt upon the Old Book, (which is just now made Pub∣lique) Pretending to be Printed for C.W. Instead of Langly Curtis; the better to Disguise, or Conceal Curtis and Cares Confederacy and Interest, in the Pamphlet. Lastly, The very Title-Page it self is a Juggle. As for Ex∣ample, [The Narrative and Case of Simson Tonge, Gent. being a True Account deliver'd upon Oath, before Mr. Justice Bridgeman, in the presence of Dr. Titus Oates; relating to Capt. Sam. Ely, Mr. Choqueux, &c. and my self, Who would have Induced me to Swear tht my Father and Dr. Oates, were the Contrivers of the Horrid Popish Plot; with Other Mate∣rial Passages Omitted in the Affidavit. Together with some Short Reflections upon Mr L'Estrange's Dialogue between Ze∣kiel, and Ephraim.] Who knows how far This [&c.] and his [OTHER Mate∣riall Passages OMITTED in the Affidavit] may Extend, Espe∣cially from the Mouth of Prostitute Falsifyers? and under the Manage of an Ignoramus-Iury? And it is a Fair Hint in Janeways History of Popish Sham-Plots from the same hand again, P. 139. where he says, that [Simson made a Considerable Confession of this Conspiracy, upon Oath, before Mr Justice Bridgeman, though HAPPILY he hath reserv'd many more particulars to another Op∣portunity.] At which rate, 'tis but rubbing up his Memory at any time, to call to mind things that never had a Being, and to lay the Plot at whose Door he pleases. But to return to his Vindication.
[Having now Sufficiently Vindicated my self (says he) from the Malicious, and Lying Aspersions cast upon me by Thomson and the Observator; I return to the Pacquetier, (that is to say, to himself again, for there's not one word of the Pac∣quetier before) who amongst them all is the only Person that has done me that Justice, Candidly to represent my Condition to the world, performing the part of an Honest man, in declaring the Great sorrow wherewith my spirits have been oppress'd for the Unnaturall Villany I was perswaded to perpetrate against my Deceased Parent, &c.] And what is all this, but an Ex∣change of Civility betwixt Harry in the Vindication, & Care in the Courant? [I Bless God (says he again) I have not so sear'd a Con∣science, as to Justify so False and Villanous a thing as is cast upon me.—I did not verify or assert any thing by dread∣full Imprecations.—It behoves me to stand upon my Guard, and by the force of Truth repell these Vicious Calumnies, which I hope is here perform'd to the Content and satisfaction of all True, Unbiass'd Protestants; And now having fully discharg'd a Good Conscience, the main End of the Vindication, &c.] To pass over now the most Daring and Blasphemous Hypocrisy that ever call'd upon Almighty God for the Grace of a Mock-Repentance, see how Dreadfully this Per∣sonated Penitent Concludes his Paper. [I do solemnly protest (says he) in the presence of the Great Jehova) it is nothing but Truth. Witness my Hand, Simson Tonge.] (Alias Henry Care had Nick'd it.) I shall proceed now to Janeways Popish Sham-Plots, which is only the same Jack-Pudding still in another dress. [Choqueux (says he P. 138.) brings Mr. L'Estrange into Simson's Chamber, where among other discourse, Honest Roger had these Words: That he heard Mr. Simson Tonge was upon a very Good De∣sign for the Good of the Nation, to find out the Truth and Contrivance of this Plot, and pray'd he might have Good Successe in it, Adding, he would give Mr. Tonge what Furtherance and Encouragement lay in his Power.]
[He has another snap at me in the Courant of Jan. 27. where he says, That Friend Hodge, &c. lately renew'd their Acquain∣tance with Mr. Tonge, and endeavour'd a fresh Intrigue of the Old Stamp; but finding upon recollection, that he would not Cor∣respond further with them; and fearing all their Roguery would come out, the Reverend Clergy-Guide found himself oblig'd to Cry Whore first.] I am coming now to his Narrative; where in the First Page he has these words. [Hearing that it is commonly re∣ported, that I should Swear against my Father, to take away his Life, it is as False as God is True.] This is no Denial of his Swearing against his Father; but of his Swearing against him to take away his Life. And he declares a little lower, That he was all along very tender of his Fathers Safety; with which shuffle he thinks to come off. He tells a Story, Page 11. Of my refusing to Licence a Book of his Fathers, called The Royal Martyr, unless I might Mo∣del it to my own Capricious Humour; and that his Father was much troubled at my sawciness, and sent for his Book again. The Word Sawciness is an Expression that fits no bodies Mouth but Care's. But to his Story now. A Book under that Title was brought to me to Licence; which upon the Perusal, I refused to do: and the Bookseller that brought it, gave me to understand who was the Author of it; and a Fair Hint in his very Countenance, what might come on't in case I would not Pass it. Upon This, for fear of After-Claps, I went to Whitehall, and discours'd the mat∣ter with Dr. Tonge himself, in words to this Effect. Doctor (said I) You must Excuse me if I dare not Licence your Book; for there are Reflections in it upon the Com't: Where you say, That the Bed-Chamber men Pick the King's Pockets; and not without a Mixture of Reproaches upon the King Himself. Beside, that you are mistaken in your Annals; There's mat∣ter of Fact misplac'd, mis-tim'd, and misapply'd; and from thence we proceeded to a Reasoning upon some Passages in his Preface. Doctor (said I) 'Tis well that both you your self, and Dr. Oates (in those days a Dr.) have so absolutely purg'd your selves to the World, that there can be no longer any doubt of your Integrity; for otherwise, there are two or three Passa∣ges
in your Preface, that people would go near to stumble at. As to the Business of the Bed-Chamber-men, I'le Justifie it (says the Doctor) and if there be any slips in the Story, we can set them Right. But what's your Exception to the Preface? So I told him, that in Substance the Matter was thus: [You tell the World, that you have, with Great Care, drawn up the Hi∣story of the Old Popish Plot (the business of Habernsfelt, &c.) And that shewing it to Dr. Oates, (who very much approv'd of the Draught) you told him, Titus, It were worth the while to know if this Plot does not go on still. Go you, and put your self among the Jesuits, and enform your self whether it does, or no. You say further, That Dr. Oates did go among them, pre∣tending to be One of them; and that when he came back, he told you that the Business went on, and that it was no New Plot, but the Old One continued.] Well! (says the Dr.) All this is True, and where's the Offence? So I told him, that it might be look'd upon as a strange Councel, ei∣ther to Give or to Take. The Advice Given is This, Go you over, Titus, and pretend to be a Papist: Take all their Oathes and Tests; joyn with them in an Idolatrous Worship, and swear your self to the Devil through Thick and Thin, only to see whether it be Cross or Pile. This seems to be the Advice Given: And the following of this Advice, up∣on Fore-thought, and Consideration, may be taken for a Re∣solution very Extraordinary. The Doctor's Answer was to this Purpose, God Almighty will do his own Work, by his own Ways and Methods. I have been the more Punctual in this Relation, to shew as well the Reasons why I would not Licence that Book, in respect of my self, as the Tenderness I had for the Credit of the Doctor, and for the Common Cause; by not consent∣ing to Expose any thing to the Publick, that might be liable either to a Censure, or a Mistake. He says further in his Narrative, P. 1. [That L'Estrange in his abusive Lying Dialogue, makes Choqueux to speak of L'Estrange's refusing to Licence The Royal Martyr; which Tonge took very ill at L'Estrange's hands,—but Choqueux knew nothing of it.] The Truth of these Things shall be made appear in their Proper Place.
And again in the same Page. [Mr. Choqueux (saies he) recommended me to L'Estrange, as a Person very worthy of my acquaintance, and told him▪ I had drawn up several Papers, as Objections against the Plot; and he did presume, I should be very glad of his Assistance therein. L'Estrange told me he would to his power assist me what he could, and asked me where my Papers were; for he would gladly peruse them: for he was enformed, those Pa∣pers had very material things in them against the Plot. That he was a great admirer of all such things, as he did not question he had demonstrated to the World by his Collections he had made concerning the Popish Plot, where Dr. Oates was pleased to be silent, and said that for his part, he found the whole Plot was re∣plenish'd with nothing else, but Improbabilities, and Ridiculous Ab∣surdities, &c. And then Choqueux, and L'Estrange discours'd concerning the late Wars, &c. Ibid.] Take notice, that Tonge had drawn up some Objections against the Plot; and L'Estrange desired a sight of 'em, and yet no Papers shew'd him, nor any Answer return'd him to that Question; but thereupon he went his way. Now see forward [Going out with L'Estrange (sayes the Narrative, Pag. 12.) I ask'd him when I should wait upon him, and if he had any writing, I would transcribe any thing for him which he had to Print, but he said he had no such business, but that any Evening he should be glad to see me, and Mr. Choqueux at his House in Holborn, and went away from us. Here's Tonge pinning himself upon L'Estrange, and L'Estrange shuffling him off, as far as decently could be done in such a Case. But see now how Tonge plies him yet with Importunities. [The next day after (sayes he Ibid.) Mr. Choqueux went to L'Estrange's House, and told me he was newly gone out, but he said to morrow in the Evening I should go along with him to L'E∣strange.] You will see by and by that I went out of the way on pur∣pose to avoid him; and that Tonge wrote me a Letter next Morning, desiring me in regard that he miss'd me last night, to appoint him some other time, for he had something to say to me, whereupon I appointed him at seven that Evening. And see how he proceeds. [Crawley (sayes he Ibid.) coming
to the Savoy before we (Choqueux and Tonge) were gone, went along with us, whom I suppose L'Estrange had no acquaintance with. But Crawley went, thinking he might have something to say to him in relation to his Papers. So soon as we came into the Room where L'Estrange was, he desired Mr. Choqueux and Craw∣ley, to withdraw; (for he said it look'd too much like a Consul∣tation) who went out and expected my coming out into the street.] It is false, that Choqueux and Crawley were desir'd to with draw; but Mr. Crawley, and a fourth person that came with them in Company, were fairly hinted to withdraw, because (as I said) it would look like a consult. And they did withdraw; but Choqueux stay'd a while after them. [Then being together (sayes the Narrative, Ibid.) meaning Tonge and L'Estrange) he asked me whether I had a Copy of that Enformation which was delivered to the King, I told him I had not, only some loose Papers relating to it; but I could recite se∣veral Material Passages of it. Then L'Estrange writ them down, and asked me whether I had no more to say, I told him I had not, and said when he had more leisure, and had all my Enforma∣tions, he would swear me to them. I told him, I did not care to be sworn to any of my Papers, &c.] This point shall be clear'd hereafter, where it will fall more naturally in my way. I shall not need to amplify upon the Particulars above-mentioned any further in this place, then to recommend it to the Reader's Observation. First, that the Persons Visibly concern'd in these Scandalous Libells, are only Tonge, (as a Fool for the Faction to make use of) Curtis, (the Publisher of the Narrative, the Pacquet, and the Vindication) Janeway, (the Publisher of the Popish Sham-plots) and Care, the Presumptive Author of these four Pamphlets: of whose Character and Credit, the World is sufficiently sensible already, without need of any further Enformation. Now though as it is the Common business of these Fellows to Bespatter the Government, and all degrees of Men, as well as Particular Persons, that Interpose toward the Vindi∣cation of the King and the Laws. Their spleen and Forge∣ries are yet so Peculiarly bent at me, that I dare be answer∣able to produce at least three hundred Scandalous, Rank and
Notorious Lyes, that these servile wretches, (taking in Baldwin for another) have published barefac'd against my single self; and I do verily believe, I may safely say, as many several Libels: But having already made an Express Application to the Magistracy of the City, for Justice, Pub∣lick, and Private upon the Infamous Authors of these Defa∣matory Papers: I make no question, but the Generous, and Loyall Governours of this City, having both the Crimes and the Criminals openly lay'd before them, and the matter, in both respects falling expresly under their Cognizance and Jurisdiction; I make no doubt, I say, but my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen will exert their Authority to the uttermost, in calling these Flagitious Incendiaries to a strict account. So that I shall now pass forward to my main business. That is to say, First, To shew that there is a Conspiracy, by Hook or by Crook, to make me a Suborner. Secondly, To Discharge my self of that Impudent, and Sense∣less Calummy, by Clear and Undeniable Proofs, Inferences, and Presumptions to the contrary. Thirdly, To make it out, beyond all dispute, that the Project has been, from First to Last, to Trepan me, by trying how far I might be prevail'd upon to entertain any Proposi∣tions of discrediting, shamming, or Ridiculing the damnable Hel∣lish Popish Plot; which has been Attested, and Confirm'd, by the Authority and Declaration of so many Parliaments. There needs no more for the making out of the First Point, than what is said already; which for Order sake, I shall briefly sum up yet once again: Care in his Courant of the 27th of Jan. 1681, Charges me with Renewing my Ac∣quaintance with Mr. Tonge, and endeavouring a Fresh Intrigue of the Old Stamp. Care again in Tonge's Pretended Narra∣tive, has hook'd me into the [&c.] in the Title Page, and his other material Passages Omitted in the Affidavit, [&c.]—by drawing my Name into the Book, within the compass of that, [&c.] and the Supplemental Reserve. The same Care again, in Janeway's Sham Plots, gives an account Pag. 139. That over and above Tonge's Oath to Mr. Justice Bridgeman, he hath reserv'd many more Particulars to another Opportunity;
which gives him Liberty till the Day of Judgment, to sup∣ply his Evidence. It is a farther Presumption of a Design; First, the Calculating of their Narrative, for the Oxford Parliament, to take me Unprovided, and by Surprize. Se∣condly, By the keeping it so Close ever since, for fear of ha∣ving the Villany of it Detected, and Expos'd; And then the Publishing of it now at last, under a False Name, is a fur∣ther Confirmation of the Foulness of that Practice. It might suffice to the Second Point, that I was Honoura∣bly Discharg'd by the King and Council; Oates and Tonge being present, and not having One word to say in Con∣tradiction to my Defence: But it is not a likely matter, over and above, that I should have a Design upon Tonge, and at the same time shake him off from fastening himself upon me. That I should enter into that Liberty of Dis∣course: of Censuring the Plot, Drawing him in to raise Ob∣jections against it, and to represent it as the Invention of his Faher, and Oates; and yet at the same time, Caution both Captain Ely, and Mr. Choqueux, to have a Care of him, for he would lay hold of any thing to Ruine them. Is it not a likely matter again, that I should ask him for his Papers, and he should give me no Answer; and that I should so Greedily Interest my self in a Zeal and Curiosity to be dabbling with him, and yet at the same time, refuse any Information from him, but under his own hand: And with this Condition An∣nex'd, That he should declare it to be his own Voluntary Act, and nether Directly, or Indirectly drawn from him at my In∣stance, or Procurement? Now all This will be laid as open as the Day in That which follows. It will be Objected perhaps, that though this Plea may serve well enough for what's past, or at least for what has been produc'd against me upon Legal Testimony: But what if he should come upon second Thoughts, (as other People have done) to refresh his Memory, and Re-inforce his Evidence, or Charge me (as Care calls it) with [a Fresh Intrigue of the Old Stamp] till I found (as the Pacquetier has it) that Tonge wuld Correspond no further with me? I would ask no more for my Acquittal, then that Curtis might be strictly Examin'd, who was the Author of those Three Insolent Impostures; The Pacque;
Tonge's Vindication; and Tonge's Narrative and Case; which were All Publish'd by him; and that Janeway might be Inter∣rogated, Who was the Author of his Popish Sham-Plots; not but that any Man may know whence they all came, they are so like the Father. I would ask this, for the Publiques sake, as well as my Own; for 'tis Impossible for any State to Live at Peace, or any Community or Person to scape Untainted, where These Pests of Humane Society are suffer'd in a Common-Wealth. I shall say nothing now to the Many, Gross, Virulent, and Scandalous Falshoods that are scatter'd Up and Down these Venemous Papers; but refer the Reader to what I have to say upon the Third Head, wherein I shall set forth the Naked Truth of the Matter; and make it Evident, that the Sham∣ming and Tampering has been on the other side; and that instead of my Wheedling of Tonge into a Complication against his Fa∣ther; it has been the Business of Young Tonge, his Fellows, and Directors, from One End to the other of this affair, to draw L'Estrange into the Toil. This is the Third and the Last Point, and I shall Handle it at large. The Design of Tonge's putting a Sham upon me (by the Order and Instruction, I suppose, of his Superiors) must bear Date a good while before I ever so much as saw the Face of him; As appears by his Propounding me (though an Absolute Stranger to him) as a fit Person for him to Advise withal, about the Menage, and Government of his Design: and making twenty sleeveless Pretences for getting into my Acquaintance; besides the Visible Importunities of Pressing upon me, after I knew him; and the Use he made of the most Frivolous Accidents, to Improve all Circumstances to my Disadvantage. And then the whole Story is Far'd with Lyes, from one end to the other; as the Reader will Observe upon comparing the several parts of this Relation. The first time that ever he saw me, (as himself confesses) or that I ever saw him, was at Monsieur Choqueux's, by the occasion of my going thither to Enquire about some Memo∣rials of the late War. This was some Months after his Im∣pious
Swearing, and Counter-Swearing, Backward and Forward, at Windsor; so that there could be no pretence for my tam∣pering of him in a matter, where he had so Perjuriously Con∣tradicted himself already; Neither did Choqueux bring me to him, (as he suggests) but the Servant, upon my Enquiry for her Master, desir'd me to Walk into a low Room till she call'd him down; and there I found a Person to me unknown, which, it seems, was Young Tonge, as I was afterwards En∣form'd by the Master of the Lodgings when he came down. I found the Fopp to be Talkative, and so I let him run on in a Nonsensical Story of the Privacies that had pass'd betwixt Oates, and his Father, certain Papers concerning the Plot that were Written in Greek Characters, and hid behind the Wain∣scout; and a Foolery of one Green, a Weaver, that meeting his Father in the Court of Requests, told him for News (and without any knowledge of him too) that E've long, there would be a Popish Massacre: Whereupon, (says Young Tonge) my Father made an acquaintance with him, and out came the Plot. He shew'd me likewise an Abuse upon some of the King's Evidence, in a kind of a Disguise like a Romance, which he said was of his own Composing, and I found he had a mind to Unriddle it to me; but I stopp'd him short; Adviz'd him against it; and made what haste Civilly I could, to get quit of his Company, and to deliver my self from the Nauscous∣ness, as well as the Danger of so Impertinent, and Suspitious an Acquaintance. This was before I had ever seen the Eyes of Capt. Ely; but coming soon after to the knowledge of him, it was my Lesson both to him, and Mr. Choqueux, to have a Care of that Young Fellow for fear of having a Trick put upon them: So far was I from making that Fool my Confi∣dent, that I did not think it safe to have any thing at all to do with him; The Incredibility of his Evidence being the best Se∣curity that any Man can have that keeps him Company. Soon after This, Capt. Ely returns from Windsor, (where he had been it seems upon Tonge's Errand) and my having some Inkling of his Business there, made me a little curious to find him one, and learn from him the Truth of the Mat∣ter. Presently upon This there, was Bruited a Report a∣bout the Town, that Oates had Exhbited a omplaint to
the Councel against Ely and Choqueux, and that L'Estrange was brought in for a Third Man. This Alarum put me to be∣think my self, and to provide for the worst that Malice and Perjury could pretend against me: For I could easily see tho∣rough Tonge; and Oates had already pronounc'd me, in all his Haunts and Gangs, as deep in the Practice, as the most Confident and Shameless Asseveration of any thing; short of a Verbum Sacerdotis could make me. Hereupon I apply'd my Self to Captain Ely, and Monsieur Choqueux, (being both Clear of the Councel) to make Oath before some Master of the Chancery to the Truth of certain Particulars, wherein I might possibly come to be Concern'd, if there should happen to be any Combination carryed on a∣gainst me. They did me the Right to Comply with my De∣sire, and the Affidavits are as follows. The Affidavit of Samuel Ely, &c. SAmuel Ely of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the Country of Middlesex, Gent. ma∣keth Oath, that he This Deponent hath not known the Person of Roger L'Estrange in the County of Mid∣dlesex, Esq till about a fortnight before the Date hereof: And that He this Deponent never saw the said L'Estrange and Mr. Simpson Tonge together, nor ever heard of any Correspondence between them, more then that Mr. Choqueux told this Deponent that he had brought the said Tonge to Mr. L'Estrange to desire him to take Tonge's Enformation upon Oath, as a thing that might much justifie Us; This being before we heard of any Order to attend the Coun∣cel. This Deponent further Enformeth, that the said Tonge made mention of Mr. L'Estrange in a certain Pa∣per about the latter end of July last, (to this Depo∣nents best Remembrance) as a person that might be
a very good Evidence against his Father, for some se∣ditious Passages in a Book of Dr. Tonge's called, The Royal Martyr; which the said Mr. L'Estrange refused to License, and D. Tonge took it very ill at his hands; Tonge the younger declaring, that he had a great mind to be acquainted with the said Mr. L'Estrange. This Deponent moreover saith, That being at Windsor about the middle of August last, He this De∣ponent was told, That young Tonge had denyed the Enformation given in by him to his Majesty, and de∣clared, that he was set on by the Papists; whereupon this Deponent went immediately to young Tonge, be∣ing then in Windsor, and told him what he had heard. Who there in the presence of Two other persons, did presently take Pen, Ink, and Paper, and drew up a short Declaration to this following Effect. ☞ Being informed that my Uncle, Captain Tonge, hath maliciously aspers'd me, that I have made a Recanta∣tion, and disown'd my former Enformation given in to his Majesty; As I hope to be saved; I never did make any such Recantation, though I was mightily urg'd thereunto by my Uncle, and to lay it upon the Pa∣pists. But the Enformation was all true, and in the Discharge of my Duty and Conscience; And that it was my own spontaneous Act, without the Ex∣pectation of any Advantage, Benefit, or Reward; or by the Procurement, Direction or Abetting of any Person whatsoever. This Declaration being by him the said Sympson Tonge Written in the presence of two other Persons, and this Deponent, of his own proper motion, and without any advice thereunto; and it was likewise attested by this Deponent and the two Persons above∣mentioned. And all this was done in the space of
one half hour, (as this Deponent verily believes) from the time after this Deponent's first hearing the Report. And finally, This Deponent saith further, That he heard Mr. L'Estrange (being in Discourse with Mr. Choqueux) caution the said Mr. Choqueux to have a care what he said to that Fellow (meaning Young Tonge) for he would lay hold of any thing to ruine you. This was the effect of Mr. L'Estrange's Caveat to Mr. Choqueux, who returned this Answer, That he had nothing to do with him in the World, but in relation to his Cure; and this Deponent heard Mr. L'Estrange say further at the same time. Remember Mr. Choque∣ux, what I told young Tonge and You together, I do declare, I will not Receive any Enformation from Tonge, but under his own hand; and I will have a Clause in it too, wherein he shall acquit me upon the same Oath, of having any thing to do with him by way of Advice or Encouragement; That I did not di∣rectly or indirectly move him to it, but that it was all at his own Motion, and at his own Request: And more this Deponent hath not to say, SAM. ELY. Jurat. coram me. JO. COELL. 4 die Octobris Anno xxxii. Car. II. R. An. Dom. 1680. Upon the perusal of This Affidavit, the Reader will be a∣ble to satisfie himself what Tonge's Donyals of any Imprecati∣ons; His Invocating the Great Jehovah to the Truth of what he said; His Prophane manner of Obtruding upon Almighty God, His Mimical Forms of Contrition and Remorse, for the Ardent Affections of a True Repentance; The Oppression of his Spirits for his Villany against his Father: What all this (I say)
amounts to upon the Comparing of the Gross, and Scandalous Contradictions: And yet the Testimony of This Prostigate Wretch is made use of by the Managers of this Infamous Cause, as an Authority sufficient to Obliege the World into a Be∣lief of any thing against L'Estrange; just according to the Measures of their Proceedings in other Cases, where the Cre∣dit of the Witnesses, is rated by the Malice, and Interest of the Faction; and None, either so Fair, or so Foul, as not to be Blasted or Justifi'd, in order to the Common End of serving a Party. I shall go forward now to the Second Affidavit. Anthony Choqueux of the Savoy, Chyrurgeon, this 4th Day of Octob. 1680. maketh Oath, as follows, Viz. Impr. I. THat about the Beginning of Septemb. last, Mr. Tho. Neucomb brought Mr. L'Estrange to his House to enquire about some Memorials of Prince Rupert's Actions in the late War, and in Flanders: but because it was somewhat late, they drank a Bot∣tle of Wine, and put off farther discourse upon that Business to another Meeting. II. That some few days after this, Mr. L'Estrange came to his House a second time; and after some dis∣course with him, the Deponent, before Mr. Tonge, (whom he had then under Cure) about the Memori∣als, and Papers concerning the Prince, he told him that the Person there present was young Mr. Tonge; whereupon Mr. L'Estrange took notice of him, and ask'd him if he had ever seen him at his Father's Chamber, who answered no, he had never seen him before, or words to the same effect.
III. That at the same time, Mr. Tonge said he re∣membred that he had been told, Mr. L'Estrange refu∣sed to License a Book of his Fathers, (called the Royal Martyr) which Refusal, Dr. Tonge took very ill, he said. And so he went on in several Discourses of di∣vrs Meetings betwixt his Father and Dr. Oates, and how many Clerks his Father kept constantly a Wri∣ting; and such kind of Talk; Mr. L'Estrange onely giving him the Hearing, without any encourage∣ment, or asking him any questions, but slightly tell∣ing him that all this signifi'd nothing; or to that pur∣pose. IV. That finding Mr. L'Estrange to wave the Dis∣course, he whisper'd the Deponent in the Ear, to de∣sire him to acquaint Mr. L'Estrange, that if he had any thing to Transcribe, he was ready to do it for him; and should take it for a great kindness. After this; That there pass'd nothing but common Talk: Onely, at parting, that Mr. Tonge desired of Mr. L'Estrange that he might wait upon him at his House, setting the day and hour himself, to which Mr. L'Estrange seemed to agree. V. That at the time appointed, Tonge went, (as he afterward told this Deponent) but Mr. L'Estrange was not at home; so that he sent him a Letter next morn∣ing, desiring him to appoint some other time; which Letter this Deponent saw, and likewise Mr. L'Estran∣ge's Answer to it, which he convey'd to Mr. Tonge. Be∣fore the writing of the said Letter, Mr. L'Estrange said (by way of caution) unto this Deponent, A Man had need have a care what he says to such Fellows, for they'l lay hold of anything; or to the sam purpose. That the substance of the Answer (to the Deponent's best me∣mory) was this; That if Mr. Tonge had any thing to say
to him, he should be within at Seaven in the Even∣ing. VI. That at seven in the Evening, (or there abouts) upon the earnest desire of Mr. Tonge, This Deponent went into Holbourn with him to Mr. L'Estrange's; and told him how great a desire Mr. Tonge had exprest to be better acquainted with him; and how ready he was to serve him, in Transcribing any thing for him: to whom Mr. L'Estrange answer'd, that he should be glad (upon occasion) to do him a kindness. VII. That hereupon, this Deponent told Mr. L'E∣strange (upon Mr. Tonge's desiring it) that Mr. Tonge offer'd to inform him of what he had delivered to the King; and that Mr. L'Estrange reply'd, If he has any thing material to present to me, as a Justice of Peace, for the King's Service, I'le give him his Oath and receive it; upon condition that he declare it to be his own Act, without any motive to it from my self; o∣therwise I will not meddle in it; or Words to the same import: And that Mr. Tonge said this was rea∣sonable, but that he had not such an Information rea∣dy drawn: That so this Deponent went away to a place hard by, and about a quarter of an hour after, returning that way, saw Mr. Tonge come out of Mr. L'Estrange's House with two or three little Printed Books in his hand, which he said Mr. L'Estrange had given him. VIII. And Lastly, That after this the Deponent heard Tonge speak no more of Mr. L'Estrange or of any Papers given unto him. A. Choqueux. Jur' 4. die Octob. 1680. coram me Magist. Cancel. Adam Ottley.
Here's the Occasion set down in the First Paragraph that brought me first to the Savoy; where I did not so much as see Tonge, that night, though the Libellers would have it thought, that my Design upon Tonge was the Thing Expresly that carryed me thither. It may be noted upon the fifth Clause, That Tonge came to my House at the time appointed, (according to the Tenor of the foregoing) and afterward, told Choqueux that I was not at home: So that it is plain, that he press'd upon me, and I avoided him; beside that his Secretary Reports it, as if Mr. Choqueux had only told him so, and he had not been there himself. Neither does he take any notice at all of his solli∣citing me by Letter to set him a Time of Meeting, or of my Answer in return to that Letter. And it appears also in the next Paragraph, that Monsieur Choqueux did not bring Tonge to me, but upon the Earnest desire of Tonge, Monsieur Choque∣ux coming along with him. Upon the whole matter here's more then enough said to this point, and to prove that it was thus far an Intrigue car∣ryed on in a direct Train for the Inveighling of me into a share. I shall now proceed to the laying open of a Continua∣tion, or rather a Repetition of the same Project, under the Countenance, and Assistance of the same Prosligate Agents. I shall here Publish the whole truth of the matter, in hope that the Government will proceed for the securing of honest men, in their Lives and Reputations, against a Band of Sanguinary Li∣bellers, and Prostitute Knights of the Post; and not suffer the Popish Plot to be Shamm'd, and Expos'd to the Highest degree of Con∣tempt and Discredit imaginable, only in the Contemplation of drawing in some Conscientious Protestant or other, that has a true Veneration for the King, and the Church, barely to the hearing of the Story; for that's sufficient to the Case here in question. The First Contriver, and Promoter of the Villany, brings himself off by setting up for the Informer. In the First business of Tonge, I kept my self upon such a Guard, as in Honesty and Prudence, I thought my self oblig'd to do, and it was well I did so, for a much wiser man then my self might have ventur'd further, perhaps, then in that Case I thought it convenient to do. I do not speak as to the
entering into any Unlawfull Act, or Consultation; but to the keeping of my self clear from any Reasonable Ground for the least Jealousie, or Suspicion. And yet all this Pre-caution notwithstanding; how did the Weekly News-papers Publish me over the Three Kingdoms for the Greatest Villain in Nature! For a matter of six weeks or two months together, without either Truth or Controll; and no more in the whole matter, than the Impudence of Two or Three Mercenary Rascals to raise all this Scandall and Clamour. This experience taught me so much wit, (though to my cost) as for the future, never to have any thing to do with this sort of Catell again, but upon Terms of stricter Reserve; so that I took up a Reso∣lution; if ever any further attempt of the same kind should be made upon me, I would fairly endeavour to spoil the jest, and set the Saddle upon the Right Horse. And this is my present Case, wherein I shall Govern my self by the Rules of a Good ChristJan, a Good Subject, and an Honest Man. There was a Whisper about a Quarter of a Year ago, of Tonge's being touch'd in Conscience for a False Oath, about the business of his Father, and the late Dr. Oates. This coming to my Ear, and a Paper of his to my hand, with strange Circumstances in it, I sent him a Letter by my ser∣vant, which I thought might very well become me in several Respects: and especially for so much as the matter of it did particularly relate to my self. The Copy of it follows. For Mr. Simson Tonge, &c. SIR, YOU will wonder at this Letter, perhaps, from a Per∣son that has neither Directly nor Indirectly had any thing to do with you, either by Word, Writing, or Message, since October last was Twelvemonth, when, upon your Enformation, I was question'd, and wrong∣fully accus'd in many particulars before the King and Councell.
I look upon it as my duty, to forgive ye; and at this Good time, to tell ye so; and I have the Charity to be∣lieve, if it had come into your thought, you would have found it your part to have desired it. I know very well, that Oates and College had the handling of ye before you gave your Evidence; and I have reason to believe it should not have stop'd there if they might have had their Will. But however, I had kept my self upon such a Guard, and so Clear, that I was acquitted without the least doubt of my Innocence. I ask ye no Questions, nor do I de∣sire any thing from ye; though I should be glad to find any Instance of your Conversion, and that the Truth of the whole matter might appear. I do wish you (in sine) such a sense of what you owe both to God and Man, as may lead ye to a Just, and a Conscientious Discharge of your Duty. After all, I am Decemb. 27. 1681. Your Loving Friend, R. L'Estrange. I thought I could not do less in Honour and Religion, (espe∣cially upon this Festival Occasion) than to mind him of His Duty by the Discharge of my Own; but my Charity was not so well Requited, it seems, as it deserv'd: for instead of keeping himself to the Subject of the Wrong he had done me, he presently falls to his Old Play again, of throwing out Baits upon the Question of the Plot, to try if he could get any better hold of me This Bout than he did the last. Up∣on December 30. I received a Letter from him, in acknow∣ledgment of mine of the 27th, in the Terms and Date fol∣lowing. Directed, For his Ever Honoured Friend, ROGER L'ESTRANGE, &c.
Ever Honoured SIR, I Humbly thank you for your Charity, in Forgiving the Wrong I did you, in October was Twelve Month; And I assure you, it hath been a Great trouble to me; and if I could have hoped for Pardon, I should have begg'd it of you long since; but I am Confident, if you had known how I was used by my Uncle first, and afterward by College and Oates, to force me to Ac∣cuse you Falsly, you would sooner have Pitied my weak∣ness, and forgiven me what I have done against you: But this Generous Charity which you have now shewed, in giving me that Pardon, which I durst not ask for, hath encouraged me to Entreat you to Intercede with His Majesty, to Grant me His Gracious Pardon, for the Great Offences which I have Committed against him. And that he would be pleased to let me be brought to my Tryal, and have the Perusal of my Father's Papers, to help to make my Defence. And I hope to make out the Truth, to the satisfaction of all Honest Men, and Dis∣charge the Conscience of, ings Bench, the Common-side, Dec. 28. 1681. Honoured Sir, Your veriest commandable Servant, Simson Tonge.
This Letter came accompanied with the Draught of a Petition; and Both in his own hand. There needed no Great Sagacity to Chop Right upon This Train, being the very Trick over again, that he had so lately serv'd me before: so that I was e'en resolv'd to look to my self, and to let Nature work; Clapping this Endorsement immediately upon the Letter for a Memorial. The Endorsement. The Letter whereupon this is Endorsed, was delivered to the Person, who hath hereunder subscribed the Two First Letters of her Name. It was delivered to her Yester∣day being the 29th of December, 1681. with an acknowledg∣ment that he had done the Person to whom it is Directed, a great deal of Wrong; That he was sorry for it, and would have acknowledg'd it sooner had he had Opportunity: But that he was put on by his Uncle, and Others, to do what he did; and desir'd the Bearer hereof to deliver the Letter, to∣gether with the Contents above written. All which he did of his own accord. Decem. 30. 1681. In the Presence of, &c. The Petition that came in company with this Letter, is Word for Word as follows. Those Names only Excepted, that are Inseparable from the Matter in Question. For my Business is only to Expose the Falshood of this miserable Wretch, without Involving others in the Consequences of his Calumnies.
To His Most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Simson Tonge Prisoner in the King's Bench. Sheweth, THat after your Petitioner had Declared the Truth to your Majesty, concerning the Con∣trivance of his Father, and Mr. Titus Oates; Your Petitioner being in great Want of Necessaries, his Uncle Captain Tonge having sent for him, was compelled to go to him for Relief, and Captain Tonge made your Petitioner Drunk, and then threatned and forced him to deny the Truth, and to Sign a Paper which the said Captain Tonge had written, your Pe∣titioner not knowing what he did; and afterwards when your Petitioner was committed to Newgate, College came to him, and by Threats and Promises, forced your Petitioner to deny the Truth; for the which your Petitioner hath been ever since under great trouble of Mind, for his great Wickedness and Cowardize to deny the Truth. But your Petitioner doth Protest, in the Presence of Almighty God; that it is very true, that the Plot was Contrived by my Fa∣ther, and Titus Oates, when he returned the second time beyond the Seas: my Father and he writ much of it out of [Houselife] Queen Elizabeth, (That Word Houselife I could not make out.) and out of the Book writ by Hooper or Hocker that came from Rome, and swore against CampJan, and the other Je∣suites; as will appear both by the said Books, and by my Father's Papers' if your Majesty please to cause them to be searched into: They first Writ at —
where the Plot was Written by Oates in Greek Letters; and afterwards went to Fox-Hall, and one of the Jesuites Letters is in my Father's Hand. Wherefore your Petitioner doth most Humbly Pray and beseech Your Sacred Majesty, to Pity the sad Condition of Your Petitioner, and to Par∣don his Great Crime of going from the Truth: And to let him be brought to his Tryal, and to have his Father's Papers deliver'd to him, to make his Defence: And Your Petitioner hopes to make what he hath Written, so Clear; that Your Majesty will think Him more fit for Your Pity, than Your Anger: And forgive the Great Wickedness of Your Petitioner, for the which he is truly Penitent; and will rather perish here in Prison, than ever be Guilty of the like: As he hath shewed to those that have been with him, since his Great Poverty, to pervert Him farther from the Truth; but Your Petitioner would not: Therefore Your Petitioner doth most Hum∣bly Beseech Your Majesty, to Pity the sad and miserable Condition of Your Petitioner, and not to let him lie here and starve for want of Cloth and Bread. And Your Petitioner [as in Duty bound] shall ever pray, &c. Simson Tonge.
This Petition made it as Clear as the Day, that he was Entring anew upon the Old Haunt; and that he lay upon the Catch for an Opportunity to do me a Good Turn: So I thought it but reasonable to keep my self out of his Reach, and return'd him for Answer this Following Letter: Ad∣dressed, For Mr. Simson Tonge, &c. Mr. Tonge, YOurs of the 28th Instant, came Yesterday to my hand, with the Draught of a Penitent Petition, which you desire may be presented to His Majesty. You must be more Particular and Clear, before I presume to undertake the Office. As for Instance. 1. You say that you were prest by your Uncle first, and afterward by College and Oates, to Accuse me falsly. But you say nothing what they would have had you to Accuse me of, more than you did: What means they us'd to bring you to't; whether there was any Money, or Reward, either given or promi∣sed: By whom? What? or how much? How? or in what manner this was done? (If any thing of this kind) Or if any man can prove This besides your self? 2. That Captain Tonge made you Drunk; and sign a Paper of his writing, when you knew not what you did. But you do not say, either where; what Liquor; what quantity; at what time; who saw you toge∣ther; or afterwards saw you Drunk. 3. That the Captain sent for you; And that you were Compelled by your Necessities to go to him for Relief. But you do not say how often he sent for you: by whom: to what place, or places: whether by word of mouth, or by Letter: Or if upon your go∣ing,
when sent for, he made you Drunk at the same time: who can prove his sending for you: nor what Relief you had from him; either in Money, or other∣wise: Or what Promises: what Conditions: or what Discourses toward, or concerning all this, pas∣sed betwixt you. 4. You say, that your Uncle threatned, and forc'd you to deny the Truth. But you do not say, what those Menaces were: what Truth you were to deny: what Arguments, or Discourses he made use of to prevail upon you: or if any Conditions were offer'd ye, in case of your ComplJance. 5. You say, that College came to ye in Newgate. and Threaten'd and Forc'd you also to deny the Truth, But you say nothing to the Queries upon Num. 1. 6. You say the Plot was Contrived by your Father, and Oates, upon Oate's second Return from be∣yond the Seas: and name some Books (the Names of them you cannot make out) upon the Subject of Queen Eliz. Out of which they have a good part of the Con∣trivance; and refer to those Books for the Agreement of the Matter. But you do not speak to Particulars; what that Contrivance was; how managed; who privy, or assistant to it: Or what Discourses past upon it. So that here's no matter of Fact set forth: Neither do I understand what Books you mean. 7. You say that Oates wrote the Plot, first, at — in Greek Characters; and that afterward they went Both to Fox-Hall. But you do not say, why in Greek; what became of the Copy; what Discourse upon it; what Assi∣stants,
or Advisers; what was done afterwards at Fox-Hall; how they came to go thither. 8. You say that One of the Jesuits Letters is in your Fathers hand. But not which of them: Nor (in one word) How you come to know all this; Or who can speak to all these Particulars? 9. You desire the Sight of your Father's Papers; but say not in whose Custody they are. You Protest the Truth of all you say, as in the Pre∣sence of Almighty God: And in the Name of that Al∣mighty God, I Adjure you, and Entreat you, to say nothing but Truth; if you shall think sit to make me any Return to this Letter: And if you shall by such an Explanation as the Matter requires, furnish me with a Reasonable Ground to proceed upon; I will plainly and honestly represent the state of the Case, as you lay it before me: and do as may become, From my House in Holbon, Dec. 31. 1681. Your kind Friend, R. L'S. P. S. This is my Second to you, in Answer to your First, and Onely Letter to me, since One in September was Twelve Month. Pray keep an account of what you Send, and Re∣ceive; for I'le do every thing Above-board To take the Matter in Order as it rises▪ The next I re∣ceived from Tonge, was, That which follows, being Dated Jan. 2. and received the Day following,
Mr. L'Estrange, I Received yours, and am very desirous of the Truth, being very confident that a great deal of Roguery and Villany lyes still undiscovered at the bottom of the Plot. But I am no wayes able to answer those Questions you Propose to me, so as to give you any tolerable satisfaction, unless that I were in Possession of my Fathers Papers, which would best clear what you desire. After my Fathers Death, I was enform'd, that those Papers he left at Colleges House, were seiz'd by the Counceil, and my Uncle, under pretence of Administring for me has seiz'd on the rest. This I am certain of, that if those Papers ever come to light they will discover very strange things. I have been now confin'd upwards of a Twelve-month; and am now in a very Indigent Condition on the Common-side of the Kings-Bench, ha∣ving no other Subsistence then the Basket: and the place I am in is no wayes suitable for writing, or any thing of serious thoughts. I Question not your Zeal for his Majesty, and the Royal Family; and I think you could not do a greater service than to enquire, if you can any wayes know which way my Fathers Pa∣pers were disposed. Untill that be found out, I shall be in the dark, and no way able to give ye any tolle∣rable result to any Questions: For the Popish Plot, by reason of the several Persons concerned in it, is so Intricate a thing, that to unravell it from first to last, and give you a Particular account of all the several Transactions, is more then I dare Assume upon me; and by reason of my confinement, I have forgot ma∣ny material things, which before would have occur'd
to my memory: and therefore of necessity must have some assistance of my Fathers writings e're I can pro∣ceed. I am Your Loving Friend, and Servant, Simson Tonge. Kings-Bench the Common-side, Jan. 2. 1681. P. S. I Request a Word of Answer from you to this Letter. Any man with half an Eye may see the Drist of this Pa∣per. The Charity of a Single six pence would have pass'd for a Subornation. My bare Enquiry after his Fathers Papers would have been a Tampering, to Invalidate the Kings Evidence. And such an Answer as he desires in his Postscript, to this Letter, would have ruin'd me to all Intents and Purposes. At the same time with the former of the second, I received from him also this following Letter. Superscribed, For his Honoured Friend Roger L'Estrange. Honoured Sir, I Received yours of the last Instant, (mistaken for Dec. 31.) and do briefly return you this Answer, untill I can better recollect my memory. 1. As to your first Question, what means was used to bring me to accuse you, when I was examind'd be∣fore Mr. Bridgman, at Captain Richardson's House, Oates asked me if you were not concern'd with me, I told him I had seen you once, but could not accuse you of any thing; then he replyed he knew the con∣trary, and if I would not discover it, it should be the worse for me, and threatn'd me very much, but pro∣ferred
me no money; and none were present with me, but Mr. Bridgman, his Clerk and Oates. 2. The first Message I had, from my Uncle Cap∣tain Tonge, was by a young man that waited on him; who brough me a letter, and desir'd me to come to him to the Golden Anchor in the Strand, whether I came, and having drunk several Bottles of Canary with him, I desir'd to take my leave of him; who importun'd me to stay, and then call'd for several Bottles more: and said he had a Paper that I must sign, and sinding me unwilling, he drunk me to such a pitch that I was quite drunk, and then I sign'd the Paper. He sent likewise twice for me to the Half Moon in the Strand, where he likewise drunk me very high, and said he would give me some allowance towards my relief, and sent one Mrs. Lamb to me with half a Crown, and promised that hence forwards he would send me three shillings and six pence a week, which I constantly had sent me till of late. The arguments he made use of were, that though I were imprison'd, I should be supply'd with what ne∣cessaries I wanted, and that he would endeavour to purchase me my liberty, and discharge my Chamber Rent, and Fees on the Master-side of the Kings-Bench. My Father used to take Notes out of a great Book, it was a Suppliment after Hollinshed left off, and was joyn'd to his, and was writ as I have heard him say by one How, or Hows, and there were other little Books written by Hocker or Hopper, that was the Witness, and Prosecuted the Jesuits. I do not very well remember which, but it may be found by comparing the Letters with Oates and my Fathers Hand.
One E— knows much, for he helped to write some of the Papers which my Father left were taken at College's House, and my Uncle sent one Mr. H- to me, in the Kings-Bench, and brought one who was a stranger to me, with a Paper, to Administer on my behalf, and sign'd it, and under pretence of Admi∣nistring for me hath seiz'd on the rest of my Fathers Papers. That Mr. H— studies Physick, and lives not far from C— but I cannot remember the Court, but the Person he Lodges near, is High-Constable. Sir, I can make no better Answer at present, be∣cause I have no place to recollect my self: In the mean time I desire you would accept of this, which is no other then the Truth, from Your Humble Servant, Simson Tongue. Here follows my Answer, Jan. 3. to Two from Tonge re∣ceived together. Mr. Tonge, Mrs. — has brought me a Letter from you this Morn∣ing of Jan. 2. 1681. and another Enclosed in it without Date. The Account you pretend to give of your Affairs, is very Imperfect; and you mistake your self, in seeming to understand me, as if I had put any Questions to you: I only told you, that your Relation concerning the Matter, whereupon you propounded to Petition the King, fell short in many Particulars. I know very well
how Liable Words are to misconstruction, and I will not meddle in any thing which is not as Clear as the Sun. I know nothing of your Father's Papers: If you have any thing to offer me, you must either Declare in the same Paper, that it is your own voluntary Act, or else I'le not meddle in it. But wherein soever I can do you a Civility, that I may Honestly justifie, I am ready to shew my self, Your Loving Friend, Ro. L'Estrange. Jan. 3. 1681. Here follows another Letter of Tonge, of Jan. 5. King's Bench, the Common-side, Jan. 5. 1681. Mr. L'Estrange, FInding that my Two last Letters to you were Im∣perfect, I send you this Third, and Request you would be pleas'd to send me the largest Letter, that I may take a Copy of it. The Contrivance was thus: That under the pretence of a Popish Plot, (which my Father first Imagin'd was on foot, and afterwards Oates at his Second Return, swore to be true) Their main and principal Design was to Disinherit His Royal Highness. The First persons that manag'd the Plot, and were privy to it, were my Father Oates, &c. The last time I was with B—, he told me he had something to write, that was not sit to be nam'd, but he had burnt it; and said, he was afraid those Pa∣pers would make him mad, should he write any lon∣ger; and that my Father would trust none but him to Transcribe them, and he could not deny him, be∣cause he had no other Livelihood.
My Father advis'd Oates to write the Plot in Greek Letters, because that none but themselves might be privy to what was doue. The Copy which was in Greek Letters was burnt by Oates. When they came to Fox-Hall, Mr. — was ta∣ken in for an Assistant, after he had been sworn to Secrecy. They went to Fox-Hall by my Father's advice, to the end they might be the more private, where those Papers they wrote at — were put into Form, and deliver'd into the Council. After they all Three remov'd from Fox-Hall, and Nail'd up the Chamber-door, having left several Pa∣pers behind; and my Father understanding by Mr. Lambert, that the Door was broken up by the Land∣lord, and the Papers like to be seiz'd on, was much troubl'd at it, and sent away the Rent that was due by his Man Richard — now living at — who brought back the Papers with him, and can Te∣stifie the same. Sir, I have no Chamber nor Conveniency to write, and besides have a very great Cold upon me; but re∣quest you would be pleas'd to accept of this, which is upon a second Recollection of my Thoughts, which is my own voluntary Act; and I have been under great Trouble of Conscience ever since I went from my Evidence, ana many times ready to Despair, but that Mrs. — coming to see a Prisoner, I desir'd her to look out some Papers I had left at her House; and I sent to you, being you were the Person I had wrong∣ed, and therefore thought it my Duty to acknow∣ledge
my Fault, which I do now again, and Protest, that what I have done is neither in hope of Favour, nor Reward, but to discharge a good Conscience, and to shew that I am truly Penitent. And am Your veriest Commandable Servant, Simson Tonge. In Answer to this as follows. Jan. 6. 1682. Mr. Tonge, ALthough you have so exceedingly forfeited your Credit in the former Abuses you put upon the King; and others that believed you, that you cannot expect much weight to be laid upon your single word, for any thing, yet having dealt so openly, and so particularly, (and all on your own accord too) in a Letter to me of Yesterday, I cannot but hope that you are a true Convert. You have named several Persons that were Privy to the matter of Fact there in Question. You shall do well to bethink your self both where they may be found, and what particulars they can speak to. And what you say, let it be in the Awe of Devine Justice, and Eternal Damnation if you bely any Creature. I will endeavour to do you good some honest way or other: but I dare not venture to see you, or speak with you, for fear of Mis-construction. This is all I can say at present. Your Loving Friend, R. L'Estrange.
This was followed by another, from Tonge, Jan. 6. 10. Jan. 10. 1682. Mr. L'Estrange, I Am very sensible that my single word will be but of small moment. However as I declare nothing but the Truth, yet if by declaring what others can Te∣stifie, I can be anyways Instrumental to the further disco∣very of it, I should not a little rjoyce. [—having writ all the Papers which related to the History of the Plot, can give account of the whole contrivance, and the several meetings that my Father, Oates, &c. had. He is the only man in Town, could he be found out, &c.] I have a great cold with sitting on the ground to make Pegg, as I do all the week, and must work very hard for three-half pence a day, which is all I have, &c.— I am barefooted, and almost naked. I must confess, I have deserved far worse than this; but God that hath promised that at what time soever a Sinner doth truly Repent, he will have mercy, will, I hope, look upon my unfeigned Repentance, and encline His Majesties Royal Heart to pitty and pardon me, if you please to im∣part my sorrowfull Estate unto the King; and to let His Gracious Majesty know how I was Trepann'd by my Uncle; for the which I am very sorrowfull, and am still. Pray Sir consider the sad Condition of Your Poor Servant, Simson Tongue There never was such a Penitent certainly to all manner of purposes; but I began now to have enough of him, and in a short Letter of the Day following put an end to the Correspondence.
Jan. 11. 1682. Mr. Tonge. I Dare not presume to trouble the King in your Affair. But I will do you all the good I can in what Case so∣ever the matter will Honestly beare it. Your Loving Friend, R. L'Estrange. By this time, Tonge, and his Advisers, finding that they could not Compass their End; and Mr. Thompson's News-Paper having given Vent to the Design, they lay'd their Heads together to make the best Retreat they could; and to Face a Shamm upon the World, as if L'Estrange had been already up to the Ears in a New Plot: But they were so Thankful however as to Cover the Back-side of the Poor Fellow for his Good-Will, put some few Pence in his Pocket, and preserve him from Starving this bout, in hope of a more favourable Opportunity. But this shall not serve their Turn, if there be any Reverence left for the Memory of the Popish Plot; or any Justice to be obtain'd upon Those Miscreants that make it their business to teare up the very Foundation of it by the Roots; For the worst is yet to come, and under Tonge's Hand, and by him Attested, as well as all the rest. When I came from the University (says he) in the Year 77. I found Oates with my Father, in a very poor Condition, who complained he knew not what to do to get Bread; who went under the Name of Ambrose. My Father took him home, and gave him Cloaths, Lodging, and Dyet, saying he would put him into a way. And then he perswaded him to get acquainted among the Papists; and when he had done so, then my Father told him, there had been many Plots in England to bring
in Popery, and if he would go over among the Jesuites, and Observe their ways, it was possible it might be One now; and if he could make it out, it would be his Prefer∣ment for ever. But however, if he could get their Names, and a little Acquaintance from the Papists, it would be an Easie matter to stir up the people to fear Popery.] And again, My Father and He (Dr. Oates) went and Lodg'd at Fox-Hall, at One Lamberts, a Bell-Founder, (which House was call'd by the Neighbours the Plot-House; And there Oates's Narrative was Written; whereof several Copies were VVritten, very Different, the One from the Other; and the Four Jesuites Letters (wherein Oates pretended was the whole Discovery) were Counterfeits, &c. All this I have to shew under Tonge's Hand, and I Ap∣peal to Men and Angels, if, it be not the Boldest Attempt that ever was yet made upon the Credit of the Popish Con∣spiracy: And sufficient to shake any Man's Faith, as to That Point, that were not Proof against the Utmost Effects of Malice, Impudence, and Imposture. So many Particulars, so Boldly, and Openly Attested; in the Face of so many Witnesses, Tryals, Convictions, Sentences, and Executions! And all this, Expresly Level'd at the Honour of our Parlia∣ments, and the Dignity of Publique Justice with only the Pro∣fligate, and Faithless Practices of the Instrument to Weigh against the Impious Design, and the Desperate Effects and Consequences of so Daring a Scandal. But let the suggesti∣ons be never so Incredible and Ridiculous; It is a thing of great Mischief yet to suffer the Authors of these Bits and Rumours to pass Unpunish'd: for Malevolent Spirits will be apt to say; If there were not something into, how is it, that the Reporters of these Fables come to scape? The Best thing he has to say for himself, will be, perhaps, that he has not so much publish'd▪ These Shamms by way of Affront to the Plot, as thrown them out for a Bait for L'Estrange to Chop at: So that the Credit of the Protestant Religion, and the
English Government must, at this rate, be Expos'd, upon the Experiment of Trying to Engage, and Hamper L'Estrange in the Intrigue. But alas! I am so thoroughly satisfied in the Business of the Plot; and the whole Scheme of it is so Per∣fectly, and Distinctly in my Head, that I have not the least Curiosity in the World to know more on't; Beside; That In vain is the Net spread in the sight of the Bird. I have not Concern'd my self to Hunt after his Fathers Papers, to Trace out his Fathers Agents; nor Directly, or Indirectly made any sort of Applications Pursuant to his Purpose, and Desire; but Innocently held him in play with Letter for Let∣ter, to keep up the Rest. The Only Thing that stuck with me upon the thought of this Publication, was the Nicety of Committing those Papers to a Publique View, which might seem perhaps to be deposited in my Hands under some sort of Confidence, and Trust: But when I consider'd, on  other hand, that These Letters were meant only as Snares to me under the Semblance of That Confidence, I was my own Confessor in the Case, and easily discharg'd my self of That Scruple: And not without a Further Sense neither of Duty to the Go∣vernment. In Conclusion; I have here made a Fair Discovery of a Foul Practice, both upon the Publique, and upon my Self; I was to have been Trappan'd the One way, and Tonge is De∣tected the Other. I shall remit the rest to the Wisdom of my Superiors, how far it may be either Safe, or Expedi∣ent to Encourage this way of Proceeding; Even to the Violation of Common-Faith, and Society. The Plot's a Sham (says Tonge;) If L'Estrange says so too, 'tis almost as much as his Neck's worth: Why should not This Scandalous Af∣front now, be as Dangerous to Tonge for the Starting of it, as it would have been to L'Estrange if he had Joyn'd in't? Trapanning will become a Trade, (Nay, and Forswearing too) if Men shall find it their Interest, First to play the Knaves, or the Cheats, and then (as I said before) come off for the Discovery, and set up for Enformers. This is the Case; and if I had done less, I had been wanting both to the Publique, and to My Self. FINIS.
