N24 12994739 96390
AN ACCOUNT of the Defeat of Count Teckely, and of his being Slain. Together with a Total Rout, given to the Turkish Army, by the United Forces of the Christian Emperour and the KING of POLAND. Entred according to Order, YEsterday, Letters arrived from Germany, all confirming in General, the great Defeat the Christian Army hath gi∣ven the Turks, since their Rasing the Siege from before Vien∣na: The particulars are as followeth, (Viz.) some of them tell us, that the German and Polish Army's, having marched about 15. German Miles into Hungary, in pursuit of the Turks that fled from Vienna, fell upon the Carriages, and Baggadge, of the Turks; and took sixty pieces of Cannon, many of which were of an extraordinary bigness, with all necessaries belonging to them, and pursued the gross of the Turkish Army, who were with the Reinforcements they receieved from the Neighbouring Turkish Garrisons, and the fresh Succours sent from the Port;) at least 150000 strong, besides the Forces under the Command of Count-Teckely, and other Renegado's in Conjunction with them. It so happened, that the German Foot quarter fell upon the Tekelitse, and cut most of them in pieces, few escaping the Sword; & its credibly related, that the Count was one of the many Rebels that fell in the Slaughter. A great part of his Army, fearing the success of the Christian Army, returned to
their obedience, and as an earnest of their fidelity and repen∣tance made great Slaughter of their Infidels, &c. Mean while the Polish, and German Horse engaged the Turks main Body with such fury, good Conduct, and Success, that in less than 3 hours time, the Gross of the Turkish Army was bro∣ken in pieces, and they put to the Refuge of the lightness of their Horses-Heels, the Christians continuing to cut their many scattered parties into pieces, and possest themselves of a far grea∣ter Treasure then was taken in the Viennean Leagure: and several say, that the City Buda (which was once the Metropolis & Seat of the Kings of Hungary, and now in Possession of the Turks) is Actually besieged by the Christians; the Turkish Army being totally Routed, and will not be in any condition of giving it relief rhis Winter, and in all humane probabillity, the Christi∣ans may make themselves Masters of the place before the Spring of the Year. His Majesty of Poland has sent for a Reinforcement of 30000 Horse, which are already on their March on the Fronti∣ers of Poland. And the Emperour is Rasing Horse and Foot in all his Heriditory Countrys, besides several of the Princes of the Empire in confederacy are doing the same: and its judged, the Christian Army by the next Spring, will be of greater Force then has been known at any time for above these hundred years past, they providing against the Effects of the Allarrum. These great Defeats, have given to the whole Territories of the Otta∣man Empire. It being expected the Turks in this next Spring, will come into Christendom with a greater Army then ever they had, since the first Errection of their Government, for that the whole Kingdom of Hungary at this time seems to lean to∣wards its ancient obedience to the Christian Emperour: and it's hoped the Christians in General, will so understand their com∣mon intrest in this Juncture; as to disable the Infidels from ban∣ding their Force any more towards Europe, in this Age of the World. There never being such and Opportunity of doing it as at this present time. Which God in his Mercy grant. Is and shall be the prayers of, N. N. LONDON Printed by E. Mallet.
